NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A FRAMEWORK FOR DEBT-MATURITY MANAGEMENT
Saki Bigio
Galo Nuño
Juan Passadore
Working Paper 25808
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25808

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019

The views expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors and do not represent the views of
the Bank of Spain, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The paper was
influenced by conversations with Anmol Bhandari, Manuel Amador, Andy Atkeson, Adrien
Auclert, Luigi Bocola, Alessandro Dovis, Raquel Fernandez, Hugo Hopenhayn, Francesco Lippi,
Rody Manuelli, Dejanir Silva, Dominik Thaler, Aleh Tsyvinski, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Pierre
Yared, Dimitri Vayanos, Anna Zabai and Bill Zame. We thank Davide Debortoli, Thomas
Winberry, and Wilco Bolt for discussing this paper. We also thank conference participants at
SED 2017, NBER Summer Institute 2017, RIDGE 2017, Rome Junior Conference in
Macroeconomics 2017, CSEF-IGIER Symposium on Economics and Insitutions, SIAM 2018
Meetings, the Restud Tour Reunion Conference, the CEBRA Annual Meeting 2018, and
ADEMU Sovereign Debt Conference, and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Oxford, Banco de España,
Penn State, ESSIM, SMU, SNU, LUISS, UCLA, UT Austin, and EIEF, for helpful comments and
suggestions.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Saki Bigio, Galo Nuño, and Juan Passadore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

A Framework for Debt-Maturity Management
Saki Bigio, Galo Nuño, and Juan Passadore
NBER Working Paper No. 25808
May 2019
JEL No. F34,F41,G11
ABSTRACT
We characterize the optimal debt-maturity management problem of a government in a small open
economy. The government issues a continuum of finite-maturity bonds in the presence of
liquidity frictions. We find that the solution can be decentralized: the optimal issuance of a bond
of a given maturity is proportional to the difference between its market price and its domestic
valuation, the latter defined as the price computed using the government’s discount factor. We
show how the steady-state debt distribution decreases with maturity. These results hold when
extending the model to incorporate aggregate risk or strategic default.
Saki Bigio
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
8283 Bunche Hall
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu

Juan Passadore
Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance (EIEF)
Via Sallustiana 62
Rome, 00187
Italy
juan.passadore@eief.it

Galo Nuño
Banco de España
Alcalá 48,
28014 Madrid
Spain
galo.nuno@bde.es

Appendices are available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25808

1

Introduction

How should a government manage its debt maturity structure? This paper presents a new
framework to think about maturity management. The framework makes two innovations.
First, it puts forth the importance of liquidity frictions, namely the notion that the larger an
issuance at a given maturity the lower the price. Liquidity costs have been well documented
by the empirical literature, but have received much less attention by normative theory. The
second innovation is technical. The curse of dimensionality quickly restricts the number and
class of bonds that can be considered in debt-management problems. Quantitative studies typically model bonds that mature exponentially and work with two maturities only.1 In practice,
however, governments issue finite-life bonds in many maturities. The framework here allows
us to work with any number of bonds of arbitrary coupon structure.
The goal of the framework is to analyze an optimal debt-maturity design in the presence of
liquidity frictions. To this end, we lay out a continuous-time, small open economy. A relatively
impatient government chooses to issue or (re-)purchase finite-life bonds within a continuum of
maturities. Its financial counterparts are risk-neutral international investors. The government’s
objective is to smooth consumption. It faces income and interest rate risk and can default when
those risks materialize. Liquidity costs emerge because bonds are auctioned to primary dealers
that need time to liquidate their bond holdings after an auction. The bond market is segmented
across maturities and vintages, in the spirit of Vayanos and Vila (2009). Under these assumptions, the larger the auction, the lower the price. The induced price impact is summarized by a
single coefficient that increases with the holding costs of intermediaries, but decreases with the
size of order flows.
We characterize the solution to the government’s problem and show that the optimal issuance problem can be decentralized. Namely, the problem can be studied as if the government delegates issuances to a continuum of subordinate traders, each in charge of managing a
single maturity. Each trader then applies a simple rule to determine how much to issue of his
maturity:
relative value gap
issuance at maturity
=
.
GDP
liquidity coefficient
This rule states that the optimal issuance of a bond of a given maturity is the ratio of a relative
value gap to the liquidity coefficient. The relative value gap of a bond of a given maturity is
the difference between the bond price in the secondary market and the domestic valuation, relative to the secondary market price. The domestic valuation is the counterfactual bond price
computed using the government’s discount factor, which differs from the international short1 This

limitation is easily understood with a simple example. If we want to construct a yearly model where the
government issues a single 30-year, zero-coupon bond, we need at least 30 state variables: a 30-year bond becomes
a 29-year bond the following year, and a 28-year bond the year after, and so on. By contrast, a bond that matures
by 5 percent every year is still a bond that matures by 5 percent the year after its issuance.

1

term rate.2 A positive value gap indicates that the trader in the decentralization scheme would
otherwise issue as much debt as possible. That desire is contained by the liquidity costs, captured by the liquidity coefficient, which reduce prices in the primary market. We calibrate the
liquidity coefficient using data on turnover rates and intermediation spreads.
The paper is built in layers. In the first layer, we study the problem under perfect foresight,
in the second layer we add risk, and in the final layer, we add the option to default. Under
perfect foresight, the asymptotic dynamics of the model can be obtained analytically. Provided
that liquidity costs are above a certain threshold, the model features a steady state. In the steady
state, the government issues at all maturities, but issues greater quantities of long-term bonds.
It is optimal to issue at all maturities because liquidity costs are convex, namely the price impact
increases with the issuance. The steady-state maturity structure is determined by the desire to
spread out issuances to minimize the liquidity costs. Nonetheless, this desire does not produce
a uniform issuance distribution. This is because long-term bonds have to be rolled over less
frequently than short-maturity ones and, hence, the use of the former is preferable in order to
minimize rollover costs. Although issuance flows increase with maturity, the outstanding stock
of debt decreases with maturity. This decreasing maturity profile for the debt stock is an artifact
of bonds having a finite life: as long-term bonds mature, they become short-term bonds. Thus,
at steady state, the stock of debt at a given maturity is the accumulation of the issuance flows
at higher maturities. We calibrate the model for the case of Spain and obtain a debt profile that
resembles that in the data.
We use the framework to characterize the maturity distribution as liquidity frictions vanish.
Although there is no steady state distribution below a threshold value of the liquidity coefficient, there always exists a well-defined asymptotic debt distribution. This limit-determinacy
result contrasts with the case without liquidity costs, in which the maturity profile is indeterminate.
We also study the transitional dynamics after an unexpected shock. Two forces interact
with the liquidity costs to shape the dynamics: consumption smoothing and bond-price reaction.
Consumption smoothing is activated when the path of consumption growth changes the domestic discount factor. As a result, domestic valuations are modified. Consumption smoothing
lengthens the maturity during downturns: after a shock produces a temporary drop in consumption, the domestic discount rate remains temporarily high while the economy recovers.
This reduces domestic valuations, particularly for longer maturities. The optimal rule thus prescribes the issuance of more debt, especially at longer maturities. The economic intuition is
that the government issues more debt during recessions to smooth consumption, especially at
longer maturities to avoid the liquidity costs associated with the rollover of debt.
2 The

government’s discount factor is computed as the solution of a fixed-point problem in the path of consumption. An imputed consumption path maps to a government discount factor. This discount factor generates
a path for debt through the issuance rule. Ultimately, the path for debt produces a new consumption path. In the
optimal solution, both consumption paths must coincide.

2

The bond-price reaction force appears when a shock to short-term rates changes bond prices.
This force only plays a role in the presence of liquidity costs. Without liquidity costs, the domestic discount factor coincides with the market interest rate, and the government is indifferent
between issuing debt at any two maturities. With liquidity costs, however, the government is
not indifferent, as rebalancing between different maturities is costly. If a shock temporarily
increases short-term rates, thereby reducing market prices—especially for long maturities, the
optimal rule dictates, ceteris paribus, a decline in debt issuances and the tilting of the maturity distribution toward shorter maturities. The government thus reduces the issuance of those
bonds most affected by the temporary fall in prices. The initial shock produces a decline and
posterior recovery in consumption, which activates consumption smoothing —a force that partially mitigates bond-price reaction.
The next layer incorporates risk. Because the state variable is the entire maturity distribution, the characterization of an equilibrium with recurrent shocks faces the same computational
challenge as incomplete market models with heterogeneous agents and aggregate shocks (as in
Krusell and Smith, 1998, and subsequent literature). To provide an analysis of the government’s
problem with risk that does not rely on numerical approximations, we study an economy where
shocks are anticipated, but occur only once. This approach is useful because we can characterize
the risky steady state (RSS), defined as the steady state reached when the government expects
a shock, but the shock has not yet materialized.3 Through the analysis of the RSS, we can study
how the anticipation of risk shapes the maturity distribution. We show that the government
follows the same issuance rule as in the deterministic case. The anticipation of risk introduces
an extra term into the domestic valuations: expected valuations after the shock arrival are adjusted by the ratio of post- to pre-shock marginal utilities, reflecting an effective "exchange rate"
between consumption goods at different states.
Risk introduces a new force that influences the maturity distribution, insurance. Insurance
shapes the maturity profile in two ways. First, the government tries to build a hedge. In the absence of liquidity costs, the government may hedge the changes in consumption due to interest
rate shocks by building a portfolio that offsets the impact of the shock. Liquidity costs make a
perfect hedge—a hedge that guarantees equal consumption in all states— too costly. Second,
the government tries to self insure. Self-insurance shows up in the ratio of marginal utilities because a future drop in consumption increases that ratio and, thus, raises valuations. By raising
valuations, self-insurance produces a lower stock of debt in the RSS than in the deterministic
steady state (DSS). Self insurance-lengthens the average maturity because long-term bonds are
less likely to have expired by the time a shock arrives, thus reducing the expected liquidity
costs of debt rollover under a negative shock. Although both hedging and self-insurance are
3 The

concept of RSS is equivalent to the one that appears in Coeurdacier et al. (2011). The analysis of the RSS is
the only tractable solution that does not rely on approximations. Transitional dynamics prior to the shock are not
analytically tractable.

3

present, our calibration shows that self-insurance is a stronger force.
The final layer incorporates strategic default. We solve the Ramsey problem where the government commits to a debt program, but upon the arrival of an income or interest-rate shock,
the government can choose to default. Default is costly and thus only exercised if it renders
a higher value than repayment. Once again, the optimal issuance rule determines the maturity profile, but default changes bond prices and valuations. Both bond prices and valuations
are corrected by a default risk premium. However, domestic valuations are also adjusted by
an additional term, which does not appear in the market price of bonds. We dub this term
the revenue-echo effect. The revenue-echo effect appears because, in the decentralization of the
problem, traders anticipate that a marginal rise in their issuances increases default probabilities during the life of the bond. The increase in default risk in future periods echoes back in
time through the prices of all bonds that are outstanding during the life of the bond. This fall
in bond prices reduces revenue collections from other issuances. All in all, the revenue-echo
effect incorporates the spillover of default risk from one bond to the rest of the portfolio. We
analyze how the option to default shapes the maturity distribution at the RSS and find that, for
our calibration, the revenue-echo effect dominates all the other forces in shaping the maturity
distribution.
A similar revenue-echo effect would appear in a version of the model where liquidity costs
depend on the outstanding stock of debt, and not only on issuances, as we study here. The solution with default showcases that the techniques are portable to more general environments.
Indeed, section 5 explores several variations and applications of the model, namely (i) alternative specifications of liquidity costs, (ii) the case of a government that can only issue debt at a
finite number of maturities, and (iii) the issuance of consols instead of finite-life bonds.
Related literature. Maturity management appears in various areas of finance: international,
public, and corporate. The framework here captures forces that have been previously identified
and uncovers new ones. An advantage of the framework is that it allows for a large number of
securities with a realistic coupon structure.
A central feature of the framework is the presence of liquidity costs. There is a large literature that studies both, theoretically and empirically, the sources and magnitudes of liquidity
costs.4 The formulation of liquidity costs in this paper builds on two ideas. As in Vayanos and
Vila (2009), markets for bonds of different maturities are segmented. As in Duffie et al. (2005),
issuances are intermediated by dealers that face a high discount and need time to reallocate
4 There

is substantial evidence of liquidity costs in different asset classes, as surveyed by Vayanos and Wang
(2013b) or Duffie (2010). In the specific case of fixed-income securities, studies that provide evidence suggestive of
the presence of liquidity costs are Cammack (1991), Duffee (1996), Spindt and Stolz (1992), Fleming (2002), Green
(2004), Pasquariello and Vega (2009), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Lou et al. (2013), and Song and
Zhu (2018) for US Treasury markets, by Duffie et al. (2003), Naik and Yadav (2003b), Pelizzon et al. (2016) and
Breedon (2018) for sovereign bond markets, Edwards et al. (2007) and Feldhutter (2011) for US corporate bond
markets, and Green et al. (2007) for US municipal bond markets. Our calibration is based on inventory-depletion
evidence in the US Treasury market documented by Fleming and Rosenberg (2008).

4

assets. In Vayanos and Vila (2009), a finite mass of long-lived investors demand bonds of a
specific maturity from intermediaries. Investors trade bonds of all maturities with intermediaries. The price impact in that model depends on the overall outstanding amount of bonds of a
specific maturity. In our framework, a large flow of customers contacts dealers, independent of
the outstanding amount at a given maturity. Therefore, in our case, the price impact depends
on the amount of issuances because this amount affects the time taken by dealers to offload
bonds to investors. Our framework can, however, also be used to study maturity management
problems without liquidity costs.
International finance stresses several forces that, in our framework, interact with the liquidity costs and shape the maturity structure. One force is insurance. A small open economy
effectively has access to complete markets when income shocks are correlated with shocks to the
yield curve in a way that allows complete asset spanning, as illustrated by Duffie and Huang
(1985). With complete spanning, the optimal maturity design is governed by the formation of
a bond-portfolio hedge that insulates the country against income and interest rate risk. But
if income shocks are uncorrelated with interest rate shocks, the government cannot exploit
the maturity of its portfolio to hedge. In that case, the debt dynamics are governed by selfinsurance only, as in Chamberlain and Wilson (2000) or Wang et al. (2016). In between these
extremes, there are a range of cases with incomplete asset spanning with a role for both hedging
and self-insurance. In our framework, liquidity costs inhibit perfect hedges, so self-insurance
and partial hedging interplay to shape the debt-maturity profile, independently of the asset
structure.
The second force stressed by international finance is incentives. When the government has
the option to default, it should take into consideration how current issuance affects the incentives to default in the future and how future default affects current prices. This feature was first
introduced in a sovereign debt model by Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), and a large literature has
followed.5 The effect of incentives in our framework is captured by the revenue-echo effect.
The literature has further identified two important channels, which we abstract from, through
which incentives shape the optimal maturity design. The first channel is debt dilution. Bulow
and Rogoff (1988) identified that, without commitment to a debt program, long-term debt is
prone to debt dilution. Debt dilution occurs when the price of outstanding bonds fall as a result of a new issuance. The expectation of debt dilution raises the cost of long-term debt. Debt
dilution is a force tilting issuances toward short maturities.6 The second channel, rollover risk,
operates in the opposite direction. Cole and Kehoe (2000) identified that a solvent government
faces rollover risk if it cannot refinance a large amount of principal and, as a result, is forced
5 See

for example Arellano (2008) and Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), and Aguiar and Amador (2013) and Tomz
and Wright (2013) for recent reviews.
6 Hatchondo and Martinez (2009), Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2015) study
quantitatively the positive and normative properties of a model in which the government borrows by issuing long
term bonds, a setup that is prone to debt dilution.

5

to default. Rollover risk is a force toward spreading debt services through many maturities to
avoid a large principal payment at any given point.
The literature on sovereign debt has studied setups in which insurance and incentive forces
are both present. For example, Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012) and Hatchondo et al. (2016)
study the interaction between insurance and incentives, when the government has access to
both short- and long-term debt. Bianchi et al. (Forthcoming) study this trade-off when the government saves in a risk-free asset. Recently, Aguiar et al. (Forthcoming) prove the remarkable
property that, under debt dilution, once the country has issued long-term debt, it should let
long-term bonds mature rather than refinance them with short-term debt. Further recent contributions that combine insurance, incentives, and rollover risk include, for example, Aguiar et
al. (2017) and Bocola and Dovis (2018).7
Our paper abstracts away from debt dilution and rollover risk, but contributes to the aforementioned literature along two dimensions. First, as we explained earlier, most of the models
employed by this literature restrict the number and types of bonds issued. Our framework
presents a methodology in which debt problems can be analyzed without these restrictions.
In light of the previous discussion, restrictions on the number of bonds and coupon structure
represent a limitation of the sovereign debt literature. For example, if debt dilution is present,
hedging may be very expensive if long-term debt is restricted to only bonds of very long maturities. Similarly, rollover risk can be mitigated if the country can spread out its issuances, and is
not restricted to a few bonds. By circumventing these ad-hoc restrictions, we believe our framework is a step toward understanding debt management with realistic debt structures, where the
government is allowed to design its debt profile to mitigate these incentive problems.8 Second,
this paper is the first to solve the debt management problem under commitment to a debt program. This case is a natural and useful benchmark. It is natural if we think that an independent
agency controls the debt maturity profile or if an international organization has a discipline
device on a sovereign. It is also a useful benchmark to obtain an upper bound on the welfare
gains if we want to establish the benefits from a fiscal rule.
Maturity choice is also a classical theme in public finance models. Models of taxation with
commitment, as in Lucas and Stokey (1983), Angeletos (2002) or Buera and Nicolini (2004),
show how a menu of bonds that differ in maturity implements a complete market allocation.9
7 Dovis

(Forthcoming) studies the optimal risk sharing agreement when the government lacks commitment
and income is not verifiable, and shows that empirical features documented and rationalized by the quantitative
literature on sovereign borrowing naturally emerge as constrained-efficient outcomes in this setup.
8 Two alternative frameworks allow for richer debt structures, Sánchez et al. (2018) and Bocola and Dovis (2018).
In Sánchez et al. (2018) the government chooses each period total debt and the number of periods to repay this
debt in equal installments. In our formulation, this choice corresponds to flat debt maturity profiles that differ in
their average duration. In Bocola and Dovis (2018), instead, the government chooses each period total debt and a
rate of decay for future promised payments. In both papers, total debt plus an additional state variable (number
of periods or rate of decay) are sufficient to describe debt maturity profiles. By constrast, in our paper, we allow in
principle for any debt maturity profile.
9 Barro (2003) considers a tax-smoothing objective to assess the optimal maturity structure of public debt.

6

Buera and Nicolini (2004) also show that this implementation results in unrealistic debt flows
and positions.10 In our paper, because of the liquidity costs, portfolios have to be rebalanced
very smoothly and this induces less extreme positions. Recently, Debortoli et al. (2017) and
Debortoli et al. (2018) study maturity choice in similar environments but when the government lacks commitment. These papers show that the government chooses a maturity structure
that is approximately flat. Our framework generates allocations that are tilted toward shorter
maturities which, in our calibrated exercise, are quantitatively similar to those of the Spanish
government.11
Our paper is also close to the literature that studies tax smoothing under incomplete markets
following Aiyagari et al. (2002).12 Faraglia et al. (Forthcoming) introduce a new method to
solve an extension of Aiyagari et al. (2002) that allows for several finite-life bonds of different
maturities. In contrast, our paper develops an analytical method to characterize the solution.
Our method allows for a clear decomposition of the different economic forces that shape the
debt distribution in response to shocks. A common aspect with Faraglia et al. (Forthcoming) is
the importance of liquidity costs to obtain a realistic debt profile.
On the technical front, the framework employs infinite-dimensional optimization techniques
similar to those applied in heterogeneous agent models. Lucas and Moll (2014) study a problem
with heterogeneous agents that allocate time between production and technology generation.
Nuño and Moll (2018) study a constrained-efficient allocation in a model with heterogeneous
agents and incomplete markets. Nuño and Thomas (2018) study optimal monetary policy in a
heterogeneous-agent model with incomplete markets and nominal debt. The contribution relative to those studies is that this paper introduces the risky steady-state approach to study the
impact of aggregate risk. This feature is novel, and allows for an exact characterization that can
be used to analyze models with aggregate risk.
10 Faraglia et al. (2010) show that introducing habits and capital leads leads to bond positions that are even
larger and more volatile.
11 Maturity choice is also a recurrent theme in corporate finance. Leland and Toft (1996) introduce a stationary
debt structure, which has been widely adopted in the literature that studies the optimal capital structure. Recent
contributions that study optimal maturity choice are, for example, Chen et al. (2012), He and Milbradt (2016) and
Manuelli and Sánchez (2018). Our framework can be adapted to answer questions in public or corporate finance.
12 Recent examples are Bhandari et al. (2017a) and Bhandari et al. (2017b). The first paper shows how the government chooses debt, asymptotically, to minimize the variability of fiscal shocks, defined as the sum of the return
on debt and spending shocks. The second paper, building on the previous results, shows that when the model is
calibrated using US returns on debt and primary deficits, the optimal maturity of debt does not involve any short
positions.

7

2
2.1

Maturity management with liquidity costs
Model setup

Time is continuous. The model features two exogenous state variables, {y(t), r ∗ (t)}t≥0 , representing an endowment and a short-term interest rate process, respectively. The vector of
exogenous states is X (t) ≡ [y(t), r ∗ (t)]. For any variable, whether endogenous or exogenous,
we employ the notation x∞ ≡ lim t→∞ x (t) to refer to its asymptotic value and xss to refer to
its steady state value, if it exists. In the case of the exogenous state variables, we use both subscripts indistinctly. All the partial differential equations (PDE) that we present here have exact
solutions which are presented in Table A of Appendix A.
Households. We consider a small open economy. There is a single, freely-traded consumption good. The economy is populated by a representative household with preferences over
expenditure paths, {c (t)}t≥0 , given by
ˆ

V0 =

∞

e−ρt U (c (t)) dt,

0

∗ < ρ, is the discount factor and U (·) is an increasing and concave utility
where ρ ∈ (0, 1), rss
function.
Government. The economy features a benevolent government that issues bonds to foreign
investors on behalf of households. Bonds differ by their time to maturity. The time to maturity
of a given bond is denoted by τ. Issuances are chosen from a continuum of maturities, τ ∈
[0, T ], where T is an exogenous maximum maturity. The maturity of a given bond falls with
time, ∂τ
∂t = −1, and the bond is retired once it matures, τ = 0. At maturity, the bond pays its
principal, normalized to one unit of good. Prior to maturity, the bond pays an instantaneous
constant coupon δ. As we discuss in section 5, our framework can also accommodate bonds
with different coupon rates. However, for simplicity, we focus on the case in which all bonds
have the same coupon rate.
The outstanding stock of bonds with a time-to-maturity τ at date t is denoted by f (τ, t). We
call { f (τ, t)}τ ∈[0,T ] the debt profile at time t. The law of motion of f (τ, t) follows a Kolmogorov
forward equation (KFE):
∂f
∂f
= ι (τ, t) + ,
(2.1)
∂t
∂τ
with boundary condition f ( T, t) = 0. The intuition behind the equation is that, given τ and t,
the change in the quantity of bonds of maturity τ, ∂ f /∂t, equals the issuances at that maturity,
ι (τ, t), plus the net flow of bonds, ∂ f /∂τ. The latter term captures the aging of the outstanding
bonds, i.e., the automatic flow from longer to shorter maturities. Issuances, ι (τ, t), are cho-

8

sen from a space of functions I : [0, T ] × (0, ∞) → R that meets some technical conditions.13
When negative, issuances are interpreted as bond purchases or repurchases. The initial stock
of τ −maturity debt is given, f (τ, 0) = f 0 (τ ). The government’s budget constraint is:
ˆ
c (t) = y (t) − f (0, t) +

T

[q (τ, t, ι) ι (τ, t) − δ f (τ, t)] dτ,

(2.2)

0

where y (t) is the (exogenous) output endowment, with steady state value yss . Furthermore,
´
− f (0, t) is the principal repayment, δ 0T f dτ are total coupon payments from all outstanding
´T
bonds, and 0 qιdτ are the funds received from debt issuances at all maturities. Finally, q (τ, t, ι)
is the issuance price of a bond of maturity τ at date t in the primary market. As we discuss
below, the price depends on the total volume of issuances of that maturity τ.
International investors. The government trades bonds with competitive risk-neutral international investors. The issuance price, q, has two components, a frictionless market price and a
liquidity cost:
(2.3)
q (τ, t, ι) = ψ(τ, t) − λ (τ, t, ι) .
| {z }
| {z }
market price

liquidity costs

The first component, ψ(τ, t), is the arbitrage-free market price of the domestic bond. This price
depends on the path of the international risk-free interest rate, r ∗ (t). Given this risk-free rate,
the market price ψ(τ, t) has a PDE representation:
∂ψ ∂ψ
−
,
(2.4)
∂t
∂τ
∗.
with a boundary condition ψ(0, t) = 1. Unless indicated otherwise, we assume that δ = rss
Liquidity costs. The second component in the issuance price, λ (τ, t, ι), represents a liquidity
cost associated with the issuance (or purchase) of ι bonds of maturity τ at date t. In Appendix B,
we present a wholesale-retail model of the bond market, whose solution yields the formulation
of the liquidity cost that we employ throughout the paper. This is similar in spirit to models
that feature over-the-counter (OTC) frictions, like Duffie et al. (2005). The main virtue of this
friction is that it produces a price impact of issuances, which has been extensively documented
in asset markets.14
In particular, we assume that to issue bonds of maturity τ at date t, the government decides
r ∗ (t) ψ(τ, t) = δ +

particular, I is the space of functions g(τ, t) on [0, T ] × [0, ∞) such that e−ρt g is square Lebesgue-integrable.
14 See Foucault et al. (2013) for a textbook treatment of liquidity and market micro-structure and Stoll (2003),
Madhavan (2000) and Vayanos and Wang (2013a) for reviews. The three main economic forces explored by this
literature are: (i) inventory management of financial intermediaries, (ii) adverse selection and, (iii) order processing
costs. Seminal inventory problem papers are Ho and Stoll (1983), Huang and Stoll (1997), Grossman and Miller
(1988), and Weill (2007). In the case of adverse selection, see Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Kyle (1985) or Easley
and O’hara (1987). A general reference of the implications of order processing costs is Foucault et al. (2013). A
large empirical literature has documented the presence of price impact. For example, see Madhavan and Smidt
(1991), Madhavan and Sofianos (1998), Hendershott and Seasholes (2007) or Naik and Yadav (2003a,b).
13 In

9

to auction ι (τ, t) bonds. The participants in that auction are a continuum of investment bankers.
Bankers participate in the auction and buy the total bond issuance. This is the wholesale market.
Then, bankers offload bonds to international investors in a retail (secondary) market. As in
Duffie et al. (2005), bankers have higher costs of capital than investors. In particular, bankers’
cost of capital is r ∗ (t) + η, where η > 0 is an exogenous spread. In the retail market, bankers are
continuously contacted by investors. The contact flow is µyss per instant. Each contact results
in an infinitesimal bond purchase by investors from a banker’s bond inventory. Thus, in an
interval ∆t, the stock of bonds sold by the banker is µyss ∆t. We assume that bankers extract all
the surplus from the international investors.
The key friction that translates into a liquidity cost for the government is that it takes time
for bankers to liquidate their bond portfolios. This, together with the fact that bankers have an
inventory holding cost due to the cost of capital, implies that the larger the auction the longer
the waiting time to resell a bond and, thus, the lower the price the banker is willing to offer
in an auction. As auction size vanishes, the opposite occurs, and the price converges to the
market price ψ(τ, t). These properties are common to OTC models, e.g., Duffie et al. (2005).
In Appendix B, we present an exact solution to the auction price as a function of the market
price and the issuance size. Here we present an approximation, a first-order Taylor expansion
around ι = 0, which yields a convenient linear expression for the auction price:
q(ι, τ, t) ≈ ψ(τ, t) −

1 η
ψ(τ, t)ι(τ, t).
2 µyss
|{z}

(2.5)

λ̄

Thus, the approximate liquidity cost function is λ (τ, t, ι) ≈ 21 λ̄ψ(τ, t)ι. The term λ̄ is a liquidity
cost coefficient which increases with the spread and decreases with the contact flow.
More General Liquidity Costs. An implicit assumption behind this formulation is that
there are no congestion externalities: the contact flow is independent of the outstanding debt at
a given maturity. We may consider two departures to this case. First, we could allow for a price
impact that spills across maturities and, in that case, equation (2.5) would depend on the entire
issuance function, ι(·, t), and not only the issuance at a given maturity. This departure would
still feature liquidity costs that depend on issuances. A second departure would be to allow
for liquidity costs that depend on the stock of outstanding debt. In principle our methodology
can also deal with that situation. In fact, the solution would share a similarity with the case of
default analyzed in section 4. We discuss this connection again in section 5.
We now return to the government’s problem and make no further reference to the source of
the liquidity costs.

10

Government problem. The government maximizes the utility of the households given by
ˆ
V [ f (·, 0)] =

∞

max

{ι(τ,t), f (τ,t),c(t)}t≥0,τ ∈[0,T ] 0

e−ρt U (c (t)) dt,

(2.6)

subject to the law of motion of debt (2.1), the budget constraint (2.2), the initial condition f 0 and
debt prices (2.3). The object V is the value functional, which maps the initial debt profile given
by f 0 , into a real number. It is a functional because the state variable is infinite-dimensional.15

2.2

Solution: the debt issuance rule

We can employ infinite-dimensional optimization techniques to solve the government’s problem. This section presents a gist of the approach. A full proof is in Appendix C.1. The main
idea is to formulate a Lagrangian:
ˆ

∞

L [ι, f ] =
0

ˆ
e−ρt U

ˆ

y (t) − f (0, t) +
e

0

0

[q (t, τ, ι) ι (τ, t) − δ f (τ, t)] dτ dt
0

∞ˆ T

+

!

T

−ρt



∂f
∂f
j (τ, t) − + ι (τ, t) +
∂t
∂τ


dτdt,

where we substitute consumption and bond prices from the objective function using the budget
constraint (2.2) and the bond price schedule (2.3). The second line is the law of motion of the
debt distribution, to which we attach the Lagrange multiplier j (τ, t). The necessary conditions
are obtained by a classic variational argument. The idea is that, at the optimum, the optimal
issuance and debt paths cannot be improved. A first condition is that no infinitesimal variation
around the control ι can produce an increase in the Lagrangian. This implies that:


∂q
U (c(t)) q (t, τ, ι) + ι (τ, t)
∂ι
0



= − j (τ, t) .

(2.7)

This necessary condition is intuitive: the issuance of a (τ, t)-bond produces a marginal cost and
a marginal benefit, and both margins must be equal at an optimum. The marginal benefit is the
marginal utility of the marginal increase in consumption, which equals the average price of that
∂q
bond, q, plus the price impact of an additional issuance, ∂ι ι. The marginal cost of the issuance
is summarized in the Lagrange multiplier, − j, which captures the forward-looking information
on the bond repayment, as explained next.
A second condition is that no infinitesimal variation over the state f can yield an improvement in value. The solution cannot be improved as long as the Lagrange multipliers j satisfy
15 An alternative approach to solving for the optimal solutions, proposed by Golosov et al. (2014), Sachs et
al. (2016), and Tsyvinski and Werquin (2017), is to analyze the welfare gains of perturbations from (potentially
suboptimal) policies observed in practice.

11

the following PDE:
ρj (τ, t) = −U 0 (c (t)) δ +

∂j
∂j
− , τ ∈ (0, T ],
∂t ∂τ

(2.8)

with a boundary condition: j (0, t) = −U 0 (c (t)) and a transversality condition limt→∞ e−ρt j(τ, t) =
0.
Each Lagrange multiplier is forward-looking because it captures future repayment costs in
the form of a continuous-time present-value formula. The first term, −U 0 (c (t)) δ, is a disutility
flow associated with the marginal cost of coupon payments. The second and third terms, ∂j/∂t
and ∂j/∂τ, capture the change in flow utility as time and the maturity of the bond progress. For
interpretation purposes, it is convenient to translate the multiplier j from utils into consumption
units. This change of units is useful to transform each multiplier into a financial cost. Define a
transformed multiplier as v (τ, t) ≡ − j (τ, t) /U 0 (c (t)) . We refer to v as the domestic valuation
of a (τ, t)-bond. Aided with this definition, we re-express the first-order conditions (2.7) and
(2.8) as
∂q
ι (τ, t) + q (t, τ, ι) = v (τ, t) ,
(2.9)
∂ι
and the PDE,
∂v ∂v
− , if τ ∈ (0, T ],
(2.10)
r (t) v (τ, t) = δ +
∂t
∂τ
with terminal condition v (0, t) = 1. The rate r (t) is defined as
.

U 00 (c (t)) c(t) c(t)
r (t) ≡ ρ −
.
U 0 (c (t)) c(t)

(2.11)

Different from r ∗ (t), the rate r (t) is the infinitesimal domestic discount factor. Under Constant
1− σ 1
Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) utility, U (c) = c 1−−
σ , the domestic discount factor satisfies the
classical formula r (t) = ρ + σċ(t)/c(t). There is a remarkable connection between the domestic
valuation (2.10) and the market-price equations (2.4): both are net present values of the cash
flows associated with each bond, the only difference between them is the interest rate used
to discount the flows. The market price of the bond is computed discounting at r ∗ , whereas
the domestic valuation uses r. The optimal issuances given by (2.9) depend on the spread
between the two valuations. The next proposition summarizes the discussion and provides a
full characterization of the solution:
Proposition 1. (Necessary conditions) If a solution {c(t), ι (τ, t) , f (τ, t)}t≥0 to (2.6) exists then domestic valuations satisfy equation (2.10), optimal issuances ι (τ, t) are given by the issuance rule (2.9)
and the evolution of the debt distribution can be recovered from the law of motion for debt, (2.1), given
the initial condition f 0 . Finally, c(t) and r (t) must be consistent with the budget constraint (2.2) and
the formula for the internal discount, (2.11).
Proof. See Appendix C.1.
12

There are two noteworthy features of the solution. The first feature is a decentralization result:
We can interpret the solution as if the government designates a continuum of traders, one for
each τ, to give an domestic price to its debt, given the domestic discount factor r. Each trader
then issues debt according to the rule in (2.9). The discount factor, of course, must be internally
consistent with the consumption path produced by issuances.
The second feature is that issuances are given by a simple debt issuance rule. Considering
the liquidity cost function (2.5), the optimal-issuance condition (2.9) can be written as:
ι(τ, t) =

ψ(τ, t) − v(τ, t)
.
ψ(τ, t)
{z
}
|
value gap

1
λ̄
|{z}

(2.12)

1/liquidity coefficient

The rule states that the optimal issuance of a (τ, t)-bond should equal the product of the value
gap and the inverse liquidity coefficient. This value gap is the difference between the market
price, ψ, and the domestic valuation of a bond, v, relative to the market price. When the value
gap is positive, a trader wants to issue debt because the market price exceeds the valuation of
that debt. A force contains the desire to issue, the liquidity cost, which captures the reduction
in price as the issuance becomes larger. This force appears as the coefficient 1/λ̄. The lower λ̄,
the greater the issuance.
The government’s problem has a dual cost-minimization representation. The dual problem
minimizes the net present value of financial expenses, given the discount r (t) constructed out
of a desired consumption path c(t). Formally, the dual problem is:
ˆ
min

{ι(τ,t)}t≥0,τ ∈[0,T ] 0

∞

e−

´t
0

ˆ
r (s)ds

ˆ

T

δ f (τ, t) dτ −

f (0, t) +
0

!

T

q(τ, t, ι)ι(τ, t)dτ

dt

(2.13)

0

where r (t) is given by (2.11), the minimization is subject to the law of motion of debt (2.1) and
the initial condition f 0 , and debt prices satisfy (2.3). The expression in parentheses is the net
flow of financial receipts. This dual problem is consistent with a debt-management office mandate to minimize the financial expenses of a given expenditure path. The proof is in Appendix
C.2.

2.3

Asymptotic behavior

The long-run behavior of the solution can be characterized analytically, as shown in Appendix
C.3. In some instances, the solution reaches a steady state and in others the solution converges
asymptotically to zero consumption. Whether there is a well-defined steady state with positive
consumption depends on the value of λ̄. In particular, we obtain an expression for the threshold
value λ̄o . A steady state exists if and only if λ̄ > λ̄o . If λ̄ ≤ λ̄o , there is no steady state;

13

∗ − ρ and r ( t ) converges to a
consumption decreases asymptotically at the exponential rate rss


limit value r∞ λ̄ . The asymptotic discount factor r∞ λ̄ is increasing and continuous in λ̄

∗.
with bounds r∞ λ̄o = ρ and r∞ (0) = rss
In the case where λ̄ > λ̄o , the solution renders an analytic expression for the steady state,
with market prices and valuations:
∗

∗τ
1 − e−ρτ
1 − e−rss τ
−rss
+
e
and
v
(
τ
)
=
δ
+ e−ρτ .
ψss (τ ) = δ
ss
∗
rss
ρ

(2.14)
−ρτ

∗ , all bonds are issued at par, ψ ( τ ) = 1, and v ( τ ) = r ∗ 1−e
Assuming that δ = rss
+ e−ρτ .
ss
ss
ss
ρ
Issuances at steady state, ι ss (τ ), follow from (2.12), and the outstanding debt satisfies

ˆ

T

f ss (τ ) =

ι ss (s)ds,

(2.15)

τ

so their expressions are given by:
∗
∗

ρ − rss
ρ − rss
ι ss (τ ) =
1 − e−ρτ , and f ss (τ ) =
ρλ̄
ρλ̄

ˆ

T


1 − e−ρs ds.

(2.16)

τ

We can investigate these expressions to learn about the forces that govern the steady state debt
profile. In a deterministic environment, the entire maturity structure in the steady state is determined by the desire to spread out issuances to minimize the liquidity costs. Nonetheless, this
does not produce a uniform issuance distribution as long-maturity bonds have to be rolled over
less frequently than short-maturity ones, and hence the use of the former is preferable in order
to minimize rollover costs. There is, therefore, a tension between issuing debt at long maturities
to minimize rollover, and spreading out debt. The solution is that, in the steady state, issuances
are increasing in maturity, which can be verified through the derivative of the issuance rule with
respect to maturity:
∗
∂ι ss
ρ − rss
=
e−ρτ > 0.
∂τ
λ̄

There is no issuance at the shortest maturity, ι ss (0) = 0, because domestic valuations coincide
with market prices. Differences in valuations are higher for longer maturities, as the govern∗ , whereas the market price of all
ment discounts future cash flows at a rate ρ greater than rss
bonds is constant and equal to 1. This means that, at the margin, the government is willing to
receive a lower price on a long-maturity bond, because it requires less frequent retrading.
By contrast to the maturity distribution of issuances, that of debt is decreasing in maturity.
The reason is simple: because debt is the integral of issuances (see equation 2.15), it should be
decreasing in maturity as long as issuances are positive, which is guaranteed by the fact that

14

the government is more impatient than foreign investors:
∂ f ss
= −ι ss (τ ) < 0.
∂τ
∗ ) the maturity profile shifts toward longer maCeteris paribus, as we increase the spread (ρ − rss
turities and the overall stock of debt increases. The liquidity cost coefficient decreases issuances
in equal proportion.
The analysis above is also useful to discuss what would happen if we allowed the government to issue at any maturity, T → ∞. Notice first how any comparison across economies with
different values of the maximum available maturity, T, should be done via a normalization to
avoid the artificial disappearance of the liquidity costs as the maximum maturity increases. In
´T
particular, we must keep the aggregate contact flow constant, i.e., keep a constant 0 µ ( T ) dτ
as we increase T, which implies µ ( T ) = µ (1) /T. As a result of this normalization, the liquidity
coefficient depends linearly on the maximum maturity, λ̄ ( T ) = λ̄ (1) T. If we take the limit as
T → ∞ in the steady state equation (2.16), we obtain a flat debt profile
∗
ρ − rss
lim f ss (τ; T ) = lim
T →∞
T →∞ ρ λ̄ (1) T



e−ρT − e−ρτ
T−τ+
ρ



=

∗
ρ − rss
,
ρλ̄(1)

for all τ. As a flat debt profile implies an infinite expenditure in coupon repayments in the
budget constraint (2.2) and thus an infinitely negative consumption, we may conclude that no
steady state exists and that consumption decreases asymptotically toward zero. Asymptotic
individual issuances, ι ∞ (τ ), also converge to zero as T increases. Asymptotic issuances are
increasing in maturity but they progressively converge toward a flat structure.16 Figure H.1
in Appendix H verifies these results for the particular calibration described below. The figure
displays the asymptotic values of consumption, discount factor, and the issuance and debt
distributions for different values of T ranging from 20 to 1000 years.

2.4

The cases without liquidity costs and vanishing liquidity costs

Proposition 1 characterizes the optimal debt profile in the presence of liquidity costs. Here we
characterize the solution without liquidity costs and at the limit when liquidity costs vanish.
As expected, in the absence of liquidity costs, the maturity profile is indeterminate. In contrast,
the limit solution as liquidity costs vanish features an uniquely determined debt profile.
16 These

two results regarding issuance are a direct consequence of the fact, explained in Appendix C.3, that the

∗ 

r∞ (λ̄( T ))−rss
−r∞ (λ̄( T ))τ
∗ ≤ r
limit discount factor is rss
λ̄
≤
ρ
and
hence
lim
ι
τ;
T
=
1
−
e
= 0 and
(
)
∞
T →∞ ∞
r∞ (λ̄( T ))λ̄( T )
∗
r∞ (λ̄( T ))−rss
∂ι ∞
e−ρτ > 0 with limT →∞ ∂ι∂τ∞ = 0. In the limit, the domestic discount converges to the risk-free rate,
∂τ =
λ̄( T )
∗

r∞ (λ̄)−rss
∗ , to ensure that the asymptotic debt distribution is zero, lim
limT →∞ r∞ λ̄ = rss
T →∞ f ∞ ( τ; T ) = r λ̄ λ̄(1) = 0,
∞( )
and hence that there is no infinite expenditure in coupon repayments.

15

Consider first the case without liquidity costs, i.e., λ̄ = 0. The necessary conditions for
a solution are still summarized in Proposition 1. Since the issuance rule (2.9) still holds, any
interior solution must satisfy an equality between domestic valuations and prices, v (τ, t) =
ψ (τ, t) for any τ. This in turn requires an equality between the domestic discount factor and
the interest rate, r ∗ (t) = r (t). This feature of the limit solution should be familiar: domestic
discount factors are equal to the interest rate in standard consumption-savings problems. This
observation is enough to characterize the solution at the limit. Denote the market value of the
government’s debt as:
ˆ T
ψ (τ, t) f (τ, t) dτ.
(2.17)
B(t) ≡
0

Proposition 7 in Appendix C.4 shows that any solution of the government problem with λ̄ = 0
yields the same value as a consumption-savings problem with a single instantaneous bond in
amount B(t), a budget constraint Ḃ(t) = r ∗ (t) B(t) − y(t) + c(t) and an initial condition given
by B(0). Hence, there are infinitely many solutions that satisfy (2.17) for a B(t) that solves
the problem with an instantaneous bond. The intuition is simple, given that the yield curve
is arbitrage-free and the discount factor coincides with the interest rate, there is no way to
structure debt to reduce the cost of servicing debt. All bonds are redundant, but the path of
consumption is consistent with r ∗ (t) = r (t) and an intertemporal budget.
Now consider the limit solution as λ̄ → 0. In Appendix C.5, Proposition 8, we present a
∗ , the limiting
general formula for the limiting distribution. In the particular case where δ = rss
issuance distribution is determinate and equal to:
∗

1 − e−rss τ
lim ι ∞ (τ ) =
∗ κ,
1 − e−rss T
λ̄→0
where κ is a positive constant that guarantees that the budget constraint is consistent with zero
consumption at the limit. The debt profile shares the qualitative features of the case with positive liquidity costs in Proposition 1; debt issuances are also tilted toward long term bonds,
but now ρ plays no role. The result shows that the solution correspondence is upper hemicontinuous, but it is not lower hemi-continuous because for any arbitrarily small cost the distribution is determined. This limiting solution can be employed as a selection device that determines the maturity structure.

2.5

Calibration

To provide further insights, we calibrate the model to the Spanish economy. The objective of the
calibration is to illustrate the ability of the model to generate realistic debt profiles, and to study
the qualitative and quantitative responses to unexpected income and interest rate shocks in the
next section. Following Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), we set the value of the coefficient of the
16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0
2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030

Figure 2.1: Maturity distribution. Data for Spain as of July 2018 and the model in the steady state.
∗ , to 4 percent. We normalize
utility function, σ, to 2, and the long-run annual risk-free rate, rss
income yss to 1 and the maximum maturity, T, to 20 years, as roughly 90 percent of Spanish
debt has a maturity of less than 20 years. The coupon, δ, is set to 4 percent so the market price
equals one at all maturities. Steady state output is normalized to one. In order to calibrate the
price impact of bonds, λ̄, we need to set the values of the arrival rate, µ, and the spread, η, in
equation (2.5). In the model, η represents the cost of capital for market makers. We calibrate
this spread to 150 basis points. As a reference, we obtain an approximation of the cost of capital
of the five biggest US banks in terms of their assets and compute the average spread. More
details are provided in Appendix D.
We jointly calibrate the discount factor, ρ, and the arrival rate, µ, to match the average level
of Spanish public debt and to replicate the average time that market makers need to exhaust
bond inventories. In particular, the calibration tries to match two targets: First, the Spanish
government net debt, obtained from the International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook
(IMF WEO), was 46 percent of GDP over the period 1985-2016. Second, according to Fleming
and Rosenberg (2008), US primary dealers exhaust 60 percent of their inventory one week after
they participate in the US Treasury primary market. These two targets imply that, in the steady
state,
ˆ T
µT
= 0.6, and
f (τ )dτ = 0.46.
´T
0
0 ι ( τ ) dτ

Accordingly, we set the value of µ to 0.0011 and the value of ρ to 0.0416. The implied value of
∂q
∂q
λ̄ is 7.08. Note that ∂ι qι ≈ ∂ι ψι = − 12 λ̄ι. We can compute the elasticity of auction prices with
respect to changes in the size of the issue that is produced by this calibration, to get a sense of

17

1
0.0415
0.041

0.5

0.0405
0

0.04
0

0.5

1

1.5

0

0.2

2

0.15

1.5

0.1

1

0.05

0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

0
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20


Figure 2.2: Steady-state equilibrium objects as a function of the liquidity cost λ̄ .

Note: The thick

red line in panels (c) and (d) indicates the values at the threshold λ̄o .

the magnitude of the price impact. The maximum value of issuances is 0.003, for a maturity of
20 years, and hence the elasticity of the auction price equals − 12 × 7.08 × 0.003 = 0.011. This
means that if the government duplicates the size of its steady-state issuance of the 20-year bond,
the bond price falls by 1.1 percent at the time of the auction.17
Figure 2.1 presents the steady state debt profile generated by the calibrated model alongside
the data corresponding to the Spanish debt profile of July 2018. Admittedly, the comparison has
some limitations: we compare a steady state object of the model with an empirical counterpart
in a particular period.18 Nevertheless, the figure shows that, despite its simplicity, the model
reproduces remarkably well the decreasing maturity profile of Spanish debt. This figure corresponds to outstanding amounts. We discuss the corresponding data for debt issuances in Spain
between 2000 and 2018 in Appendix E.
Under the calibration, the model has a proper steady state because the calibration satisfies
λ̄ > λ̄o . Figure 2.2 displays steady-state objects as functions of λ̄. The value of the threshold
λ̄o is 0.14, well below the calibrated value of λ̄, which is 7.08. Panels (a) and (b) show how, for
liquidity costs below the threshold, asymptotic consumption c∞ is zero because no steady state
exists. Similarly, as liquidity costs vanish, the discount factor r∞ converges to the annual risk17 The

magnitude of the price impact is roughly similar to other estimates in the literature. For instance, Faraglia
et al. (Forthcoming) consider average auction costs of 0.0028 for 10-year, 0.0026 for 9-year and 0.000284 for 1-year
bonds based on the empirical findings for the US market of Lou et al. (2013). In our model, calibrated for Spain,
these costs amount to 0.0065, 0.0060 and 0.00078, respectively.
18 Notwithstanding, we have repeated the analysis for other periods with similar results. Results are available
upon request.

18

free rate of 4 percent. The thick red line in panels (c) and (d) indicates the values at the threshold
λ̄o . The black lines above it are the values for λ̄ ≤ λ̄o . The limiting distribution is approached
as λ̄ goes to zero and it is relatively similar to the distribution at the threshold. This implies
that, even in the case of liquidity cost values such that no steady state exists, the asymptotic
debt and issuance profiles are approximately the same as those at the threshold λ̄ = λ̄o .

2.6

Maturity management with unexpected shocks

The computation of the transitional dynamics that satisfy the analytic expressions of the solution in Proposition 1 requires a numerical algorithm. The idea follows directly from Proposition
1: Given a guess for {c (t)}, we obtain the domestic discount factor {r (t)} through equation
(2.11). This discount factor produces valuations {v (τ, t)} according to (2.10), which, in turn,
determine the issuances {ι (τ, t)} through the optimal issuance rule (2.9). Issuances produce
a path of debt profiles { f (τ, t)} obtained from the law of motion of debt, (2.1). Given these
debt profiles and the corresponding issuance policies, the budget constraint, equation (2.2), determines a new consumption path. The transition to the steady state is a fixed point problem
in {c (t)}, where the guess and resulting consumption paths should coincide. We present the
details of this numerical algorithm in Appendix F.
We now study transitions after unexpected shocks to income or to the short-term interest
rate. Transitions are initiated from a steady state debt profile. In the experiments, we reset either
y (0) or r ∗ (0) to an initial value, and then let the variable revert back to the steady state. Once
either variable is reset, the entire path is anticipated. We study the dynamics of the debt profile.
These dynamics are governed by two forces: consumption smoothing and bond-price reaction. Both
forces are counterbalanced by the liquidity costs.
Consumption smoothing refers to the management of the debt profile in order to smooth
consumption along a transition path. Consumption smoothing is active only when the government is risk averse, i.e., σ > 0. This force operates even without liquidity costs, but the
force has an effect on the debt maturity profile only when liquidity costs are present, λ̄ > 0.19
This force is summarized by the internal discount factor r (t) = ρ + σċ(t)/c(t). In fact, when
r ∗ is constant (ψ = 1), the value gap equals 1 − v. In this case consumption growth shapes the
maturity profile directly from the solution to v presented in Proposition 1: if a shock produces
a growing consumption path, the domestic discount increases and the debt distribution tilts
toward longer maturities, as valuations at longer horizons are affected more. The increase in
domestic discounts, or equivalently the decline in domestic valuations, also induces an increase
in the volume of issuances.
Bond-price reaction is a more subtle force. This force determines how the debt profile
19 Without

liquidity costs, permanent income and the path of interest rates determine the consumption path, but
the debt maturity profile is indeterminate, as we discussed above.

19

changes with bond prices, ψ(τ, t). It is present even with risk neutrality, i.e., when we shut
down consumption smoothing. This force only plays a role in the presence of liquidity costs,
λ̄ > 0. Without liquidity costs, the domestic discount factor coincides with the interest rate,
r (t) = r ∗ (t), and since bond prices are arbitrage free, the government is indifferent between
issuing at any two maturities. With liquidity costs, even a risk-neutral government is no longer
indifferent. The reason is that liquidity costs allow for a gap between r (t) and r ∗ (t) as rebalancing is now costly. Any gap between these two rates is compounded differently along different
time horizons, and thus the government faces different consumption paths depending on its
maturity choice. We can again observe how this force operates through the value gap in the
simplified case of risk neutrality. In this case consumption smoothing is not active, and valuations are constant and equal to their steady state value vss . If a shock temporarily increases
short-term rates, thereby reducing market prices −specially at long maturities, the optimal issuance rule (2.12) prescribes a decline in debt issuances and a tilting of the maturity distribution
toward shorter maturities. In the general case with risk aversion, interest rate shocks produce
a race between consumption smoothing and bond-price reaction.
To gather further insights into these two forces, we analyze the responses to unexpected
shocks to y(t) and r ∗ (t) separately. Consider first the response to an income shock, displayed
in figure 2.3. In the experiment, income follows dy(t) = αy (yss − y(t)) dt, the continuous-time
counterpart of an AR(1) process. We set y(0) to a level 5 percent below its steady state value,
corresponding to a major recession in Spain.20 The reversion coefficient, αy , is set to 0.2 in line
with Spanish data. In this case, the only active force is consumption smoothing, as the interest
rate remains constant.
Figure 2.3 displays the transition. Panels (a) and (b) show how the fall in income produces a
decline in consumption on impact, followed by a recovery. The expected consumption growth
produces an increase in the domestic discount on impact, which reverts back to the steady state.
Since there is an increase in domestic discounting, domestic valuations decrease, which acts like
a reduction in the perceived cost of debt. Given that bond prices are constant, the optimal issuance rule (2.12) dictates an increase in the issuances at all maturities, as displayed in panel (e)
´T
and hence in the outstanding amount of total debt (panels c and f), b(t) ≡ 0 f (τ, t) dτ. One
noticeable feature is that new issuances are not homogeneously distributed across maturities:
they are more concentrated in longer maturities, as expected. This is because long-term domestic valuations are more sensitive to changes in the discount factor. This produces an increase in
the average debt duration of the portfolio, computed as the average of the Macaulay duration
of each individual bond (panel d).
The intuition for this pattern is the following. In response to a negative income shock, the
government attempts to smooth consumption by issuing more debt. Because of the liquidity
costs, the government tilts issuances toward long-term debt to minimize the liquidity costs as20 See

Appendix D for further details on the calibration of the experiments.

20

1

5
4.8

0.98

4.6
4.4

0.96

4.2
4
-10

0

10

20

30

0.94
-10

40

60

6.4

55

6.3

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

6.2

50

6.1
45
6
40
-10

0

10

20

30

5.9
-10

40

0.03

0.3

0.02

0.2

0.01

0.1

0
-10

0

10

20

30

0
-10

40

Figure 2.3: Response to an unexpected temporary drop in income.
sociated with debt rollover during the period in which the decline in income, and consumption,
is more acute. The desire of the government to delay these rollover costs explains the lengthening in the maturity.
To pry on the mechanism, figure 2.4 displays the optimal transition path when at time 0 it
is revealed that a positive income shock lasting one year will hit the economy 20 years ahead
(panel b). Prior to the arrival of the shock, the government progressively issues debt that matures when the shock hits. In particular, the first year it issues 20-year bonds, in the second year
it issues 19-year bonds, and so on (panel e). As displayed in panels (c) and (d), the government
not only steadily decreases the maturity of the issuances, it also increases the amount of debt
issued as the date of realization of the shock approaches. The result is a progressive build-up of

21

30

1.06

20

1.04

10
1.02
0
1

-10
-20
-10

0

10

20

30

0.98
-10

40

50

6.2

48

6.1

46

6

44

5.9

42
-10

0

10

20

30

5.8
-10

40

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

0.2

0.02

0.15
0.01
0.1
0
0.05
-0.01
-10

0

10

20

30

0
-10

40

Figure 2.4: Response to an unexpected drop in income 20 years ahead.
debt, which allows a relatively constant consumption path greater than its long-term value. The
average duration is longer than its long-term average during the first 14 years, because the government issues bonds with longer maturities than the average (around six years) and declines
afterwards until the shock arrival. Once the shock hits, the government uses the extra income
to (i) repay the principals of all the debt issued in the pre-shock period, (ii) repurchase part of
its debt stock, especially at short-term maturities and (iii) increase temporarily consumption.
As in the previous exercise, this strategy minimizes the liquidity costs because the government
spreads out bond issuances and avoids any rollover of the extra debt prior to the shock arrival.
Next, consider an unexpected shock to r ∗ (t), as presented in figure 2.5. We let dr ∗ (t) =
∗ − r ∗ ( t )) dt, with α = 0.2, which is also taken from the Spanish data. On impact, the
αr (rss
r

22

5

1

4.8
0.98

4.6
4.4

0.96

4.2
4
-10

0

10

20

30

0.94
-10

40

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

0

10

20

30

40

6.4

60
55

6.2
50
6

45
40
-10

0

10

20

30

5.8
-10

40

0.03

0.3

0.02

0.2

0.01

0.1

0
-10

0

10

20

30

0
-10

40

Figure 2.5: Response to an unexpected temporary shock to interest rates.
interest rate increases from 4 percent to 5 percent. The shock produces a consumption drop of
the same magnitude as the income shock in figure 2.3, which makes both shocks comparable.
In this case, both the bond-price reaction force and consumption smoothing are active.
We can interpret the transition as follows. On impact, the domestic discount jumps to 5
percent, as shown in panel (a) of figure 2.5. This narrows the value gap across all maturities.
The initial effect of a narrower value gap is a decrease in all issuances (panel e). This captures
the notion that, upon an interest rate increase, the government wants to sacrifice present consumption to mitigate a higher debt burden. A noticeable feature is that the interest rate shock
produces an initial reduction in the average debt duration. This occurs even though the path
of consumption resembles the one of the income shock that produces the opposite prediction

23

regarding debt maturity. The reason why maturity shrinks with the rate shock is that, in this
case, the valuation gap decreases more for long-term bonds. The valuation gap is proxied by
the interest rate gap, r (t) − r ∗ (t), which narrows on impact, but widens again as consumption
recovers. This tells us that bond-price reaction dominates over consumption smoothing.
The intuition in this case is straightforward. Faced with temporary lower bond prices, the
government decides to issue less debt. This reduction is more relevant for long-term bonds,
because these are the bonds that experience the larger price declines. This effect is, nevertheless, partially mitigated by consumption smoothing because the initial decline in consumption
encourages, as discussed above, the issuance of long-term bonds.
In order to isolate the bond-price reaction force, figure H.2 in Appendix H displays the transitions when the government is risk neutral, i.e, σ = 0. The effects of figure 2.5 are magnified
as consumption smoothing is not active. As figure H.2 shows, once the shock arrives and bond
prices fall, the government decides to directly repurchase debt, especially at long maturities,
and to resell it when prices go up again. This summarizes well the essence of this force: because liquidity costs make it expensive to rebalance debt across maturities, the government
buys (or issues less) debt when it is temporarily cheap in order to resell it (or issue more) when
prices recover.
Summing up, the introduction of liquidity costs explains the opposite responses, in terms of
the issuance profile, to contractionary shocks. In the case of an income shock, the desire to issue
more debt to smooth consumption will necessarily depress bond prices in the primary market,
forcing the government to spread issuances to minimize the price impact and tilt them toward
long maturities to reduce the rollover during the recession. In the case of an interest rate shock,
the previous channel is more than compensated by the change in bond prices in the secondary
market, and hence, the government finds it optimal to temporarily reduce issuances in the long
part of the yield curve because those are the bonds most affected by the decline in prices.

3

Risk

The previous section analyzed optimal debt-management under perfect foresight. This section
presents a characterization that allows for risk. The goal is to understand how the anticipation
of shocks affects the shape of the optimal debt profile and the ability to insure.

3.1

The model with risk

Risk is modeled as a single jump at a random date. We introduce notation to distinguish prefrom post-jump variables: for any variable x, we represent its value prior to the shock by a hat,
i.e., x̂ (t), and use x (t) to express the value after the jump event.

24

The exogenous state X (t), comprising income, y(t), and the risk-free rate, r ∗ (t), now features a jump at a random date to . Prior to the jump, the state is denoted as X̂ (t). The random
date to is exponentially distributed with a parameter φ. Upon the jump, a new value for the
state is drawn, X (to ) ∼ G (·| X̂ (to )), where G (·) is the conditional distribution of the exogenous
state given its value prior to the shock.21 We let {y(to ), r ∗ (to )} take values in the compact space


[yl , yh ] × rl∗ , rh∗ and let G (·| X̂ (to )) be a discrete or continuous distribution. We denote the
conditional expectation operator under the distribution G (·; X (t− )) by EtX [·].
Once the jump occurs, each element x (t) ∈ X (t) follows a continuous mean-reverting process:
ẋ (t) = −α x ( x (t) − xss )
where α x captures the speed of mean reversion to its steady-state value xss . Obviously, there
is risk before the one-time jump, but after the jump the economy becomes the perfect-foresight
one of the previous section.
With risk, bond prices satisfy a standard pricing equation with a single jump. The flow
value of the bond, δ, plus the expected price appreciation should equal the value of the bond at
the market rate r̂ ∗ (t) ψ̂(τ, t). Thus, the market price is now given by:
r̂ ∗ (t) ψ̂(τ, t) = δ +



∂ψ̂ ∂ψ̂
−
+ φEtX ψ (τ, t, Xt ) − ψ̂ (τ, t) , if t < to ,
∂t
∂τ

(3.1)

with the terminal condition ψ̂(0, t) = 1. As before, the market price ψ (τ, t, Xt ) denotes the
perfect-foresight price of the bond after the shock if the initial state is Xt , which still satisfies
(2.4). The price that the government receives is still given by (2.5).
Prior to the shock, the government problem is:

h

"ˆ

i

V̂ fˆ (·, 0) , X (0) =

max

{ι(τ,t), f (τ,t),c(t)}t≥0,τ ∈[0,T ]

Et

to

e
0

−ρt

U (ĉ (t)) dt + e

−ρto

EtXo

#
h h
ii
o
o
V fˆ (·, t ) , X (t )
,

(3.2)
where V
is the value given by (2.6). The maximization is subject to the law of
motion of debt (2.1), the budget constraint (2.2) and the initial condition fˆ (·, 0) = f 0 , and bond
h

fˆ (·, to ) , X (to )

i

prices are given by (3.1).

3.2

Solution: risk-adjusted valuations

To characterize the problem, we adapt the perfect-foresight solution to allow for risk. The
proof of the solution to the problem with risk can be found in Appendix C.6. The approach is
X (t) is right-continuous. If the jump occurs at to , the left-limit X̂ (to ) ≡ lims↑to X̂ (s) jumps to some
∼ G (·; X (to )).

21 Formally,

new

X (to )

25

the same as the one used to prove Proposition 1: We construct a Lagrangian and then apply
variational techniques to obtain the first-order conditions. Proposition 2 below is the analogue
to Proposition 1.
Proposition 2. (Necessary conditions) If a solution {c(t), ι (τ, t) , f (τ, t)}t≥0 to (3.2) exists, it satisfies
the same conditions of the perfect-foresight solution (Proposition 1) with valuations prior to the shock
now satisfying the PDE


U 0 (c (t))
∂v̂ ∂v̂
X
− v̂ (τ, t) , τ ∈ (0, T ],
r̂ (t) v̂ (τ, t) = δ +
−
+ φEt v (τ, t) 0
∂t
∂τ
U (ĉ (t))

(3.3)

with boundary condition v̂ (0, t) = 1.
Proposition 2 shows how the decentralization scheme of the perfect-foresight problem carries over to the problem with risk: The optimal issuance rule still holds, but applies to the
pre-shock valuations, which now are adjusted for risk. After the shock, the transition and
asymptotic limits coincide with those of the perfect-foresight problem that takes as its initial
condition the debt profile at the time of the shock.
This decentralization shows that the effect of risk is captured exclusively through a correction in domestic valuations. The PDE is similar to the one that corresponds to the riskless
case, equation (2.10). The only difference is the last term on the right. This term is akin to
the correction in any expected present-value formula that features a jump. In the particular
case of domestic valuations, the expression captures that, upon the arrival of the shock, valuations jump from v̂ (τ, t) to v (τ, t), the latter term being corrected by the ratio of marginal
utilities. This ratio of marginal utilities captures an "exchange rate" between states. The domestic valuation after the shock, v (τ, t), is measured in goods after the arrival of the shock, but
the valuation v̂ (τ, t) is expressed in goods prior to the shock. The ratio of marginal utilities
tells us how goods are relatively valued in terms of utilities, before vis-à-vis after the shock. If a
shock produces a drop in consumption, the ratio of marginal utilities associated with that state
is greater than one. This correction captures that payments associated with a bond are more
costly in states where marginal utility jumps. This extra kick in the valuations affects bonds of
different maturities differently, as we illustrate below.
Although Proposition 2 characterizes the solution with risk, its computation involves solving a fixed point problem over a family of debt distributions. The reason for this complexity is
that any date t prior to the shock is associated with a jump in consumption from ĉ (t) to c (t).
The size of the jump is a function of the distribution f (·, t) . Through its influence on valuations,
the potential consumption jump affects the choice of issuances. Hence, a solution to the transition is a fixed point over a family of debt distributions, requiring a time-varying distribution
prior to the shock arrival consistent with the post-shock consumption path. This complexity
renders the numerical solution to the problem unfeasible, and we are forced to employ only
26

approximate solutions. If instead of a single jump, we were to consider multiple jumps, the
complexity would escalate even further. An analogous challenge appears in incomplete market models with aggregate shocks, which is why the literature uses the bounded-rationality
approximation of Krusell and Smith (1998) or equivalent approaches.
Our approach to analyze the influence of risk is to study the risky steady state (RSS) of the
problem. In our context, the RSS is defined as the asymptotic limit of variables prior to the
realization of the shock. In other words, the RSS is the state to which the solution converges
when shocks are expected to arrive but have not yet materialized. We obtain an explicit solution
to the valuations in the RSS:
ˆ
v̂rss (τ ) = e

−(r̂rss +φ)τ

+

τ

e
0

−(r̂rss +φ)(τ −s)



X
δ + φErss



U 0 (c (0))
v (s, 0)
U 0 (ĉrss )


ds, for τ ∈ (0, T ],

(3.4)
where v (τ, 0) is the valuation of the perfect-foresight problem with initial condition fˆrss (τ ).
The advantage of the RSS approach is that the RSS can be characterized as a fixed point in
the space of consumption policies, an object that is feasible to compute. In fact, the method used
to calculate a solution adds only one more unknown to the perfect-foresight algorithm; now we
must obtain the RSS consumption. The idea is to propose a guess of crss and the path {c(t)} and
then compute the valuations using (3.4) for the RSS and (2.10) for the valuation after the shock.
We then obtain issuances from the simple issuance rule (2.12). Given issuances, we compute
the debt profile in the RSS using the law of motion of debt (2.1). The budget constraint (2.2)
yields a new crss and a new path {c(t)}. Naturally, {c(t)} is the solution to the perfect-foresight
problem where f (τ, 0) = fˆrss (τ ).
We can exploit a decomposition to explain how risk alters the debt distribution from the deterministic steady state (DSS) to the RSS. The main force that shapes the maturity profile under
risk is insurance. Insurance is captured by the ratio of marginal utilities, U 0 (c (0)) /U 0 (ĉrss ),
in equation (3.3). Insurance is achieved in two ways: via self-insurance or hedging. By self insurance we refer to the fact that, in some cases, the government may decide to reduce its RSS
debt stock to minimize the fall in consumption after a negative income or interest rate shock.
Moreover, in the case of an interest rate shock, the government might, in principle, hedge the
fall in consumption by building a portfolio that offsets the impact of the shock. In Appendix
G.1 we analyze the particular case without liquidity costs and show how, in the case of interest
rate shocks, the government may perfectly hedge, whereas in the case of income shocks, it is
forced to self-insure.22
22 In

the case of interest rate shocks, we derive a generalization of the conditions that guarantee market completion discussed in Duffie and Huang (1985), Angeletos (2002) or Buera and Nicolini (2004).

27

3.3

The risky steady state

We now return to our calibration to analyze how quantitatively important the forces that risk
introduces are in shaping the maturity profile. To do so, we compute the RSS and analyze postshock transitions. We compare these dynamics with those following unexpected shocks when
the economy is at the deterministic steady state. Naturally, in both cases the economy converges
to the DSS as time progresses. We calibrate the shock intensity φ to 0.02. As explained in Appendix D, the value of the intensity is obtained by computing the cross-country frequency of a
yearly output decline greater than or equal to 5 percent. We maintain the rest of the calibration.
The comparisons are reported in figures 3.1 and 3.2 where solid lines denoted by DSS are
the dynamics of the perfect-foresight section and dashed lines denoted by RSS describe the
dynamics when the shock is expected.
Figure 3.1 reports responses to a shock that produces a 5 percent income drop. Compared
to the DSS, the total debt stock in the RSS prior to the shock (panels a and c) is smaller, 35
percent of GDP compared to 45 percent. The reason for this decline is self-insurance. Since
rates do not move, both hedging and bond-price reaction are shut down. Thus, the decline in
the stock of debt is a race between two forces, ex-post consumption smoothing and ex-ante selfinsurance. These forces are encoded in the valuations. Recall from the RSS valuation formula
(3.4) that two terms influence RSS valuations, namely the ratio of marginal utilities and postshock valuations. Panel (f) displays the valuation immediately after the arrival of the shock,
v(τ, 0). This value is lower than the DSS valuations, vss (τ ), reflecting that once the shock hits,
r (t) will increase. Despite v (τ, 0) being lower than vss (τ ), the RSS valuations are higher, i.e.,
vrss (τ ) > vss (τ ) > v (τ, 0), and this mechanically occurs because of the larger ratio of marginal
2
U 0 (c(0))
= 1.03. This tells us that self-insurance and consumption smoothing
utilities U 0 (ĉ ) = 0.986
0.971
rss
operate in opposite directions, with self-insurance as the dominant force, thereby producing a
lower stock of debt.
Another feature is that duration is slightly higher in the RSS (panel d). This can be entirely
explained by the change in the concavity of the valuations in the RSS, v̂rss (τ ), with respect to
valuations in the DSS, both displayed in panel (f). As explained in section 4.3, once the shock
hits, consumption smoothing extends the average duration to reduce rollover costs. This is
captured by the shape of v(τ, 0), which is inherited by v̂rss (τ ). The intuition is the following.
The government slightly tilts the debt distribution toward long maturities to reduce rollover
costs in the event of the shock arrival.
Next, consider the case of an interest rate shock. The stock of debt is 30 percent of GDP in
the RSS, a smaller value than the 45 percent in the deterministic steady state, as displayed in
panel (c) of figure 3.2. The reduction is seen at all maturities (panel a). Again, we can dissect
which forces drive these results by examining the effects on valuations and prices. As with the
income shock, consumption smoothing operates in the opposite direction of self-insurance, but

28

0.04

1

0.03

0.99

0.02

0.98

0.01

0.97

0
0

5

10

15

0.96
-10

20

60

6.6

50

6.4

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

6.2

40

6
30
-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

5.8
-10

60

1

1

0.99

0.99

0.98

0.98

0.97

0.97

0.96

0.96

0.95

0.95
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 3.1: Response to a shock to income. RSS is model starting at the risky steady state and DSS at
the deterministic steady state.

in this case both forces cancel each other. As shown in panel (f), domestic valuations are very
similar between the DSS and the RSS.
In the case of an interest rate shock, hedging might also play a role in shaping the maturity
profile. We can understand the role of hedging by comparing the RSS solution to the counterfactual RSS of a risk-neutral government, σ = 0. This comparison is reported in figure H.3 of
the Appendix H. The figure reveals that the overall stock of debt is not modified substantially.
However, we do observe some hedging. As discussed in the case without liquidity costs in
Appendix G.1, the correct hedge to a negative interest-rate shock is to hold more long-term
debt and less short-term debt. We observe that pattern, but the effect is small. This suggests
that liquidity costs introduce both a cost to set up the hedge ex-ante and a cost to unwind the
position. In our calibration, these costs are large and practically mute the hedging force.
29

0.04

1

0.03

0.99

0.02

0.98

0.01

0.97

0
0

5

10

15

0.96
-10

20

60

6.6

50

6.4

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

6.2

40

6
30
-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

5.8
-10

60

1

1

0.99

0.99

0.98

0.98

0.97

0.97

0.96

0.96

0.95

0.95
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 3.2: Response to a shock to interest rates. RSS is the model starting at the risky steady state
and DSS at the deterministic steady state.

Once we know that valuations do not change between the RSS and the DSS and that hedging
is ineffective, we conclude that the reduction in debt follows mainly from bond-price reaction,
namely from the reduction in bond prices in the RSS relative to the DSS (panel e). In the RSS
a future rate increase has been priced into the bonds, which has a greater effect on long-term
bonds. As a result, the government avoids a high interest-rate expense and holds less debt,
especially at longer maturities, which explains the slight reduction in duration (panel d).

4

Default

This section extends the model with risk to allow for the possibility of strategic default. The
nature of the problem changes because now bond prices depend on government actions.
30

4.1

The option to default

Consider the model in section 3.1, but now, upon the realization of the shock to X (t), assume
that the government has the option to default. If the government exercises this option, it defaults on all debts and is barred from international markets. The value in autarky is
ˆ
D

o

V ( X (t )) ≡

∞
to

o

e−ρ(s−t ) U ((1 − κ )y (s)) ds + ε.

(4.1)

The value is the discounted utility of consuming the endowment, assuming a permanent output
loss of κ, plus a a zero-mean random variable, ε. The variable ε captures randomness around the
decision to default. Thus, the post-default value is also a random variable, centered around the
expected value of moving into perpetual autarky with an output loss κ. Denote by Θ(·) and θ (·)
the cumulative distribution and the probability density function of V D ( X (t)), respectively.23
If the government chooses not to default after the shock, the economy becomes the perfectforesight economy studied in section 2. The government strategically defaults when
h 

 i
V D ( X (to )) > V fˆ ·, t0 , X t0 ,
that is, if the value after default is greater than the value obtained by continuing to service its
debts, which coincides with the perfect-foresight value of an initial debt profile fˆ (·, to ). Therefore, at any given time, the default probability is
n

h 

 io
 h
i
0
0
ˆ
ˆ
P V ( X (t )) > V f ·, t , X t
= 1 − Θ V f (·, t) , X (t)
D

o

 h
i
and the probability of repayment is Θ V fˆ (·, t) , X (t) .
Market prices must be adjusted for credit risk. The corresponding pricing equation is:
h  h
i
i
∂ψ̂ ∂ψ̂
X
ˆ
−
+ φEt Θ V f (·, t) , X (t) ψ (τ, t, X (t)) − ψ̂ (τ, t) , if t < to .
r̂ (t) ψ̂(τ, t) = δ +
∂t
∂τ
(4.2)
After the shock, the pricing equation is again (2.4). Prior to the shock, the pricing equation is
similar to the version with risk, but now the post-shock price is multiplied by the probability
of repayment. The idea is that the expected change in the price after the shock is the perfectforesight price times the repayment probability, Θ (V ) ψ. The option to default implies that the
government’s actions affect bond prices, a new feature which alters the nature of the solution
to the government’s problem.
∗

23 Note

that the government can hold foreign bonds ( f (τ, t) < 0). Default implies that these bonds are expropriated by foreign investors.

31

With a default option, the government’s problem now becomes:
"ˆ
max

{ι(τ,t), f (τ,t),c(t)}t≥0,τ ∈[0,T ]

Et

to

e

−ρt

U (ĉ (t)) dt + e

−ρto

0

EtXo

h

  oi
max V [ f (·, t ) , X (t )] , V (t , X t0 )
n

o

o

D

o

(4.3)
subject to the law of motion of debt, (2.1), the budget constraint, (2.2), and the pricing equation
(4.2).
In this problem, the government commits at time zero, before the realization of the shock,
to a debt program. Notwithstanding, the government cannot commit to repay its debt once the
shock arrives and it may default strategically. We focus on this case for three reasons. First, the
problem with commitment to debt policies is a natural extension of the problems analyzed in
sections 2 and 3. Second, this is a relevant case from a practical point of view. For example,
it is a natural benchmark when an independent agency designs the debt policy of a sovereign
country or when the government commits to a fiscal rule, which are reasonable approximations
for developed economies. Third, to the best of our knowledge, the solution of the game between
the government and the investors that is usually studied by the literature following Eaton and
Gersovitz (1981) must rely on numerical approximations, which is beyond the scope of the
current paper. This is one of the first studies to deal with the case of full commitment.24

4.2

Default-adjusted valuations

We adapt the framework to allow for default. The main novelty is that the government takes
into account how its decisions affect market prices and the future decisions to default. To ease
notation, we define V (t) ≡ V [ f (·, t) , X (t)].
Proposition 3. (Necessary conditions) If a solution {c(t), ι (τ, t) , f (τ, t) , ψ(τ, t)}t≥0 to (4.3) exists,
it satisfies the same conditions of the perfect-foresight solution (Proposition 1) with valuations prior to
the shock now satisfying the following PDE,
∂v̂ ∂v̂
−
...
∂t ∂τ


U 0 (c (t))
X
+φ Es (Θ (V (t)) + Ω(t)) 0
v (τ, t) − v̂ (τ, t) ,
U (ĉ (t))
v̂ (0, t) = 1.

r̂ (t) v̂ (τ, t) = δ +

24 A

(4.4)

recent exception is Hatchondo et al. (2018), which compares debt policy under full commitment in a model
as in Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) with long-term debt, to the debt policy of the Markov Equilibrium with bonds
and income as state variables.

32

#

where
Ω(t) = θ (V (t)) U 0 (ĉ (t)) . . .
"

2 #
ˆ Tˆ t
´t ∗
1
v̂
m
+
t
−
z,
z
(
)
1−
dzdm.
e− z (r (u)−r̂(u))du ψ (m, t)
2λ̄
ψ̂ (m + t − z, z)
0
max{t+m− T,0}
Proposition 3 shows that the option to default alters valuations, but that the principle of a
simple issuance rule still holds. We can compare the expression for valuations with default,
(4.4), to the expression for market prices (4.2). As discussed in section 3, without the option
to default, prices and valuations would only differ in their discount rates (r̂ (t) versus r̂ ∗ ) and
U 0 (c(t))
in the presence of an adjustment for risk ( U 0 (ĉ(t)) ) in the latter. Default introduces two new
features. The first is that default allows for a new form of insurance. This is captured by the
repayment probability, Θ (V (t)). After-shock valuations are multiplied by the repayment probability in equation (4.4) since debt is worthless after a default. The same repayment probability
appears in the market price (4.2). This captures the improvement in insurance provided by the
option to default. As we explained in the previous section, the increase in marginal utility is
driven by a self-insurance motive. The option to default reduces this motive because the probability of repayment is low when a negative shock triggers an increase in the marginal utility
U 0 (c(t))
ratio—to put it simply, Θ offsets the effects of U 0 (ĉ(t)) in the valuations in particularly adverse
states. This feature captures how default improves insurance under incomplete markets (an
idea found for example in Zame, 1993).
The second feature reflects the role of incentives. Once the default option appears, the government cannot commit to repay. The inability to honor debts in the future impacts bonds
prices. The issuance of a (τ, t)-bond increases the probability of default, which not only affects
the price of that particular bond, but also the price of all the bonds that coexist with it, independently of when they were issued. This implies that the issuance of a bond at a certain date
reduces revenues at different dates through a decline in bond prices, an effect which should be
taken into account by the government when deciding whether to issue. The marginal impact of
this reduction in revenues from each bond issuance, which we dubbed as the revenue-echo effect,
is captured by the term Ω in equation (4.4).
We analyze the terms inside Ω to uncover an interpretation. We develop the explanation
with the aid of figure 4.1. The revenue-echo Ω (t) is the product of the marginal probability
of default, θ (V (t)) U 0 (ĉ (t)), and an integral described below. To understand why, consider
a small issuance of a (τ0 , t0 )-bond, located at the gray dot in figure 4.1. The bond matures as
time progresses, as depicted by the gray ray in the direction (1, −1) that starts at the issuance
point. By time t, the bond, now with a maturity τ = τ0 − (t − t0 ), has a marginal impact on the
U 0 (c(t))
repayment probability. If we multiply the term θ (V (t)) U 0 (ĉ (t)), inside Ω, by the term U 0 (ĉ(t)) v
in the valuation, we obtain the marginal effect on the repayment probability:
33

maturity
{m, t} − bonds

T
vintage {τ0 , t0 }

impact on bond price {m2 , t}

impact on default at t:
θ · U 0 · v(τ, t)
impact on bond price {m1 , t}

t

time

Figure 4.1: Illustration of the revenue-echo effect (axes inverted).

θ (V (t)) U 0 (c (t))
|
{z
}

·v (τ, t) .

effect on repayment probability

Hence, the term θ (V (t)) U 0 (c (t)) reflects the marginal effect on the repayment probability at
time t.
The double integral captures how a lower repayment probability at time t impacts the revenues generated by all issuances in all moments prior to t. Notice how the range of integration
covers all maturities m ∈ [0, T ] in the outer integral. The inner integral covers the relevant
times prior to time t, z ∈ max {t + m − T, 0}, when the marginal effect on repayment of the
(τ, t)-bond affects the repayment probability of other bonds. These bonds are those that are still
outstanding at time t, with a maturity m—they are depicted in the vertical line at time t. The effect of default at time t impacts past prices in an "echo effect": Any bond price at a date prior to t
for a bond that is still outstanding at time t should include the discounted value of its price at t,
´t ∗
e− z (r̂ (u))du ψ (m, t) for a specific maturity m. For example, the price of a bond with maturity m,
ψ (m, t), affects the price of all bonds (m + t − z, z) indexed by z ∈ max {t + m − T, 0}. Each ray
that extends from the vertical line at t depicts one such family of bonds. Thus, if we multiply
´t ∗
the change in the repayment probability at t by e− z (r̂ (u))du ψ (m, t), we obtain the reduction in
the price of the (m + t − z, z)-bond. We can do the same for all bonds in m ∈ [0, T ], the outer
integral, and past times z, the inner integral, to obtain the marginal effect that the (τ, t)-bond
has on all past bond prices.
34

This marginal impact on past prices affects past revenues. Thus, fix a maturity m and a date
t. If we want to get the effect on revenues of a change in past prices, we must multiply the
 
change in price by ι̂ 1 − λ̄/2 ι̂ , the issuance amount net of the liquidity costs. If we use the
optimal issuance rule (2.12), revenues are proportional to:
"

 #
1
v̂ (m + t − z, z) 2
.
1−
2λ̄
ψ̂ (m + t − z, z)
Thus, when this term is inside the double integral, it captures the impact on past revenues of an
increase in default probabilities. We bring past reductions in revenues into the current period t
´t
by multiplying by e z r̂(u)du . The echo effect is present at any instant prior to the maturity of the
bond, which is why it appears as a flow in equation (4.4). When the government considers the
marginal issuance of the (τ0 , t0 )-bond, its valuation is the present value of all the echo effects
Ω that last throughout the life of the bond. This reduction in revenues is part of the issuance
consideration.
In Appendix G.2 we analyze the option to default without liquidity costs. In contrast to the
case only with risk, the possibility of default makes it impossible to perfectly hedge. As long
as the cardinality of shocks is discrete, the maturity profile is indeterminate. One extreme case
of indeterminacy is that of a shock which does not produce a jump in income nor interests, but
only grants a default option. Aguiar et al. (Forthcoming) studies that shock in a discrete-time
model similar to ours but without commitment.
As in section 3.2, the computation of the solution in proposition 3 involves solving for a
fixed point in a family of time-varying debt distributions. In this case the problem is even more
complex, due to the interplay between debt management and bond prices that was absent in
previous sections. However, as with the case with risk, we can obtain a solution in the RSS.

4.3

The impact of default on maturity choice

We now continue with the quantitative analysis, but incorporate default. We calibrate the output loss, κ, to 1.5 percent. This is a lower value than the 2 percent used in, for example, Aguiar
and Gopinath (2006). We calibrate a lower output loss because the literature usually assumes
reinsertion to capital markets after some periods. Here autarky is absorbing. A lower κ is meant
to produce a similar autarky value as if we allowed for reinsertion. The distribution of ε is a
logistic with coefficient ς, as is common in discrete-choice models. We set ς to 100. This number produces a default in Spain in 32 percent of the events when it is hit by an extreme shock.
Coupled with the intensity of the extreme event, φ, the unconditional default probability is 0.6
percent per year, roughly a default every 157 years—according to Reinhart and Rogoff (2009)
Spain experienced one default during the years 1877-1982. Further details on the calibration
can be found in Appendix D.
35

0.03

1
0.99

0.02
0.98
0.01
0.97
0
0

5

10

15

0.96
-10

20

60

6.6

50

6.4

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

6.2

40

6
30
-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

5.8
-10

60

1

1

0.98

0.98

0.96

0.96

0.94

0.94

0.92

0.92

0.9

0.9
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 4.2: Response to a shock to income when the option to default is available. Panels (e)
and (f) refer to the case with the option to default.
To gather a sense of the quantitative impact of default, figure 4.2 analyzes the RSS and the
post-shock transitions in an economy with the option to default that is facing an income shock.
The figure also reports the case with risk but without default, which is studied in section 3.3.
We use the labels "Default," and "No default” correspondingly. Panel (e) and panel (f) show
prices and valuations for the version with default at the RSS, the DSS, and the impact of the
shock, v(τ, 0).
The possibility of default leads to a reduction in the level and maturity of debt compared
to the case only with risk. In panel (c), we observe that the option to default produces a reduction in total debt in the RSS, from 35 percent to 30 percent. Four main forces are at play.
First, as in the case only with aggregate risk, there is self-insurance. Second, despite the absence of changes to the market interest rate, bond-price reaction is operative here. This is due
36

0.04

0.99
0.985

0.03

0.98
0.02
0.975
0.01

0.97

0
0

5

10

15

0.965
-10

20

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

6.6

50
6.4
40
6.2
30
20
-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

6
-10

60

1

1

0.95

0.95

0.9

0.9

0.85

0.85
0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

Figure 4.3: Response to a shock to income with Ω = 0 when the option to default is available.
Panels (e) and (f) refer to the case with Ω = 0.
 h
i
to the presence of the default premium, Θ V fˆ (·, t) , X (t) , which reduces bond prices in
the RSS (see equation 4.2). Third, as discussed above, default provides additional insurance
because it limits payments in high-marginal utility paths. Fourth, the revenue-echo effect increases domestic valuations as the government internalizes how extra debt affects revenues.
Self-insurance, bond-price reaction and the echo effect are all forces toward less debt, whereas
the insurance provided by the default probability operates in the opposite sense.
The reduction in the debt stock is dominated by the echo effect. We can see this by calculating the analogue of figure 4.2, and comparing the solution with default with a myopic solution
without echo effect (Ω = 0). This comparison is reported in figure 4.3. Once we shut off the
echo effect, the RSS debt stock increases from 30 to 40 percent, a level even higher than without
the default option. This pattern reflects the trade-off between insurance and incentives. If we
37

shut down the echo effect, the possibility of default improves insurance. This extra insurance
is strong enough to reverse the effect of both self-insurance and bond-price reaction.
The shortening of maturities can also be read off from figure 4.2. We discussed above how,
despite a constant risk-free rate, the ex-ante increase in the default premium activates the bondprice reaction force, tilting the distribution toward shorter maturities. The increase in insurance
partially offsets this effect because long-term debt has higher valuations in the RSS. Back in
figure 4.3 we see that, without the echo effect, maturity falls even further. At first, this result
seems surprising because the echo effect penalizes longer maturity bonds. However, the echo
effect reduces the debt outstanding, which lowers the default probability. Hence, the echo
effect reduces the risk premium, which mitigates the bond-price reaction force that pushes the
distribution toward shorter maturities.
Figure H.4 in Appendix H, compares the baseline solution with default and risk aversion
with the solution assuming risk neutrality. Both solutions approximately coincide in the RSS:
the debt level, consumption, and the risk premium are almost identical. This occurs because
the insurance and incentives channels offset each other. This result is intuitive because the
echo effect is linked to the elasticity of inter-temporal substitution through the comparison of
revenues across time.

5

Extensions

To underscore the flexibility of our framework, in this section we illustrate further extensions
that bring the model closer to reality or that can help us understand the cost and benefits of the
introduction of alternative debt instruments, which connects this framework with topics that
are currently discussed in the literature.

5.1

Alternative specifications for the liquidity costs

As a first extension, we could introduce liquidity costs that also depend on the overall stock of
debt rather than only on the issued amount, in the spirit to Vayanos and Vila (2009). In that
case, valuations in the deterministic version of the model should be adjusted by a term with a
flavor similar to the revenue-echo-effect term discussed in section 4. The reasoning is similar,
even if there is no default: Given that the issuance of a bond will affect future liquidity costs,
and hence future revenues, the government should take that into account when deciding how
much debt to issue at each maturity. We can also allow for a more general function of λ̄, for
instance one that changes with the sign of issuances or with maturity. This extension can be
used to understand the impact on fiscal policy of central bank quantitative easing programs or
the role of safe assets, as in (Bianchi et al., Forthcoming). Furthermore, we can assume that λ̄ is
a stochastic process, which could be interpreted as rollover risk.
38

5.2

Finite issuances

Through sections 2, 3 and 4, the sovereign actively issues in a continuum of maturities. In
practice, however, countries issue only at a discrete number of maturities. One example are the
issuances of Spain, as we discuss in Appendix E. Here we show how the model is adaptable to
allow for issuances at a discrete set of points. We set the liquidity coefficient λ̄ ( N ) to be finite
only for a discrete number of maturities {τ1 , τ2 , ..., τN } as well as a function of the total number
of available maturities, N.25
For the deterministic, risk, and default cases, simple extensions to Propositions 1, 2 and 3
imply that the optimal issuance rule would be:

ι(τ, t) =




1
λ̄( N )

·

ψ(τ,t)−v(τ,t)
ψ(τ,t)

τ ∈ {τ1 , τ2 , ..., τN }
τ∈
/ {τ1 , τ2 , ..., τN } ,

0

without changes to the valuation formulas for the three cases. To render reasonable comparisons, the liquidity coefficient, λ̄ ( N ), has to be adapted to the total number of maturities, N.
This can be done by keeping the overall customer flow constant and spreading it equally across
maturities. We can use this formulation to study, for instance, the welfare gains of increasing
the set of maturities at which the government issues.
In Appendix E, we describe how we also observe the pattern of increasing issuances by
maturity, but that the pattern holds for two groups of bonds—below and above one year. It
is easy to adapt the model to reproduce this profile, for example, by introducing a liquidity
coefficient that varies within groups of bonds. This extension can capture segmented markets
or institutional features that affect the order flow at different maturities.

5.3

Consols

To keep the state space manageable, most quantitative applications on debt management employ bonds that mature probabilistically, also known as consols (see, for example, Leland and
Toft, 1996, or Hatchondo and Martinez, 2009). Perpetuities with different coupons, proposed
by Cochrane (2015) and studied from a normative point of view by Debortoli et al. (2018), have
also received some attention. We can adapt the environment to compare the steady state and
transitions. We use the "c” superscript to refer to the consols. For concreteness, we explain the
case with perfect-foresight consols, but noting substantial would change if we were to add risk.
25 Technically,

issuances have to be modeled with Dirac delta functions at the issuance points, obtained as a limit
where we shrink intervals. In terms of computations, this technical detail does not matter because the maturity
space is discretized.

39

The market price at time tof a consol maturing at a rate τ̃1 , ψc (τ̃, t), satisfies:
1
∂ψc (τ̃, t)
1
.
r ∗ (t)ψc (τ̃, t) = ( + δ) − ψc (τ̃, t) +
τ̃
τ̃
∂t
with limτ̃ →0

ψc (τ̃, t)

= 1. The first term in in this valuation equation,



1
τ̃



+ δ , denotes the

1
τ̃ .

coupons δ and a principal repayment
The second term captures the maturity rate of the
bond, and the third term captures the change in bond prices over time. The government’s
budget constraint and law of motion of debt are:
ˆ

T



c

c



q (τ̃, t, ι)ι (τ̃, t) −

c (t) = y (t) +
0

1
+δ
τ̃



c



f (τ̃, t) dτ̃,

1
∂ f c (τ̃, t)
= ιc (τ̃, t) − f c (τ̃, t).
∂t
τ̃
The solution to this problem entails the same issuance rule as in the case of finite-life bonds,
equation (2.12), but domestic valuations are now given by


c

r (t) v (τ̃, t) =


1
∂vc 1
1
+ δ − vc (τ̃, t) +
, ∈ (0, T ],
τ̃
τ̃
∂t τ̃

∗ , we
with lim 1 →0 v(τ̃, t) = 1. At a steady state with positive consumption, assuming that δ = rss
τ̃
 


1
1
c
c
∗
obtain that prices and valuations should satisfy ψss (τ̃ ) = 1 and vss (τ̃ ) = rss + τ̃ / ρ + τ̃ .
The steady-state debt profile of consol coefficients is:

f ssc (τ̃ ) =

∗)
τ̃ (ρ − rss

,
λ̄ ρ + τ̃1

and the associated profile of future debt payments, i.e., the equivalent object to the debt profile
in the case of finite-life bonds, is
ˆ
f ssc

(τ ) =
0

T




1
+ δ e−τ/τ̃ f ssc (τ̃ ) dτ̃,
τ̃

which has a different shape than that under finite-life bonds. The conclusion is that, in the presence of liquidity costs, the choice between consols and standard debt has important empirical
implications.

40

6

Conclusions

The aim of this paper is to present a framework to study debt management problems with
debt instruments that closely resemble the ones that governments issue in reality. The main
challenge of these problems is that the state variable is a distribution. A central feature of the
framework is the presence of liquidity costs that limit the possibility of immediate rebalancing
across maturities. The paper showcases a general principle: optimal issuances are proportional
to the gap between the market price of debt and its domestic valuation. In the presence of risk
and default, prices and valuations are adapted, but the principle remains the same. All in all,
the paper highlights classic forces and uncovers new ones that shape the optimal debt-maturity
distribution.
As a first step in a less explored direction, the framework naturally faces limitations. We
are optimistic about the prospect for improvement. One limitation is that we can obtain exact
solutions when shocks occur only once. This captures, up to a first order, expected impulse
responses. An extension that admits recurrent shocks faces the same computational challenges
as heterogeneous agent models with aggregate shocks. Second, we consider a specific form of
liquidity costs. However, as we stress throughout the paper, the framework can be extended to
allow for more general liquidity costs that, for instance, vary with maturity and the amount of
outstanding debt. Finally, when we study default, we assume that the government can commit
to an issuance path. The challenge of a solution without commitment is that we will have
to compute terms that capture how current actions disciplines the future self. We leave these
interesting issues for future research.

41

References
Achdou, Yves, Jiequn Han, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll, “Income and wealth distribution in macroeconomics: A continuous-time approach,” Technical
Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath, “Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account,”
Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69 (1), 64 – 83.
and Manuel Amador, “Sovereign Debt: A Review,” Technical Report, National Bureau of
Economic Research August 2013.
, , Hugo Hopenhayn, and Iván Werning, “Take the short route: Equilibrium default and
debt maturity,” Econometrica, Forthcoming.
, Satyajit Chatterjee, Harold Cole, and Zachary Stangebye, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises, Revisited: The Art of the Desperate Deal,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Aiyagari, S Rao, Albert Marcet, Thomas J Sargent, and Juha Seppälä, “Optimal taxation without state-contingent debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (6), 1220–1254.
Angeletos, George-Marios, “Fiscal policy with noncontingent debt and the optimal maturity
structure,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (3), 1105–1131.
Arellano, Cristina, “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,” The American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (3), 690–712.
and Ananth Ramanarayanan, “Default and the Maturity Structure in Sovereign Bonds,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), pp. 187–232.
Barro, Robert, “Optimal Management of Indexed and Nominal Debtl,” Annals of Economics and
Finance, 2003, 4, 1 – 15.
and José Ursua, “Barro-Ursua Macroeconomic Data,” 2010.
Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas J. Sargent, “Fiscal Policy and
Debt Management with Incomplete Markets*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132
(2), 617–663.
, , , and Thomas Sargent, “The Optimal Maturity of Government Debt,” University of
Minnesota working paper, 2017.

42

Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez, “International reserves and
rollover risk,” American Economic Review, Forthcoming.
Bocola, Luigi and Alessandro Dovis, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises: A Quantitative Analysis,”
Working Paper, 2018.
Breedon, “On the Transactions Costs of UK Quantitative Easing,” Journal of Banking and Finance,
2018, 88, 347–356.
Buera, Francisco and Juan Pablo Nicolini, “Optimal maturity of government debt without
state contingent bonds,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2004, 51 (3), 531–554.
Bulow, Jeremy I. and Kenneth Rogoff, “Sovereign Debt: Is To Forgive To Forget?,” Working
Paper 2623, National Bureau of Economic Research June 1988.
Cammack, Elizabeth B., “Evidence on Bidding Strategies and the Information in Treasury Bill
Auctions,” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (1), 100–130.
Chamberlain, Gary and Charles A. Wilson, “Optimal Intertemporal Consumption Under Uncertainty,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2000, 3 (3), 365–395.
Chatterjee, Satyajit and Burcu Eyigungor, “Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk,” The
American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2674–2699.
and , “A seniority arrangement for sovereign debt,” The American Economic Review, 2015,
105 (12), 3740–3765.
Chen, Hui, Yu Xu, and Jun Yang, “Systematic risk, debt maturity, and the term structure of
credit spreads,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2012.
Cochrane, John H, “A new structure for US federal debt,” Hoover Institution Economics Working
Papers, 2015.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, Héléne Rey, and Pablo Winant, “The Risky Steady State,” American
Economic Review, May 2011, 101 (3), 398–401.
Cole, Harold L. and Timothy J. Kehoe, “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” The Review of Economic
Studies, 2000, 67 (1), pp. 91–116.
Debortoli, Davide, Ricardo Nunes, and Pierre Yared, “Optimal time-consistent government
debt maturity,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (1), 55–102.
, , and , “Optimal Taxation and Debt Management without Commitment,” Technical
Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
43

Dovis, Alessandro, “Efficient sovereign default,” The Review of Economic Studies, Forthcoming.
Duffee, Gregory R., “Idiosyncratic Variation of Treasury Bill Yields,” The Journal of Finance,
1996, 51 (2), 527–551.
Duffie, Darrell, “Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital,” The
Journal of finance, 2010, 65 (4), 1237–1267.
and Chi-Fu Huang, “Implementing Arrow-Debreu Equilibria by Continuous Trading of Few
Long-Lived Securities,” Econometrica, 1985, 53 (6), 1337–1356.
, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Kenneth J Singleton, “Modeling sovereign yield spreads: A case
study of Russian debt,” The journal of finance, 2003, 58 (1), 119–159.
, Nicolae Garleanu, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, “Over-the-Counter Markets,” Econometrica,
2005, 73 (6), 1815–1847.
Easley, David and Maureen O’hara, “Price, trade size, and information in securities markets,”
Journal of Financial economics, 1987, 19 (1), 69–90.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, “Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical analysis,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1981, 48 (2), 289–309.
Edwards, Amy K., Lawrence E. Harris, and Michael S. Piwowar, “Corporate Bond Market
Transaction Costs and Transparency,” The Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (3), 1421–1451.
Faraglia, Elisa, Albert Marcet, and Andrew Scott, “In search of a theory of debt management,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2010, 57 (7), 821–836.
, , Rigas Oikonomou, and Andrew Scott, “Government Debt Management: The Long and
the Short of It,” The Review of Economic Studies, Forthcoming.
Feldhutter, Peter, “The Same Bond at Different Prices: Identifying Search Frictions and Selling
Pressures,” Review of Financial Studies, 2011.
Fleming, Michael J., “Are Larger Treasury Issues More Liquid? Evidence from Bill Reopenings,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2002, 34 (3), pp. 707–735.
and Joshua V. Rosenberg, “How do Treasury Dealers Manage their Positions,” 2008. Frederal Reserva Bank of New York Staff Reports Staff Report no. 299.
Foucault, Thierry, Marco Pagano, Ailsa Roell, and Ailsa Röell, Market liquidity: theory, evidence,
and policy, Oxford University Press, 2013.

44

Glosten, Lawrence R. and Paul R. Milgrom, “Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1985, 14 (1),
71 – 100.
Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Nicolas Werquin, “A variational approach to the analysis of tax systems,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2014.
Green, Richard C., Burton Hollifield, and Norman Schurhoff, “Financial Intermediation and
the Costs of Trading in an Opaque Market,” The Review of Financial Studies, 2007, 20 (2), 275–
314.
Green, T. Clifton, “Economic News and the Impact of Trading on Bond Prices,” The Journal of
Finance, 2004, 59 (3), 1201–1233.
Grossman, Sanford J and Merton H Miller, “Liquidity and market structure,” the Journal of
Finance, 1988, 43 (3), 617–633.
Hatchondo, Juan Carlos and Leonardo Martinez, “Long-duration bonds and sovereign defaults,” Journal of International Economics, 2009, 79 (1), 117 – 125.
, , and Cesar Sosa-Padilla, “Debt dilution and sovereign default risk,” Journal of Political
Economy, 2016, 124 (5), 1383–1422.
,

, and Francisco Roch, “Overborrowing,” 2018.

He, Zhiguo and Konstantin Milbradt, “Dynamic Debt Maturity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 08 2016, 29 (10), 2677–2736.
Hendershott, Terrence and Mark S Seasholes, “Market maker inventories and stock prices,”
American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (2), 210–214.
Ho, Thomas S.Y. and Hans R. Stoll, “The dynamics of dealer markets under competition,” The
Journal of finance, 1983, 38 (4), 1053–1074.
Huang, Roger D and Hans R Stoll, “The components of the bid-ask spread: A general approach,” The Review of Financial Studies, 1997, 10 (4), 995–1034.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “The aggregate demand for treasury
debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 2012, 120 (2), 233–267.
Krusell, Per and Anthony A Smith Jr, “Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy,” Journal of political Economy, 1998, 106 (5), 867–896.
Kyle, Albert S., “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading,” Econometrica, 1985, 53 (6), pp.
1315–1335.
45

Leland, Hayne and Klaus Toft, “Optimal Capital Structure, Endogenous Bankruptcy, and the
Term Structure of Credit Spreads,” The Journal of Finance, 1996, 51 (3), 987–1019.
Lou, Dong, Hongjun Yan, and Jinfan Zhang, “Anticipated and Repeated Shocks in Liquid
Markets,” The Review of Financial Studies, 06 2013, 26 (8), 1891–1912.
Lucas, Robert E and Benjamin Moll, “Knowledge growth and the allocation of time,” Journal
of Political Economy, 2014, 122 (1), 1–51.
and Nancy L Stokey, “Optimal fiscal and monetary policy in an economy without capital,”
Journal of monetary Economics, 1983, 12 (1), 55–93.
Madhavan, Ananth, “Market microstructure: A survey,” Journal of financial markets, 2000, 3 (3),
205–258.
and George Sofianos, “An empirical analysis of NYSE specialist trading,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 1998, 48 (2), 189–210.
and Seymour Smidt, “A Bayesian model of intraday specialist pricing,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 1991, 30 (1), 99–134.
Manuelli, Rodolfo and Juan Sánchez, “Endogenous Debt Maturity: Liquidity Risk vs. Default
Risk,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Research Division, Working Paper Series, 2018.
Naik, Narayan Y and Pradeep K Yadav, “Do dealer firms manage inventory on a stock-bystock or a portfolio basis?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2003, 69 (2), 325–353.
and , “Risk management with derivatives by dealers and market quality in government
bond markets,” The Journal of Finance, 2003, 58 (5), 1873–1904.
Nuño, Galo and Benjamin Moll, “Social optima in economies with heterogeneous agents,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 2018, 28, 150–180.
and Carlos Thomas, “Optimal monetary policy with heterogeneous agents,” Working Paper,
2018.
Pasquariello, Paolo and Clara Vega, “The on-the-run liquidity phenomenon,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2009, 92 (1), 1 – 24.
Pelizzon, Loriana, Marti G Subrahmanyam, Davide Tomio, and Jun Uno, “Sovereign credit
risk, liquidity, and European Central Bank intervention: Deus ex machina?,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2016, 122 (1), 86–115.
Reinhart, Carmen M and Kenneth S Rogoff, This time is different: Eight centuries of financial
folly, Princeton University Press, 2009.
46

Sachs, Dominik, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Nicolas Werquin, “Nonlinear tax incidence and optimal
taxation in general equilibrium,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
2016.
Sánchez, Juan M, Horacio Sapriza, and Emircan Yurdagul, “Sovereign default and maturity
choice,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2018, 95, 72–85.
Song, Zhaogang and Haoxiang Zhu, “Quantitative easing auctions of Treasury bonds,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 2018, 128 (1), 103 – 124.
Spindt, Paul A. and Richard W. Stolz, “Are US treasury bills underpriced in the primary market?,” Journal of Banking & Finance, 1992, 16 (5), 891 – 908.
Stoll, Hans R, “Market microstructure,” in “Handbook of the Economics of Finance,” Vol. 1,
Elsevier, 2003, pp. 553–604.
Tomz, Michael and Mark LJ Wright, “Empirical research on sovereign debt and default,” Annu.
Rev. Econ., 2013, 5 (1), 247–272.
Tsyvinski, Aleh and Nicolas Werquin, “Generalized compensation principle,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Vayanos, Dimitri and Jean-Luc Vila, “A preferred-habitat model of the term structure of interest rates,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.
and Jiang Wang, “Market liquidity: theory and empirical evidence,” Handbook of the Economics of Finance, 2013, 2, 1289–1361.
Vayanos, Dimitry and Jiang Wang, “Market Liquidity: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” in
George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance, 2013, chapter 19.
Wang, Chong, Neng Wang, and Jinqiang Yang, “Optimal consumption and savings with
stochastic income and recursive utility,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2016, 165, 292 – 331.
Weill, Pierre-Olivier, “Leaning against the wind,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (4),
1329–1354.
Zame, William R., “Efficiency and the Role of Default When Security Markets are Incomplete,”
The American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (5), 1142–1164.

47

