NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION AND INVESTMENT

Andrew

B. Abel

Working Paper No. 2580

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachuaetta Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1988

This paper was written for the Handbook of Monetary Economics edited by
I thank Benjamin Friedman, David
Benjamin M. Friedman and Frank Hahn.
Wilcox and Stephen Zeldes for their detailed comments on earlier drafts of
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
this paper.
Any opinions expressed are those of the
program in Economic Fluctuations.
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

MBER Working Paper #2580
May 1988

Consumption and Investment

ABSTRACT

presents an overview of current models of consumption and
investment behavior, First, the stochastic implications of the permanent
income model and empirical tests of these implications are discussed. Then
the simple theoretical model is extended to include expenditure on consumer
This paper

durables.

In addition,

unpredictability

of

the

the implications of liquidity constraints and the
The overview
rate of return on wealth are discussed.

of consumption behavior closes with a critical discussion of the Ricardian
Equivalence Theorem.
Investment behavior is analyzed using a dynamic optimization model of a
firm facing costs of adjustment. This framework integrates the accelerator
The model is then used to
model, the neoclassical model and the q theory.
and investment and also
analyze the interaction of corporate taxes, inflation
to analyze the effects of uncertainty on investment. The overview of
investment concludes with a discussion of inventory investment.

Andrew B. Abel
Department of Finance
Tharton School
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
(215) 898-4801

of GNP in the
Consumption and investment expenditure together account for 80 percent
This
United States and for a similarly large percentage of GNP in other major economies.1
on the response of these
chapter analyzes the behavior of consumption and investment focusing
in assets markets. I have tried to
components of spending to changes in income and to changes
macroeconomists
to
present the material in this chapter :'i that it will be useful both Keynesian

of
and to new classical macroeconomists. To a Keynesian economist, the organizing principle
the chapter can be viewed as the development of private domestic behavioral relations underlying
the IS schedule. In particular, I have stressed the effects of income and interest rates on cnnwould not find it helpful to think
sumption and investment. Although a new classical economist
of this chapter in terms of the IS curve, he or she could view the separate treatments of consumption and investment as developing, within an intertemporai optimization framework, the behavior

of different economic actors.
This chapter is, by design, partial equilibrium in nature. What is missing is the eneconomist would close the
dogenous determination of income and interest rates. A Keynesian

the LM schedule
model and determine income and interest rates by adding an LM schedule, but
a
is covered elsewhere in this handbook. A new classical economist would specify producuon
\Vith the
function and then would allow prices and interest rates to adjust to clear all markets.
for testing the permaexception of a briefdiscussion of the implications of general equilibrium
nent income hypothesis, this chapter does not touch upon general equilibrium considerations.
In keeping with the partial equilibrium focus

of this chapter, I will first discuss the

economic
determinants of consumption and then I will discuss investment. Since the 1950's,
decimodels of consumption behavior have explicitly recognized that in making consumption
their current income.
sions, consumers take account of their lifetime resources rather than simply
Both the life-cycle model of Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) and Ando and Modigliani (1963)

GNP for the penod 1980-85
1The ratio of private consumptionto GNP and the ratio of gross fixed investmentto
and
are: U.S.: 64.3% and 15.7%; U.K.: 60.1% and 16.8%; Germany: 57.0% and 20.8%;Japan (1980-84): 59.0%
278%.

and the permanent income model of Friedman (1957) are based on the notion that consumers
prefer smooth sweams of consumption over dme. Access to capitth markets allows consumers to
choose

a sequence of consumption over time that is smoother than the sequcncc of income,

Section LA,

In

I show- tht if income in even' period is determinsstic, then for a consumer with

access to peodct capital markets, there wouid be no rela-tion between income and contcm
poraneous consumption. However, if income foi)ou'r

atochastio poocess. then there is. in

generad, a positive contemporaneous conciation betweco consumption and income, Section LB.

analyzes the relation between consumption and income and diacusses sevsrai empirical tests of
the pemnoanent income hypothesis.
The s mHm pe—narert rrcme modm

wec

t

eec

no t s ao

c

co

r

tion of nondurable goods and services. However, the model is not appiicabie to consumers'
expenditures on durable goods. Becaose durable goods produce services to consumers over
several periods, these goods are consumed over several periods. Because the expenditure on a
durable good usually takes place in one period, it is importar.t to distinguish the consumption of
durable goods from the expenthture on these goods. From the viewpoint

of the individual

consumer, what matters is the flow of consumption ser"tces from duranic go-ods. From the

of the macroeconomic determinadon of aggregate income, expenditure on durable
goods is important. Section II enriches the permanent income model to incorporate durable
viewpoint

goods as well as non-alurabie goods and services into the decision problems

of individual

consumers.
The theoretical analysis of consumer expenditure in Sections

1

and II is based on the

assumption that consumers have access to perfect capital markets and can borrow or lend at an
exogenous rate of interest. However, a substantial fraction of consumers is unable to consume as
much as predicted by the permanent income model because they cannot borrow as much as they

would like at the prevailing interest rate. Consumers who would like to increase their current
borrowing in order to increase current consumption are said to be liquidity constrained. The
importance

of liquidity constraints from the viewpoint of macroeconomics is that the relation

between consumption and contemporaneous income

is generally different for liquidity con-

-3-

strained consumers than it is for consumers who do not face binding liquidity constraints. The
implication of liquidity constraints for the relation between consumption and income is discussed
in Section III.
In analyzing the relation between income

and consumption in the first three sections of

the paper, the rate of return on wealth is assumed to be constant. However, there are important
links between asset markets and consutiptionbehavior. In particular, the level of consumption
on the
depends on the consumer's wealth, and the intertemporal pattern of consumption depends
rate of return on assets. Section IV presents a formal model of consumption by an infinitely-

lived consumer who faces a stochastic rate of return on wealth. This model produces a simple
relation between consumption and wealth and allows us to distinguish the effects of cx post
changes in the rate of return from changes in the cx ante rate of return.
is
Although the statement that consumption depends on the consumer's level of wealth
not controversial, there is still wide-ranging disagreement about what constitutes the wealth of a
consumer. In particular, should a consumer's holding of government bonds be counted as net
wealth? An equivalent question in a different guise is whether a bond-financed cut in lump-sum
taxes has an effect on consumption. At first glance, it would appear that consumers who receive
a tax cut would view themselves as having an increase in lifetime disposable resources and
would increase their consumption accordingly. However, because the government must eventually pay interest on the newly issued bonds and repay the principal, the bond-financed tax cut
implies that future taxes will be increased. Indeed, the increase in future taxes will have a
present value equal to the current tax Cut, and thus, it is argued by some economists, there will be
no response of consumption to a change in tax policy. In Section V, this argument, which is
known as the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem, will be presented and critically evaluated.
The discussion of capital investment begins in Section VI with the Jorgensoniari neoclassical theory

of investment. This theory explicitly treats the demand for capital as a derived

demand by starting with the firm's production function and demand curve. The demand curve
and production function are used to obtain a relation between a firm's cashflow and its contemporaneous stock of fixed capital (plant and equipment). The firm's demand for fixed capital is

-4-

set at a level that equates the marginal profit of capital with the user cost of

capital. The user cost
is a concept that captures the cost of using a unit of capital in production over a certain period of
time. The neoclassical theory

of investment predicts that a firm's demand for canital

wili be

positiveiy related to the firm's level of outout and will he negatively related to the user cost of
capital. A more resolctedmodel which corresponds to a special case of the neoclassical model is
the accelerator model, in which the demand for capital

i

'opontonalto the level of oumut but is
of
the
user
cost. The accelerator modci and the more general neoclassical model are
independent
discussed in Section V.A.
An ultomadve theory of investment behavior by firma is the q
theory. Tohin (1969)
defined q to be the ratio of the market value of a finn to the replacement cost of the loan. This
ratio is meant to measure the value of lured capital reladve to its cost. The greater is this ratio.
the greater would be the incentive to acquire the capital and hence the greater would he the rate

of investment. Because the value of the firm is measured using data from equity and bond
markets, the link between asset markets and investment expenditure is quite explicit. Although

Tohin's presentation of the q theoty did not explicidy model the firms' production function and
demand curve, it is possible to start with the demand curve and the pnodttctionfdnction and then
derive the q theory as the result of intertemporal maxin-dzation by firms. A formal derIvation of
the q theory, and the link between the formal model and Tobin's q, is presented in Section VI.B.

The corporate tax environment--in particular, the corporate tax rate, the investment tax
credit, and the schedule of depreciation allowances--has a potentially important impact on capital
investment decisions, Although the effects of these aspects of the tax code on investment are
important in their own right, from the viewpoint
feature of the taxation

of monetary economics the most interesting

of capital income and expenditure is the interaction of inflation, taxes and

investment. This interaction is briefly discussed in Section VII.

The models of investment analyzed in Sections VI and VII do not take explicit account of
uncertainty facing firms. The decision to present deterministic models in these sections reflects
two considerations: First, as a matter of expositional
clarity, the deterministic models are much
than
the
stochastic models. Second, and more importantly, is that, in contrast to models
simpler

-5-

of consumption, state-of-the-art models of investment behavior do not rely critically on the
stochastic nature of the decision problem facing firms. Nevertheless, a brief discussion of the
impact of uncertainty is presented in Section Vifi.

In addition to investment in plant and equipment, firms also invest in inventories. Invendemand. It would appear
tory behavior has been a particularl puzzling component of aggregate
that just as consumers with concave unity functions would want to have smooth time profiles of

to have smooth time profiles of
consumption, firms with convex cost functions would want
to have smooth production in the face of
production. Inventories provide firms with a means
take advantage of inventory
fluctuating sales. However, it does not appear that firms actually
accumulation and decumulation to smooth out production relative to sales. Section IX discusses
this apparent contradiction in the simple production smoothing model as well as possible
explanations.

I. Consumption
The life cycle and permanent income hypotheses, which are the major theories of conhis lifetime income rather than
sumption behavior, each relate the consumption of a consumer to
to his contemporaneous income. The underlying choice-theoretic framework is that a consumer
has an intertemporal utility function that depends on consumption in every period of life. The
consumer maximizes utility subject to single lifetime budget constraint. There is no static, or
to
the income in
period by period, budget constraint that requires consumption in a period equal
that
Indeed, in the absence of uncertainty, the life cycle and permanent income
periodi2

and contemporaneous
hypotheses both predict that there will be no relation between consumption
income. However, the introduction of uncertainty will generally induce a positive relation
between consumption and contemporaneous income.

To develop the implications of the permanent income model, consider the decision
after-tax labor
problem facing an individual consumer at time t. Let Yt÷j denote the consumer's
the presence of binding liquidity constraints, which are discussed in Section ilL the consumer will face a
sequence of period by period budget constraints.

-6-

income at time t+j, forj

It is convenient to assume that the consumer

0, 1, 2,

Sthctlv speaking, this assumption

is

lives forever.

consistent with the permanent income hypothesis bet

inconsistent with the life-cycle hypothesis. One

is

of the major implications of the life-cycle

hothesis is that saving is done by consumers when they are working to provide for consumption when they are retired. This implication will not be capnired in a model in which the consumer lives, and earns income, forever. However, for the puose of
examaning the cyclical
relation between consumption and contemporaneous iecome, it is simply not important whether
the consumer has a finite hor-izon. Let c,., denote the consumption of the consumer in period N-j
and let W denote the werith of the consumer at the beginning of period before earning interest.

The rate of return on wealth caoded from period t-i to period t is r,. The accumuiauon of wealth
is described by
= (1 +r.)W+y,c,.
Equation (1) describes the evolution of the consumer's wealth over time but, by itself,
does not consu-ain behavior, There is nothing in equation (1) that prevents the consumer from
borrowing to finance arbitrarily large consumption. An additional constraint is needed. If the
consumer has a finite lifetime, with period T being the last period of his life, then one could
impose the consu-aint WT÷I

0, which states that the consumer cannot die in debt, Under

an

infinite horizon, the appropriate constraint is

lim{(l + r) (1 + r+i) (1 + r2) . . . (1

r÷1)}1

W'+-

0

The intertemporal utility function of the consumer is assumed to be additively separable
overtime.4 Let u(c) denote the utility of consumption in period t+j. The period utility function
u() is assumed to be strictly increasing and strictly concave. As of the beginning of period t the

3Thewealtheffectsassociated
changes in the timing of lump-sum taxes and the validity of the Ricardian Equiv.
alence Theorem discusted below depend critically on whether the horizon of an individual consumer is finite or
infinite. Poterba and Summers (1987) argue that empirically the distinction between infinite horizons and finite
horizons has a small effect on the impactof tax policy.
4For examples of non-time-separableutility functions,see Hayashi(1985b)and Eichenbaum, Hansenand
Singleton
(1986).

-7-

consumer maximizes the intertemporal utility function

+p)u(c+)
ij =E(l
jO
p is the rate of time preference and where E[ } denotes the expectation conditional on
information available at the beginning of period t. This available information includes the
where

realization of current income y and thL current rate of return on wealth

r

It is now straightforward to derive the first-order condition characterizing optimal

con-

sumption behavior

u'(c) = (1 + p) E{(l + r+t) u(c+i)}
To interpret (3) consider a reduction in

c of one unit accompanied by a one unit increase in the

wealth carried into period t+l. The additional unit of wealth carried into period t+l produces an
additional I +

r1 units of disposable resources in period t÷l which can be consumed in period

t+l without affecting

any future opportunities

of the consumer.

In evaluating whether

this

potential intertemporal rearrangement of consumption is a good idea, the consumer compares
which is the loss in utility from the unit reduction in c, with
(1 +

which

p) E{(l + rt+i) U'(Ct÷t)}

is the expected discounted gain in utility from the increase of (I + r÷1) in c÷1. If the

utility loss associated with a unit reduction in

c is smaller than the expected discounted utility

can increase expected
gain from the increase in period t+l consumption, then the consumer
with a unit reduction in ct is
utility by reducing c. Alternatively, if the utility loss associated
t+ 1 consumption,
greater than the expected discounted utility gain from the increase in penod
then the consumer can increase expected utility by increasing c1. Optimality requires that neither
an increase nor a decrease in

c can lead to higher expected utility, which is impliedby equation

(3).

of return on wealth is perfectly predictable one period in
advance; more precisely, suppose that r1÷1 is in the information set at time t. This assumption
a
holds, for example, if the real interest rate is constant overtime. Empirically, if the length of
Now suppose that the rate

r

-8-

period

is

taken to be a calendas quarter and if r, is the real return on
90-day Treasury Bills, then

the assumption that

r is perfectly predictable one period in advance may be a reasonable ap-

proximation. Alternatively, if rL is the one-period homing remm on common stocks, then the
assumption that r, is perfectly predictable one period in advance is clearly inaporopriate.
Nevertheless, I make this assumption to understand some of the implications of the first-order
condition in equation (3). Observe that equadon (3) can be rewritten as

uic÷;) = (l p)I(i

e÷

r1±i)1 u'fc1)

(4)

where e,÷. is an unpredictable random variable. More
precisely, E {e,±i} = 0. Equation (4) is
particularly useful for understanding the stochastic implications of the oeanent income
hypothesis. Before exsining the stochastic implications of (0, 1 will first discuss the implications of intertemporal utility maximization in the absence of uncertainty.
A.

Deterministic Income

In the absence of uncertainty the random disturbance
in (4) is identically equal to
zero, in this case, equation (4) implies that the marginal
utility of consumption grows (or falis) at

et

a rate equal to (p - r+j) 7(1 + r+i). Thus, if the rate of return r,.. exceeds the discount rate
p, then
the marginal utility falls over time which implies that consumption rises over time. That
is, if the
reward to postponing consumption (r÷) cxcceds the impatience cost of
waiting (p), then the
consumer will choose to have lower consumption today than in the future.
Alternatively, if the
rate of return on saving is less than the rate of time preference, then the consumer 'will choose to
have higher consumption today than in the future.

r

Now make the stronger assumption that the rate of return is a constant, and furthermore
that is equal to the rate of time preference p. It follows
immediately from (4) that if rt = p and

r

if e÷ is identically zero, then consumption is constant over time. The level of consumption will
be the maximum permanently sustainable flow of consumption, which Friedman (1957) has

5Although the nominal rate of return on 90-day T-bills is perfectty predictable, the rate of inflation cannot be
predictedperfectly,so the real rate of return cannot be predictedperfectly.

-9-

called permanent income. Note that if the consumer always consumes an amount equal to the net
return on his or her wealth (appropriately defined, as below, to include human as well as nonhuman wealth), then his or her total wealth will remain constant over time. Any attempt to
sustainable. Thus permanent
permanently consume more than the return on wealth will not be
income is equal to the real rate of return on total wealth multiplied by total wealth.

To calculate the level of perma. 'it income, it is necessary to calculate human wealth.

In

the absence of uncertainty, and in the presence of a real interest rate which is constant and equal
to p, human wealth is simply the present value of current and future labor income,6 which I will
denote as H. More precisely,
(5)
The factor 11(1 + r) appears in front of the summation because, consistent with the definition of
non-human wealth, I am defining human wealth in period t to be calculated prior to earning the
rate of returnr in that period. The implication of this definition is that if income is always equal
to some constant, say y0, then human wealth would be equal to

y/r. In this case, the return to

human wealth would be y0 so that in the absence of nonhuman wealth, permanent income would

be equal to y0.
In the presence of nonhuman wealth, permanent income,

y' *

is equal to the return on

human plus nonhuman wealth so that

y'*=r(wt+H)

.

(6)

Recall that with r = p. consumption is constant over time. The invariance of consumption over
time holds even if labor income is (deterministically) time-varying. Thus, for an individual

a world without uncertainty, there would be no relation between consumption and
with different
contemporaneous income over time. However, in a cross-section of individuals
living in

6Flavin (1981) pointed Out that Sargent (1978) erroneously defined permanentincome as the present value of
disposable income. However, because disposable income includes the return on wealth, this concept involves
doublecounting.

-10-

levels of permanent income, there would be a positive cross-sectional relation between consumption and permanent income, From the viewpoint of macroeconomics and stab ill ration
policy, it
is the dme-series co-movement of consumption and contemporaneous income which is of
interest, Since there would he no systematic co-movement nf consumption and contemporaneous
income for a consumer In

a deterministic environment, it

is

necessary to shift attention to a

stochastic environment,

B, StochasticIncome
10

the presence of income uncertainty the deiiaiuon of pcrmancnt income necds to he

modified somewhat, Although current nonhuman wealth

and cun'cnt after-tax labor ]ncamc

are each known nt the beginning of period t, future labor income is uncertain at the
beginning
of period t. Thereforr, human wealth as delmed in (5y is not observable to the individual consumer at time t. In the presence of uncenalnty, the expression on the right hand side of (5) will
be called the ex post human wealth and the expression on the right hand side of (6) will be called

cx post permanent income at rime t, An individual consumer in period t must choose consumption in period t prior to observing the cx post permanent income,
Let H

E {H} denote ex ante human wealth in period t and let y

ex ante permanent income in period

t. Talcing the condirional expectation

E1

*}

denote

of each side of (6)

yields

y = r(W1 + H) .
Suppose that the consumer sets consumption in period t equal to ex ante permanent income

(7)

y so

that
ct

=y =r(W +H) .

(8)

Sa'ictly speaking, it is not generally optimal to set consumption equal to permanent income as in
(8). The uncertalnty associated with future income flows may generate precautionary saving
which would imply that an intertemporally optimizing consumer would choose to consume less

-11—

than permanent income as defined here.7 However, if the utility function u( )

is

quadratic, which

implies that the third derivative of u( ) is identically equal to zero, then the certainty equivalence
income as
principle implies that it is indeed optimal to set consumption equal to permanent
defined in (6). I will ignore the complications associated with a nonzero third derivative of u(),
and proceed as if optimal consumption is equal to permanent income in (6).
response of consumption to income for a fairly general
for income, I first derive a consumption function for a simple special case.

Before proceeding to study
stochastic process

tin..

Suppose that y evolves according to the first-order autoregressive process
Yt

where

0

a < 1,
= y + a (Yt -

{ut}

= 0, and y

-y
is

=ai(yti -y)

+u

the unconditional expected value of y. In this

case,

so that using the definition of permanent income in (5) and (6) it can be

shown that consumption is
ci

=rW + [r/(1 +r- ai)}yt + [(1 -ai)/(1 +r- aj)J.

a
Equation (10) relates consumption to wealth and contemporaneous income and thus resembles
traditional

aggregate consumption function.8

Note that

the coefficients on

y and y

are

each

W, consumption would be a weighted
average of current income and the unconditional average value of income. The weight on current
positive and they sum to one. Thus, ignoring wealth

income is an increasing function of a1 which measures the persistence of deviations in income.
Although (10) may not appear at first glance to be a forward-looking consumption function, it
7see Dreze and Modigliani (1972), Kimball (1986), and Zeldes (1986) for discussions of precautionarysaving.
with
Recently, Caballero (1987) has derived the solution to the consumer's optimizationproblem under uncertainty
a constant absolute risk aversion utility function. He has argued that precautionary saving behaviorcan explain the
excesssensitivityand excess smoothness phenomenadiscussedbelow.
8Sse for example, Ando and Modigliani (1963) and Modigliani (1975). In the formulationpresented in equation
This result depends
1O), a one dollar increase in current wealth leads to an r dollar increase in current consumption.
on the assumption that the consumer has an infinite horizon. Alternatively, under the life cycle model, which
assumes that the consumer has a finite horizon, the consumer consumes some of the principal in addition to the
intereston his wealth. In thiscase, the coefficient on wealthis larger than the real interest rate r. Empirically, Ando
and Modigliani (1963) estimated this coefficient to be in the range from 0.04 to 0.10 for a sample of U.S. data; in
examiningItalian data, Modigliani(1975) estimatedthe coefficient on wealth to be roughlyin the range from 0.06 to
0.09.

does take account of forecasts of future income. It mrns out that for a fst-order autoreciessive
process, y contains all information that is known about future deviations of income from 7.
For

a more generai stochastic process on

y1,

I will not derive a consumption funcdon

relating consumption to wealth and current and past income. Instead 1 will focus on thc relation
between fluctuations in consumption and fluctuations in income.

To study the fluctuations In consumptson,recah that consumption,cc is equal to conternporaneous (cx ante) permanent income

y.

Therefore, fluctuations iu consumption will be

identical to fluctuations in permanent income. if the rate of return nn wealth is constant, then ad
fluctuations in permanent income are due to fluctuations in human wealth; specifically, fluctuations in permanent income are due to revisions in expectations about future labor iocome,
follows immediately from the definition
Et{Et+t{y÷j}}

of human wealth

(5j

and thc

it

fact that

={yt+j},j = 1,2, 3,., that
[y+Et{Hoc}J.

r

(11)

Adding nonhuman wealth to both sides of (11) yields

W +H =

[(1

+E{H}]

(12)

Now multiply both sides of (12) by (1 + r) and use the wealth accumulation equation (1) to
replace (1 + r)W1 y by c1 + W÷. to obtain
(1

+ r) [W + HJ

= e + W + E {H1} .

(13)

Equation (13) was derived simply by manipulating the definition of human wealth and using the
wealth accumulation equation; it does not embody any behavioral assumptions. Now suppose
that consumption is equal to permanent income and use (8) and (13) to obtain

r(W + H) = r(W+i +

{l÷})

*

(14)

Equation (14) indicates that if consumption is equal to permanent income, then permanent
income is not expected to change. Equivalently, any change in permanent income and consumption between period t and period t+1 must be unanticipated from the viewpoint of period t. The

-13-

wealth is equal to the
underlying economic reason for this result, of course, is that if the return on
rate of time preference, the individual optimally plans to have constant consumption over his life.
Indeed, using the definition of permanent income in (8), and using the fact that
= E{E+1 {H+j}} yields

c =y' =E{y1}

=E{ct+i}

Thus, the conditional forecast of c÷1 based on information available in period t is equal to c1.9
Therefore, any deviation from constant consumption must be the result of unanticipated factors.

It follows immediately from (15) and the permanent income hypothesis in (8) that
c+1

-CtYi -E{y}
is equal to the innovation, i.e., the

The change in consumption from one period to the next
unanticipated change, in permanent income.

In order to calculate the changes in permanent income and consumption, it is necessary to
to
specify the stochastic process for after-tax labor income. The simplest stochastic environment
is
analyze is one in which after-tax labor income is stochastic but the rate of return on wealth

r

constant. Let r denote the constant value of r. Suppose that y evolves according to a univariate
autoregressive process

y -y =a(L)(y -y)

+

where a(L) is a polynomial in the positive powers of the lag operator L, and the innovation u is a

E {Ut+1 } = 0.

random disturbance with the property that
order autoregressive process y - y = a1

(y -

For example, if

y follows the first-

+ Ut, then the polynomial a(L) is simply a1L. It

is sometimes more convenient to work with the moving average representation of the income
process
Yt

-

= b(L) ut

9F[all (1978) first observed that consumption should follow a random walk. This observation is based on the
first-order condition (3). If the utility function u(c1) is quadratic and if the interest rate is equal to p. then (3) can be
written astsi -

d c = E( -

i

which implies that E,{c÷1} =c.

-14-

where h(L) is a polynomial in the non-negative powers of the lag operator U It foilows from
inspection of (171 and (18) that b(L) = (I - aG)11. The effect on future income y of a one unit
innovation in y is b so that
E+1 {y÷i÷i} - E

{y+} = b ufl

Using the definitions of cx post and cx ante permanent income yields an expression that relates
the innovation in permanent income to the innovation in after-tax iahor income

/

Ft{y1} =r/(t

)

;(l=

[U+

F fv

y

,

Equation (20) states that the revision in expected permanent income is equai to the present vaiue

of revisions in expectations of

y, j =

1,

2,

3,....

Suhstituting (19) into 20) and recalling that

b(L) is the polynomial in the non-negative powers

of L, the expression for the innovation in

permanent income in (20) can he wtitten more succinctly as

Yi

-{yi} =(rI(1 +r))b(1/(1 +r))u.

(21)

Equation (21) relates the innovation in permanent income to the innovation in current
after-tax income.tO It is perhaps easiest to interpret (21) and its implications in the special case
of a first-order autoregressive process. In this case the coefficients are equal to at for
b1

= 0, 1. 2,. . so that equation (21) and
equation (16) together imply that
Ct÷t

-c =r/(l +r-at)ut+t .

(22)

Equation (22) relates consumption to the contemporaneous innovation in income. Interpreting

the response of consumption to the contemporaneous innovation in income as the marginal
propensity to consume (MPC), equation (20) implies that the MPC is equal to r!(1 + r The
a1).

size of the marginal propensity to consume plays a crucial role in Keynesian models of
demand. Equation (22) illustrates that the value

aggregate

of the MPC depends on the nature of the

10The factor (rIO + r))b(1f(1 + r)) on the right hand side of (21) is equal to (r/(t + rfl(1 a(1/(1 + r))4. Note that if
is stationary,then this factor is positive. However, it is not necessarily less than one, even if is
stationary.

y

-15-

stochastic process of income as stressed by Friedman (1957).

then a1 =

0

and the MPC is equal to rI(1

If income is serially uncorrelated,

r). The average annual real rate of return in the U.S.

is, depending on the asset, somewhere between zero and perhaps seven percent. This suggests
that if annual income is serially uncorrelated, then the MPC is quite small, ranging roughly from
zero to 0.07.

The MJC is an increasing fw -tion of the parameter a1, which is the first-order serial
correlation coefficient of a first-order univariate autoregressive process for income. In fact,
income--more precisely aggregate income--tends to be very highly serially correlated. Note that

if income follows a random walk, then a1 = 1 and the MPC is equal to one. The reason for a
unitary MPC in the case of a random walk is that any innovation in income is expected to be
permanent. That is, a one dollar innovation in income at time t raises the forecast of income at
all future dates by one dollar and hence raises the expectation of permanently sustainable consumption by one dollar.
The relation between consumption and income that is predicted by the permanent income
hypothesis serves as a basis for econometrically testing this hypothesis. Flavin (1981) examined
the joint behavior of consumption and income and concluded that consumption displays excessive sensitivity to the anticipated change in contemporaneous income. Of course, this conclusion
depends on the estimated stochastic process for income. More recently, Deaton (1986) and
Campbell and Mankiw (1986) have suggested that income has a random walk component so that,

for example, a positive innovation to income raises the forecasts of future income into the
indefinite future, Deaton (1986) and Campbell and Deaton (1987) have estimated the stochastic
process for income including a random walk component and have argued that permanent income
is more variable than current income because changes in labor income are positively serially
correlated. Therefore, if consumption is equal to permanent income, then consumption should be
more variable than current income. Deaton and Campbell and Deaton calculate, based on the

and Prescott(1985) reportthat in the U.S. over the period from 1889 to 1978 the average real rate of return
ott short-termbonds is 0.80% per year and the averagereal rate of return on equityis 6.98% per year.

16-

estimated time-series process for income, the degree to which the variance of consumption
should exceed the variance of current income.

They conciude that consumption

is

'too

smooth."2 At first glance Fiavin's finding of excess sensitivity of consumption to income
appears to be contradicted by Campbell and Deaton's finding tltat consumption responds too
httie to innovations in income. Campbeli and Deaton rcsoive this apparent conrtadictiot by

obsen'ing that Flavin's result concerns the relation betoccn consumption and the anticipated
change in income, whereas their excess smoothness re nIt conerrns the relation between con
sumption and the contemporaneous innovation to the income, process. When Campbell and
Deaton examine the reiadon between consumption and anticipated changes tin income, they aiso
find excess sensitivity. in addition, they present an anaiytic argcment that "chere is no contradie
tion between e.eess sensitivity and excess smoothness; they are the same phenontenon." tp 33)

The tests of the permanent income hypothests based on the time-series properties of
income and consumption maintain the assumption that the rate of interest used to discount future
cash flows is constant This seemingiy innocuous assumption has important implications for the
interoretadon

of tests of permanent income hypothesis. Miehener (1984) developed a simple

stochastic general equilibrium model in which the interest rate is cndogenoosi determined, He
showed that even if consumers maximize the expected value of a standard time-separable utility
function, the stochastic process for aggregate consumption can fail to satisfy the properties
discussed above, Although Michener's model includes production and capital accumulation, his
point can be made more simply, and more starkly, by considering an endowment economy in
which each (identical) consumer receives an endowment y, of the homogeneous perishable good.

In equilibrium, aggregate consumption (per capita), c1, will be equal to aggregate income, y' and
hence aggregate consumption would inherit the time-series properties of aggregate income. In
this situation, consumption and income would have equal variances so that comparisons of the
variances

of these series would be uninformative. Also, if the change in income were

(1987) models the income processwith a random walk componentand develops a variance bounds test of
the permanent income model. He also findsthat consumptionis too smooth relative to income,

-17-

forecastable, the change in consumption would be forecasublewhich violates one of the implications of the permanent income hypothesis. The lesson from Michener's analysis is that the tests

of the permanent income hypothesis discussed above maintain several auxiliary assumptions in
addition to the hypothesis that consumers maximize an intertemporal utility function subject to a
budget constraint and subject to available information about future income. Therefore, rejections
of the permanent income hypothes based on the time series properties of consumption and
income can be interpreted as rejecting specific formulations of the permanent income hypothesis
but do not necessarily reject the hypothesis

of intertemporal utility maximization under

uncertainty.

II. ConsumerDurables
The discussion so far has proceeded under the assumption that there is a homogeneous
consumption good. While this assumption is intended to be only a simplifying abstraction, one
must ask what sorts of important or interesting differences among goods are masked by this
assumption. The major heterogeneity among goods that is recognized in the literature on consumption is the distinction between durable goods and non-durable goods. In fact, expenditure
on durable goods and consumption of nondurable goods (and services) have quite different
cyclical behavior. Durable goods expenditures display much more volatility over the business
cycle than do nondurable goods and services. More precisely, the percentage variation in
durables expenditures is much greater than the percentage variation in nondurables consumption.
However, the level of expenditure on durables is much smaller than the level of expenditures on
nondurables. In fact, it is this difference in the average level of expenditures on durables and
nondurables that accounts for the difference in the percentage variation. The variation in the
absolute level of durables expenditures is smaller than the variation in the absolute level of
nondurable expenditures)3

t3startz (1987) reports that 'the standard deviation of deviations from trend for durablesis large (60 dollars), about
one-half the size of that for nondurables." (p. 2) Mankiw (1982) uses lagged information to forecast durables
expenditureand nondurablesconsumption. He finds that the standard deviationsof the forecasterrors are roughly
equal (13.1 for durables vs. 13.2 for nondurables).

-18-

In analyzing

the behavior of consumer durables, it is important to distinguish between

expenditure on consumer durables which I will denote by x,, and the consumption of the services

of durables which 1 will denote by d,. I will assume that the flow of consumption services from
durabies during period t,
period t,

DL,

d, is proportional to the

stock

of durables held

at the beginning

of

plus the durables acquired during period t, x. In particular, suppose that
=

x(

-

(23)

Although the concept of the consumption of the flow of services from the durable good is
important for some puoses, it is the level of expenditure on durable goods which is important
for the determination of aggeegate demand.

It is useful to introduce the concept of the user cost of durabies. To simplify the analysis.
suppose that the relative price of durables and nondurables remains fixed over time, Let p.
denote the price of durabies in terms of nondurables. In the absence of relative price changes,
there are ewo components to the user cost of the durable: foregone interest and depreciation. By
holding a unit of a durable rather than interest-earning wealth, the consumer foregoes interest cf
qj. per period, where r is the real interest rate. In addition, if the durable depreciates at a rate P
per period, then depreciation imposes a cost of Pp. per period to the owner of the durable.
Therefore the user cost of a durable is (r

The introduction of durables implies that the consumer holds two assets: interest-earning
wealth and durables. Previously, W was defined to be the nonhuman wealth of a consumer at
the beginning of period t. Now W is to be interpreted as the interest-earning wealth, or equivalently, as the nonhuman wealth

of the consumer minus the value of the consumer's stock of

durable goods. The budget constraint in (1) must be amended to
W+1

where

=(l +r)W +Yt -ct -

(24)

c is now interpreted as the consumption of nondurables. Recalling that 6 is the deprecia-

tion rate per period of the durable leads to the following relation between the stock of the durable

-19-

and expenditures on the durable
D+1

=(l - ö)(D +Xt)

In order to motivate expenditure on durables as well

(25)
as nondurables, the utility function

must be augmented to include services from durables as well as from nondurables. Let u(c, d1)
be the utility function in period t. The consumer will allocate spending in period t between the
purchase of nondurables and the rental of durables. The optimal allocation will equate the
Writing the utility function as
marginal rate of substitution with the rental price.

u(c, i(D + x')) makes clear that
durable goods is Wud/u where

the marginal rate

of substitution between nondurables and

u is the derivative of u(c, d) with respect to durable services and

u is the derivative of u(c, d) withrespect to nondurables. Setting this marginal rate of substitution equal to the rental priceof durables yields
(26)

For simplicity, supposethat the period utility function has the following Cobb-Douglas
specification

u(c,d)

=cd

.

(27)

In this case, the consumer will allocate a fraction 1-a of his or her consumption basket to nondurables, c, and a fraction a to the rental of services of durables, (r + ö) i.i(D + x'). Therefore,

D+XL=('&)
Substituting (28) into (25) yields
D+1

c.

=(l-S) (r+)L

(29)

To obtain the relation between expenditures on durables and expenditures on nondurables,
substitute (29) into (25) to obtain

x = K{c - (1 - 3)c.1}
where

K = [lf(r

+

) t] [a/(l

- a)] .

(30a)
(30b)

Equation (ba) can he used to determine the response nf expenditures on durahies to an
innovation in incme 1' follows immediately from (303. that ir. response to ao innovation in
income, the mammal ropenstty to spend on dorabies is equal to

K ames

the marginal pro"e:sirv

to consume rondurubles. Let q(x1 denote the standard deviatton of the one pedod fe-coast rror
eonh:t:onai on inrerma ion koowu at thu end of period
sitroLtriy. iet cm1 c denrte the

tt.

:mrdarf ueviation & the one-period forecast error & e
;od of reniod :. L fell tar immediately from '30a

:editionai on infermadon Pmmn as tne

nt

c(x =Koju

durah re'ativr C
an be ether eatrr or ies5

The ;'araroeser K measures th" uyuhcal sotattion ol expenditurar no
the

e'rhcal volatility of nondurables consumption. in poncpie

K

than one so that the cyclical vaaiahility of durables expenditures can exceed or Lii vront of the
cyciinai variability of nondurables consumption. However the tneo:y predalts shut the relative
sariability of dumables expenditure must exceed the rriaove variability of nondurahies consompdon, To derive this implicatior of the rheory. first nhserve from (30a) that if x, und e, a-c statsonamy. then

where k ri the average vaioe of x and c

'

x =

KOe

(32)

the average value of e. Then divide (31) by (32) to
=
obtain c1(xy 7k (1/6) a1 (e) 7k. Therefore, since 6 is iess than one, this
simpie extension of the
pemaanent income model to include consumer durables as well as nondurables explains the fact

that the percentage volatility of durables expenditures exceeds that of nondurable

consumption.

Equation (32) can be used to get an estimate of the parameter K using data on the rate of
depreciation and the average levels of expenditures on durables and nondurables. Using the
figures for average durables expenditure and average nondurables consumption reported in Startz
(1987, p. 2) yields a value of X7k equal to 12.2%. Therefore, the factor K is equal to .122/6.
Bernanke (1985, p. 53) reports a depreciation rate for consumer durables of 0.0506
per quarter.
Therefore, for quarterly data, the value of K is 2.41. This value of K appears to be substantially

larger than is reflected in consumer spending. It implies, counterfactually, that

a (x) should be

-21-

larger than

a (c).

Also recall from (30) that

i is

equal to the ratio of the effect of an income

innovation on durables expenditure to the effect of an income innovation on nondurables concalculated
sumption. Bernanke (1985, p. 57) estimates this ratio to be .775. The fact that the
to overstate the cyclical variability of durables expenditures may reflect that
value of K
appears

the model derived above has ignored costs of adjusting the stock of durables (see Bernanke
(1985)) and has ignored implications f irreversibility discussed below.
on consumer
Equation (30a) can be used to analyze the serial correlation of expenditure
durables. The contrast between the predicted serial correlation of durables expenditure and
nondurables consumption is particularly striking in the case in which durables are perfectly
durable. Formally, durables are perfectly durable when the rate of depreciation, & is equal to
zero. In this case, equation (30a) implies that x is proportional to c1 cr1, the change in nondurables consumption. Under the permanent income hypothesis the change in nondurables
on durables cannot be predicted.
consumption is completely unpredictable, and thus expenditure
on durables
Equivalently, Ei {Xt} = 0. Therefore, in the absence of depreciation, expenditure

follows a white noise process but expenditure on nondurables follows a random walk.

It is also worth noting that if the rate of depreciation is equal ro one, so that durables are

c

That is, x and
completely nondurable, then equation (30a) states that x is proportional to c.
both follow a random walk, as should be expected because in ihts case 'durables' are
nondurable.

The analysis above suggests that the serial correlation of expenditures on durables is an
are highly
increasing function of the rate of depreciation. In fact, expenditures on durables

If the large degree of serial correlation is to be consistent with the model
outlined above, then the rate of depreciation would probably have to be implausibly large.
serially correlated.14

Alternative explanations for the high degree of serial correlation would point to departures from

14Lam (1986) reports that, exceptfor motor vehicles, most categoriesof consumer durables expenditures are wett
characterizedby a first-order process of coefficient around 0.95. (p. 12) The first-order autocorrelationof new cars
is 0,770.

-22-

the simple model. Two such departures are liquidity constraints, to be discussed later, and
irreversibility of durables expenditures.

The term 'irreversibility' of durables expenditures is meant to capture the notion that an
individual who tries to sell a used consumer durable generally receives a price that is lower than
the value of the remaining durables services evaluated at the markal price for new durables. In
the extreme case of complete irreversibility, the consumer cannot obtain any resources by selling
a used durable good. To see the effects of irreversibility, consider a small unanticipated decrease
in the consumer'sincome. Under perfect reversibility, the consumer should reduce consumption

of both durables services and nondurables. However, if the resale price of the durable is low,
then the consumer may choose not to sell any of the durable, but instead may reduce nondurable
consumption or interest-earning wealth by more than in the optimal plan undercomplete reversibility. If income continues to be unexpectedly low for a few periods, then the consumer may
have to sell off some of the durable in order to avoid a large decline in nondurables consumption.

it becomes optimal to sell some of the durable depends on the level of the
consumer'sother wealth. With a higher level of wealth, the consumer can wait longer before
The date at which

selling some of the nondurable. Although this discussion has focused on the response to a
decrease in income, the consumer will display a conservative response to an increase in income
because of the possibility of a future decline in income. At the level of the individual consumer,
the effect of the introduction of irreversibility is to reduce the marginal propensity to purchase
durables in response to an increase in income. As for the behavior of aggregate expenditure on
durables, Lam (1986) has used simulation techniques to show that if there

is cross-sectional

variation in household wealth, then irreversibility will induce a high degree of serial correlation
in aggregate durables expenditures.

ilL Liquidity Constraints
The permanent income hypothesis presented above is based on the assumption that an
individual consumer can borrow and lend at the same interest rate, and furthermore that the
consumer can borrow or lend any amount subject to the lifetime budget constraint described

-23

above. An important departure from this assumption is the possibility that the consumer may

face a liquidity constraint. Broadly interpreted, the term liquidity constraint is meant to capture
the notion that an individual is not able to borrow any amount he or she chooses at an interest
rate equal to the rate he or she earns on financial wealth. The departure from the assumption of
the individual may be able
perfect capital markets may take any of several forms. For instance,
of
to borrow any amount he or she cho es at a fixed interest rate but this rate exceeds the rate
is
return on financial assets. In this case the intertemporal budget constraint of the individual
to current
is
piecewise linear, with a kink occurring at a point where current consumption equal
income plus liquid financial wealth. An extreme example of this type of liquidity constraint,
which corresponds to an infinite borrowing rate, is the case in which the consumer is simply
form
unable to borrow. Alternatively, the capital market imperfection may manifest itselfin the

of an interest rate on borrowing that rises with the level of the consumer'sborrowing.15 For the
sake

of simplicity, I will use the term liquidity constraint to refer to a situation in which the

consumer is unable to borrow at all.
relation between consumption
Liquidity constraints have important implications for the
and contemporaneous income.t5 A consumer who is currently liquidity constrained would like
to increase current consumption but is unable to do so because he or she cannot borrow. if the
to
consumer's income turns out to be one dollar higher, then it is both feasible and desirable
increase current consumption by one dollar. Alternatively, if income turns out to be one dollar
lower, then the consumer is forced to reduce consumption by one dollar. Thus, for a consumer
consume out of current
currently facing a binding liquidity constraint, the marginal propensity to
does not face a binding liquidity
disposable income is equal to one. Even if the consumer

'5See Stiglitzand Weiss (1981) for a discussion ofcredit rationing.
thIn addition, liquidity constraints have importantimplications for the effects of tax policy. See Hayashi (1985c)
and Yotauzuka (1987) for a discussion of the implications of liquidity constraints for the Ricardian Equivalence
theorem.

-24-

constraint in the current period, the prospect

of a binding liquidity constraint in the future would

affect the current marginal propensity to consume,17
Although liquidity constraints have strong implications for the marginal propensity to
consume, they may be difficult to detect in aggregate data. The reason for this difficulty is that
under the permanent income hypothesis, the marginal propensity to consume depends on the
stochastic properties of income, Since aggregate income is highly serially correlated, and indeed
may even be

a random walk, the permanent income hypothesis predicts an MPC of about one

even in the absence of liquidity constraints, Thus an MPG near unir'' could result from either a
binding liquidity constraint or highly serially correlated income.
Evidence of binding liquidity constraints has been found in econometric analyses of panel
data. Hall and Mishkin (1982) analyzed expenditures on food in the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics and concluded that about 20% of the households in their sample of U.S. households
were liquidity constrained. Hayashi(1985a) and Zeides(1985) used data on individual household
wealth and found that households with large amounts of liquid assets appeared to adhere to the
permanent income hypothesis but households with small liquid wealth appeared to behave as if
liquidity-constrained, The importance of liquidity constraints from the viewpoint of the cyclical
relation between consumption and income is that the MPG of constrained households is

equal to

one. Thus, if the MPG implied by the permanent income hypothesis is less than one and is less
than the apparent
excess sensitivity'

in income are

MJDC

in the data, one might appeal to liquidity constraints to explain the

of consumption. Alternatively, if income has a unit root and if the changes

as persistent

as estimated by Campbell and Deaton (1987), then one might appeal

to liquidity constraints to explain excess smoothness.

t7For example, suppose that p = r = 0 and the consumer does not currently (in period t) face a binding liquidity
constraint. If the consumerwill face a binding liquidity constraint inperiod t + N, thenthe marginal propensityto
consume out of a one-timeadditionto wealth in period t is 1/(N + 1).

-25-

IV. Interest Rate and Wealth Effects on Consumption
The response of consumption to changes in after-tax labor income y1 were analyzed above
in a model in which consumers take account of stochastic vanation in

y1

in optimally reaching

in the rate of
consumption decisions. Ideally, to analyze the response of consumption to changes
interest or to changes in the value of wealth, one would like to develop a model of a consumer
return as
maximizing an intertemporal utility 'inction subject to random variation in the rate of
well as random variation in labor income. Unfortunately, it is difficult to develop a simple model
with a closed form solution for a consumer facing both labor income uncertainty and rate of
return uncertainty. To analyze the response of consumption to changes in the rate of return on
wealth, I will present a simple model in which the only source of income is the return on nonhuman wealth.
Suppose that the consumer has no labor income so that the wealth accumulation equation
(1) can be written as

W = (1 + r)W1 - c

(33)

where the real rate of return on wealth is now treated as a random variable. For analytic simplic-

r

ity suppose that the random rate of return is identically and independently disttibuted over
time. The consumer attempts to maximize the time-separable utility function in (2). The maximum attainable value of U depends only on the consumer'savailable resources in period t,
(1

+ r1)W1. Let the function V((l + r)WL) denote the maximum attainable value of U in (2) and

note that

V((i + r1) W) = max u(ct) + (11(1 + p)) E {V((l + rt÷1) W1+1)} .

(34)

The function V( ) cannot be specified independentiy. It is a solution to the functional equation in
(34).

In general the functional equation in (34) is difficult to solve, but in the case of isoelastic
utility a solution can be derived in a straightforward manner)8 Suppose that the utility function

18Samuelson (1969) derivesthe solution

for the fmite-honzonversion of this problem using

backward induction.

u(c) has the isoelastic form u(c) = c"Y/(l - 'O where 7> 0 is the (constant) coefficient of relative
risk aversion. In this case, the intertemporal utility fonction in (2) is homothetic so that income
expansion path relating consumption at various dates is

a sonight line thrnngh the origin. Thns,

changes in (1 + r3W, induce an equiproportionate change in c,, A solution to the functional
equation is'9
r,) W,) = AU1

V((l

where A is a coefficient to be determined later.

o) W)'1/(

(35)

lo solve the consumer'soptimization problem.

consider a reduction in c, of one unit and an accompanying tocrease of one uott in W,.,. The
e'Lc 0" if C
Lrert omit or ne c gInf ("4 uy
arr ea n

ro h

tfl ijce

in

\V,, will increase the expected present value of next period's utility on the right hand side of

(34) by

(11(1

+ p)) E, {(1 + r,±l) V'((l + r,+,) W,1)}, At the optimum, the net effect on the

consumer's utilmi will be zero, and henceconsumption 'will be at the optimal level when

p))E,{( + r,) Viii + r,÷t)W1)}

= (11(1

.

(36)

Using the isoelastic specificahon for no and using (35), equation (36) can be written as

(c,)° = (Mi + p))
Now raise both sides of (37) to the

-

1(1 r1)t'1} ((I + r,) IV, -

c,j

(37)

l/y power to obtain
c, = 0(1 + r,)W,

(38a)

where

0 = { I + [(A/U + p)) E, {(1 rt÷t)'°}]'}

.

(38b)

Substituting the optimal consumption rule (38a) into (34) and using the definition of 0 in (38b)

19The functional equation (34) has a continuum of solutions of the form

V((t + r1)W,) = A((I + r,) W,)'-/(t
where

$ is an arbitraryconstant, The solutionin (35) sets

-

+ $(t +

equal to zero,

-27-

implies, after some manipulation, that

A=G'

(39)

Finally, substituting (39) into (38b) yields

G= 1- [E{(l +rL+i) }I(l
Observe from (38a) that
resources.

+p)J.

0 is the m ginal (= average) propensity to consume out of available

I have now derived the optimilconsumption rule of a consumer who faces a stochas-

tic rate of return on wealth. It follows immediately from (38a) that consumption is proportional
to the contemporaneous value of wealth including the current return to capital. Note, in particular, that consumption in period t is an increasing function of the ex post rate of return r.
This model allows us to distinguish the effects of changes in the ex ante probability
distribution of the rate of return from changes in the cx post rate of return. From the point of
view of period t, the ex ante information about the stochastic rate of return ri+i is summarized by

[E {(l + r+i)}J in the marginal propensity to consume out of wealth, 0. Note
first that if y is equal to one, in which case the utility function u( ) is logarithmic, then
0 = 1 - [11(1 + p)}. Thus, under logarithmic utility, consumption, c, is invariant to the ex ante
the factor

distribution of the rate of return. The reason for this invariance is that the income and substitution effects associated with an increase in the prospective rate of return offset one another
exactly. An increase in the prospective interest rate has a positive income effect because the
consumer is assumed to be a net lender rather than a net borrower (i.e.,W > 0). The substitution
effect

of a higher prospective interest rate is to make current consumption more expensive

relative to future consumption and thus to reduce current consumption. The income and substitution effects are in opposite directions, and for the case of logarithmic utility, they are
magnitude.

of equal

If the utility function u() displays less curvature than the logarithmic function, i.e., if

y< I, then the substitution effect is strengthened; if the rate of return, r11, is nonstochastic, then
consumption, c, would be a decreasing function of r+1. Alternatively, if the utility function is
more curved than the logarithmic function, ('j> 1), then the substitutioneffect is diminished;if
the rate

of return, r11, is nonstochastic, consumption, c, would be an increasing function of r1÷1.

-28-

I have

shown that consumption, c, increases in response to an increase in the cx post
interest rate r., but may rise, fall, or remain unchanged in response to a given chge in the cx
ante distribution of the rate of return r,,. The difference in the effects of ex post and cx ante
interest rates is that the cx post interest has oniy an income effect associated with it, whereas a
change in the cx ante interest rate has hoth an income effect and a aubstitodon effect. In particular, if, at the beginning of period t, the consumer
rate

r

is higher than expected, then the consumer

increases consumption. The interest rate
periods t

- 1

aud period t; because

s that the reah'zed vaiue of the interest
as

wealthier than expected acd therefore

r represents the consumer's terms of trade hetweera

r does not affect the terms nf trcdc between petiod t end any

future perich. there is no substitutton effect on cc By contrast, if iu period t the "cUe of r., is
seen

to increase, then the terms of trade between period t and period t

I are altered, thereby

inducing a substitution effect in addition to the income effect,
The magnitude of the respohse of consumption to changes irt the expected rate of interest
can be measured by the intertemporai elasticity of substitution, Under the isoelastic utility
function u(c) =c°'Y(i - y), the intertemporal elasticity of suhstisutionis equal to i/y This result
can be derived by substituting u'(c) = c' hate the first-order condition (3) and rearranging

t.o

obtain
boc1÷t/c =-(l/'y)in(i

+p)

-(I/y)inii±t

(41)

i'lt÷t} = i. Recalling that I + r11 is the relative
price of consumption in periods t and t+i, it is clear from (41) that a one percent change in the
where 'rh+i is a positive random variable and

relative price

E1

of c4,1 and c induces a 1/y percent change in

elasticity of substitution is equal to

c,÷5/c.

Thus, the intertemporal

l/y Using monthly data and tueasuring the rate of return on

wealth by the value-weighted aggregate return on stocks on the New York Stock Exchange,
Hansen and Singleton (1983) estimated yto be between zero and two,
The formal analysis of the effect of the interest rate is based on the assumption that all of
the consumer's disposable resources come from return on wealth. In particular, after-tax labor
income is ignored. To the extent that there will be positive flows of after-tax labor income in the

-29-

future, an increase in the ex ante interest rate would have a smaller income effect, or possibly
even a negative income effect. Intuitively, art increase in the prospective rate of return would
reduce the present value of future labor income and thus would reduce the current value of
human wealth. Indeed, if the consumer's current nonhuman wealth and current income are
sufficiently low compared to his future earnings, the consumer may be a net borrower rather than
a net lender (i.e.,
may be negative1. In this case, an increase in the interest rate would have a

W

to reduce
negative income effect; both the income effect and the substitution effect would tend
consumption in response to an increase in the interest rate.20

V. Government Bonds and Ricardian Equivalence
the next
Having shown that consumption is an increasing function of nonhuman wealth,
task is to examine whether government bonds are to be included in wealth. To see why this is an
interesting question consider the effects of a $100 cut in current lump-sum tax revenues that the
government finances by issuing $100 of bonds. It was pointed out by Ricardo (1911), and later
modeled formally by Barro (1974), that under certain conditions forward-looking consumers
would not change their consumption at all in response to this tax change. The reason is that
consumers recognize that the government will have to increase taxes in the future to repay the
taxes in the
principal and interest on the newly-issued bonds. Because of the need to increase
future, the opportunity set of the representative consumer is unaltered by this policy. The
consumer can achieve exactly the same path of current and future consumption by increasing
current saving by $100, and by holding this additional saving in the form of government bonds.
The consumer can hold these bonds in his portfolio earning interest until future taxes are increased to pay the interest and principal on the bonds. The future tax increases will be exactly

that accompaniesan tncrease
2OUsing a simulation model,Summers (1981) finds that the reduction in human wealth
in the interest rate is quantitatively substantial. In addition, he finds that the interest elastsciiy 01 savIngs is quite
substantial(roughly in the rangefrom 1 to 3) and that this interest elasticity is not very sensitiveto the parameterq.
Estimates of this elasticity based on consumption and rate of return data are generally much smaller (Boskin's
(t978) estimate of 0.4 for the interest elasticity of saving is at the high end of the range), but Summers attributes
much of the difference to the fact that these other studies hold wealth constant, whereas he takes account of the
negativeimpactof higher interest rates on human wealth.

-30

equal in value to the principal and interest earned by the consumer, Therefore, the consumer can
support the same path of consomption as initially planned.

Furtheore, since the tax change is
in a lump-sum tax, mere will be no change tn relative prices, Therefore, it is both feasible and
optimal for the consumer to maintain the same consumption and portfolio decisions (except for
increasing the holdine of govemment bonds) as before the tax change. This invariance of private
spending to changes in the tisniog of lump-sum taxes its been dubbed "The Ricardian Equivalence Theorem" by Buchanan (1976), It is worth noting that although Ricardo stated the basic
argument, he cautioned against taking thc argument seriously as

a descdpdon of the actual

impact of debt financed tax cuts, claiming that such a system tends to discourage saving (1911,
pp. 162-163),

To analyze the question of whether govemrnent bonds are net wealth, suppose that the
interest rate is constant and use the expression for peanent income implied by (5) and (6) to
obtain

c =r w +(1/(l

E {(i

(42)

Now distinguish government bonds. B,, from the rest of the consumer's nonhuman wealth, K,, so

(43)

It is also convenient to separate after-tax labor income alto pre-tax labor income y. and taxes T
so that

YYLT.

(44)

Substituting (43) and (44) into the consumption function (42) yields

c =r[}c +(l/(l +r)) L {(1
+r)'iEt{yu÷j}}]
(45)

E {(l+r)'iE{T1÷}} - Bj.
The Ricardo-Bo insight is that the government's budget consint implies that the present

-31-

value of tax revenues must equal the sum of the current government debt outstanding plus the
present value of government expenditure on goods and services. Thus, the second line of (45),
which is the excess of the present value of current and future tax revenues over the value of
currently outstanding government bonds, is equal to the present value of current plus future
government spending. Therefore, debt-financed changes in taxes that leave the path of government spending unchanged have no

e'-ct on consumption

To make the point starkly, suppose

that government spending on goods and services is always equal to zero so that the second line of
(45) is equal to zero. In this case, the consumption function is simply
ct
Inspection

=r K +(lI(l+r))
L

{(l
jO

+r)Jyi2*}J

(46)

of (42) and (46) sheds light on the question of whether government bonds should be

ieated as part of net wealth in an economy in which the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem holds.
It follows from (42) that if the income variable is net of taxes, then the wealth variable should
include government bonds. Alternatively, if the income variable is pre-tax labor income, then it
follows from (46) that the wealth variable should not include government bonds as net wealth.
In addition, if there is government spending, then (45) implies that the present value

of govern-

ment spending should appear as an additional explanatory variable along with pre-tax labor
income and Kr

The above discussion has proceeded under the assumption that the Ricardian Equivalence
Theorem holds. There is a large theoretical literature that explores many reasons why the
Ricardian Equivalence Theorem may not hold.

of actual tax policy may not

I will mention only three reasons why the impact

be accurately described by the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem.

First, the argument underlying the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem requires the taxes to be
non-distortionary taxes. However, virtually all taxes are distortionary taxes in that they affect the
relative price

of some economic activity.

In addition to non-distortionary taxes, the Ricardian

Equivalence Theorem relies on the assumption

of forward-looking intertemporally optimizing

consumers who do not face binding constraints on the intertemporal allocation of consumption.

-32-

The Ricardian Equivalence Theorem will fail to hold if coosumers lack the foresight to take
account of the implications for future taxes of current fiscal policy,

A third source of departure from the Ricardian Equivalence TI eorem may

arise

if con-

somers face binding constraints on the intertesnpora]. allocation of consumption. One such:
binding constraint is a binding liquidity constraint as discussed abeve tn Section III. Consumers
who face currently binding liquidity constraints wsll rrd.uce their current
consumption by an
amount equal to the current increase in taxes, sf the constraInt on thess borrowing does not
change
when taxes are changed. It is possible so consnstcs models in which the borrowing constrain
endogenously ad.iusts. with sax changes in a way that lrayes current consumption unchanged.
However, whether the borsowing constraint cndogenousi.y adjusts in a massner to maintain
Pricardian Equivalence depends on the rationale for liquidity constraints and on the extent of
communication asnong lenders.2t

of constraint on the intertemporal allocation of consumption that
violates the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem is a binding cnnstratnt on the intergenerational
An aitemative type

aiiocatson of consumption.

If current taxes are reduced, t,nS if tin impitest future sax increase is

ievied on future generations, then the current recipients of the sax reduction wousd increase their
consumption unless they have operative aisnaistic bequest motives. in particular, current conLrnpon an ibe ncreaseu under as's of fu towlflh se s rf acctwnp an I, 'ons s em nc

e

have bequest mottves;

(2) the bequest motive is a funetson of the size of the bequest; (3) the
bequest motive is of the altruistic form, but is not strong enough to induce the consumer to leave

a positivebequest.22
a large empirical literature that attempts to test whether the Ricardian
Equivalence Theorem accurately describes the impact of tax policy in actual economies. There
There is also

are manypapers which support each side of this question. This literature can be read as
supporting the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem (see, for example. Seater (1985)) or as rejecting

Lts Hayashi (1985e)and Yotsuzuka (t987).

22 Web (1987)and Abel(1987).

is

(see,

for example Eemheim (1987)). More importantly. ne

critic

question ri not whether the

Ricardian Equivalence Theorem is literally n-ue: the cr1: cal question is whether there are quantitatively substantial departures from Riea.rdian EVuiv.hcnce c tsP If

v.

ohat .' the nsa;nitddeof

these departures, This last question remains .mansered

VI. investment
In additlan to consumption expenditure, We o.her tpj .r component of phi ate spensPng

busoess invesun-ar which Include; .t'st.n.ory

..e to

as

i

wen as fixed investment in plant

and ecuipmeot. Toe dtsc s3ton below nth anc.( a: the sure., of fluctuations in investment with

uf inte:et flies 'tse or es, inflation, and aggregate demand
Ideaiiy, a theory of investment fiuetuatins snooLd he eeveioped in a stochastic environment just
rs,t-t(eular attenoon to the effects

as the ccnsunp:ion functIon presented

unove was ha.,en on utilimv-maxnxuzin: consumers fac.ns

uncertain srteums of exogenous Income. A though he IIter'atore does contain form;' models of

:nve5ent under uneertajnty?3 and also contains to: cumomem:

mpiementationof models of
a
tnvesrmert ender uncertainty st has Oct deveopec ..nd testec a set of stochastic impucafinns
wtth the snaanoeas of the stochastic implications or tie aermanent meome hypotnes±s. Therefore

I 'xiii develop the basic tnodels of investment unoes 'ha

5c

rnptioo

of certainty; the effects of

uncertainty will be briefly discussed later. Of the several popular models of fixed investment, I
will limit attention to three models: the accelerator model, the neoclasstcai model and the
q-theory model?3
A. The Neoclassical Model and the Accelerator
The demand for productive capital is a derived demand by fsrms, I will begin by considering the investment and employment decisions of a finn in a determintstie environment without
taxes. For analytic tractability and clarity, the model wtll be set in continuous tIme Let K, be

for example,Lucas and Prescott (197 t), Harman (1972), and Abel (1985).
for
2'See, example,Pindyckand Rotentberg (1983) and Bemanke (1983).

Bisehoff (l97t) and Clark (1979) for comparison of the empsricat performance of alternative investment
models. Niekell (1978) provides an excellentcomprehensive weament of several models of invesment and many
issues related to invesment behavior.

the stock of capital at time t, let L1 be the amount of labor employed at time t, and let I. be the

firm's gross investment at time t. Let

Y(K1, L1)

be the real revenue function of the firm

and

assume that it is concave. This function embodies the firm's production function and the demand
curve it faces. For a price-taking firm Y(K1, L1) is simply the output of the firm multiplied by the
real price of its output. At the level of the aggregate economy, Y(K1, L,) is to be interpreted as
the aggregate real revenue function, which depends on aggregate demand. The net real cash flow

at time t, X1, is
X1

= Y(K, L) - w1L1 - PtIt - c(11, K1)

where Pt IS the real price of investment goods and
expression for cash flow in (44), c(1.,

K1),

w1 is

(47)

the real wage rate. The final term in the

requires furtherexplanation. This function represents

the cost of adjusting the capital stock. This cost is in addition to the price of investment goods.

The adjustment cost function is meant to capture the notion that if the capital stock is to be
increased by a given increment, it is more costly to achieve this increase rapidly rather than
slowly. This idea was formalized by Eisner and Strotz (1963) and was used later by Lucas
(1967), Gould (1968), Treadway (1969), Mussa (1977), Abel (1980, 1982), Yoshikawa (1980)
and Hayashi (1982). The adjustment Cost function is non-negative and is convex in the rate

of

investment I, It is convenient to think of the adjustment cost function as representing installation
costs. With this interpretation, p1 can be called the price of uninstalled capital, and p1 + c1(11, K1)
is the marginal cost of new installed capital. Although the neoclassical and accelerator models
ignore costs of adjustment, I introduce adjustment costs at this point to develop a unifying
framework that will include the q theory of investment to be developed in the next section.

The firm attempts to maximize the present value of its net cash flow over an infinite
horizon. Let r1 be the instantaneous real rate of interest at time t and define R(t, s)

ex-1

to be the discount factorthat discounts real cashflows at date s back to date t. Let

rvdvl

V. be the value of the firm at time t and observe that
v1

=max$

X1R(t,

s)ds.

(48)

-35-

in the maximization on the right hand side of (48) the firm can choose the path of cmpio1meo:.

L, and the path of gross Investment, L, for s
treated as

n mitsal condition.

c The ievei of the capital stock a: time

The change in the apitai stock, i e., net imestmeot, I,

t K,,

e,, ,. to

,r
gross investment le5s heprcciaooo. Assumtng that capita: depreciates at a c natant proporh•
rate h,tfe cvootIon of fe apitai stock is 45000 oy
K.

=l. - hK

where a Jot over a aoabicoc otes the dens atsoc all :ha

149'
o

bIu a

:h

repeJ '0 o'ne

maxmoz.ctso.
The finns chooscs me patitr of '-moo vmaot and invcstmeo to perform
43; subject to the Jynamo onsmtr' 4 49) and .he ,Jstlon in:: K s: invett Th solve thia

mar m'zation problem deinne

ll

=X. ffKC

where q, is the shadow price ot a unit of installed capital. The detenninanon of o soIl be inscussed farther below lntegrrvttog

, a 'he

the ne, snerement to the capital stock

k.

shaoow price of cophal. the term q, K .' the valve of

Thos, the dght hand stde of (cl))

he vsco od is ttm

value accruing to the firm's employment and investment activities at time

Tnese acttvtfes

produce real cash flow at the rate X. and tncrease the capital stock by an amount worth chK,.
Technically. H: is the current value Hamshonian'

To solve the finn's maximization problem, employment and investment must be chosen
to maximize H5. Substituting (47) and (49) into (50) yields
Fl4

= Y(K4,

[4 - w4L1 - tlt - c(L, lC) + q4(14 - hK)

-

(5iy

Differentiating H with respect to L and I, respectively, and setting the dersvatives equal to zero,
yields
YL (K4,

L) = Wt

et(14,K4) =qt -pt.

(52a)
(52b)

Equation (52a) simply states that the firm hires labor to the point at which the marginal revenue

-36-

product of labor is equal to the wage rate. Equation (52b) states that the firm chooses a rate of
invesmient such that the marginal cost, which is equal to the price of the investment good P1 plus
the marginal adjustment cost

c1(I1, K1),

is equal to the value of an additional unit of installed

capital q1.26 This equation has important implications to which I will return later.
In addition to choosing and L1 to maximize H1, the solution to the firm's intertemporal

I

maximization problem in (48) requires that the shadow price
= -H1/K1. Using (51) this relation can be written as

q1

obey the relation

rq

= (r + h) q - YK (K1, L1) + CK (k,
K1)
Although equation (53) may appear to be merely

.

(53)

a technical condition for optimality, it has

a step toward interpreting (53), observe that it is a
differential equation and that the stationary solution of this differential equation is
important economic interpretations. As

q1

= 5 [YK (Ks, L) - cK (Is, Ks)] R(t, s) ett) ds.

(54)

Equation (54) states that the shadow price of capital is equal to the present discounted value of
the stream of marginal cash flow attributable to a unit of capital installed at time t. At each future
date s, the marginal cash flow consists of two components: (I)
YK(KS, L5) is the extra revenue
attributable to an additional unit of capital at time s; (2)
-cK(IS, K) is the reduction in the adjustment cost made possible by an additional unit of installed capital. The (instantaneous) rate at
which marginal cash flows at date s are discounted is equal to r1 + h ratherthan simply because
r5
a unit of capital depreciates at rate h. Thus, if a unit of capital is installed at time t, then at some
future time s, only a fraction e5t) of the unit of capital remains.

A second interpretation of (53) is based on viewing the shadow price q1 as if it were the
price at which a marginal unit of installed capital could be bought or sold. With this interpretation in mind, consider the decision of whether to invest in an additional unit of installed
capital at

LtiThis analysis ignoms any non-negativi constrthnt on ross investmenpinstead I have assumed that it is possible
for individual firms to remove capital goods and sell them subject to an adjustmentcost, See Sargent (1980) for an
analysis that explicitly incorporates a non-negativity constraint on ross investment in a discrete-time model.
Bertola (1987) analyzes the implications of the non-negativity constraintin a continuous-time model.

-a I—

a

cost of p1 or alternatively, to invest the p. units of numeraire in a finanetal mse' pdylng a rate of

return r,. If the capital inxesttnent decision is optintal then the firm ti'ould be .ndtfferent between these wo alternat.ve uses of p. enits of toe ru'neraire, xi.ieh :mphes thur tim reri 0' return
on capital investment is equal to r: Toe re,mn

capstul irtvesment cons:s' of four .o n'ponents

ct a mit or capital reim e the aoustment

(1) a unit of capital increases revenue by YKiK,
cost by

-etI,, K0;

3) -apt.al depre.crtes

oa

'oat the value if the -sod ti ioct te .iepveC-

Pie price if cepttat bonge; r t. - -ate

tion is hq, ma

positive and a capital

lu5.

capttai, and tnen th-iding y

:ielda {YKtK,

at rate h

L

j-

-(.

er ernesmts a cac'et .'.t-i C 4.
c mtop. ri-ct; ri Sc retu-x- to
C ..ga ie AJd.ng cv. f.er the
the sPauow p cc; :piti 'C express toe return
-ate ri return

'

- ho.

q,] p..

-C

t

.

boa ion 5, 5iri; is

;tPe

it rht; ruri

retr.

is equal to r.

if equatioc

.enmpt of he t er
(sometimes called the rental cost of .apital derived by lt5czmon 'lb(l The cc. tal euS
interpretation ri faehtated by again 'iewing the shaP,w price p as toe Price at whalh . :r..t of
A third, related. tnteroretat!un

f531 uvuCe> the

sspital can he bought or sold. Constder someone 'ri o own; -. u.'tt if ca t.J that v in
someone else for use. The owner of the capital

rented to

ltl ci arge a rental coct u, such thst rue rate of

return front renting the capital is equal to r,, which is the rate of octurn avaliuble on financial
assets. The owner's return consists of the rental cost u, plus the eapiuo gtuo 4, less the vtdoe of
the physical depreciation
Therefore, the owner'srate of return is {u + 4 - haj /q. Setting

qh.

this rate of return equal to rt yields

u1=(r1-rh)q-41.

(55)

Equation (55) is the analogue of the Jorgensonian user cost of capital, except that in piace of he
shadow price q, Jorgenson uses the price of the investment good. p0 The reason for this difference is that Jorgenson ignores the adjustment cost function, or equtvaientiy, assumes that ccl,, K1)
is identically zero. Under this assumption, equation (52b) indicates that q1 is equal to p1 so that
the user cost in (55) is identical to the Jorgensonian user cost in this ease.

-38

The definition of the user cost in (55) can be used to rewrite equation (53) as
YK(Kt,L) cK(L, K,)
Equation (56) states that

= Ut

at each instant of time, the marginal cash flow of an additional

(56)
unit

of

have
capital is equal to the user cost u. Except for the fact that Jorgenson's formulation does not
an adjustment cost function, so that CK(It, K5) is identically zero, this relation is the same as

Jorgenson's condition which states that the marginal product of capital is equal to the user cost of
capital.
For the purpose of expositional clarity, I will assume that the adjustment cost function has
the following form
c(15, K5)

0, g(0) = 0, g(0) = 0, and

g(15

-

hK)

(57)

The adjustment cost function specified in (57)
is a non-negative convex function of the rate of net investment. When the rate of net investment
where g( )

g() > 0.

is zero, the adjustment cost is assumed to be zero.2'
Now suppose that the price of investment goods, p., the real wage rate w, and the real
interest rate are constant and consider the steady state in which both the capital stock, K5, anti
r1

the shadow price of capital, q. are constant. When the capital stock is constant, I. = hK,, so that
it follows from the specification of the adjustment cost function in (57) that the adjustment cost is
equal to zero. In addition, the partial derivatives c1 and CK are each equal to zero. The fact that c1
is equal to zero implies, using (52b), that the shadow price q5 is constant and equal to the price of
investhient goods, p5. Because q5 is equal to p, it follows from the definition of the user cost in
(55) that

u5=(r+h)p5.

(58)

Finally, recall that the partial derivative, cK, is equal to zero in the steady state so that (56)

(19681, Treadway(1969) and Abel (1985) express the adjustment cost function as a function of gross
investment. Expressing the adjustmentcost function as a function of net investmentimplies that in the long run,
when K = 0, the value ofcapital, q1, is equal to its replacement cost, p, as argued by Tobin (1969).

-39-

implies that
YK(K:, L0

= O:

(5th

Equations 5S; and (59) correspond to the user 'ost of capital and the destrco

of investment goods

stock derived by Jorgenson under the nondicon that the

The desirectcapital itoek

actermined from

p.,

cptal

con'tant,

s s

59; to illu,rrate Joraenson's dunisation, 'sell

uppce that the revenue funntton
constant returns to cale in K, and I. and dtspca s a no' 7taJt elancay ot aTst ,ctiou crweca K
ard L In particular suppose that
the Eisner-Nadiri cntneism

brgenson's deniva:'on,

YK,Lj -A(mK
where A > C, h a 'as c , and o

of a competitinc finn

-

-L-m)LJ

6th

, The reven,, .cncuon in (5Q Juvnc,hes tOe revenue

with a nonstaut elasticity

of subsntutiun procuceon fanction,

shown that the elastin:ty ( substitution, a. ts equal to

thacti

It can ne

if - th and that the margtna revenue
I

product of capital Is
'1K (K L) = [mjA} (57K)1

Recalling from (59) that the marginal revenue product

f

6I)

capital is set equal to the user cot

(61) can be rearranged to yield

K = (m/ASPYu'C
Equation (62) expresses the steady state capital stock. K, as a function of the real revenue

(62)

of the

firm and the user cost of capital. Of course, the revenue of the firm is a decision variable of the
firm, so (62) cannot properly be regarded as a relation expressing the steady state capital stock as
a function of exogenous variables. It is more appropriately regarded as a relation among endogenous variables in the steady state.
The neoclassical investment model developed by Jorgenson is based on a special ease of
(62;. In particular, Jorgenson assumed that the revenue function is Cobb-Douglas, which in
terms of (62) implies that the elasticity of substitution, a, is equal to one. In this ease, the steady

-40-

cost
state capital stock, K, is propoedonal to revenue Y and is inversely proportional to the user
first step
Jorgenson's derivation of the investment equation proceeded in two steps. The
was the derivation of a "desired capital stock", which corresponds to the steady state capital stock
in (62) with

equal to one. The second step is the determination of the rate at which the firm's

capital stock approaches its desired level. Rather than specifying a particular dynamic adjustment mechanism, such as an adjustment cost function, in the firm's optimization problem,
rate at which
Jorgenson assumed that there is some exogenous mechanism that determines the
the gap between the desired capital stock and the actual capital stock is closed. In particular,
Jorgenson specified the investment equation as
=

In

-

hK

(63

where K is the desired capital stock at time t.
Observe that a strong implication of Jorgenson's assumption of a unitary elasticity of
substitution between K and L is that the desired capital stock depends only on the ratio of revenue to the user cost of capital. Jorgenson exploits this fact in his estimation by constraining the
as the reresponse of investment to revenue to be the same (proportionately, except for sign)
sponse to the user cost. However, Eisner and Nadiri have clalmed that this procedure may
overstate the response of investment to cost of capital changes because the elasticity of substitution is less than one. When the elasticity of substitutionis not equal to one, then it follows from
(62) that the elasticity of the desired capital stock with respect to real revenue Y is still unity hut
the elasticity of the desired capital stock with respect to the user cost is equal to -o With an
user
elasticity of substitution less than one, the magnitude of the response of investment to the
cost will be smaller than the response to revenue. Therefore, constralning the responses to be of
equal (percentage) magnitude, as Jorgenson does, will tend to overstate the response of investment to the user cost. Eisner and Nadiri argue that the elasticity of substitution is nearer zero
than unity (1968, p. 381), but Jorgenson and Stephenson (1969) claim that empirical evidence
supports a unitary elasticity.

-41-

There is another reason to expect the response of investment to the user cost to differ
from the response to output or revenue, in discussing the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor, it ts important to distinguish the cx ante elasticity of substitution from the cx
post elasticity of substitution. More specifically, before

a piece of capital is built and put

into

place, there may be a substantial degree of substitutability between capital and labeL However,
after the capital is put in place, there may be very limited, or even zero, substitutability. An

exerne version of this notion is the putty-clay hypothesis: cx ante, capital is malleable lIke
putty and the firm can choose the capital labor taco; cx post, capital is not malleable, like clay,
and there is no substitutability between capital and labor. Under the putty-clay hpothcsis. we
might expect to see larger and mote rapid responses to changes in output than to changes in tin'
user cost. For example, an increase in output may lead to an increase in the destred capital 5:ock
as described above in equation

However, a fall in the user cost would lead to a

maler

response of the desired capital stock than in (62). The reason i5 that a fall in the user en st leads
to an increase in the desired capital labor ratio but under the putty-clay hypothesis, the
labor ratio on existing capital

is

apital

immutable, Thus newly installed capital will be less labor

intensive, but the old capital will not be replaced with labor-saving capital until the old capital
becomes uneconomical.
An even more extreme limitation on capital

labor substitutability gives

rise to the ac-

celerator model of investment. In particular, suppose that there is no substitutability either ex
ante or cx post. In terms of the expression for the desired capital stock in (62), suppose that the
elasticity of substitution, r,

is equal to zero. In this case, the desired capital stock in (62) is

simply proportional to revenue, investment in this case would be a distributed lag function of
changes in the level of revenue
I, =

Li O) [Yri

-

Y.'i]1 + hI.

(64)

The accelerator model (64) is a special case of the neoclassical investment model (63) in which

.47-

the user cost of capital is ignored.28 Although some studies find significant effects of the user
cost,29 it is pan of the "fol.k wisdom" that user cost effects on investment are harder to estimate in
the data than are accelerator or output effects. Perhaps one reason for the difficulty of finding

user cost effects is the problem of simultaneity. If there is an exogenous increase in the real
interest rate, then the user cost would increase and investment would decrease. However, if for
some reason there were an upward shift in the investment function, (for example, Keynesian
"animal spirits," (Keynes (1936), pp. 161-163)) then investment would increase and would put
upward pressure on the real interest rate. Thus, as a consequence of the upward shift in the
investment function, both investment and the user cost would increase, if data contain both
exogenous increases in the real interest rate and exogenous shifts in the investment function, then
the predicted negative relation between user cost and investment might be masked by the positive
relation between user cost and investment in response to exogenous shifis in the investment
function.

It should be noted that simultaneity of the son discussed above would tend to exaggerate,
rather than diminish or reverse, the estimated accelerator effects. An exogenous upward shift in
the investment function would increase investment, which would increase output. This positive
relation between investment and output reinforces the positive relation due to the accelerator
effect discussed above. Finally, it should be noted that althbugh simultaneity problems can be
alleviated by the use

of inswumental variables, the resulting estimates are only as good as the

instauments.
An additional complication in estimating the effect of the user cost

is the question of

whether to use a short-term or long-term interest rate in measuring the cost of capital. Traditionally, the long-term interest rate is viewed as the appropriaterate but Hall (1977) argues that "as a
matter of theory, what belongs in the service price of capital is a short-run interest rate, though
the issue of short versus long rates is unlikely to be resolved empirically" (p. 100). Hall's point
'8See Eisner (1978) for an excellent comprehensive teaunent of the acceleratormociet using the McGraw-Hitl
PublishingCo. capital expenditure surveys from t956 to 1969.
Feldstein(t982), for example.

-43-

that the user cost depends on the short rate rather than the long rate is illustrated by equation (55).

In the absence of adjustment costs, q1 is equal to the price of investment goods p, and the expression for the user cost of capital in (55) yields the Jorgensonian user cost u, = (r, + h) PL +
interest rate in this expression is the instantaneous real rate of interest.

.

The

While it is true that the user cost is related to the contemporaneous instantaneous interest
rate, one must avoid the temptation to say that investment depends on the short-term interest rate

rather than the long.term interest rate, Halls' argument that the short-term rate is the appropriate
interest rate was based on a model without adjustment costs in which the 'finn faces an open
choice about the scheduling of investment" (p. 74). However, the essence of adjustment costs is
to interfere with "the open choice about the scheduling of investment". In the presence of costs

of adjustment. the scheduling of investment affects

the cost

of investment. In this case, invest-

ment is necessarily forward-looking and depends on the present value of the stream of marginal
products accruing to a newly-installed unit of capital. Observing that the real interest rate prevail-

ing from date t to date s is [Rti, 5)] - I, equation (54) implies that q1, and a fortiori investment,
depends on the entire term structure of real interest rates. To make this point more sharply,
consider the response of investment to an instantaneously-lived increase in ri and, alternatively,
the response of investment to a permanent increase in the interest rate. An instantaneous increase

in

r will have no effect on R(t, s) and will have no effect on q or investment at time

t. By
contrast, a permanent increase in the instantaneous interest rate would reduce the stream of
discount factors, R(t, s), and would reduce

04

and investment. In the presence of adjustment

costs, invesunent depends on the entire term structure of interest rates.

is no consensus about the magnitude of the response of investment to
changes in interest rates, the analysis above offers some guidance on the size of this effect.
Suppose that the relevant real rate of interest is equal to 4% per year and the rate of depreciation
Although there

is equal to 6% per year, which is an appropriate depreciation rate for stmctures. Now consider
the effect of a 1 percentage point decrease in the real interest rate (from 4% to 3% per year). It
follows immediately from the expression for the user cost in (58) that this decrease itt the real
interest rate decreases the user cost of capital by 10%.

Under a Cobb-Douglas production

-44-

function, this 10% decrease in the user cost increases the desired stock of capital by 10%. In the
long run, the rate of investment would rise by 10% in order to maintain the capital stock at its
higher level, In the short run, the rate of investment would increase by even more than 10% in
order to increase the capital stock to its new desired level. The magnitude of the increase in the
rate of investment in the short run depends, of course, on how rapidly the new desired capital
stock is achieved.

The 10% increase in the desired capital stock in response to a 1 percentage point decrease
in the real interest rate may overstate the response of the desired aggregate capital stock for three
reasons. First, as emphasized by Eisner and Nadiri (1968), the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor may be substantially less than one. Recalling that this elasticity of substitution

is denoted by cT, it follows immediatelyfrom (62) that the response of the desired capital stock to
this one percentage point decrease in the real interest rate is equal to (lOa)%. Thus, if = 0.1.
the desired capital stock rises by only 1% in response to a one percentage point fall in the real
interest rate. Second, the depreciation rate of 6% per year may be a reasonable rate for structures, but the depreciation rate for equipment

is about

16% per year. Thus, for equipment a

decrease in. the real interest rate from 4% to 3% reduces the user cost of capital by only 5% rather
than the 10% calculated for structures.3° Third, the real rate of interest used by firms in capital
budgeting decisions is generally a risk-adjusted rate of return such as a weighted average of the
after-tax interest rate on debt and the expected rate

of return on equity.3' Feldstein (1982)

calculates the cost of funds annually for the period 1954-1977. Although this real cost of funds

is about 4% for the first half of this sample, it is higher than 4% throughout the second half of the
sample and reached a value of 7.2% in 1977. A one percentage point increase in the real cost of
funds has

a smaller impact on the user cost of capital if the cost of capital starts from a higher

value.

30Ha11 and Jorgenson (1967) estimate the depreciation rates for broadly defined capital aggregates using the
so-called Bulletin F lifetimes from the Department of the Treasury. They presentthe following (annual) deprecinLion rates: manufacturing equipment: 0.1471; manufacturing structureS: 00625; non-farm non-manufacturing
equipment: 0.1923; non-farmnon-manufacturing structures: 00694.

31see Auerbach (l979a) for a derivation of the weighted-average cost of Capital.

-45-

B. The qTheory
The neoclassical model and the accelerator model were each derived abovc by using the
steady state capital stock as the desired level of the capital stock and then positing some sort of
adjusonent mechanism of the actual capital stock toward its desired level An aternattve
proach is provided by

a

a model that incorporates adjustment costs as a eli as the price of nse.

tnent goods directly tnto the maximization probem and then deri,es the opttms. rate of niestnent at each point or time. In addition to determining the optirom r ..c of investment, thts .nodel
makes expheL the dynamic response of investment to permanent and temporary cnaoges

a the

firm's econormc environment soc to sot epated as weP as unnticipated chac:zer ornermuee
the adcstment CO)t model can nc med to provine forrnai unOerpsnrnngs to the q theory of invest-

mentintrooocedby1mm 1969).
Tobtn', q theory

cf ovesnout f.-vnahzes a noton of Keynes

1936, p.

Ill) 'cat,n'c

incentive to bald new capital depends on the market value of the capital relatIve LO tho cost ot
conso'ueting me capital. II an addttioaal unit of installed capital would misc the market calue of
the firm by more than the cost of acquiring the capital and putting it in place, then a valm
maximizing firm should acquire it and put it in place.3a The greater the amount by which the
value of the capital exceeds its cost the greater is the incentive to invest. To capture thss notion
in an observable quantitattve measure. Tobin defined the variable q to be the ratio of the market
value of a firm to the replacement cost of its capital stock. He then argued that investment is an
increasing function of q. A majoradvantage of Tobin's q is thai it relies on securities markets to
value the prospects of the firm.
Before discussing the q theory of investment more formally, it is worthwhile to digress
briefly to discuss

a related model in which the rate of investment depends on the market valua-

of capital. Foley and Sidrauski (1970) developed a two-sector model of the economy in
which there is a concave production possibilities frontier relating the aggregate output of the
don

32Thisargument dependson the assumption that capital investmentis reversible, If investment is irreversible, then
rmns may optimallyforego someprojectswhose presentvalue exceedstheir cost. See McDonald and Siegel (1986).

-46-

consumption good and the aggregate output of the capital good. In a competitive economy,
resources are allocated to these two sectors depending on the relative prices of these two goods.

of new capital goods is an increasing function of the price of
capital goods relative to the price of consumption goods. In the Foley-Sidrauski model, the price
More precisely, the production

of capital is determined endogenously in a securities markets in which three assets--money,
bonds, and capital--are uaded. The price of capital is determined to equilibrate the demand for
of new capital
capital with the existing supply of capital. This price then determines the flow
goods production. Although the formal model is different from the q theory, in both the FoleySidrauski model and the q theory, the rate of investment is an increasing function of the price of
capital goods whichis determined in asset markets.

A version of the q theory of investment can be derived from the adjustment cost model of
investment presented above. For the sake of continuity of exposition, suppose that the adjustment cost function is as specified in (57) so that the marginal cost of investment is c(I, K) =

g'(I - hK). Using this form of the marginal adjustment cost function in the first-order condition
for the optimal rate of investment, (52b), yields
=

-

p) + hK

(65)

= g1() so that G' > 0 and 0(0) = 0. Equation (65) expresses the rate of investment
Note that in the steady state,
as an increasing function of the shadow priceof installed capital,
where Go

with K = 0, the rate of gross investment, I, is equal to depreciation hK; the shadow price of a
unit of capital, is equal to the price of investment goods, Pt. The latter result, (q Pt in the
steady state) is a consequence of specifying the adjustment cost function such that the marginal
adjustment cost c1(I, K) is equal to zero when net investment is equal to zero. Alternatively, if
the adjustment cost function is specified so that the marginal cost of investment is equal to zero
when gross investment is equal to zero, then in the steady state q would exceed p by the marginal cost of replacement investment, hK.
The investment equation in (65) is related to Tobin's q theory of investment. To understand the relation between (65) and Tobin's q theory of investment, it is important to distinguish

-47-

average

q,'

which will be denoted as

q',

from marginal q, which will he denoted as

q*

Tobin defines q to be the ratio of the average value of the capital stock VJK, to the price of a
unit of capital, Pt. Thus. Tobin's q is qA where

u' =V,I(pK,)

66)

and where V, is the value of the firm at time t. Altemativey,marnal q, p'. s the ratio of the
marginal value of an additional unit of installed capital, d'V'dK to the price or a unit of capital.
p1.

Therefore,
()M

Qoserve that the numerator of

= (dV,IdK,)/p.

q, dVjdK, ts equal to the shadow price q,.

167,

Therefore

(65

and

(67) imply that

I =G((q

i)pt)

A natural question is whether there are conditions under which average q and marginal q

are equal to each other. The answer can be obtained using the following proposition. 'ahich is a
generalization of a result due to Hayashi (1982): Suppose that the revenue function Y(K, L, is
linearly homogeneous in K and L, the adjustment cost function is linearly homogeneous in I anti
K, and that p. w,, and R(t, s) are exogenous to the firm. Then the value of the firm, V1, is proportional to the stock of capital, K0 Under these conditions, it follows that dV/dK is equal to V/K,;
thus, (66) and (67) imply that average q is equal to marginal q in this case.
The equality of average q and marginal q holds more generally than under the conditions
stated above. It holds even if the interest rate is stochastic, It also holds if the cash flow, X,, is
subject to random multiplicative shocks. The key assumption about the behavior of cash flow is
that it is a linearly homogeneous function of the three variables K, L, and I.

The use of Tobin's q to explain investment provides an attractive link between asset
markets and investment activity. In particular, stock and bond markets are relied upon to value
the firm's capital stock, thereby relieving the economist from having to calculate the relevant
expected present value of future cash flows. Unfortunately, investment equations based on

-48-

Tobin's q are not free of difficulty. Typically, estimated equations relating investment to Tobin's
q leave a large unexplained serially correlated residual.33 In addition, lagged values of Tobin's q
often enter significantly as explanators of investment, which contradicts the simple adjustment
cost model described above. Finally, other variables such as output and capacity utilization have
additional explanatory power in investment equations with q. This fmding contradicts the notion
that all information that is relevant to the valuation of capital and to the investment decision is
captured by the market value of the firm.
There are several possible explanations for the departures

of empirically estimated

investment equations from the simple predictions of the theory. First, average q and marginal q
may display different movements. For example, consider
energy-intensive capital.

a firm that has a large amount of

If the price of energy rises dramatically, then the value of the firm

would fall as the quasi-rents available on existing energy-intensive capital would fall. However,
the firm may undertake substantial investment in energy-saving capital. Therefore, an observer

of this firm would see a drop in average q coinciding with an increase in investment. This
example makes clear that heterogeneity of capital can potentially destroy the relation between
average q and investment. As for marginal q,

it is important to distinguish the marginal q, or

shadow price, for the different types of capital. In the example above, the marginal q of energyintensive capital is reduced and the marginal q of energy-savingcapital is increased by the rise in
the price of energy.

The fact that lagged values of q are found to be significant explanators of investment is
perhaps suggestive of the importance of delivery lags in the investment process. For many types

of capital, especially structures, there may be a substantial delay between the date on which it is
decided to the acquire and install new capital and the date at which the capital expenditures are

33see von Furstenberg(1977),Summers (1981) and Blanchardand Wypiosz(1981).

-49-

actually made:? The existence of delive lags complicates the relation 'oet'xeer i'vesirent and
q. if, for example. there is a two-period delay between the decition to Invest and the capital
expenditure, then capital exoenditure in period t should be related to the forecast in period

t-2 of the value of capttal in period t, ix., E.,(qJ. However, the variable which apoears significantly in investment equations is laeged q, ic., q, ,, rather than the iaggeo expectaoon or
To toe extent that q,

a predictor of q1, it may serve as a proxy tar F

Toe p thoor' of tr'onent
in the market

,

ased no tn nnuon that

2

ii relcear t inforotaron

Puaouo of the irm and therefore JtOr eanao'c, sch as

t

capacity utiliaaison should nase no additiorai orcdicovc ono or for invesunent.

flow or profit often have slgoifcant addtialnal prcdic?i re

1

c ipt_reJ

Jrw prot (it
Tm f 'ha: cash

50

t

pwcr Is conslaten' 0 oh there bein:

different costs of internal and external funds or with firm's having Pinned arihty to ti, ance
invesmient by raising funds in capital markets. The underlying economic reasons tsr, and
implications of, these capital market imperfections remain an open quesuon.15

VII. CorporateTaxes and Inflation
The incentive to invest is influenced by the corporate tax environment in gene'al and by

the interaction of corporate taxes and inflation in particular. Toe three aspects of the corporate
tax code that have been analyzed most widely in the context of investment are the corporate tax
rate, the depreciation allowance and nbc investment tax credit.36 Let t be the tax rate assessed on
corporate proflts. Taxable corporate profits are calculated as revenues less wages, depreciation
allowances and adjustment costs. For simplicity, I will assume that adjustment costs are expensed, which is consistent with treating adjustment costs as foregone output or revenue. Let
D(x) be the depreciation allowance for an asset of age x that cost one dollar when new. Then,
following Hall and Jorgenson (1967), let a = J D(x)

e' dx be the present value of depreciation

34Alel and Blanchard(1986) have have found thai for nonelectrical machineryand fabricated metals there is a an
avenge delivery lag of 2 quarters, and for electrical machinery the avenge lag is 3 quarters. For structures, the
average lags range from 3 to 8 quarters.
35See Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen(t987).
36See Hall and Jorgenson (t967), Feldatein (t982), Abel (t982), Taylor (t982), and Auerbach (1983).

-50-

deductions overthe life of the asset, where i is the nominal interest rate. Finally, let k be the rate

of the investment tax credit so that for each dollar spent on investment goods, the firm receives a
rebate of k dollars.37 Thus the net cost to the firm

of a dollar of investment goods is

(1 - k - tz).38

Now define X to be the excess of after-tax real revenues over real wages, adjustment
costs and the real net priceof investment goods at time

X = (1 - t) [Y(K, L) - c(11, K) - wILl - (1 - k - tz) p1 I.
In the absence of taxes,

X would be equal to the cash flow X in (47).

(69)

The maximization

problem of the firm is equivalent to maximizing the present value of the sn-earn of X.39 This
maximization problem can be solved using the same procedure as presented earlier in the absence of taxes. The current value Hamiltonian, which is analogous to (51), is

=(l -t){Y(}c,L) -c(,}c) -w] -(1 -k-tz)p111 +q(11 -hK1).

(70)

Differentiating the current value Hamiltonian with respect to L1 and setting the derivative equal
to zero yields the condition that labor is hired until the marginal revenueproduct of labor is equal
to the wage rate (equation (52a)). Differentiating (70) with respect to the rate of investment, I,
yields the analogue of (52b)

(l-t)cs(I,K4) =q -(1-k-tz)p.
The shadow price q must obey the relation
analogue of (53)
=

(r + h)

(71)

- rq = -H IK which implies the following

- (1 - t) [YK (Ic,

- cK (It, K1)] .

(72)

37The Tax Reform Act of 1986eliminatedthe investment tax credit in the United States.
38Under the Long Amendment, which was in effect in 1962 and 1963, the basis for depreciation allowances was
reduced by the investment tax credit, and the net price of investmentgoods was (1 - k) (1 - tz). The expression in
the text is appropriate for the period after the repeal of the Long Amendment.
39The present value of x; is not equal to the presentvalue of cash flow because it ignores the depreciation allowances on capital installedbefore date t. Because the cash flows assnciated with these deductions are predetermined
at time t, they can be ignoredin the maximization problem at time I

The stadonaty soiudon to the differential equation in 72) is
th

f{(l - t)[Y(K5,L)

cK(I, K)jRt,

s)e' ds}

Equation (73) states that the shadow price q is equal to the present value of the stream of aftertax marginal products of capital.

'

Before deriving the investment equadon, I will first describe the steady state in which I. =

it folLws itumediatei-v from '2 that a is equal to zero, then the chajow
pnce q is equal to the present value of the treac ri constant after-tax marvlnai cash flow'
hK and

= 0.

accnuing to capital

= (I r; (Ye

ce)Fr

(74j

h)

Now suppose that the adjustment cost function has the specification in (57) so that the mar7tna
adjustment cost, eT, is equal to zero tn the steady state, In this case, the first-order condition in
(71) implies that, in the steady state, the shadow priceof capi'al is equal to the tax-adjusted pnce

of investment goods
q

=(l -k-tz)pi.

Next set the right hand side of (74), which is the present value of after-tax marginal cash flow,
equal to the right hand side of (75), which is the tax-adjusted priceof capital, to obtaln
-

T

where

eK

= T(r + h)p

(76a)

(1 - k - tz)J(1 - t) .

(76b)

The right hand side of (76a) is equal to the tax-adjusted user cost of capital derived by Hall and
Jorgenson (1967). The factorT is a tax-adjustment factor; when T is equal to one, as it would be
in the absence of taxes, then the user cost is identical to the steady state user cost presented above
in (58).
To obtain a simple investment equation in the presence of corporate taxes, suppose that
the adjustment cost function is independent of the capital stock, i.e.,
first-order condition in (71) can be rewritten as

c

0. In this case, the

-52-

=
where Ho = C (

,

H(

-

(77)

TPL)

) is an increasing function. The behavior of the investment equation (77) can

be easily examined under the assumption that the revenue function is linearly homogeneous in K

of Y(K, L) implies that when cash flow is maximized with
respect to labor, L, the maximized value of Y(K, L) - wL is equal to 8(w)K where O(w) is a
and L. The linear homogeneity

positive but decreasing function of the real wage rate w. Therefore, when the firm follows an
optimal employment policy, we obtain
YK(K,

L) = 8(w)

(78)

so that the marginal revenue product of capital is positive and decreasing in the real wage rate.
Recalling that cJ( is identically equal to zero, the shadow price of capital can be easily calculated
from (73) to be

=5

{(i -

It follows immediately from (79) that c1

) B(w)

R(t, s)

et)} ds.

(79)

1(1 - t) is independent of the tax rate t. The effect

of the

tax code is captured by the tax adjustment factor T, and inspection of (77) reveals immediately
that the rate of investment is a decreasing function of T. Therefore, investment is an increasing
function of the investment tax credit, k, and is also an increasing function of the present value of
depreciation deductions, z.
Now consider the effects on investment of changes in real and nominal interest rates. In
the neoclassical model, an increase in the real rate

of interest raises the user cost of capital and

hence reduces the desired capital stock and investment. It would appear that changes in the
nominal interest rate would not affect the user cost unless they were accompanied by changes in
the real interest rate. However, the U.S. tax code contains an important inflation non-neutrality,

which gives nominal interest rates an effect on investment over and above the effect of real
interest rates. Depreciation allowances are based on the nominal historical cost of a piece of
capital rather than on its replacement cost. Thus, inflation reduces the real value of future
depreciation deductions so that an increase in inflation reduces z, the present value

of real

-53-

depreciation deductions. An alternative, but equivalent, explanation for the negattve relation
between inflation and z is that the depreciation deductions represent a sri-earn of nominai flows
and can be discounted by

a nominal interest rate, If the (expected and actual) rate of riflation

rises without any change in the real interest rate, then the nominal interest rate also rises so that
the present value of the unchanged sri-earn of nominal flows is reduced, The redueu3n in z
increases the tax adtustment parameter T and thus tends to reduce the rate of invectroent, In
addition, .nflaton tn the presence of h:toneai eo3t dpreJaior 'oay distort the

J,ore among

different types of capital with dtf"ercnt useful lives mu dIfferent depreeation allowance
schedules,m An increase in the rate rt tnflaun can either increase or decrease the degree of
durability

of capital chosen by finns, operding on the nominal irterest rare

and the rate

of

depreeiation,t'

VIII. Uncertainty
The investment behavior of firms has been derived above in the absence

of uneera:rtr.

It seems intuitively plausible that the desirability of investment projects would depend on the risk
associated with the project and, furthermore, one might suspect that an increase in risk would
reduce the rate of investment.

However, much

of the existing analytic work on investment

under uncertainty does not support the notion that greater uncertainty inhibits investment,
Hartman (1972) and Abel (1985) have shown that an increase in the variance of the output price

or in the variance of the price of variable factors will induce a competitive firm to increase its
rate of investment. Pazner and Razin (1974) have shown that an increase in interest rate uncertainty also induces the firm to increase its rate of investment. The argument underlying these

resultscan be illustrated using the expression for q in (79) which was derived under the assumpdon that the revenue function is linearly homogeneous in K and L. This equation would apply to
a competitive firm with a constant returns to scale production function.

It can be shown that the

40See Auerbach (t979b), Kopcke (1981), and Abel (1981).
4tFelthtein (1982) analyzes other inflation non •'eutralities such as the fact that nominal interest payments,rather
thanreal interest payments,are tax deductible.

-54-

marginal revenue product of capital, e(w5), is a convex function of w. Therefore, if the variance

of w is increased while its expected value is held constant, then Jensen's inequality implies that

of O(w) increases. This increase in the expected value of e(W) implies that
the expected present value of marginal revenue products of capital increases and thus the optimal
rate of investment increases. Similarly, it can be shown that R(t, s) is a convex function of future
the expected value

instantaneous rates of interest,

r for v > t, and hence

an increase in the variance

of interest rates

will also increase investment.
Recently, Zeira (1987) has developed a model of a monopolistic firm that is uncertain
both about its own capacity and about the demand curve

it faces.

In this particular model,

increased priceuncertainty will reduce investment.

It should be noted that in all of the above-mentioned works on investment under uncertainty, the firm is modelled as risk-neutral. More precisely, the fiim is assumed to maximize the
expected present value of cash flow. It seems that future work could usefully model risk-averse
managers and/or couldmodel the covariance of the firm's returns with the market portfolio.

IX, Inventories
Up to this point, the discussion of investment has focused on fixed investment. In
addition to fixed investment, firms invest in inventories. Although the average value of inventory investment, i.e., the average change in the stock of inventories, is quite small relative to the
average level of fixed investment, the volatility of inventory investment is quite large.42 Rather
than develop a formal analytic model of inventory behavior, I will simply discuss some of the
major issues. The first step is to explain why firms hold inventories. Two reasons that have been
studied are: (a) for technological reasons, there is a lag between the beginning of production and
the sale of a good. To the extent that the production process takes time, there will be an inventory of goods in process. To the extent that there is a delay between the completion of produc-

2B1inder (1981) reports that declines in inventory investmentaccountfor 70% of the peak-to-trough decline in real
GNP during recessions. During the period 1959:1 to 1979:4 changesin inventory investment accounted for 37% of
the varianceof changes in GNP.

tion and the sale of the good, there is a finished goods inventory, n) men if it werc postole to
make production always equal to the contemporaneous valoe of sales so that there mignt be no

need to hind inventories, cost-minimizing firms may choose to hold inventories as a means

of

avoiding large fluctuations in production in the face of large fluctuations in sales

Th1s

production smoothing motive for holding inventories would arise if the :nargina

riyt of

production were an increasing function of the level of production. In this case, the costmintmizing scheduling of any eve1 of average prc'du;con

reqore minimiz'ng f1uctuiu'ri

to

production.
The production smoothing model of nventcriesnsa a smking resemblance to tne ;etrranent income model of consumption, which could he descrioed

s a mode of consumption

smoothing. Indeed, some of the lemons from the permanent income model could be rarried 01cr
to the production smoothing model of inventor,es. For example, if all changes in a firm

.ales

were perfecdy forecastable, then the production smoothing model would predict thit 'he firm
would malntaln a smooth pmflle of production in the face of variations in its sales. Only cointicipated changes in sales would lead firms to alter production. The macroeconormc impiicaoun

of fnis observation is that an anticipated increase in final demand, aristng from (say) govemment
spending, would not affect GNP because the firm would meet the cxtiti demand by selling out of
inventory. The increase in government spending would be exactly offset by negative inventory
invesmient. Alternatively, if the increase in government spending were unanticipated, then the
ftrm would presumably revise its production plans and raise production somewhat.

The production smoothing model of inventories has the implication that the variance of
production should be less than or equal to the variance of sales. However, Blinder (1986) and
West (1986) argue convincingly that the data on production and sales contradicts this implication

of the theory. There are a few potential explanations of the apparent production "countersmoothing" in the data. A simple but unsatisfying explanation is that shocks to the production
function or to the cost of inputs lead firms to vary their production even in the face of unchanging demand. An alternative explanation is that an unanticipated increase in sales implies that
future sales will be even higher.

If the average level of expected future sales increases by more

-56-

than the current increase in sales, then a firm facing increasing marginal costs

of production

would respond by increasing production by more than the current increase in sales. Hence, the
variance of production responses to sales shocks would exceed the variance of sales shocks.43
Thus, for example, an unanticipated increase in government purchases of goods would lead firms
to increase production by an even greater amount, thereby increasing inventory investment. Thus
the initial sales innovation has a magnified effect on GNP.
A third explanation of production counter-smoothing is that firms have a desired level

inventories that depends on the stochastic distribution of

of

sa1es. An unanticipated increase in

sales would deplete inventories by an equal amount. In order to restore inventories to the originally desired level, production would have to increase by an amount equal to the unanticipated
increase in sales. If, in addition, the unanticipated increase in sales leads the firm to revise
upward its forecast of future sales, the desired level of inventories would increase. In order to
reach the new, higher, desired level of inventories, the firm would have to increase production by
even more than the increase in sales. Again, the production response to an innovation in inventories magnifies the effect on GNP.

In addition to depending on sales expectations, inventory investment may depend on the
behavior of interest rates. The reason for the dependence of inventory investment on interest
rates is similar to the reason that fixed investment should depend on interest rates. Specifically,
the interest rate measures the opportunity cost of holding inventories rather than interest-earning
assets. An increase in the real interest rate should lead to a decrease In the desired holding of
inventories. However, as in the case of business fixed investment, it has been difficult to detect
the effect of interest rates on inventory investment econometrically. Recently, Irvine (1981) and
Akhtar (1983) have reported statistically significant negative responses of inventory investment
to increases in short-term interest rates. Specifically, Akhtar finds that a one percentage point
rise in the short-term nominal interest rate would reduce aggregate inventory investment by about

43See Blinder(1986) and Kahn (1987).
Feldstein and Auerbach (1976). Kahn (1987) motivates the desired level of inventories by explicitly considering stockoutcosts.

See

-57-

$2 billion; a one percentage point increase in the expected rate of inflation leads to an increase tn
inventory investment of about $0.8 billion.

X. Concluding Remarks
Although the last decade has seen u-emendou progress in understanding the

't-hesdc

of consumption, many questions still remain. As mentioned earlier in this chapter.
recent evidence suggests that labor income is characterized a unit root, and the presence ,jf a
behavior

y

fx consumption nehavur, Whether it is uLtimatey deter

unit root has important impiea.ions

rnjned that the u-end in labor income 15 stochastic, as suggested by the evidence on a ur,h no o, or
is deterrnnistic. there ttili remains the question of whether consumers think of the u-end as being
stochastic or deterministic in making consumption deci.hot s.

iThe

formal analysis at tee pernm

nent income model employs the assumptson of ratio'ai expectations xhiah implC that •unsumers know wuether the u-end is stochastic or deterministic; however, it must be recognized that
the assurr'ption of rational expectations is simply an assumption. Whether it will prove truitful to
explore alternative assumptions about the expectations of consumers is an open question.
Other important questions about consumption behavior remain for policy makers. For
instance, are there quantitatively important departures from the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem?

If so, what is the source of these departures and is there scope for tax policy to achieve alternative allocations

of consumption that might be preferred according to some critenon? Another

unresolved question relevant for policy involves the interest elasticity of saving. If this elasticity
could be reliably estimated, then there would be scope for fiscal policy to increase the level of
saving by somehow subsidizing the rate of return on saving.
The empirical performance of investment equations could also benefit from future
advances. Many capital goods are indivisible and take a long rime to build. The indivisibility of
these goods and the delivery lags associated with capital continue to pose challenges to the
theory of investment and its empirical implementation.
Another area of open research questions involves the cost of capital and its relation to
investment. The theory

of corporate finance is still working toward an understanding of the

-58-

financing decisions of firms and an appropriate concept of the cost of capital. Further developments in this theory may help to clarify the role of risk in affecting the cost of capital and the
investment decisions of firms.

-59-

REFERENCES
Abel, Andrew B., Empirical Investment Equations' An Integrati'e Framework, in Karl
Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer (eds.), On the State of Microeconomics, Voalme 12 of the
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, a Supplementary Senes to the
Journal of Monetary Economics (1980), 39-91.
Abel, Andrew B.,, Taxes, Inflation and the Durability of Capital,' Jourr.al of PolticaiLo,n rnv
89, 3 (June 1981), 548-560.
Abel, Andrew B., 'Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a q M.>,iir-f
Investment,"Journal of Monetary Economics 9 (May 1982). 353-3'ii.
Abel,

of Investment, Margrnal q and the Market V.
Review
26, (June 19851 303-322.
Firm,' International Economic

\idrew B.,

A Stochas.ic Model

ot

the

Abel, Andrew B. arid Olivicr .1. Blanchard, "Investmeot and Sales' Some Empirical Evoence,
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2050 October 1986.
Abel, Andrew B., 'Operatrvc Girt and Bequest Motives," American EUonomic
(December 1987), 1037-1047.

Revie, 77,

Akhtar, M. A., "Effects of Interest Rates and Inflation on Ag'egate Inventory Investment lii
United States," American Economic Review, 73,3 (June 1983), 3i9-328,

5

the

Ando, Albert and Franco Modigliani, "The 'Life-Cycle' Hypothesis of Saving: Aggregate
implications and Tests," American Economic Review, 53, i. lMarch 1963), 55-84.
Auerbach, Alan J., "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,"
Economics, 93 (1979), 433-446. (a)

Inrljournaiof

Auerbach, Alan J., "Inflation and the Choice of Asset Life," Journal of Political Economy 87, 3
(June 1979), 621-638. (b)
Auerbach, Alan J., The Taxation of Capital Income, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1983.

Barro, Robert 31, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?," Journal of Political Econgrpy 82
(November/December 1974), 1095-1117.
Bernanke, Ben S., "The Determinants of Investment: Another Look," American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings 73, 2 (May 1983), 71-75.
Bernanke, Ben S., "Adjustment Costs, Durables, and Aggregate Consumption," Journal
Monetaiy Economics 15, 1 (January 1985), 4 1-68.
Bemheim, B. Douglas, "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation
mimeo, Stanford University, January 1987.

of

of Theory and Evidence,"

-60-

Bertola, Giuseppe, "Irreversible Investment,"mimeo, M.I.T., July 1987.
Bischoff, Charles W., Business Investment in the 1970's: A Comparison of Models,' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1971, 13-58.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Charles Wyolosz, "An Empirical Structural Model of Aggregate
Demand," Journal of Monetary Economics7, 1 (January 1981), 1-28.
Blinder, Alan S., "Inventories and the Structure of Macro Models," American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, May 1981, pp. 11-16.
Blinder, Alan S., "Can the Production Smoothing Model of Inventory Behavior Be Saved?,'
JournalofEconornics 101, 3 (August 1986), 43 1-453.
Boskin, Michael, I. "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest," Journal of Political Economy,
86, 2 part 2 (April 1978), S3-S27.
Buchanan, James M., "Barro on the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem," Journal of Political
Econony 84, 2 (April 1976), 337-342.
Caballero, Ricardo J., 'Consumption and Precautionary Savings: Empirical Implications,"
mimeo, Massachusetts Institute ofTechnology, May 1987.
Campbell, John and Angus Deaton, "Is Consumption Too Smooth?," mimeo, Princeton University, January 1987.
Campbell, John and N. Gregory Manlciw, "Are Output Fluctuations Transitory?," mimeo,
Princeton University, 1986.
Clark, Peter K., "Investment in the 1970's: Theory, Performance, and Prediction,' Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1:1979, 73-113.

Deaton, Angus, "Life-Cycle Models of Consumption: Is the Evidence Consistent with the
Theory?," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1910, April 1986.
Dreze, Jacques and Franco Modigliani, "ConsumptionDecisions under Uncertainty," Journal of
Economic Theory 5 (December 1972), 308-335.
Eichenbaum, Martin S., Lars Peter Hansen and Kenneth J. Singleton, "A TimeSeries Analysis of
Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure under Uncertainty," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 1981, 1986.
Eisner, Robert, Factors in Business Investment, Cambridge, MA:
1978.

Ballinger Publishing Co.,

Eisner, Robert and M. Ishaq Nadiri, 'Investment Behavior and Neo-classical Theory," Review of
Economics and Statistics 50, 3 (August 1968), 369-382.

Eisner, Robert and M, Ishaq Nadiri, Neoclassical Theory of Investment Behavior:
ment, Review of Economics and Statistics 52,2 'May 1970), 216-222,

\ Com-

jjicsot

Eisner, Robert and Robert H. Suotz, Determinants or Business investment, in
Monetary Policy, compiled cy toe Commission on Money and Cretin Englcwood CLns,
NJ: Prentice-dali, 1963.
Fazzari, Steven, R, Glenn Ilubbard and Brace Petersen Financing Co,isrraints and
Investment," mimea Narthwestern Univerrity. 1987.
Feidstein, Martin S., "linfla-ton Ta,a Ro1r, and inv'-s ent862.
Econometnca 50,4 Culy 1982),

25

Some Econometric

Comno.

C' dance,

Fealstcin Martin S. and Alan 3, Auerhach, inventory Bena'ior .n Durable Gooca Mancfa:cr"
log: The Target Adjustment M'xiei Bmooning" Papers on Economic Activi.y 2 IPO
3M -396
FiscOer Stanley. 'A Note on Investment and Lagged Q,' mmreo Massachusetts Institute om
Technology, December 1983,

FIavn, Maijorie, "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations abo,,t Fatre
Income,' Journal of Politicat Economv89,5(October1981), 974-1009,
Foley, Duncan and Migual Sidrauski, "Portfolio Choice, Investment and Growth," Amecan
Economic Review, 60 (March 1970),44-63.
Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Unive"sity
Press, 1957,
Gould, John P., "Adjustment Costs in the Theory of investment of the Firm," Review of
nomic Studies 35 (January 1968), 47-55,
Hall, Robert E,," Investment, Interest Rates and the Effects of Stabilization Policies," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1:1977, 61-103.
Hall, Robert E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypomesis:
Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Ecq9p386, 6 (December 1978),97 1-987.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American
Economic Review 57 (June 1967), 391-414.
Hall, Robert E. and Frederic S. Mishldn, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income:
Estimates from Panel Data on Households," Econometrica 50 (March 1982), 461-481.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J. Singleton, "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion, and the
Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns," Journal of Political Economy, 91, 2 (April 1983),
249-265,

-62-

Hartman, Richard, "The Effects of Price and Cost Uncertainty on Investment," Journal of
nomic Theory 5 (October 1972), 258-266.
Hayashi, Fumio, Tobin's Marginal and Average q:
Econometrica50 (January 1982), 2 13-224.

A Neoclassical Interpretation,"

Hayashi, Fumio, "The Effect of Liquidity Constraints on Consumption: A Cross-Sectional
Analysis,' Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 1 (February 1985), 183-206. (a)
Hayashi, Fumio, 'The Permanent Income Hypothesis and Consumption Durability: Analysis
Based on Japanese Panel Data," Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 4 (November
1985), 1083-1113. (b)
Hayashi, Fumlo, 'Tests for Liquidity Constraints: A Critical Survey, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 1720, October 1985. (c)
Irvine, Owen F., Jr., Retail Inventory Investment and the Cost of Capital," American Economic
Review, 71,4, (September 1981), 633-648.
Jorgenson, Dale W., "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings 53 (May 1963), 247-259.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and James A. Stephenson, "Issue in the Development of the Neoclassical
Theory of Invest.nient Behavior," Review of Economics and Statistics, (August 1969),
346-353.
Kahn, James A., "Inventories and the Volatility of Production,' American Economic Review 77,
4 (September 1987), 667-679.
Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, The Macmillan Press Ltd., 1936.

"
Kimball, Miles S., "Precautionary Saving and the Marginal Propensity to Consume, mimeo,
Harvard University 1986.
Kopcke, Richard W., "Inflation, Corporate Income Taxation, and the Demand for Capital Assets," Journal of Political Economy 89, 1 (February 1981), 122-131.
Lam, Pok-sang, Two Essays on Consumer Durable Expenditures,Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard
University, 1986.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply," Journal of Political
(August 1967), 321-343.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Edward C. Prescott, "Investment under Uncertainty," Economen-ica 39,
5 (1971), 659-681.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, "Hall's Consumption Hypothesis and Durable Goods," Journal
Monetary Economics 10, 3 (November 1982), 417-425.

of

-63-

McDonald, Robert and Daniel Siegel, The Value of Waiting to invCst," Q .r'eriv J,)uu alc'f
Economics 101, 4 tNovember 1986), 707-727.
Mehra, Rajnish and Edward C. Presco't. 'The Eq.i:y Prsrrium: A Puzzle," Jc..riaI
Economics 15,2 March 1985, 45-i61,

f l'lc netar

Michener, Ron, Permanent Income ,o General Ecuilibu' rn, Journal of Mire arv Eou',r :c,
13, 3 (May 1984), 297-305.

Modgliani,Franco 'The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving Twenty Years Later, Markin Parkin
led.), Contemporary Issues in EconomIcs, Manchester UniversityPress, 975
Massa Mschaei, 'External and Intenai Adjcstrnent Cuts and the Thee:;' of Ag0ro'ate 2n
investment," Economica47 (May 1977), 163-178.
Ntckeii, Stephen J The investmenrDcis'onsof Fire

,

Osford

Cambridge i'tiicrsr.y h'es

1978.

Pazner, Elisna A, and Asaf Razin, A Model of ln'iesurent under Interest Rate Lncer:an.y,
International Economic Rviw 15, 3 'October 1974,, 798-402.
Pindack. Robert and Julio Rotemberit, 'Dynamic Factor Demands and the Effects of Energy
Price Shocks,' American Economic Review 73,5 (December 1983), 1066-1079.
Poterba, James Mi and Lawrence L Summers, "Finite Lifetimes and the Effects of Budg
Deficits on National Saving,"
of MonFtar_Economics, 20, 2 (September 1987)
369-391.

nci

3I

les of Political_Econ
Ricardo, David,
ndTixation, J, Mi Dent and Sorjs Ltd.,
Aldine House Bedford St., London, Great Britatn, 1911, ,ast reprinted 1960

Samuelson, Paul A., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection oy Dynamic Stochastic Programming,"
Review of Economicsand Statistics 51 3 (August 1969), 239-246.
Sargent, Thomas J., "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity, and Consumption,"
Journal of Political Economy 86, 4 (August 1978), 673-700.
Sargent, Thomas J., "Tobin's q' and the Rate of Investment in General Equilibrium," in Karl
Brunner and Allan H. Meitzer (eds.), On the State of Macroeconomics, Volume 12 of the
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, a Supplementary Series to the
Journal of Monetary Economics,(1980).
Seater, John J., "Does Government Debt Matter? A Review," Journal of Monetary Economics.
16, 1 (July 1985), 121-131.
Startz, Richard, "The Stochastic Behavior of Durable and Nondurable Consumption," mimeo,
University of Washington,February 1987.

-64-

Stiglitz, Joseph E. and Andrew Weiss, 'Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information," American Economic Review 71, 3 (June 1981), 393-410.
Summers, Lawrence H., 'Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory Approach," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:198 1, 67-127.
Summers, Lawrence H., 'Capital Taxation and Accumulationin a Life Cycle Growth Model,'
American Economic Review, 71,4 (September 1981), 533-544.
Taylor, John B., "The Swedish Investment Funds System as a Stabilization Rule," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1:1982, 57-99.
Treadway, Arthur B., 'On Rational Entrepreneurial Behavior and the Demand for investment,"
Review of Economic Studies 36 (April 1969), 227-239.
Tobin, James, "A General Equilibrium Approach to MonetaryTheory," Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 1, 1 (February 1969), 15-29.
von Furstenberg, George M., "Corporate Investment: Does Market Valuation Matter in the
Aggregate?," Brookings Papers on EconomicActivity 2:1977, 347-397.
Well, Phillipe, "Love Thy Children': Reflections on the Barro Debt Neutrality Theorem,'
Journal of Monetary Economics, 19,3 (May 1987), 377-391.
West, Kenneth D., "A Variance Bounds Test of the Linear Quadratic Inventory Model," Journal
of Political Ecoom94,2 (April 1986), 374-401.
West, Kenneth D., "The Insensitivity of Consumption to News about income,'National Bureau
of Economic ResearchWorking Paper, No. 2252, May 1987.
Yoshikawa, Hiroshi, "On the 'q' Theory of Investment,' American Economic Review 70
(September 1980), 739-743.
Yotsuztika, Toshiki,"Ricardian Equivalence in the Presence of Capital Market Imperfections,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 20,2 (September 1987), 411-436.
Zeira, Joseph, "Investment as a Process of Search," Journal of Political Economy 95, 1 (February
1987), 204-210.
Zeldes, Stephen P., "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation,"
Rodney L. White Center Working Paper #24-85, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, November 1985.
Zeldes, Stephen P., "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income: Deviations from Certainty
Equivalence," Rodney L. White Center Working Paper #20-86, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania,August 1986.

