NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVIZED RESUME RATING:
ELICITING EMPLOYER PREFERENCES WITHOUT DECEPTION
Judd B. Kessler
Corinne Low
Colin Sullivan
Working Paper 25800
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25800

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019, Revised May 2019

We thank the participants of the NBER Summer Institute Labor Studies, the Berkeley Psychology
and Economics Seminar, the Stanford Institute of Theoretical Economics Experimental
Economics Session, Advances with Field Experiments at the University of Chicago, the
Columbia-NYU-Wharton Student Workshop in Experimental Economics Techniques, and the
Wharton Applied Economics Workshop for helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Judd B. Kessler, Corinne Low, and Colin Sullivan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentivized Resume Rating: Eliciting Employer Preferences without Deception
Judd B. Kessler, Corinne Low, and Colin Sullivan
NBER Working Paper No. 25800
May 2019, Revised May 2019
JEL No. C90,J24,J71
ABSTRACT
We introduce a new experimental paradigm to evaluate employer preferences, called Incentivized
Resume Rating (IRR). Employers evaluate resumes they know to be hypothetical in order to be
matched with real job seekers, preserving incentives while avoiding the deception necessary in
audit studies. We deploy IRR with employers recruiting college seniors from a prestigious school,
randomizing human capital characteristics and demographics of hypothetical candidates. We
measure both employer preferences for candidates and employer beliefs about the likelihood
candidates will accept job offers, avoiding a typical confound in audit studies. We discuss the
costs, benefits, and future applications of this new methodology.

Judd B. Kessler
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
judd.kessler@wharton.upenn.edu

Colin Sullivan
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
colins@wharton.upenn.edu

Corinne Low
1461 Steinberg Hall Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
corlow@wharton.upenn.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25800

1

Introduction
How labor markets reward education, work experience, and other forms of human capital is of

fundamental interest in labor economics and the economics of education (e.g., Autor and Houseman
[2010], Pallais [2014]). Similarly, the role of discrimination in labor markets is a key concern for
both policy makers and economists (e.g., Altonji and Blank [1999], Lang and Lehmann [2012]).
Correspondence audit studies, including resume audit studies, have become powerful tools to answer
questions in both domains.1 These studies have generated a rich set of findings on discrimination
in employment (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004]), real estate and housing (e.g., Hanson
and Hawley [2011], Ewens et al. [2014]), retail (e.g., Pope and Sydnor [2011], Zussman [2013]),
and other settings (see Bertrand and Duflo [2016]). More recently, resume audit studies have been
used to investigate how employers respond to other characteristics of job candidates, including
unemployment spells [Kroft et al., 2013, Eriksson and Rooth, 2014, Nunley et al., 2017], for-profit
college credentials [Darolia et al., 2015, Deming et al., 2016], college selectivity [Gaddis, 2015], and
military service [Kleykamp, 2009].
Despite the strengths of this workhorse methodology, however, resume audit studies are subject
to two major concerns. First, they use deception, generally considered problematic within economics
[Ortmann and Hertwig, 2002, Hamermesh, 2012]. Employers in resume audit studies waste time
evaluating fake resumes and pursuing non-existent candidates. If fake resumes systematically differ
from real resumes, employers could become wary of certain types of resumes sent out by researchers,
harming both the validity of future research and real job seekers whose resumes are similar to those
sent by researchers. These concerns about deception become more pronounced as the method
becomes more popular.2 To our knowledge, audit and correspondence audit studies are the only
experiments within economics for which deception has been permitted, presumably because of the
importance of the underlying research questions and the absence of a method to answer them
without deception.
A second concern arising from resume audit studies is their use of “callback rates” (i.e., the rates
at which employers call back fake candidates) as the outcome measure that proxies for employer
1

Resume audit studies send otherwise identical resumes, with only minor differences associated with a treatment
(e.g., different names associated with different races), to prospective employers and measure the rate at which candidates are called back by those employers (henceforth the “callback rate”). These studies were brought into the
mainstream of economics literature by Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004]. By comparing callback rates across groups
(e.g., those with white names to those with minority names), researchers can identify the existence of discrimination.
Resume audit studies were designed to improve upon traditional audit studies of the labor market, which involved
sending matched pairs of candidates (e.g., otherwise similar study confederates of different races) to apply for the same
job and measure whether the callback rate differed by race. These traditional audit studies were challenged on empirical grounds for not being double-blind [Turner et al., 1991] and for an inability to match candidate characteristics
beyond race perfectly [Heckman and Siegelman, 1992, Heckman, 1998].
2
Baert [2018] notes 90 resume audit studies focused on discrimination against protected classes in labor markets
alone between 2005 and 2016. Many studies are run in the same venues (e.g., specific online job boards), making it
more likely that employers will learn to be skeptical of certain types of resumes. These harms might be particularly
relevant if employers become aware of the existence of such research. For example, employers may know about resume
audit studies since they can be used as legal evidence of discrimination [Neumark, 2012].

2

interest in candidates. Since recruiting candidates is costly, firms may be reluctant to pursue
candidates who will be unlikely to accept a position if offered. Callback rates may therefore conflate
an employer’s interest in a candidate with the employer’s expectation that the candidate would
accept a job if offered one.3 This confound might contribute to counterintuitive results in the
resume audit literature. For example, resume audit studies typically find higher callback rates for
unemployed than employed candidates [Kroft et al., 2013, Nunley et al., 2017, 2014, Farber et al.,
2018], results that seem much more sensible when considering this potential role of job acceptance.
In addition, callback rates can only identify preferences at one point in the quality distribution (i.e.,
at the threshold at which employers decide to call back candidates). While empirically relevant,
results at this callback threshold may not be generalizable [Heckman, 1998, Neumark, 2012]. To
better understand the underlying structure of employer preferences, we may also care about how
employers respond to candidate characteristics at other points in the distribution of candidate
quality.
In this paper, we introduce a new experimental paradigm, called Incentivized Resume Rating
(IRR), which avoids these concerns. Instead of sending fake resumes to employers, IRR invites employers to evaluate resumes known to be hypothetical—avoiding deception—and provides incentives
by matching employers with real job seekers based on employers’ evaluations of the hypothetical
resumes. Rather than relying on binary callback decisions, IRR can elicit much richer information
about employer preferences; any information that can be used to improve the quality of the match
between employers preferences and real job seekers can be elicited from employers in an incentivized way. In addition, IRR gives researchers the ability to elicit a single employer’s preferences
over multiple resumes, to randomize many candidate characteristics simultaneously, and to collect
supplemental data about the employers reviewing resumes and their firms. Finally, IRR allows
researchers to study employers who would not respond to unsolicited resumes.
We deploy IRR in partnership with the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) Career Services office
to study the preferences of employers hiring graduating seniors through on-campus recruiting. This
market has been unexplored by the resume audit literature since firms in this market hire through
their relationships with schools rather than by responding to cold resumes. Our implementation of
IRR asked employers to rate hypothetical candidates on two dimensions: (1) how interested they
would be in hiring the candidate and (2) the likelihood that the candidate would accept a job offer
if given one. In particular, employers were asked to report their interest in hiring a candidate on
a 10-point Likert scale under the assumption that the candidate would accept the job if offered—
mitigating concerns about a confound related to the likelihood of accepting the job. Employers
were additionally asked the likelihood the candidate would accept a job offer on a 10-point Likert
scale. Both responses were used to match employers with real Penn graduating seniors.
3

Researchers who use audit studies aim to mitigate such concerns through the content of their resumes (e.g.,
Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004] notes that the authors attempted to construct high-quality resumes that did not
lead candidates to be “overqualified,” page 995).

3

We find that employers value higher grade point averages as well as the quality and quantity
of summer internship experiences. Employers place extra value on prestigious and substantive
internships but do not appear to value summer jobs that Penn students typically take for a paycheck,
rather than to develop human capital for a future career, such as barista, server, or cashier. This
result suggests a potential benefit on the post-graduate job market for students who can afford to
take unpaid or low-pay internships during the summer rather than needing to work for an hourly
wage.
Our granular measure of hiring interest allows us to consider how employer preferences for
candidate characteristics respond to changes in overall candidate quality. Most of the preferences
we identify maintain sign and significance across the distribution of candidate quality, but we find
that responses to major and work experience are most pronounced towards the middle of the quality
distribution and smaller in the tails.
While we do not find that employers are more or less interested in female and minority candidates on average, we find some evidence of discrimination against white women and minority men
among employers looking to hire candidates with Science, Engineering, and Math majors.4
The employers in our study report having a positive preference for diversity in hiring.5

In

addition, employers report that white female candidates are less likely to accept job offers than
their white male counterparts, suggesting a novel channel for discrimination.
Of course, the IRR method also comes with some drawbacks. First, while we attempt to directly
identify employer interest in a candidate, our Likert-scale measure is not a step in the hiring process
and thus—in our implementation of IRR—we cannot draw a direct link between our Likert-scale
measure and hiring outcomes. However, we imagine future IRR studies could make advances on this
front (e.g., by asking employers to guarantee interviews to matched candidates). Second, because
the incentives in our study are similar but not identical to those in the hiring process, we cannot
be sure that employers evaluate our hypothetical resumes with the same rigor or using the same
criteria as they would real resumes. Again, we hope future work might validate that the time and
attention spent on resumes in the IRR paradigm is similar to resumes evaluated as part of standard
recruiting processes.
Our implementation of IRR was the first of its kind and thus left room for improvement on a
few fronts. For example, as discussed in detail in Section 4, we attempted to replicate our study
at the University of Pittsburgh to evaluate preferences of employers more like those traditionally
targeted by resume audit studies. We underestimated how much Pitt employers needed candidates
4

We find suggestive evidence that discrimination in hiring interest is due to implicit bias by observing how
discrimination changes as employers evaluate multiple resumes. In addition, consistent with results from the resume
audit literature finding lower returns to quality for minority candidates (see Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004]), we
also find that—relative to white males—other candidates receive a lower return to work experience at prestigious
internships.
5
In a survey employers complete after evaluating resumes in our study, over 90% of employers report that both
“seeking to increase gender diversity / representation of women” and “seeking to increase racial diversity” factor into
their hiring decisions, and 82% of employers rate both of these factors at 5 or above on a Likert scale from 1 = “Do
not consider at all” to 10 = “This is among the most important things I consider.”

4

with specific majors and backgrounds, however, and a large fraction of resumes that were shown
to Pitt employers were immediately disqualified based on major. This mistake resulted in highly
attenuated estimates. Future implementations of IRR should more carefully tailor the variables
for their hypothetical resumes to the needs of the employers being studied. We emphasize other
lessons from our implementation in Section 5.
Despite the limitations of IRR, our results highlight that the method can be used to elicit
employer preferences and suggest that it can also be used to detect discrimination. Consequently,
we hope IRR provides a path forward for those interested in studying labor markets without using
deception. The rest of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes in detail how we implement
our IRR study; Section 3 reports on the results from Penn and compares them to extant literature;
Section 4 describes our attempted replication at Pitt; and Section 5 concludes.

2

Study Design
In this section, we describe our implementation of IRR, which combines the incentives and

ecological validity of the field with the control of the laboratory. In Section 2.1, we outline how
we recruit employers who are in the market to hire elite college graduates. In Section 2.2, we
describe how we provide employers with incentives for reporting preferences without introducing
deception. In Section 2.3, we detail how we created the hypothetical resumes and describe the
extensive variation in candidate characteristics that we included in the experiment, including grade
point average and major (see 2.3.1), previous work experience (see 2.3.2), skills (see 2.3.3), and race
and gender (see 2.3.4). In Section 2.4, we highlight the two questions that we asked subjects about
each hypothetical resume, which allowed us to get a granular measure of interest in a candidate
without a confound from the likelihood that the candidate would accept a job if offered.

2.1

Employers and Recruitment

IRR allows researchers to recruit employers in the market for candidates from particular institutions and those who do not screen unsolicited resumes and thus may be hard—or impossible—to
study in audit or resume audit studies. To leverage this benefit of the experimental paradigm, we
partnered with the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) Career Services office to identify employers
recruiting highly skilled generalists from the Penn graduating class.
Penn Career Services sent invitation emails (see Appendix Figure A.1 for recruitment email) in
two waves during the 2016-2017 academic year to employers who historically recruited Penn seniors
(e.g., firms that recruited on campus, regularly attended career fairs, or otherwise hired students).
The first wave was around the time of on-campus recruiting in the fall of 2016. The second wave
was around the time of career-fair recruiting in the spring of 2017. In both waves, the recruitment
email invited employers to use “a new tool that can help you to identify potential job candidates.”
While the recruitment email and the information that employers received before rating resumes (see
5

Appendix Figure A.3 for instructions) noted that anonymized data from employer responses would
be used for research purposes, this was framed as secondary. The recruitment process and survey
tool itself both emphasized that employers were using new recruitment software. For this reason,
we note that our study has the ecological validity of a field experiment.6 As was outlined in the
recruitment email (and described in detail in Section 2.2), each employer’s one and only incentive
for participating in the study is to receive 10 resumes of job seekers that match the preferences
they report through rating the hypothetical resumes.

2.2

Incentives

The main innovation of IRR is its method for incentivized preference elicitation, a variant of a
method pioneered by Low [2017] in a different context. In its most general form, the method asks
subjects to evaluate candidate profiles, which are known to be hypothetical, with the understanding that more accurate evaluations will maximize the value of their participation incentive. In our
implementation of IRR, each employer evaluates 40 hypothetical candidate resumes and their participation incentive is a packet of 10 resumes of real job seekers from a large pool of Penn seniors.
For each employer, we select the 10 real job seekers based on the employer’s evaluations.7 Consequently, the participation incentive in our study becomes more valuable as employers’ evaluations
of candidates better reflect their true preferences for candidates.8
A key design decision to help ensure subjects in our study truthfully and accurately report
their preferences is that we provide no additional incentive (i.e., beyond the resumes of the 10
real job seekers) for participating in the study, which took a median of 29.8 minutes to complete.
Limiting the incentive to the resumes of 10 job seekers makes us confident that participants value
the incentive, since they have no other reason to participate in the study. Since subjects value
the incentive, and since the incentive becomes more valuable as preferences are reported more
accurately, subjects have good reason to report their preferences accurately.

2.3

Resume Creation and Variation

Our implementation of IRR asked each employer to evaluate 40 unique, hypothetical resumes,
and it varied multiple candidate characteristics simultaneously and independently across resumes,
6
Indeed, the only thing that differentiates our study from a “natural field experiment” as defined by Harrison
and List [2004] is that subjects know that academic research is ostensibly taking place, even though it is framed as
secondary relative to the incentives in the experiment.
7
The recruitment email (see Appendix Figure A.1) stated: “the tool uses a newly developed machine-learning
algorithm to identify candidates who would be a particularly good fit for your job based on your evaluations.” We
did not use race or gender preferences when suggesting matches from the candidate pool. The process by which we
identify job seekers based on employer evaluations is described in detail in Appendix A.3.
8
In Low [2017], heterosexual male subjects evaluated online dating profiles of hypothetical women with an incentive
of receiving advice from an expert dating coach on how to adjust their own online dating profiles to attract the types
of women that they reported preferring. While this type of non-monetary incentive is new to the labor economics
literature, it has features in common with incentives in laboratory experiments, in which subjects make choices (e.g.,
over monetary payoffs, risk, time, etc.) and the utility they receive from those choices is higher as their choices more
accurately reflect their preferences.

6

allowing us to estimate employer preferences over a rich space of baseline candidate characteristics.9
Each of the 40 resumes was dynamically populated when a subject began the survey tool. As shown
in Table 1 and described below, we randomly varied a set of candidate characteristics related
to education; a set of candidate characteristics related to work, leadership, and skills; and the
candidate’s race and gender.
We made a number of additional design decisions to increase the realism of the hypothetical
resumes and to otherwise improve the quality of employer responses. First, we built the hypothetical
resumes using components (i.e., work experiences, leadership experiences, and skills) from real
resumes of seniors at Penn. Second, we asked the employers to choose the type of candidates that
they were interested in hiring, based on major (see Appendix Figure A.4). In particular, they could
choose either “Business (Wharton), Social Sciences, and Humanities” (henceforth “Humanities &
Social Sciences”) or “Science, Engineering, Computer Science, and Math” (henceforth “STEM”).
They were then shown hypothetical resumes from the set of majors they selected. As described
below, this choice affects a wide range of candidate characteristics; majors, internship experiences,
and skills on the hypothetical resumes varied across these two major groups. Third, to enhance
realism, and to make the evaluation of the resumes less tedious, we used 10 different resume
templates, which we populated with the candidate characteristics and component pieces described
below, to generate the 40 hypothetical resumes (see Appendix Figure A.5 for a sample resume). We
based these templates on real student resume formats (see Appendix Figure A.6 for examples).10
Fourth, we gave employers short breaks within the study by showing them a progress screen after
each block of 10 resumes they evaluated. As described in Section 3.4 and Appendix B.4, we use
the change in attention induced by these breaks to construct tests of implicit bias.
2.3.1

Education Information

In the education section of the resume, we independently randomized each candidate’s grade
point average (GPA) and major. GPA is drawn from a uniform distribution between 2.90 and 4.00,
shown to two decimal places and never omitted from the resume. Majors are chosen from a list
of Penn majors, with higher probability put on more common majors. Each major was associated
with a degree (BA or BS) and with the name of the group or school granting the degree within
Penn (e.g., “College of Arts and Sciences”). Appendix Table A.3 shows the list of majors by major
category, school, and the probability that the major was used in a resume.
9
In a traditional resume audit study, researchers are limited in the number of resumes and the covariance of
candidate characteristics that they can show to any particular employer. Sending too many fake resumes to the same
firm, or sending resumes with unusual combinations of components, might raise suspicion. For example, Bertrand
and Mullainathan [2004] send only four resumes to each firm and create only two quality levels (i.e., a high quality
resume and a low quality resume, in which various candidate characteristics vary together).
10
We blurred the text in place of a phone number and email address for all resumes, since we were not interested
in inducing variation in those candidate characteristics.

7

Table 1: Randomization of Resume Components
Resume Component
Personal Information
First & last name

Education Information
GPA
Major
Degree type
School within university
Graduation date
Work Experience
First job
Title and employer
Location
Description
Dates
Second job
Title and employer
Location
Description
Dates
Leadership Experience
First & second leadership
Title and activity
Location
Description
Dates
Skills
Skills list

Description

Analysis Variable

Drawn from list of 50 possible names given selected
race and gender (names in Tables A.1 & A.2)
Race drawn randomly from U.S. distribution (65.7%
White, 16.8% Hispanic, 12.6% Black, 4.9% Asian)
Gender drawn randomly (50% male, 50% female)

Female, White (32.85%)
Male, Non-White (17.15%)
Female, Non-White (17.15%)
Not a White Male (67.15%)

Drawn U nif [2.90, 4.00] to second decimal place
Drawn from a list of majors at Penn (Table A.3)
BA, BS fixed to randomly drawn major
Fixed to randomly drawn major
Fixed to upcoming spring (i.e., May 2017)

GPA
Major (weights in Table A.3)
Wharton (40%)
School of Engineering and
Applied Science (70%)

Drawn from curated list of top internships and
regular internships
Fixed to randomly drawn job
Fixed to randomly drawn job
Bullet points fixed to randomly drawn job
Summer after candidate’s junior year (i.e., 2016)

Top Internship (20/40)

Left blank or drawn from curated list of regular
internships and work-for-money jobs (Table A.5)
Fixed to randomly drawn job
Fixed to randomly drawn job
Bullet points fixed to randomly drawn job
Summer after candidate’s sophomore year (i.e., 2015)

Second Internship (13/40)
Work for Money (13/40)

Drawn from curated list
Fixed to randomly drawn leadership
Fixed to Philadelphia, PA
Bullet points fixed to randomly drawn leadership
Start and end years randomized within college
career, with more recent experience coming first
Drawn from curated list, with two skills drawn from
{Ruby, Python, PHP, Perl} and two skills drawn from
{SAS, R, Stata, Matlab} shuffled and added to skills
list with probability 25%.

Technical Skills (25%)

Resume components are listed in the order that they appear on hypothetical resumes. Italicized variables in the
right column are variables that were randomized to test how employers responded to these characteristics. Degree,
first job, second job, and skills were drawn from different lists for Humanities & Social Sciences resumes and STEM
resumes (except for work-for-money jobs). Name, GPA, work-for-money jobs, and leadership experience were drawn
from the same lists for both resume types. Weights of characteristics are shown as fractions when they are fixed across
subjects (e.g., each subject saw exactly 20/40 resumes with a Top Internship) and percentages when they represent a
draw from a probability distribution (e.g., each resume a subject saw had a 32.85% chance of being assigned a white
female name).

8

2.3.2

Work Experience

We included realistic work experience components on the resumes. To generate the components,
we scraped more than 700 real resumes of Penn students. We then followed a process described
in Appendix A.2.5 to select and lightly sanitize work experience components so that they could
be randomly assigned to different resumes without generating conflicts or inconsistencies (e.g., we
eliminated references to particular majors or to gender or race). Each work experience component
included the associated details from the real resume from which the component was drawn, including
an employer, position title, location, and a few descriptive bullet points.
Our goal in randomly assigning these work experience components was to introduce variation
along two dimensions: quantity of work experience and quality of work experience. To randomly
assign quantity of work experience, we varied whether the candidate only had an internship in the
summer before senior year, or also had a job or internship in the summer before junior year. Thus,
candidates with more experience had two jobs on their resume (before junior and senior years),
while others had only one (before senior year).
To introduce random variation in quality of work experience, we selected work experience components from three categories: (1) “top internships,” which were internships with prestigious firms
as defined by being a firm that successfully hires many Penn graduates; (2) “work-for-money” jobs,
which were paid jobs that—at least for Penn students—are unlikely to develop human capital for
a future career (e.g., barista, cashier, waiter, etc.); and (3) “regular” internships, which comprised
all other work experiences.11
The first level of quality randomization was to assign each hypothetical resume to have either
a top internship or a regular internship in the first job slot (before senior year). This allows us to
detect the impact of having a higher quality internship.12
The second level of quality randomization was in the kind of job a resume had in the second
job slot (before junior year), if any. Many students may have an economic need to earn money
during the summer and thus may be unable to take an unpaid or low-pay internship. To evaluate
whether employers respond differentially to work-for-money jobs, which students typically take for
pay, and internships, resumes were assigned to have either no second job, a work-for-money job,
or a standard internship, each with (roughly) one-third probability (see Table 1). This variation
11
See Appendix Table A.4 for a list of top internship employers and Table A.5 for a list of work-for-money job
titles. As described in Appendix A.2.5, different internships (and top internships) were used for each major type but
the same work-for-money jobs were used for both major types. The logic of varying internships by major type was
based on the intuition that internships could be interchangeable within each group of majors (e.g., internships from
the Humanities & Social Sciences resumes would not be unusual to see on any other resume from that major group)
but were unlikely to be interchangeable across major groups (e.g., internships from Humanities & Social Sciences
resumes would be unusual to see on STEM resumes and vice versa). We used the same set of work-for-money jobs
for both major types, since these jobs were not linked to a candidate’s field of study.
12
Since the work experience component was comprised of employer, title, location, and description, a higher quality
work experience necessarily reflects all features of this bundle; we did not independently randomize the elements of
work experience.

9

allows us to measure the value of having a work-for-money job and to test how it compares to the
value of a standard internship.
2.3.3

Leadership Experience and Skills

Each resume included two leadership experiences as in typical student resumes. A leadership
experience component includes an activity, title, date range, and a few bullet points with a description of the experience (Philadelphia, PA was given as the location of all leadership experiences).
Participation dates were randomly selected ranges of years from within the four years preceding
the graduation date. For additional details, see Appendix A.2.5.
With skills, by contrast, we added a layer of intentional variation to measure how employers
value technical skills. First, each resume was randomly assigned a list of skills drawn from real
resumes. We stripped from these lists any reference to Ruby, Python, PHP, Perl, SAS, R, Stata,
and Matlab. With 25% probability, we appended to this list four technical skills: two randomly
drawn advanced programming languages from {Ruby, Python, PHP, Perl} and two randomly drawn
statistical programs from {SAS, R, Stata, Matlab}.
2.3.4

Names Indicating Gender and Race

We randomly varied gender and race by assigning each hypothetical resume a name that would
be indicative of gender (male or female) and race (Asian, Black, Hispanic, or White).13 To do this
randomization, we needed to first generate a list of names that would clearly indicate both gender
and race for each of the groups. We used birth records and Census data to generate first and last
names that would be highly indicative of race and gender, and combined names within race.14 The
full lists of names are given in Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 (see Appendix A.2.3 for additional
details).
For realism, we randomly selected races at rates approximating the distribution in the US
population (65.7% White, 16.8% Hispanic, 12.6% Black, 4.9% Asian). While a more uniform
variation in race would have increased statistical power to detect race-based discrimination, such
an approach would have risked signaling to subjects our intent to study racial preferences. In our
analysis, we pool non-white names to explore potential discrimination of minority candidates.
13

For ease of exposition, we will refer to race / ethnicity as “race” throughout the paper.
For first names, we used a dataset of all births in the state of Massachusetts between 1989-1996 and New York
City between 1990-1996 (the approximate birth range of job seekers in our study). Following Fryer and Levitt [2004],
we generated an index for each name of how distinctively the name was associated with a particular race and gender.
From these, we generated lists of 50 names by selecting the most indicative names and removing names that were
strongly indicative of religion (such as Moshe) or gender ambiguous in the broad sample, even if unambiguous within
an ethnic group (such as Courtney, which is a popular name among both black men and white women). We used a
similar approach to generating racially indicative last names, assuming last names were not informative of gender.
We used last name data from the 2000 Census tying last names to race. We implemented the same measure of race
specificity and required that the last name make up at least 0.1% of that race’s population, to ensure that the last
names were sufficiently common.
14

10

2.4

Rating Candidates on Two Dimensions

As noted in the Introduction, audit and resume audit studies generally report results on callback,
which has two limitations. First, callback only identifies preferences for candidates at one point
in the quality distribution (i.e., at the callback threshold), so results may not generalize to other
environments or to other candidate characteristics. Second, while callback is often treated as a
measure of an employer’s interest in a candidate, there is a potential confound to this interpretation.
Since continuing to interview a candidate, or offering the candidate a job that is ultimately rejected,
can be costly to an employer (e.g., it may require time and energy and crowd out making other
offers), an employer’s callback decision will optimally depend on both the employer’s interest in a
candidate and the employer’s belief about whether the candidate will accept the job if offered. If the
likelihood that a candidate accepts a job when offered is decreasing in the candidate’s quality (e.g.,
if higher quality candidates have better outside options), employers’ actual effort spent pursuing
candidates may be non-monotonic in candidate quality. Consequently, concerns about a candidate’s
likelihood of accepting a job may be a confound in interpreting callback as a measure of interest in
a candidate.15
An advantage of the IRR methodology is that researchers can ask employers to provide richer,
more granular information than a binary measure of callback. We leveraged this advantage to
ask two questions, each on a Likert scale from 1 to 10. In particular, for each resume we asked
employers to answer the following two questions (see an example at the bottom of Appendix Figure
A.5):
1. “How interested would you be in hiring [Name]?”
(1 = “Not interested”; 10 = “Very interested”)
2. “How likely do you think [Name] would be to accept a job with your organization?”
(1 = “Not likely”; 10 = “Very likely”)
In the instructions (see Appendix Figure A.3), employers were specifically told that responses to
both questions would be used to generate their matches. In addition, they were told to focus only
on their interest in hiring a candidate when answering the first question (i.e., they were instructed
to assume the candidate would accept an offer if given one). We denote responses to this question
“hiring interest.” They were told to focus only on the likelihood a candidate would accept a job
offer when answering the second question (i.e., they were instructed to assume they candidate had
been given an offer and to assess the likelihood they would accept it). We denote responses to this
question a candidate’s “likelihood of acceptance.” We asked the first question to assess how resume
characteristics affect hiring interest. We asked the second question both to encourage employers
15

Audit and resume audit studies focusing on discrimination do not need to interpret callback as a measure of
an employer’s interest in a candidate to demonstrate discrimination (any difference in callback rates is evidence of
discrimination).

11

to focus only on hiring interest when answering the first question and to explore employers’ beliefs
about the likelihood that a candidate would accept a job if offered.
The 10-point scale has two advantages. First, it provides additional statistical power, allowing
us to observe employer preferences toward characteristics of inframarginal resumes, rather than
identifying preferences only for resumes crossing a binary callback threshold in a resume audit
setting. Second, it allows us to explore how employer preferences vary across the distribution of
hiring interest, an issue we explore in depth in Section 3.3.

3

Results

3.1

Data and Empirical Approach

We recruited 72 employers through our partnership with the University of Pennsylvania Career
Services office in Fall 2016 (46 subjects, 1840 resume observations) and Spring 2017 (26 subjects,
1040 resume observations).16
As described in Section 2, each employer rated 40 unique, hypothetical resumes with randomly
assigned candidate characteristics. For each resume, employers rated hiring interest and likelihood
of acceptance, each on a 10-point Likert scale. Our analysis focuses initially on hiring interest,
turning to how employers evaluate likelihood of acceptance in Section 3.5. Our main specifications
are ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions. These specifications make a linearity assumption with
respect to the Likert-scale ratings data. Namely, they assume that, on average, employers treat
equally-sized increases in Likert-scale ratings equivalently (e.g., an increase in hiring interest from
1 to 2 is equivalent to an increase from 9 to 10). In some specifications, we include subject fixed
effects, which account for the possibility that employers have different mean ratings of resumes (e.g.,
allowing some employers to be more generous than others with their ratings across all resumes),
while preserving the linearity assumption. To complement this analysis, we also run ordered probit
regression specifications, which relax this assumption and only require that employers, on average,
consider higher Likert-scale ratings more favorably than lower ratings.
In Section 3.2, we examine how human capital characteristics (e.g., GPA, major, work experience, and skills) affect hiring interest. These results report on the mean of preferences across
16
The recruiters who participated in our study as subjects were primarily female (59%) and primarily white (79%)
and Asian (15%). They reported a wide range of recruiting experience, including some who had been in a position
with responsibilities associated with job candidates for one year or less (28%); between two and five years (46%); and
six or more years (25%). Almost all (96%) of the participants had college degrees, and many (30%) had graduate
degrees including an MA, MBA, JD, or Doctorate. They were approximately as likely to work at a large firm with
over 1000 employees (35%) as a small firm with fewer than 100 employees (39%). These small firms include hedge
fund, private equity, consulting, and wealth management companies that are attractive employment opportunities for
Penn undergraduates. Large firms include prestigious Fortune 500 consumer brands, as well as large consulting and
technology firms. The most common industries in the sample are finance (32%); the technology sector or computer
science (18%); and consulting (16%). The sample had a smaller number of sales/marketing firms (9%) and non-profit
or public interest organizations (9%). The vast majority (86%) of participating firms had at least one open position
on the East Coast, though a significant number also indicated recruiting for the West Coast (32%), Midwest (18%),
South (16%), or an international location (10%).

12

the distribution; we show how our results vary across the distribution of hiring interest in Section
3.3. In Section 3.4, we discuss how employers’ ratings of hiring interest respond to demographic
characteristics of our candidates. In Section 3.5, we investigate the likelihood of acceptance ratings
and identify a potential new channel for discrimination. In Section 3.6, we compare our results to
prior literature.

3.2

Effect of Human Capital on Hiring Interest

Employers in our study are interested in hiring graduates of the University of Pennsylvania for
full-time employment, and many recruit at other Ivy League schools and other top colleges and
universities. This labor market has been unexplored by resume audit studies, in part because the
positions employers aim to fill through on-campus recruiting at Penn are highly unlikely to be
filled through online job boards or by screening unsolicited resumes. In this section, we evaluate
how randomized candidate characteristics—described in Section 2.3 and Table 1—affect employers’
ratings of hiring interest.
We denote an employer i’s rating of a resume j on the 1–10 Likert scale as Vij and estimate
variations of the following regression specification (1). This regression allows us to investigate the
average response to candidate characteristics across employers in our study.

Vij = β0 + β1 GPA + β2 Top Internship + β3 Second Internship + β4 Work for Money +
β5 Technical Skills + β6 Female, White + β7 Male, Non-White+
β8 Female, Non-White + µj + γj + ωj + αi + εij

(1)

In this regression, GPA is a linear measure of grade point average. Top Internship is a dummy
for having a top internship, Second Internship is a dummy for having an internship in the summer
before junior year, and Work for Money is a dummy for having a work-for-money job in the summer
before junior year. Technical Skills is a dummy for having a list of skills that included a set of four
randomly assigned technical skills. Demographic variables Female, White; Male, Non-White; and
Female, Non-White are dummies equal to 1 if the name of the candidate indicated the given race and
gender.17 µj are dummies for each major. Table 1 provides more information about these dummies
and all the variables in this regression. In some specifications, we include additional controls. γj
are dummies for each of the leadership experience components. ωj are dummies for the number
of resumes the employer has evaluated as part of the survey tool. Since leadership experiences
are independently randomized and orthogonal to other resume characteristics of interest, and since
resume characteristics are randomly drawn for each of the 40 resumes, our results should be robust
17
Coefficient estimates on these variables report comparisons to white males, which is the excluded group. While
we do not discuss demographic results in this section, we include controls for this randomized resume component in
our regressions and discuss the results in Section 3.4 and Appendix B.4.

13

to the inclusion or exclusion of these dummies. Finally, αi are employer (i.e., subject) fixed effects
that account for different average ratings across employers.
Table 2 shows regression results where Vij is Hiring Interest, which takes values from 1 to
10. The first three columns report OLS regressions with slightly different specifications. The first
column includes all candidate characteristics we varied to estimate their impact on ratings. The
second column adds leadership dummies γ and resume order dummies ω. The third column also
adds subject fixed effects α. As expected, results are robust to the addition of these controls.
The fourth column, labeled GPA-Scaled OLS, rescales all coefficients from the third column by the
coefficient on GPA (2.196) so that the coefficients on other variables can be interpreted in GPA
points. These regressions show that employers respond strongly to candidate characteristics related
to human capital.
GPA is an important driver of hiring interest. An increase in GPA of one point (e.g., from a 3.0
to a 4.0) increases ratings on the Likert scale by 2.1–2.2 points. The standard deviation of quality
ratings is 2.6, suggesting that a point improvement in GPA moves hiring interest ratings by about
0.8 of a standard deviation.
As described in Section 2.3.2, we created ex ante variation in both the quality and quantity
of candidate work experience. Both affect employer interest. The quality of a candidate’s work
experience in the summer before senior year has a large impact on hiring interest ratings. The
coefficient on Top Internship ranges from 0.9–1.0 Likert-scale points, which is roughly a third of
a standard deviation of ratings. As shown in the fourth column of Table 2, a top internship is
equivalent to a 0.41 improvement in GPA.
Employers value a second work experience on the candidate’s resume, but only if that experience
is an internship and not if it is a work-for-money job. In particular, the coefficient on Second
Internship, which reflects the effect of adding a second “regular” internship to a resume that
otherwise has no work experience listed for the summer before junior year, is 0.4–0.5 Likert-scale
points—equivalent to 0.21 GPA points. While listing an internship before junior year is valuable,
listing a work-for-money job that summer does not appear to increase hiring interest ratings. The
coefficient on Work for Money is small and not statistically different from zero in our data. While it
is directionally positive, we can reject that work-for-money jobs and regular internships are valued
equally (p < 0.05 for all tests comparing the Second Internship and Work for Money coefficients).
This preference of employers may create a disadvantage for students who cannot afford to accept
(typically) unpaid internships the summer before their junior year.18
We see no effect on hiring interest from increased Technical Skills, suggesting that employers on
average do not value the technical skills we randomly added to candidate resumes or that listing
technical skills does not credibly signal sufficient mastery to affect hiring interest (e.g., employers
may consider skills listed on a resume to be cheap talk).
18
These results are consistent with a penalty for working-class candidates. In a resume audit study of law firms,
Rivera and Tilcsik [2016] found that resume indicators of lower social class (such as receiving a scholarship for first
generation college students) led to lower callback rates.

14

Table 2: Hiring Interest
Dependent Variable: Hiring Interest

GPA
Top Internship
Second Internship
Work for Money
Technical Skills
Female, White
Male, Non-White
Female, Non-White
Observations
R2
p-value for test of joint
significance of Majors
Major FEs
Leadership FEs
Order FEs
Subject FEs

OLS
2.125
(0.145)
0.902
(0.095)
0.465
(0.112)
0.116
(0.110)
0.046
(0.104)
-0.152
(0.114)
-0.172
(0.136)
-0.009
(0.137)
2880
0.129

OLS
2.190
(0.150)
0.900
(0.099)
0.490
(0.118)
0.157
(0.113)
0.053
(0.108)
-0.215
(0.118)
-0.177
(0.142)
-0.022
(0.144)
2880
0.181

OLS
2.196
(0.129)
0.897
(0.081)
0.466
(0.095)
0.154
(0.091)
-0.071
(0.090)
-0.161
(0.096)
-0.169
(0.115)
0.028
(0.120)
2880
0.483

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

GPA-Scaled
OLS
1.000
(.)
0.409
(0.043)
0.212
(0.045)
0.070
(0.042)
-0.032
(0.041)
-0.073
(0.044)
-0.077
(0.053)
0.013
(0.055)
2880

Ordered
Probit
0.891
(0.063)
0.378
(0.040)
0.206
(0.047)
0.052
(0.046)
0.012
(0.043)
-0.061
(0.048)
-0.075
(0.058)
-0.014
(0.057)
2880

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

Ordered probit cutpoints: 1.91, 2.28, 2.64, 2.93, 3.26, 3.60, 4.05, 4.51, and 5.03.

Table shows OLS and ordered probit regressions of Hiring Interest from Equation
(1). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. GPA; Top Internship;
Second Internship; Work for Money; Technical Skills; Female, White; Male, NonWhite; Female, Non-White and major are characteristics of the hypothetical resume, constructed as described in Section 2.3 and in Appendix A.2. Fixed effects
for major, leadership experience, resume order, and subject included in some specifications as indicated. R2 is indicated for each OLS regression. GPA-Scaled OLS
presents the results of Column 3 divided by the Column 3 coefficient on GPA, with
standard errors calculated by delta method. The p-values of tests of joint significance of major fixed effects are indicated (F -test for OLS, likelihood ratio test for
ordered probit).

15

Table 2 also reports the p-value of a test of whether the coefficients on the major dummies are
jointly different from zero. Results suggest that the randomly assigned major significantly affects
hiring interest. While we do not have the statistical power to test for the effect of each major, we can
explore how employers respond to candidates being from more prestigious schools at the University
of Pennsylvania. In particular, 40% of the Humanities & Social Sciences resumes are assigned a BS
in Economics from Wharton and the rest have a BA major from the College of Arts and Sciences.
In addition, 70% of the STEM resumes are assigned a BS from the School of Engineering and
Applied Science and the rest have a BA major from the College of Arts and Sciences. As shown in
Appendix Table B.2, in both cases, we find that being from the more prestigious school—and thus
receiving a BS rather than a BA—is associated with an increase in hiring interest ratings of about
0.4 Likert-scale points or 0.18 GPA points.19
We can loosen the assumption that employers treated the intervals on the Likert scale linearly
by treating Hiring Interest as an ordered categorical variable. The fifth column of Table 2 gives
the results of an ordered probit specification with the same variables as the first column (i.e.,
omitting the leadership dummies and subject fixed effects). This specification is more flexible than
OLS, allowing the discrete steps between Likert-scale points to vary in size. The coefficients reflect
the effect of each characteristic on a latent variable over the Likert-scale space, and cutpoints
are estimated to determine the distance between categories. Results are similar in direction and
statistical significance to the OLS specifications described above.20
As discussed in Section 2, we made many design decisions to enhance realism. However, one
might be concerned that our independent cross-randomization of various resume components might
lead to unrealistic resumes and influence the results we find. We provide two robustness checks in
the appendix to address this concern. First, our design and analysis treat each work experience
as independent, but, in practice, candidates may have related jobs over a series of summers that
create a work experience “narrative.” In Appendix B.1 and Appendix Table B.1, we describe how
we construct a measure of work experience narrative, we test its importance, and find that while
employers respond positively to work experience narrative (p = 0.054) our main results are robust
to its inclusion. Second, the GPA distribution we used for constructing the hypothetical resumes
did not perfectly match the distribution of job seekers in our labor market. In Appendix B.2, we
re-weight our data to match the GPA distribution in the candidate pool of real Penn job seekers
and show that our results are robust to this re-weighting. These exercises provide some assurance
that our results are not an artifact of how we construct hypothetical resumes.
19

Note that since the application processes for these different schools within Penn are different, including the
admissions standards, this finding also speaks to the impact of institutional prestige, in addition to field of study
(see, e.g., Kirkeboen et al. [2016]).
20
The ordered probit cutpoints (2.14, 2.5, 2.85, 3.15, 3.46, 3.8, 4.25, 4.71, and 5.21) are approximately equally
spaced, suggesting that subjects treated the Likert scale approximately linearly. Note that we only run the ordered
probit specification with the major dummies and without leadership dummies or subject fixed effects. Adding too
many dummies to an ordered probit can lead to unreliable estimates when the number of observations per cluster is
small [Greene, 2004].

16

3.3

Effects Across the Distribution of Hiring Interest

The regression specifications described in Section 3.2 identify the average effect of candidate
characteristics on employers’ hiring interest. As pointed out by Neumark [2012], however, these
average preferences may differ in magnitude—and even direction—from differences in callback rates,
which derive from whether a characteristic pushes a candidate above a specific quality threshold
(i.e., the callback threshold). For example, in the low callback rate environments that are typical of
resume audit studies, differences in callback rates will be determined by how employers respond to a
candidate characteristic in the right tail of their distribution of preferences.21 To make this concern
concrete, Appendix B.3 provides a simple graphical illustration in which the average preference for
a characteristic differs from the preference in the tail of the distribution. In practice, we may
care about preferences in any part of the distribution for policy. For example, preferences at the
callback threshold may be relevant for hiring outcomes, but those thresholds may change with a
hiring expansion or contraction.
An advantage of the IRR methodology, however, is that it can deliver a granular measure of
hiring interest to explore whether employers’ preferences for characteristics do indeed differ in the
tails of the hiring interest distribution. We employ two basic tools to explore preferences across the
distribution of hiring interest: (1) the empirical cumulative distribution function (CDF) of hiring
interest ratings and (2) a “counterfactual callback threshold” exercise. In the latter exercise, we
impose a counterfactual callback threshold at each possible hiring interest rating (i.e., supposing
that employers called back all candidates that they rated at or above that rating level) and, for
each possible rating level, report the OLS coefficient an audit study researcher would find for the
difference in callback rates.
While the theoretical concerns raised by Neumark [2012] may be relevant in other settings, the
average results we find in Section 3.2 are all consistent across the distribution of hiring interest,
including in the tails (except for a preference for Wharton students, which we discuss below). The
top half of Figure 1 shows that Top Internship is positive and statistically significant at all levels of
selectivity. Panel (a) reports the empirical CDF of hiring interest ratings for candidates with and
without a top internship. Panel (b) shows the difference in callback rates that would arise for Top
Internship at each counterfactual callback threshold. The estimated difference in callback rates
is positive and significant everywhere, although it is much larger in the midrange of the quality
distribution than at either of the tails.22 The bottom half of Figure 1 shows that results across
21

A variant of this critique was initially brought up by Heckman and Siegelman [1992] and Heckman [1998] for
in-person audit studies, where auditors may be imperfectly matched, and was extended to correspondence audit
studies by Neumark [2012] and Neumark et al. [2015]. A key feature of the critique is that certain candidate
characteristics might affect higher moments of the distribution of employer preferences so that how employers respond
to a characteristic on average may be different than how an employer responds to a characteristic in the tail of their
preference distribution.
22
This shape is partially a mechanical feature of low callback rate environments: if a threshold is set high enough
that only 5% of candidates with a desirable characteristic are being called back, the difference in callback rates can be
no more than 5 percentage points. At lower thresholds (e.g., where 50% of candidates with desirable characteristics

17

Figure 1: Value of Quality of Experience Over Selectivity Distribution

(a) Empirical CDF for Top Internship

(b) Linear Probability Model for Top Internship

(c) Empirical CDF for Second Job Type

(d) Linear Probability Model for Second Job Type

Empirical CDF of Hiring Interest (Panels 1a & 1c) and difference in counterfactual callback rates (Panels 1b & 1d)
for Top Internship, in the top row, and Second Internship and Work for Money, in the bottom row. Empirical CDFs
show the share of hypothetical candidate resumes with each characteristic with a Hiring Interest rating less than or
equal to each value. The counterfactual callback plot shows the difference between groups in the share of candidates
at or above the threshold—that is, the share of candidates who would be called back in a resume audit study if
the callback threshold were set to any given value. 95% confidence intervals are calculated from a linear probability
model with an indicator for being at or above a threshold as the dependent variable.

18

the distribution for Second Internship and Work for Money are also consistent with the average
results from Section 3.2. Second Internship is positive everywhere and almost always statistically
significant. Work for Money consistently has no impact on employer preferences throughout the
distribution of hiring interest.
As noted above, our counterfactual callback threshold exercise suggests that a well-powered
audit study would likely find differences in callback rates for most of the characteristics that we
estimate as statistically significant on average in Section 3.2, regardless of employers’ callback
threshold. This result is reassuring both for the validity of our results and in considering the
generalizability of results from the resume audit literature. However, even in our data, we observe
a case where a well-powered audit study would be unlikely to find a result, even though we find one
on average. Appendix Figure B.1 mirrors Figure 1 but focuses on having a Wharton degree among
employers seeking Humanities & Social Sciences candidates. Employers respond to Wharton in the
middle of the distribution of hiring interest, but preferences seem to converge in the right tail (i.e.,
at hiring interest ratings of 9 or 10), suggesting that the best students from the College of Arts
and Sciences are not evaluated differently than the best students from Wharton.

3.4

Demographic Discrimination

In this section, we examine how hiring interest ratings respond to the race and gender of candidates. As described in Section 2 and shown in Table 1, we use our variation in names to create
the variables: Female, White; Male, Non-White; and Female, Non-White. As shown in Table 2,
the coefficients on the demographic variables are not significantly different from zero, suggesting
no evidence of discrimination on average in our data.23 This null result contrasts somewhat with
existing literature—both resume audit studies (e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004]) and laboratory experiments (e.g., Bohnet et al. [2015]) generally find evidence of discrimination in hiring.
Our differential results may not be surprising given that our employer pool is different than those
usually targeted through resume audit studies, with most reporting positive tastes for diversity.
While we see no evidence of discrimination on average, a large literature addressing diversity in the sciences (e.g., Carrell et al. [2010], Goldin [2014]) suggests we might be particularly
likely to see discrimination among employers seeking STEM candidates. In Table 3, we estimate the regression in Equation (1) separately by major type. Results in Columns 5-10 show
that employers looking for STEM candidates display a large, statistically significant preference for
white male candidates over white females and non-white males. The coefficients on Female, White
and Male, Non-White suggest that these candidates suffer a penalty of 0.5 Likert-scale points—
or about 0.27 GPA points—that is robust across our specifications. These effects are at least
marginally significant even after multiplying our p-values by two to correct for the fact that we are
are called back), differences in callback rates can be much larger. In Appendix B.3, we discuss how this feature of
difference in callback rates could lead to misleading comparisons across experiments with very different callback rates.
23
In Appendix Table B.6, we show that this effect does not differ by the gender and race of the employer rating
the resume.

19

Table 3: Hiring Interest by Major Type
Dependent Variable: Hiring Interest
Humanities & Social Sciences

GPA
Top Internship
Second Internship
Work for Money
Technical Skills
Female, White

20

Male, Non-White
Female, Non-White
Observations
R2
p-value for test of joint
significance of Majors
Major FEs
Leadership FEs
Order FEs
Subject FEs

OLS
2.208
(0.173)
1.075
(0.108)
0.540
(0.132)
0.087
(0.129)
0.063
(0.122)
-0.047
(0.134)
-0.029
(0.158)
0.085
(0.160)
2040
0.128

OLS
2.304
(0.179)
1.043
(0.116)
0.516
(0.143)
0.107
(0.134)
0.084
(0.130)
-0.117
(0.142)
-0.010
(0.169)
0.101
(0.171)
2040
0.196

OLS
2.296
(0.153)
1.033
(0.095)
0.513
(0.114)
0.116
(0.110)
-0.050
(0.106)
-0.054
(0.117)
-0.026
(0.137)
0.091
(0.137)
2040
0.500

0.021
Yes
No
No
No

0.027
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

0.007
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

GPA-Scaled
OLS
1.000
(.)
0.450
(0.050)
0.224
(0.051)
0.050
(0.048)
-0.022
(0.046)
-0.024
(0.051)
-0.011
(0.059)
0.040
(0.060)
2040

Ordered
Probit
0.933
(0.074)
0.452
(0.046)
0.240
(0.056)
0.037
(0.055)
0.013
(0.052)
-0.015
(0.057)
-0.007
(0.066)
0.024
(0.068)
2040

0.007
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.030
Yes
No
No
No

STEM

OLS
1.932
(0.267)
0.398
(0.191)
0.242
(0.208)
0.151
(0.212)
-0.028
(0.197)
-0.419
(0.215)
-0.567
(0.271)
-0.329
(0.264)
840
0.119

OLS
1.885
(0.309)
0.559
(0.216)
0.307
(0.246)
0.275
(0.254)
-0.113
(0.228)
-0.612
(0.249)
-0.617
(0.318)
-0.260
(0.301)
840
0.323

OLS
1.882
(0.242)
0.545
(0.173)
0.311
(0.189)
0.337
(0.187)
-0.180
(0.186)
-0.545
(0.208)
-0.507
(0.257)
-0.046
(0.261)
840
0.593

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

0.035
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

GPA-Scaled
OLS
1.000
(.)
0.289
(0.100)
0.165
(0.103)
0.179
(0.102)
-0.096
(0.100)
-0.290
(0.115)
-0.270
(0.136)
-0.025
(0.138)
840

Ordered
Probit
0.802
(0.112)
0.175
(0.078)
0.111
(0.088)
0.076
(0.088)
-0.001
(0.083)
-0.171
(0.089)
-0.265
(0.111)
-0.142
(0.111)
840

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

Ordered probit cutpoints (Column 5): 2.25, 2.58, 2.96, 3.26, 3.60, 3.94, 4.41, 4.86, 5.41.
Ordered probit cutpoints (Column 10): 1.44, 1.90, 2.22, 2.51, 2.80, 3.14, 3.56, 4.05, 4.48.
Table shows OLS and ordered probit regressions of Hiring Interest from Equation (1). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. GPA; Top Internship;
Second Internship; Work for Money; Technical Skills; Female, White; Male, Non-White; Female, Non-White and major are characteristics of the hypothetical
resume, constructed as described in Section 2.3 and in Appendix A.2. Fixed effects for major, leadership experience, resume order, and subject included as
indicated. R2 is indicated for each OLS regression. GPA-Scaled OLS presents the results of Column 3 and Column 8 divided by the Column 3 and Column 8
coefficients on GPA, with standard errors calculated by delta method. The p-values of tests of joint significance of major fixed effects are indicated (F -test for
OLS, likelihood ratio test for ordered probit) after a Bonferroni correction for analyzing two subgroups.

analyzing our results within two subgroups (uncorrected p-values are: p = 0.009 for Female, White;
p = 0.049 for Male, Non-White). Results in Columns 1-5 show no evidence of discrimination in
hiring interest among Humanities & Social Sciences employers.
As in Section 3.3, we can examine these results across the hiring interest rating distribution.
Figure 2 shows the CDF of hiring interest ratings and the difference in counterfactual callback rates.
For ease of interpretation and for statistical power, we pool female and minority candidates and
compare them to white male candidates in these figures and in some analyses that follow. The top
row shows these comparisons for employers interested in Humanities & Social Sciences candidates
and the bottom row shows these comparisons for employers interested in STEM candidates. Among
employers interested in Humanities & Social Sciences candidates, the CDFs of Hiring Interest
ratings are nearly identical. Among employers interested in STEM candidates, however, the CDF
for white male candidates first order stochastically dominates the CDF for candidates who are not
white males. At the point of the largest counterfactual callback gap, employers interested in STEM
candidates would display callback rates that were 10 percentage points lower for candidates who
were not white males than for their white male counterparts.
One might be surprised that we find any evidence of discrimination, given that employers may
have (correctly) believed we would not use demographic tastes in generating their matches and
given that employers may have attempted to override any discriminatory preferences to be more
socially acceptable. One possibility for why we nevertheless find discrimination is the role of implicit
bias [Greenwald et al., 1998, Nosek et al., 2007], which Bertrand et al. [2005] has suggested is an
important channel for discrimination in resume audit studies. In Appendix B.4, we explore the
role of implicit bias in driving our results.24 In particular, we leverage a feature of implicit bias—
that it is more likely to arise when decision makers are fatigued [Wigboldus et al., 2004, Govorun
and Payne, 2006, Sherman et al., 2004]—to test whether our data are consistent with employers
displaying an implicit racial or gender bias. As shown in Appendix Table B.7, employers spend
less time evaluating resumes both in the latter half of the study and in the latter half of each set
of 10 resumes (after each set of 10 resumes, we introduced a short break for subjects), suggesting
evidence of fatigue. Discrimination is statistically significantly larger in the latter half of each block
of 10 resumes, providing suggestive evidence that implicit bias plays a role in our findings, although
discrimination is not larger in the latter half of the study.
Race and gender could also subconsciously affect how employers view other resume components.
We test for negative interactions between race and gender and desirable candidate characteristics,
which have been found in the resume audit literature (e.g., minority status has been shown to lower
returns to resume quality [Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2004]). Appendix Table B.8 interacts Top
24

Explicit bias might include an explicit taste for white male candidates or an explicit belief they are more prepared than female or minority candidates for success at their firm, even conditional on their resumes. Implicit bias
[Greenwald et al., 1998, Nosek et al., 2007], on the other hand, may be present even among employers who are not
explicitly considering race (or among employers who are considering race but attempting to suppress any explicit
bias they might have).

21

Figure 2: Demographics by Major Type Over Selectivity Distribution

(a) Empirical CDF: Not a White Male, Humanities
& Social Sciences

(b) Linear Probability Model: Not a White Male,
Humanities & Social Sciences

(c) Empirical CDF: Not a White Male, STEM

(d) Linear Probability Model: Not a White Male,
STEM

Empirical CDF of Hiring Interest (Panels 2a & 2c) and difference in counterfactual callback rates (Panels 2b & 2d)
for White Male and Not a White Male. Employers interested in Humanities & Social Sciences candidates are shown
in the top row and employers interested in STEM candidates are shown in the bottom row. Empirical CDFs show
the share of hypothetical candidate resumes with each characteristic with a Hiring Interest rating less than or equal
to each value. The counterfactual callback plot shows the difference between groups in the share of candidates at or
above the threshold—that is, the share of candidates who would be called back in a resume audit study if the callback
threshold were set to any given value. 95% confidence intervals are calculated from a linear probability model with
an indicator for being at or above a threshold as the dependent variable.

22

Internship, our binary variable most predictive of hiring interest, with our demographic variables.
These interactions are all directionally negative, and the coefficient Top Internship × Female,
White is negative and significant, suggesting a lower return to a prestigious internships for white
females. One possible mechanism for this effect is that employers believe that other employers
exhibit positive preferences for diversity, and so having a prestigious internship is a less strong
signal of quality if one is from an under-represented group. This aligns with the findings shown
in Appendix Figure B.6, which shows that the negative interaction between Top Internship and
demographics appears for candidates with relatively low ratings and is a fairly precisely estimated
zero when candidates receive relatively high ratings.

3.5

Candidate Likelihood of Acceptance

In resume audit studies, traits that suggest high candidate quality do not always increase
employer callback. For example, several studies have found that employers call back employed
candidates at lower rates than unemployed candidates [Kroft et al., 2013, Nunley et al., 2017, 2014,
Farber et al., 2018], but that longer periods of unemployment are unappealing to employers. This
seeming contradiction is consistent with the hypothesis that employers are concerned about the
possibility of wasting resources pursuing a candidate who will ultimately reject a job offer. In
other words, hiring interest is not the only factor determining callback decisions. This concern has
been acknowledged in the resume audit literature, for example when Bertrand and Mullainathan
[2004, p. 992] notes, “In creating the higher-quality resumes, we deliberately make small changes
in credentials so as to minimize the risk of overqualification.”
As described in Section 2.4, for each resume we asked employers “How likely do you think
[Name] would be to accept a job with your organization?” Asking this question helps ensure
that our measure of hiring interest is unconfounded with concerns that a candidate would accept a
position when offered. However, the question also allows us to study this second factor, which also
affects callback decisions.
Table 4 replicates the regression specifications from Table 2, estimating Equation (1) when Vij
is Likelihood of Acceptance, which takes values from 1 to 10. Employers in our sample view high
quality candidates as more likely to accept a job with their firm than low quality candidates. This
suggests that employers in our sample believe candidate fit at their firm outweighs the possibility
that high quality candidates will be pursued by many other firms. In Appendix B.5, we further
consider the role of horizontal fit and vertical quality and find that—holding hiring interest in a
candidate constant—reported likelihood of acceptance falls as evidence of vertical quality (e.g.,
GPA) increases. This result highlights that there is independent information in the likelihood of
acceptance measure.
Table 4 shows that employers report female and minority candidates are less likely to accept a
position with their firm, by 0.2 points on the 1–10 Likert scale (or about one tenth of a standard
deviation). This effect is robust to the inclusion of a variety of controls, and it persists when we
23

hold hiring interest constant in Appendix Table B.9. Table 5 splits the sample and shows that while
the direction of these effects is consistent among both groups of employers, the negative effects are
particularly large among employers recruiting STEM candidates.
If minority and female applicants are perceived as less likely to accept an offer, this could
induce lower callback rates for these candidates. Our results therefore suggest a new channel
for discrimination observed in the labor market, which is worth exploring. Perhaps due to the
prevalence of diversity initiatives, employers expect that desirable minority and female candidates
will receive many offers from competing firms and thus will be less likely to accept any given offer.
Alternatively, employers may see female and minority candidates as less likely to fit in the culture
of the firm, making these candidates less likely to accept an offer. This result has implications for
how we understand the labor market and how we interpret the discrimination observed in resume
audit studies.25

25

In particular, while audit studies can demonstrate that groups are not being treated equally, differential callback
rates need not imply a lack of employer interest. The impact of candidate characteristics on likelihood of acceptance
is a case of omitted variable bias, but one that is not solved by experimental randomization, since the randomized
trait endows the candidate with hiring interest and likelihood of acceptance simultaneously.

24

Table 4: Likelihood of Acceptance
Dependent Variable: Likelihood of Acceptance

GPA
Top Internship
Second Internship
Work for Money
Technical Skills
Female, White
Male, Non-White
Female, Non-White
Observations
R2
p-value for test of joint
significance of Majors
Major FEs
Leadership FEs
Order FEs
Subject FEs

OLS
0.605
(0.144)
0.683
(0.094)
0.418
(0.112)
0.197
(0.111)
-0.051
(0.104)
-0.231
(0.114)
-0.125
(0.137)
-0.221
(0.135)
2880
0.070

OLS
0.631
(0.150)
0.677
(0.098)
0.403
(0.119)
0.192
(0.116)
-0.059
(0.108)
-0.294
(0.118)
-0.170
(0.142)
-0.236
(0.142)
2880
0.124

OLS
0.734
(0.120)
0.664
(0.076)
0.394
(0.091)
0.204
(0.090)
-0.103
(0.086)
-0.258
(0.094)
-0.117
(0.110)
-0.162
(0.112)
2880
0.492

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Ordered
Probit
0.263
(0.060)
0.285
(0.040)
0.179
(0.047)
0.088
(0.047)
-0.025
(0.044)
-0.093
(0.048)
-0.060
(0.057)
-0.103
(0.057)
2880

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

Ordered probit cutpoints: -0.26, 0.13, 0.49, 0.75, 1.12, 1.49, 1.94, 2.46, and 2.83.

Table shows OLS and ordered probit regressions of Likelihood of Acceptance from Equation (1). Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. GPA; Top Internship; Second Internship; Work for Money; Technical
Skills; Female, White; Male, Non-White; Female, Non-White and major are
characteristics of the hypothetical resume, constructed as described in Section 2.3 and in Appendix A.2. Fixed effects for major, leadership experience,
resume order, and subject included in some specifications as indicated. R2 is
indicated for each OLS regression. The p-values of tests of joint significance
of major fixed effects are indicated (F -test for OLS, likelihood ratio test for
ordered probit).

25

Table 5: Likelihood of Acceptance by Major Type
Dependent Variable: Likelihood of Acceptance
Humanities & Social Sciences
STEM

GPA
Top Internship
Second Internship
Work for Money
Technical Skills
Female, White

26

Male, Non-White
Female, Non-White
Observations
R2
p-value for test of joint
significance of Majors
Major FEs
Leadership FEs
Order FEs
Subject FEs

OLS
0.581
(0.176)
0.786
(0.111)
0.481
(0.136)
0.206
(0.135)
-0.094
(0.125)
-0.175
(0.139)
-0.069
(0.161)
-0.244
(0.162)
2040
0.040

OLS
0.610
(0.186)
0.773
(0.118)
0.422
(0.148)
0.173
(0.144)
-0.103
(0.134)
-0.211
(0.148)
-0.076
(0.172)
-0.212
(0.175)
2040
0.107

OLS
0.694
(0.142)
0.754
(0.089)
0.424
(0.109)
0.187
(0.108)
-0.106
(0.104)
-0.170
(0.116)
-0.046
(0.130)
-0.163
(0.130)
2040
0.516

0.798
Yes
No
No
No

0.939
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

0.785
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Ordered
Probit
0.251
(0.072)
0.316
(0.046)
0.201
(0.055)
0.084
(0.055)
-0.046
(0.052)
-0.062
(0.056)
-0.030
(0.066)
-0.107
(0.068)
2040

0.598
Yes
No
No
No

OLS
0.688
(0.251)
0.391
(0.178)
0.254
(0.198)
0.155
(0.194)
0.050
(0.190)
-0.365
(0.198)
-0.269
(0.259)
-0.200
(0.243)
840
0.090

OLS
0.724
(0.287)
0.548
(0.199)
0.324
(0.230)
0.346
(0.239)
0.000
(0.217)
-0.572
(0.236)
-0.360
(0.302)
-0.108
(0.278)
840
0.295

OLS
0.813
(0.237)
0.527
(0.171)
0.301
(0.187)
0.350
(0.186)
-0.116
(0.179)
-0.577
(0.194)
-0.289
(0.246)
-0.010
(0.245)
840
0.540

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Ordered
Probit
0.314
(0.110)
0.190
(0.078)
0.119
(0.088)
0.092
(0.088)
0.032
(0.083)
-0.177
(0.089)
-0.147
(0.110)
-0.105
(0.110)
840

< 0.001
Yes
No
No
No

Ordered probit cutpoints (Column 4): -0.23, 0.14, 0.50, 0.75, 1.11, 1.48, 1.93, 2.42, 2.75.
Ordered probit cutpoints (Column 8): -0.23, 0.20, 0.55, 0.83, 1.25, 1.64, 2.08, 2.71, 3.57.
Table shows OLS and ordered probit regressions of Likelihood of Acceptance from Equation (1). GPA; Top Internship;
Second Internship; Work for Money; Technical Skills; Female, White; Male, Non-White; Female, Non-White and major are
characteristics of the hypothetical resume, constructed as described in Section 2.3 and in Appendix A.2. Fixed effects for major,
leadership experience, resume order, and subject included as indicated. R2 is indicated for each OLS regression. The p-values
of tests of joint significance of major fixed effects are indicated (F -test for OLS, likelihood ratio test for ordered probit) after
a Bonferroni correction for analyzing two subgroups.

3.6
3.6.1

Comparing our Demographic Results to Previous Literature
Qualitative comparison

Our results can be compared to those from other studies of employer preferences, with two
caveats. First, our measure of the firms’ interest in hiring a candidate may not be directly comparable to findings derived from callback rates, which likely combine both hiring interest and likelihood
of acceptance into a single binary outcome. Second, our subject population is made up of firms
that would be unlikely to respond to cold resumes and thus may have different preferences than
the typical firms audited in prior literature.
Resume audit studies have consistently shown lower callback rates for minorities. We see no
evidence of lower ratings for minorities on average, but we do see lower ratings of minority male
candidates by STEM employers. Results on gender in the resume audit literature have been mixed.
In summarizing results from 11 studies conducted between 2005 and 2016, [Baert, 2018] finds four
studies with higher callback rates for women, two with lower callback rates, and five studies with no
significant difference. None of these studies found discrimination against women in a U.S. setting.
This may be due to resume audit studies targeting female-dominated occupations, such as clerical or
administrative work. Riach and Rich [2006], which specifically targets male-dominated occupations,
shows lower callback rates for women. Outside the labor market, Bohren et al. [2018] and Milkman
et al. [2012] found evidence of discrimination against women using audit-type methodologies. We
find that firms recruiting STEM candidates give lower ratings to white women, demonstrating the
importance of being able to reach new subject pools with IRR. We also find that white women
receive a lower return to prestigious internships. This result matches a type of discrimination—
lower return to quality—seen in Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004], but we find it for gender rather
than race.
We also find that employers believe white women are less likely to accept positions if offered,
which could account for discrimination found in the resume audit literature. For example, Quadlin
[2018] finds that women with very high GPAs are called back at lower rates than women with lower
GPAs, which could potentially arise from a belief these high quality women will be recruited by
other firms, rather than from a lack of hiring interest.
3.6.2

Quantitative comparison using GPA as a numeraire

In addition to making qualitative comparisons, we can conduct some back-of-the-envelope calculations to compare the magnitude of our demographic effects to those in previous studies, including
Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004]. We conduct these comparisons by taking advantage of the
ability—in our study and others—to use GPA as a numeraire.
In studies that randomize GPA, we can divide the observed effect due to race or gender by
the effect due to GPA to compare with our GPA-scaled estimates. For example, exploiting the
random variation in GPA and gender from Quadlin [2018], we calculate that being female leads

27

to a decrease in callback equivalent to 0.23 GPA points.26 Our results (shown in Tables 2 and 3)
suggest that being a white female, as compared to a white male, is equivalent to a decrease of 0.073
GPA points overall and 0.290 GPA points among employers recruiting for STEM.
When a study does not vary GPA, we can benchmark the effect of demographic differences on
callback to the effect of GPA on counterfactual callback in our study. For example, in Bertrand and
Mullainathan [2004], 8% of all resumes receive callbacks, and having a black name decreases callback
by 3.2 percentage points. 7.95% of resumes in our study receive a 9 or a 10 rating, suggesting that
receiving a 9 or higher is a similar level of selectivity as in Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004]. A
linear probability model in our data suggests that each 0.1 GPA point increases counterfactual
callback at this threshold by 1.13 percentage points. Thus, the Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004]
race effect is equivalent to an increase of 0.28 GPA points in our study.27 This effect can be
compared to our estimate that being a minority male, as compared to a white male, is equivalent
to a decrease of 0.077 GPA points overall and 0.270 GPA points among employers recruiting for
STEM.

4

Pitt Replication: Results and Lessons
In order to explore whether preferences differed between employers at Penn (an elite, Ivy League

school) and other institutions where recruiters might more closely resemble the employers of typical
resume audit studies, we reached out to several Pennsylvania schools in hopes of running an IRR
replication. We partnered with the University of Pittsburgh (Pitt) Office of Career Development
and Placement Assistance to run two experimental rounds during their spring recruiting cycle.28
Ideally, the comparison between Penn and Pitt would have given us additional insight into the
extent to which Penn employers differed from employers traditionally targeted by audit studies.
26

Quadlin [2018] reports callback rate in four GPA bins. The paper finds callback is lower in the highest GPA bin
than the second highest bin, which may be due to concerns about likelihood of acceptance. Looking at the second
and third highest bins (avoiding the non-monotonic bin), we see that an increase in GPA from the range [2.84, 3.20]
to [3.21, 3.59]—an average increase of 0.38 GPA points—results in a callback rate increase of 3.5 percentage points.
Dividing 0.38 by 3.5 suggests that each 0.11 GPA points generates 1 percentage point difference in callback rates.
Quadlin [2018] also finds a callback difference of 2.1 percentage points between male (14.0%) and female (11.9%)
candidates. Thus, applicant gender has about the same effect as a 0.23 change in GPA.
27
Bertrand and Mullainathan [2004] also varies quality, but through changing multiple characteristics at once.
Using the same method, these changes, which alter callback by 2.29 percentage points, are equivalent to a change of
0.20 GPA points, providing a benchmark for their quality measure in our GPA points.
28
Unlike at Penn, there is no major fall recruiting season with elite firms at Pitt. We recruited employers in the
spring semester only, first in 2017 and again in 2018. The Pitt recruitment email was similar to that used at Penn
(Figure A.1), and originated from the Pitt Office of Career Development and Placement Assistance. For the first wave
at Pitt we offered webinars, as described in Appendix A.1, but since attendance at these sessions was low, we did
not offer them in the second wave. We collected resume components to populate the tool at Pitt from real resumes
of graduating Pitt seniors. Rather than collect resumes from clubs, resume books, and campus job postings as we
did at Penn, we used the candidate pool of job-seeking seniors both to populate the tool and to suggest matches for
employers. This significantly eased the burden of collecting and scraping resumes. At Pitt, majors were linked to
either the “Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences” or the “Swanson School of Engineering”. Table C.1 lists the majors,
associated school, major category, and the probability that the major was drawn. We collected top internships at
Pitt by identifying the firms hiring the most Pitt graduates, as at Penn. Top internships at Pitt tended to be less
prestigious than the top internships at Penn.

28

Instead, we learned that we were insufficiently attuned to how recruiting differences between
Penn and Pitt employer populations should influence IRR implementation. Specifically, we observed significant attenuation over nearly all candidate characteristics in the Pitt data. Table 6
shows fully controlled OLS regressions highlighting that our effects at Pitt (shown in the second
column) are directionally consistent with those at Penn (shown in the first column for reference),
but much smaller in size. For example, the coefficient on GPA is one-tenth the size in the Pitt
data. We find similar attenuation on nearly all characteristics at Pitt for both Hiring Interest and
Likelihood of Acceptance, in the pooled sample and separated by major type. We find no evidence
of Pitt employers responding to candidate demographics. (Appendix C provides details for our
experimental implementation at Pitt and Tables C.2, C.3, and C.4 display the full results.)
We suspect the cause of the attenuation at Pitt was our failure to appropriately tailor resumes to
meet the needs of Pitt employers who were seeking candidates with specialized skills or backgrounds.
A large share of the resumes at Pitt (33.8%) received the lowest possible Hiring Interest rating,
more than double the share at Penn (15.5.%). Feedback from Pitt employers suggested that they
were also less happy with their matches: many respondents complained that the matches lacked a
particular skill or major requirement for their open positions.29 In addition, the importance of a
major requirement was reflected on the post-survey data in which 33.7% of Pitt employers indicated
that candidate major was among the most important considerations during recruitment, compared
to only 15.3% at Penn.
After observing these issues in the first wave of Pitt data collection, we added a new checklist
question to the post-tool survey in the second wave: “I would consider candidates for this position
with any of the following majors....” This question allowed us both to restrict the match pool for
each employer, improving match quality, and to directly assess the extent to which our failure to
tailor resumes was attenuating our estimates of candidate characteristics. Table 6 shows that when
splitting the data from the second wave based on whether a candidate was in a target major, the
effect of GPA is much larger in the target major sample (shown in the fourth column), and that
employers do not respond strongly to any of the variables when considering candidates with majors
that are not Target Majors.
The differential responses depending on whether resumes come from Target Majors highlights
the importance of tailoring candidate resumes to employers when deploying the IRR methodology.
We advertised the survey tool at both Pitt and Penn as being particularly valuable for hiring skilled
generalists, and we were ill equipped to measure preferences of employers looking for candidates
with very particular qualifications.
This was a limitation in our implementation at Pitt rather than in the IRR methodology itself.
That is, one could design an IRR study specifically for employers interested in hiring registered
nurses, or employers interested in hiring mobile software developers, or employers interested in
29

As one example, a firm wrote to us in an email: “We are a Civil Engineering firm, specifically focused on hiring
students out of Civil and/or Environmental Engineering programs... there are 0 students in the group of real resumes
that you sent over that are Civil Engineering students.”

29

Table 6: Hiring Interest at Penn and Pitt
Dependent Variable: Hiring Interest

GPA
Top Internship
Second Internship
Work for Money
Technical Skills
Female, White
Male, Non-White
Female, Non-White
Observations
R2
p-value for test of joint
significance of Majors
Major FEs
Leadership FEs
Order FEs
Subject FEs

Penn
2.196
(0.129)
0.897
(0.081)
0.466
(0.095)
0.154
(0.091)
-0.071
(0.090)
-0.161
(0.096)
-0.169
(0.115)
0.028
(0.120)
2880
0.483

Pitt
0.265
(0.113)
0.222
(0.074)
0.212
(0.085)
0.153
(0.081)
0.107
(0.077)
0.028
(0.084)
-0.040
(0.098)
-0.000
(0.100)
3440
0.586

Pitt, Wave 2
Non-Target Major
-0.196
(0.240)
0.020
(0.142)
0.095
(0.165)
0.144
(0.164)
0.125
(0.149)
-0.015
(0.180)
0.002
(0.185)
0.182
(0.197)
642
0.793

Pitt, Wave 2
Target Major
0.938
(0.268)
0.098
(0.205)
0.509
(0.220)
0.378
(0.210)
-0.035
(0.211)
-0.151
(0.212)
-0.331
(0.251)
-0.332
(0.256)
798
0.596

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

< 0.001
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.120
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.850
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Table shows OLS regressions of hiring interest from Equation (1). Sample differs
in each column as indicated by the column header. Robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. GPA; Top Internship; Second Internship; Work for Money;
Technical Skills; Female, White; Male, Non-White; Female, Non-White and major
are characteristics of the hypothetical resume, constructed as described in Section
2.3 and in Appendix A.2. Fixed effects for major, leadership experience, resume
order, and subject included in all specifications. R2 is indicated for each OLS
regression. The p-value of an F -test of joint significance of major fixed effects is
indicated for all models.

30

hiring electrical engineers. Our failure at Pitt was in showing all of these employers resumes
with the same underlying components. We recommend that researchers using IRR either target
employers that specifically recruit high quality generalists, or construct resumes with appropriate
variation within the employers’ target areas. For example, if we ran our IRR study again at Pitt,
we would ask the Target Majors question first and then only generate hypothetical resumes from
those majors.

5

Conclusion
This paper introduces a novel methodology, called Incentivized Resume Rating (IRR), to mea-

sure employer preferences. The method has employers rate candidate profiles they know to be
hypothetical and provides incentives by matching employers to real job seekers based on their
reported preferences.
We deploy IRR to study employer preferences for candidates graduating from an Ivy League
university. We find that employers highly value both more prestigious work experience the summer
before senior year and additional work experience the summer before junior year. We use our rating
data to demonstrate that preferences for these characteristics are relatively stable throughout the
distribution of candidate quality.
We find no evidence that employers are less interested in female or minority candidates on
average, but we find evidence of discrimination among employers recruiting STEM candidates.
Moreover, employers report that white female candidates are less likely to accept job offers than
their white male counterparts, a novel channel for discrimination. We also find evidence of lower
returns to prestigious internships for women and minorities. One possible story that can explain
these results is that employers believe other firms have a positive preference for diversity, even
though they do not display this preference themselves. It may thus be fruitful to examine in future
research whether employers have distorted beliefs about aggregate preferences for diversity, which
could harm female and minority candidates in the job market.
Here, we further discuss the benefits and costs of the IRR methodology, highlight lessons learned
from our implementation—which point to improvements in the method—and discuss directions for
future research.
A key advantage of the IRR methodology is that it avoids the use of deception. Economics
experiments generally aspire to be deception-free, but the lack of an incentivized method to elicit
employer preferences without deception has made correspondence audits a default tool of choice
for labor economists. Audit studies have also expanded into areas where the continued use of
deception may be more fraught, since such deception has the potential to alter the preferences or
beliefs of subjects.30 We hope that further development of the IRR method will provide a useful
30

As prominent examples, researchers have recently audited college professors, requesting in-person meetings [Milkman et al., 2012, 2015], and politicians, requesting information [Butler and Broockman, 2011, Distelhorst and Hou,
2017]. Professors are likely to learn about audit studies ex post and may take the existence of such studies as an

31

alternative for researchers, reducing the need for deceptive field experiments. This would both limit
any potential harms of deception—such as to applicants whose profiles may resemble researchergenerated ones—as well as provide a positive externality for researchers whose work requires an
audit design (by reducing potential contamination of the subject pool).
A second advantage of the IRR method is that it elicits richer preference information than
binary callback decisions.31 In our implementation, we elicit granular measures of employers’ hiring
interest and of employers’ beliefs about the likelihood of job acceptance. We also see the potential
for improvements in preference elicitation by better mapping these metrics into hiring decisions,
by collecting additional information from employers, and by raising the stakes, which we discuss
below.
The IRR method has other advantages. IRR can access subject populations that are inaccessible
with audit or resume audit methods. IRR allows researchers to gather rich data from a single
subject—each employer in our implementation rates 40 resumes—which is helpful for power and
makes it feasible to identify preferences for characteristics within individual subjects. IRR allows
researchers to randomize many candidate characteristics independently and simultaneously, which
can be used to explore how employers respond to interactions of candidate characteristics. Finally,
IRR allows researchers to collect supplemental data about research subjects, which can be correlated
with subject-level preference measures and allows researchers to better understand their pool of
employers.
A final advantage of IRR is that it may provide direct benefits to subjects and other participants
in the labor market being studied; this advantage stands in stark contrast to using subject time
without consent, as is necessary in audit studies. We solicited subject feedback at numerous
points throughout the study and heard very few concerns.32 Instead, many employers reported
positive feedback. Positive feedback also came by way of the career services offices at Penn and
Pitt, which were in more-direct contact with our employer subjects. Both offices continued the
experiment for a second wave of recruitment and expressed interest in making the experiment a
permanent feature of their recruiting processes. In our meetings, the career services offices reported
seeing value in IRR to improve their matching process and to learn how employers valued student
characteristics (e.g., informing the advice they could give to students about pursuing summer work
excuse to ignore emails from students in the future. Audits of politicians’ responses to correspondence from putative constituents might distort politicians’ beliefs about the priorities of the populations they serve, especially when
researchers seek a politician-level audit measure, which requires sending many fake requests to the same politician.
31
Bertrand and Duflo [2016] argues that the literature has generally not evolved past measuring differences in callback means between groups, and that it has been less successful in illuminating mechanisms driving these differences.
That said, there have been some exceptions, like Bartoš et al. [2016], which uses emails containing links to learn
more about candidates to show that less attention is allocated to candidates who are discriminated against. Another
exception is Bohren et al. [2018], which uses evaluations of answers posted on an online Q&A forum—which are not
conflated with concerns about likelihood of acceptance—to test a dynamic model of mistaken discriminatory beliefs.
32
First, we solicited feedback in an open comments field of the survey itself. Second, we invited participants to
contact us with questions or requests for additional matches when we sent the 10 resumes. Third, we ran a follow-up
survey in which we asked about hiring outcomes for the recommended matches (unfortunately, we offered no incentive
to complete the follow-up survey and so its participation was low).

32

and leadership experience and how to write their resumes). While we did not solicit feedback from
student participants in the study, we received hundreds of resumes from students at each school,
suggesting that they valued the prospect of having their resumes sent to employers.33
Naturally, IRR also has some limitations. Because the IRR method informs subjects that
responses will be used in research, it may lead to experimenter demand effects (see, e.g., de Quidt
et al. [2018]). We believe the impact of any experimenter demand effects is likely small, as employers
appeared to view our survey tool as a way to identify promising candidates, rather than as being
connected to research (see discussion in Section 2). For this reason, though, as well as others
highlighted in Section 3.4, IRR may be less well equipped to identify explicit bias than implicit
bias. More broadly, we cannot guarantee that employers treat our hypothetical resumes as they
would real job candidates. As discussed in the Introduction, however, future work could help
validate employer attention in IRR studies.34 In addition, because the two outcome measures in
our study are hypothetical objects rather than stages of the hiring process, in our implementation
of IRR we cannot draw a direct link between our findings and hiring outcomes. Below, we discuss
how this might be improved in future IRR implementations.
A final cost of running an IRR study is that it requires finding an appropriate subject pool and
candidate matching pool, which may not be available to all researchers. It also requires an investment in constructing the hypothetical resumes (e.g., scraping and sanitizing resume components)
and developing the process to match employer preferences to candidates. Fortunately, the time and
resources we devoted to developing the survey tool software can be leveraged by other researchers.
Future research using IRR can certainly improve upon our implementation. First, as discussed
at length in Section 4, our failed attempt to replicate at Pitt highlights that future researchers
must take care to effectively tailor the content of resumes to match the hiring needs of their
subjects. Second, we suggest developing a way to translate Likert-scale responses to the callback
decisions typical in correspondence audit studies. One idea is to ask employers to additionally
answer, potentially for a subset of resumes, a question of the form: “Would you invite [Candidate
Name] for an interview?” By having the Likert-scale responses and this measure, researchers could
identify what combination of the hiring interest and likelihood of acceptance responses translates
into a typical callback decision (and, potentially, how the weight placed on each component varies by
firm). Researchers could also explore the origin and accuracy of employer beliefs about likelihood
of acceptance by asking job candidates about their willingness to work at participating firms.
Third, researchers could increase the stakes of IRR incentives (e.g., by asking employer subjects
33
Student involvement only required uploading a resume and completing a short preference survey. We did not
notify students when they were matched with a firm, in order to give the firms freedom to choose which students to
contact. Thus, most students were unaware of whether or not they were recommended to a firm. We recommended
207 unique student resumes over the course of the study, highlighting the value to students.
34
The time employers spent evaluating resumes in our study at Penn had a median of 18 seconds and a mean that
was substantially higher (and varies based on how outliers are handled). These measures are comparable to estimates
of time spent screening real resumes (which include estimates of 7.4 seconds per resume [Dishman, 2018] and a mean
of 45 seconds per resume [Culwell-Block and Sellers, 1994]).

33

to guarantee interviews to a subset of the recommended candidates) and gather more information
on resulting interviews and hiring outcomes (e.g., by building or leveraging an existing platform to
measure employer and candidate interactions).35
While we used IRR to measure the preferences of employers in a particular labor market, the
underlying incentive structure of the IRR method is much more general, and we see the possibility
of it being applied outside of the resume rating context. At the heart of IRR is a method to
elicit preference information from experimental subjects by having them evaluate hypothetical
objects and offering them an incentive that increases in value as preference reports become more
accurate. Our implementation of IRR achieves this by eliciting continuous Likert-scale measures of
hypothetical resumes, using machine learning to estimate the extent to which employers care about
various candidate characteristics, and providing employers with resumes of real candidates that
they are estimated to like best. Researchers could take a similar strategy to explore preferences of
professors over prospective students, landlords over tenants, customers over products, individuals
over dating profiles, and more, providing a powerful alternative to deceptive studies.

35

An additional benefit of collecting data on interviews and hiring is that it would allow researchers to measure the
impact of IRR matches on hiring, in addition to validating the quality of the matches (e.g., researchers could identify
12 potential matches and randomize which 10 are sent to employers, identifying the effect of sending a resume to
employers on interview and hiring outcomes). If employers do respond to the matches, one could imagine using IRR
as an intervention in labor markets to help mitigate discrimination in hiring, since IRR matches can be made while
ignoring race and gender.

34

References
Joseph G Altonji and Rebecca M Blank. Race and gender in the labor market. Handbook of Labor
Economics, 3:3143–3259, 1999.
David H Autor and Susan N Houseman. Do temporary-help jobs improve labor market outcomes
for low-skilled workers? Evidence from “Work First”. American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, pages 96–128, 2010.
Stijn Baert. Chapter 3: Hiring discrimination: An overview of (almost) all correspondence experiments since 2005. In Michael S. Gaddis, editor, Audit Studies: Behind the Scenes with Theory,
Method, and Nuance, chapter 3, pages 63–77. Springer, 2018.
Vojtěch Bartoš, Michal Bauer, Julie Chytilová, and Filip Matějka. Attention discrimination: Theory and field experiments with monitoring information acquisition. American Economic Review,
106(6):1437–75, June 2016. doi: 10.1257/aer.20140571.
Marianne Bertrand and Esther Duflo. Field experiments on discrimination. NBER Working Papers
22014, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, Feb 2016.
Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullainathan. Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha
and Jamal? The American Economic Review, 94(4):991–1013, 2004.
Marianne Bertrand, Dolly Chugh, and Sendhil Mullainathan. Implicit discrimination. American
Economic Review, 95(2):94–98, 2005.
Iris Bohnet, Alexandra Van Geen, and Max Bazerman. When performance trumps gender bias:
Joint vs. separate evaluation. Management Science, 62(5):1225–1234, 2015.
J. Aislinn Bohren, Alex Imas, and Michael Rosenberg. The dynamics of discrimination: Theory
and evidence. American Economic Review (Forthcoming), 2018.
Daniel M. Butler and David E. Broockman. Do politicians racially discriminate against constituents? A field experiment on state legislators. American Journal of Political Science, 55
(3):463–477, 2011.
Scott E. Carrell, Marianne E. Page, and James E. West. Sex and science: How professor gender
perpetuates the gender gap. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):1101–1144, 2010.
Beverly Culwell-Block and Jean Anna Sellers.
ities agree?, Dec 1994.

Resume content and format - do the author-

URL https://www.questia.com/library/journal/1G1-16572126/

resume-content-and-format-do-the-authorities-agree.

35

Rajeev Darolia, Cory Koedel, Paco Martorell, Katie Wilson, and Francisco Perez-Arce. Do employers prefer workers who attend for-profit colleges? Evidence from a field experiment. Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 34(4):881–903, 2015.
Jonathan de Quidt, Johannes Haushofer, and Christopher Roth. Measuring and bounding experimenter demand. American Economic Review, 108(11):3266–3302, November 2018. doi:
10.1257/aer.20171330. URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20171330.
David J. Deming, Noam Yuchtman, Amira Abulafi, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. The
value of postsecondary credentials in the labor market: An experimental study. American Economic Review, 106(3):778–806, March 2016.
Lydia Dishman.
how

to

stand

Your resume only gets 7.4 seconds to make an impression–here’s
out,

Nov

2018.

URL

https://www.fastcompany.com/90263970/

your-resume-only-gets-7-4-seconds-to-make-an-impression-heres-how-to-stand-out.
Greg Distelhorst and Yue Hou. Constituency service under nondemocratic rule: Evidence from
China. The Journal of Politics, 79(3):1024–1040, 2017. doi: 10.1086/690948.
Stefan Eriksson and Dan-Olof Rooth. Do employers use unemployment as a sorting criterion when
hiring? Evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Review, 104(3):1014–39, March
2014. doi: 10.1257/aer.104.3.1014.
Michael Ewens, Bryan Tomlin, and Liang Choon Wang. Statistical discrimination or prejudice? A
large sample field experiment. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1):119–134, 2014.
Henry S Farber, Chris M Herbst, Dan Silverman, and Till von Wachter. Whom do employers
want? The role of recent employment and unemployment status and age. Working Paper 24605,
National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2018.
Roland G. Fryer and Steven D. Levitt. The causes and consequences of distinctively black names.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119:767–805, 2004.
S. Michael Gaddis. Discrimination in the credential society: An audit study of race and college
selectivity in the labor market. Social Forces, 93(4):1451–1479, 2015.
Claudia Goldin. A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American Economic Review, 104
(4):1091–1119, 04 2014.
Olesya Govorun and B Keith Payne. Ego–depletion and prejudice: Separating automatic and
controlled components. Social Cognition, 24(2):111–136, 2006.
William Greene. The behaviour of the maximum likelihood estimator of limited dependent variable
models in the presence of fixed effects. The Econometrics Journal, 7(1):98–119, 2004.
36

Anthony G Greenwald, Debbie E McGhee, and Jordan LK Schwartz. Measuring individual differences in implicit cognition: the implicit association test. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 74(6):1464, 1998.
Daniel Hamermesh. Are fake resumes ethical for academic research? Freakonomics Blog, 2012.
Andrew Hanson and Zackary Hawley. Do landlords discriminate in the rental housing market?
Evidence from an internet field experiment in US cities. Journal of Urban Economics, 70(2-3):
99–114, 2011.
Glenn W. Harrison and John A. List. Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4):
1009–1055, December 2004. doi: 10.1257/0022051043004577.
James J. Heckman. Detecting discrimination. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(2):101–116,
1998.
James J. Heckman and Peter Siegelman. The Urban Institute audit studies: their methods and
findings. In Clear and convincing evidence: measurement of discrimination in America, pages
187–258. Lanhan, MD: Urban Institute Press, 1992.
Lars J Kirkeboen, Edwin Leuven, and Magne Mogstad. Field of study, earnings, and self-selection.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(3):1057–1111, 2016.
Meredith Kleykamp. A great place to start?: The effect of prior military service on hiring. Armed
Forces & Society, 35(2):266–285, 2009. doi: 10.1177/0095327X07308631.
Kory Kroft, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. Duration dependence and labor market
conditions: Evidence from a field experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3):
1123–1167, 2013. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjt015.
Kevin Lang and Jee-Yeon K Lehmann. Racial discrimination in the labor market: Theory and
empirics. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(4):959–1006, 2012.
Corinne Low. A “reproductive capital” model of marriage market matching. Manuscript, Wharton
School of Business, 2017.
Katherine L. Milkman, Modupe Akinola, and Dolly Chugh. Temporal distance and discrimination:
an audit study in academia. Psychological Science, 23(7):710–717, 2012.
Katherine L. Milkman, Modupe Akinola, and Dolly Chugh. What happens before? A field experiment exploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway into
organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(6), 2015.
David Neumark. Detecting discrimination in audit and correspondence studies. Journal of Human
Resources, 47(4):1128–1157, 2012.
37

David Neumark, Ian Burn, and Patrick Button. Is it harder for older workers to find jobs? New
and improved evidence from a field experiment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2015.
Brian A Nosek, Frederick L Smyth, Jeffrey J Hansen, Thierry Devos, Nicole M Lindner, Kate A
Ranganath, Colin Tucker Smith, Kristina R Olson, Dolly Chugh, Anthony G Greenwald, et al.
Pervasiveness and correlates of implicit attitudes and stereotypes. European Review of Social
Psychology, 18(1):36–88, 2007.
John M Nunley, Adam Pugh, Nicholas Romero, and R Alan Seals. Unemployment, underemployment, and employment opportunities: Results from a correspondence audit of the labor market
for college graduates. Auburn University Department of Economics Working Paper Series, 4,
2014.
John M. Nunley, Adam Pugh, Nicholas Romero, and R. Alan Seals. The effects of unemployment
and underemployment on employment opportunities: Results from a correspondence audit of the
labor market for college graduates. ILR Review, 70(3):642–669, 2017.
Andreas Ortmann and Ralph Hertwig. The costs of deception: Evidence from psychology. Experimental Economics, 5(2):111–131, 2002.
Amanda Pallais. Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets. American Economic Review, 104
(11):3565–99, 2014.
Devin G Pope and Justin R Sydnor. What’s in a picture? Evidence of discrimination from prosper.com. Journal of Human resources, 46(1):53–92, 2011.
Natasha Quadlin. The mark of a woman’s record: Gender and academic performance in hiring. American Sociological Review, 83(2):331–360, 2018. doi: 10.1177/0003122418762291. URL
https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122418762291.
Peter A Riach and Judith Rich. An experimental investigation of sexual discrimination in hiring
in the English labor market. Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(2), 2006.
Lauren A. Rivera and András Tilcsik. Class advantage, commitment penalty: The gendered effect
of social class signals in an elite labor market. American Sociological Review, 81(6):1097–1131,
2016. doi: 10.1177/0003122416668154. URL https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122416668154.
Jeffrey M Rzeszotarski, Ed Chi, Praveen Paritosh, and Peng Dai. Inserting micro-breaks into
crowdsourcing workflows. In First AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing,
2013.
Jeffrey W Sherman, Frederica R Conrey, and Carla J Groom. Encoding flexibility revisited: Evidence for enhanced encoding of stereotype-inconsistent information under cognitive load. Social
Cognition, 22(2):214–232, 2004.
38

Margery Turner, Michael Fix, and Raymond J. Struyk. Opportunities denied, opportunities, diminished: racial discrimination in hiring. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 1991.
Daniël HJ Wigboldus, Jeffrey W Sherman, Heather L Franzese, and Ad van Knippenberg. Capacity
and comprehension: Spontaneous stereotyping under cognitive load. Social Cognition, 22(3):292–
309, 2004.
Asaf Zussman. Ethnic discrimination: Lessons from the Israeli online market for used cars. The
Economic Journal, 123(572):F433–F468, 2013.

39

