NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN EMPIRICAL HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES POSTAL SAVINGS SYSTEM
Steven Sprick Schuster
Matthew Jaremski
Elisabeth Ruth Perlman
Working Paper 25812
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25812

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019

Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The research in this paper does not use any confidential Census Bureau data.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Steven Sprick Schuster, Matthew Jaremski, and Elisabeth Ruth Perlman. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Empirical History of the United States Postal Savings System
Steven Sprick Schuster, Matthew Jaremski, and Elisabeth Ruth Perlman
NBER Working Paper No. 25812
May 2019
JEL No. G21,H42,N22
ABSTRACT
Seeking to reach the unbanked, the United States Postal Savings System provided a federally
insured savings alternative to traditional banks. Using novel datasets on postal deposits,
demographic characteristics, and banks, we study how and by whom the System was used. We
find the program was initially used by non-farming immigrant populations for short-term saving,
then as a safe haven during the Great Depression, and finally as long-term investment for the
wealthy during the 1940s. However, even during the earliest period, Postal Savings was only a
partial substitute for traditional banks, as locations with banks often still heavily used postal
savings.
Steven Sprick Schuster
Department of Economics
Colgate University
43 Eaton St
Hamilton, NY 13346
ssprickschuster@colgate.edu
Matthew Jaremski
Utah State University
Department of Economics and Finance
3565 Old Main Hill
Logan, UT 84322
and NBER
matthew.jaremski@usu.edu

Elisabeth Ruth Perlman
Center for Economic Studies
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Suitland, MD 20746
elisabeth.perlman@census.gov

Abstract
Seeking to reach the unbanked, the United States Postal Savings System provided a federally insured savings alternative to traditional banks. Using novel datasets on postal deposits,
demographic characteristics, and banks, we study how and by whom the System was used.
We find the program was initially used by non-farming immigrant populations for short-term
saving, then as a safe haven during the Great Depression, and finally as long-term investment
for the wealthy during the 1940s. However, even during the earliest period, Postal Savings
was only a partial substitute for traditional banks, as locations with banks often still heavily
used postal savings.

Keywords: Postal Savings Banks, Commercial Banking, Savings, Bank Competition, Unbanked, Underbanked
JEL Codes: N22, G21, H42

1 Introduction
Despite the rise in bank branches and the prevalence of online banking, many households go unbanked even today. The FDIC estimates that 7 million U.S. households do not have a bank account
and that another 20 million are underbanked (they have a bank account, but still rely on alternative banking services, such as payday loans, check cashing services, etc.). These households have
long been a concern for policy-makers, and this paper provides an empirical history of one service that may have reached them: the United States Postal Savings System (1911-1967). Offering
a federally-insured savings alternative, the program was aimed at the unbanked and marginalized
portions of the population, and its re-establishment has become an increasingly prominent prescription to address the gap in affordable banking options for low-income households. This paper builds
on detailed narrative histories of this program with new post office-level dataset on postal deposits
to provide the first comprehensive account of who made use of the system’s services throughout its
lifetime.
Following a renewed academic interest in Postal Savings (Baradaran, 2013, 2014; Garon, 2012),
policy-makers began to recommend its re-establishment. A 2014 USPS Inspector General report
1

outlined how the Post Office could fill the banking needs of small depositors. The establishment
of a program was part of Bernie Sanders’ 2016 U.S. Democratic Presidential Primary campaign
platform.1 Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand proposed legislation in 2018 that will re-institute a savings
offering at post offices and also allow check-cashing and loan services. Despite the renewed interest,
however, there has been no detailed statistical analysis of the United States Postal Savings System
from which policy-makers could draw lessons.
The literature on Postal Savings can be divided into two strands. First, there are narrative
studies on the origin and general patterns of the system. Writing just a few years after the system
began, Kemmerer (1917) discusses the establishment of the system and the demographic makeup
(e.g., nativity, age, and geographic makeup) of initial depositors. He provides an analysis of the legal
structure of the system, and how it was starting to fit into the broader financial system. Looking
back on the system a few years after its dissolution, Schewe (1971) provides a thorough account
of the aggregate trends in postal deposits over its lifetime. He argues that while Postal Savings
provided a valuable service, promoted thrift, and earned a profit, its popularity was primarily tied
to its security and the introduction of the FDIC in 1933 rendered the service redundant.
The second strand of literature examines how the System competed with commercial banks.
Sissman (1938) and O’Hara and Easley (1979) argue that more traditional banking institutions
saw Postal Savings as a competitor during the Great Depression as its fixed interest rate was
relatively high in the low interest rate environment. Sissman (1936) measures changes in Postal
Savings usage at the state-level from 1911 to 1935, asserting that growth in postal deposits was
tied to bank failures. Kuwayama (2000) shows that lower interest rates and more bank failures
were associated with greater deposits during the 1911 to 1935 period but that only interest rates
remain important after 1936, suggesting a large impact of the FDIC. Using town-level data on
postal deposits for several states, Davidson and Ramirez (2016) find that postal deposits rose more
in places without deposit insurance after a commercial bank failure, indicating that depositors
gravitated towards Postal Savings when commercial bank stability was called into question.
1

In an January 5, 2016 speech on the American economy, he said “One important way to provide decent banking
opportunities for low income communities is to allow the U.S. Postal Service to engage in basic banking services, and
that’s what I will fight for.” (marketwatch.com/story/text-of-bernie-sanders-wall-street-and-economy-speech-201601-05)

2

The existing literature provides a rich narrative history of the system and many important
insights into its operation, yet both strands of the literature have their drawbacks when trying to
understand who benefited from postal savings. Many of the key conclusions in the narrative-driven
studies have not been tested at the disaggregated level necessary to sort through competing hypotheses. For instance, the typical narrative argues that the system was used heavily by immigrants
and urban residents in its early years, but due to the high positive correlation between these two
factors, they cannot be separated in bivariate comparisons, nor do any studies measure how user
demographics changed over time. To disentangle different demographic and economics characteristics of depositors and to determine whether Postal Savings reached the unbanked and marginalized
populations, post office- or county-level data are needed.
Publicly available information from Historical Statistics and other sources covers the aggregate
amount of deposits and depositors, but does not provide the level of detail necessary to undertake
an analysis of who used the United States Postal Savings System throughout the period. As such,
we have collected post office-level depositor data as well as state-level data on deposit inflow,
withdrawals, and redeposits from 1911 through 1966 in order to provide a comprehensive empirical
analysis of who used postal savings. We link the Postal Savings data to city-level data on banks
(which include commercial banks, trust companies, and savings banks) and county-level information
on demographic and economic characteristics. The new post office-level data allow us to identify
several factors that are not visible in the aggregated data used in previous papers.
In examining the entire history of the System, we find that Postal Savings underwent several
shifts in how and by whom it was used. In the program’s early years, Postal Savings was heavily
used for short-term deposits as well as by foreign-born people, who avoided traditional banks.
The 1929 Crash was followed by a surge in Postal Savings deposits and a shift in how the system
was used. By 1936, the association between foreign-born populations and Postal Savings weakens,
and the system becomes more popular with farming communities and whites. When interest rates
dropped in the 1940s, depositors placed even more money into Postal Savings. The demographic
evidence indicates that there was a shift over time in the usage from the marginalized and unbanked
individuals that used postal depositories for short-term savings, to the wealthier individuals that

3

used postal deposits as a way to earn reasonable returns on medium- to long-term investments
in the low interest rate environment during the Great Depression and WWII. We also find that
several changes to the program, including the decision to close thousands of Postal Savings offices
and to increase the account maximum led to changes in how the program was used.
Focusing more specifically on banking accessibility, we also find that the establishment of a bank,
especially a national bank, decreased postal deposits. However, the lack of banking alternatives does
not explain all or even most of people’s usage. Postal Savings was not only used by those without
access to banks, as most postal customers lived near enough to other banks to make use of them.
Moreover, we find that people particularly turned to Postal Savings during periods of banking
instability, or in places where state deposit insurance programs were not in place. This implies risk
aversion was also a factor in savers’ choice of banking services.
Throughout the paper, we attempt to understand who the main beneficiaries of postal savings
were using a variety of narrative and empirical approaches. The paper proceeds as follows: Section
2 provides a historical background on how the United States Postal Savings System was created in
order to understand who postal savings was intended to benefit and its place in the U.S. financial
system. Section 3 describes the data that we collected on postal savings, commercial banks, and
demographics. Section 4 uses national and state-level data to form hypotheses as to why postal
savings was used in different ways in various historical periods. Finally, Section 5 examines countyand city-level information on postal savings usage to see whether marginalized populations (e.g.,
immigrants, blacks) and individuals in locations without commercial banks relied on the system.
Section 6 concludes.

2 Legislative History
Before diving into the empirical analysis of who used Postal Savings, we need to understand why
the legislation was passed, how it was structured, and who it was meant to benefit. We draw from
the existing narrative literature (especially Kemmerer (1917) and Schewe (1971)) as well as official
Post Office reports, contemporary newspapers, and other government documents.
Postal savings systems existed for decades in other countries before the program was instituted
4

in the United States. The first postal savings bank was established in 1861 in the United Kingdom,
aimed at small-scale depositors. The system proved popular, with 11 of the 21.9 million Britons
holding accounts totaling the equivalent of $781 million in 1908 (National Monetary Commission,
1910). Many countries and colonies around the world established postal savings systems with similar
characteristics.
While U.S. lawmakers and government officials advocating for Postal Savings initially highlighted the profitability of international systems, the Panic of 1873 re-framed the discussion of
postal depositories toward the security offered to savers. In his 1873 report, John A. Creswell, the
Postmaster General under President Ulysses S. Grant, emphasized the safety of postal deposits
and how it was a solution to the problem of savers hiding their money rather than depositing it
in banks (Post Office Department, Annual Report, 1873). President Grant explicitly advocated his
Postmaster’s plan in his 1873 Annual Message to Congress.
Banking instability continued to be a central argument made by postal bank advocates. In 1878,
Rep. Thomas J. Tipton (R-IL) articulated the need for safety:
(P)eople all over the country will be afforded an opportunity to invest their savings
with assurance that the principal will be returned with a small interest... The failure
of savings banks and consequent loss, especially to the poorer class, makes the demand
greater than ever before.... They simply desire a safe depository of their small earnings
until the accumulation shall enable them to purchase a lot of ground on which in
time they can build a home for themselves and their families. (Congressional Record,
3/11/1878, Pg. 1680.)
Another selling point of Postal Savings was the belief that it would increase money in circulation.
Postmaster General James Gary said:
Have you ever thought what a dead thing money is when it is not in use? It is the deadest
thing in the universe. There are many millions of such dead money in the country. It
is hoarded away in stockings, buried under the hearthstones, tucked away behind the
rafters and planted here and there in the earth, because the owners have no faith in

5

private savings institutions. They have faith in the government, and they would bring
the money out and deposit it in the postal savings banks. (Los Angeles Times, 1897)
The only people who would be hurt by the system, he argued, were owners of “grogg shops and
tobacco stores.”
The nation’s banking sector opposed Postal Savings. Bankers had considerable political clout,
especially after the establishment of the American Banking Association (ABA) in 1875.2 They
argued that Postal Savings would siphon money out of communities. A 1907 criticism of postal
savings quoted the London Banker’s Magazine: “The branches of the Post-Office Savings-Bank
convey all the savings of the district which they receive straight up to the central office in London...
it is thus removed from the district in which it originates” (Roberts, 1907).
Other critics argued that postal depositories (indeed, any federal bank) would be unconstitutional.3 One potential solution was to use Postal Savings funds to purchase government bonds
(Schewe, 1971, Pg. 78). However, because the United States did not have a permanent debt, some
worried that a postal savings system could quickly exhaust the supply of government bonds. A
1898 newspaper editorial noted, “...the chief objection now advanced against the scheme is the fear
that proper investment could not be found for the funds, and that as a result a vast sum would
congest in the hands of the Government upon which it could pay no reward to the depositors, and
thus it would become a source of danger” (Sacramento Record-Union, 1898).
From 1873 to 1906, 59 bills establishing postal savings were proposed to Congress, yet none
went to a vote.4 Two factors broke the inaction. The Panic of 1907 increased calls for banking
reform, and the election of William Howard Taft in 1908 provided a friendly benefactor for postal
savings. Taft not only supported the system, but was also the governor of the Philippines when a
postal savings bank was established there in 1906 (Schewe, 1971, Pg. 59).
2

In later years, the ABA seemed to see Postal Savings only as the lesser of two evils when presented with political
pressure for either Postal Savings or deposit insurance, about which it said, “the defects of the guarantee scheme are
more glaring” (Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 1909, Pg. 145). While the ABA continued its formal opposition
to Postal Savings, it considered (but did not adopt) a recommendation for an alternative postal savings law to the
ones being considered by Congress (Commercial and Financial Chronicle, 1909, Pg. 119).
3
One of the primary reasons that the First and Second Banks of the United States were not renewed was that
many in Congress saw them as unconstitutional (Reid, 2016).
4
Charitable organizations filed dozens of petitions with Congress advocating for the establishment of postal
savings. For example, a petition with over 600,000 signatures collected by The Chicago Record was presented to
Congress in 1898 (Columbus Republican, 1898).

6

The Postal Savings bill (Senate Bill 5876) was passed on June 9, 1910, with Republicans largely
supporting the bill and Democrats opposing it. The final structure of the program shows the compromises legislators made to maintain broad support. To appeal to bankers, most postal deposits
were to be re-deposited in local banks, interest rates were kept low (2%), and balances were capped
at $500. To appease those who worried about the program’s constitutionality, a portion of postal
deposits were invested in national debt, depositors could convert their deposits into Treasury bonds,
and banks receiving postal deposit funds were required to purchase bonds as security. Deposits were
insured by the federal government, meaning if a bank holding postal deposits closed, Postal Savings
customers’ accounts with the post office were unaffected.

3 Data
While previous studies have made use of some postal savings aggregates, we constructed a comprehensive set of all available Postal Savings data. The data are drawn from Annual Reports on
the Operation of the Postal Savings System, and include all data on depositor behavior reported by
Post Office Department at the finest geographic level available. Our post office-level data include
the annual amount of deposits and number of depositors for all post offices in the United States. We
matched post offices listed by name and state to a list of populated places maintained by the U.S.
Board on Geographic Names to the list found in the AniMap 3.0.2 County Boundary Historical
Atlas and used Nominatim’s and Google’s geocoding API to obtain each location’s approximate
latitude and longitude.5 The reported state-level data contain annual figures for deposit inflow,
withdrawals, reinvestment in banks, and bond conversions. At the national level, we have monthly
deposit data.
We paired postal deposit data with a dataset of city-level information on banks from 1913,
1919, 1929, and 1940 using the Rand McNally Bankers Directory for each year. These directories
5

If these sources had coordinates within 3 km of each other, the U.S. Board on Geographic Names data was
used. If there was a greater distance, the options were checked and the best option was chosen. If we deemed no
option satisfactory, we researched the post offices to match it with an existing town that changed its name or with
a previously existing town whose approximate location could be determined. The Annual Report’s list were used for
guidance. All but four of the Postal Savings locations in the Continental U.S. (excluding Alaska) were assigned a
geocode.

7

provide the location of the over 35,000 unique banks in operation, as well as whether they were
chartered by a state legislature (state bank, trust company, or savings bank) or the Comptroller of
the Currency (national bank). The data allow us to construct a measure of the presence of banking
in any city or county.6 We matched these as described above in order to obtain each city’s latitude
and longitude.
Finally we added information on population, demographics, and economic characteristics, using
the county-level Census information collected by the U.S. Census Bureau and digitized by Haines
(2010) as well as county-level bank data from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (1984).
Care has been made to correct any coding errors by comparing county totals to state and national
totals. This process also allows us to fix the most obvious typos in the reported data. Summary
statistics can be found in Appendix Table A1.

4 How Was Postal Savings Used Throughout the Years?
The first Postal Savings depositories were established on January 3, 1911, and the system was
fully rolled out over the next two years. Figure 1 shows the overall pattern of deposits over time,
characterized by three distinct periods of usage: 1911-1929, 1930-1941, and 1942-1966. From 1911
through 1929, the program alternated between periods of slow growth and stagnation. The program
experienced a surge in popularity during the Great Depression as depositors sought guarantees on
their funds. A second surge occurred in the 1940s, when the historically low interest rates during
the war turned postal savings into an appealing investment, followed by a prolonged decline until
the program ended in 1967.
In this section, we attempt to use old and new state- and national-data to shed light on the
various reasons for the patterns of usage. In particular, we are interested in understanding more
6

We use the term “state banks” to denote any state-chartered financial institutions, including trust companies
and savings banks (they were chartered in the same manner as commercial banks, took in deposits, and made most
of their money from loans). The only banking institutions left out of our data are those operating without a formal
charter (i.e., private banks), which were typically very small in terms of capital and located in financial centers to
facilitate securities purchases, and accordingly should not bias the results. Indeed, by 1929, there were only 700
private banks in existence compared to over 26,000 other banks and trust companies. The Directory leaves out
insurance companies because they were not doing formal banking business and often were located on major cities
but received funds and made investments throughout the country.

8

generally when postal deposits were popular and how they were being used before turning to
regression analysis.

4.1 A Slow Start: 1911-1929
Over this period, postal deposits were a small part of the total deposits in the banking system. In
1916, $86 million ($1.3 billion in 2015 dollars) was deposited at postal depositories in compared to
$12 billion ($291 billion in 2015 dollars) in state and national banks (Treasury Department, 1917).
Despite the relatively low total value of postal deposits, more than 300,000 depositors used the
program each year, and more than 9,000 post offices had at least one depositor during this period.
Use in this period seems to have best reflected what the supporters of the system envisioned: giving
people a safe place to hold a relatively small amount of savings.
Figure 2(a) shows the regional breakdown of Postal Savings usage trends through 1929, while a
snapshot of the county-level use of Postal Savings in 1919 can be seen in Figure 3(a). The program
was most popular in the West and Northeast. The popularity of the program peaked in 1917,
then stagnated through the early 1920s. After 1925, this stagnation gave way to strong increases
everywhere but in the Northeast.7 Overall, the large variation between regions indicates that Postal
Savings usage responded to location-specific factors.8
Much of the regional variation in Postal Savings usage coincided with fluctuations in the safety of
commercial banks. For example, in the 4 years following the collapse of the Florida real estate bubble
in 1925, real postal deposits in the state grew by 600%. Contemporary accounts (The St. Louis Star
and Times, 1924) attributed the popularity of Postal Savings to a desire for security following bank
failures. Davidson and Ramirez (2016) find that state deposit insurance systems affected Postal
Savings demand following bank failures in those states. Between 1908 and 1920, Kansas, Mississippi,
Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Washington imposed some kind
of deposit insurance system. Four of these states (Mississippi, North Dakota, South Dakota, and
Washington) implemented deposit insurance after the start of Postal Savings, and in the year
7

The drop in the Northeast was driven entirely by decreases in New York City.
In states in which Democrats broke party ranks and voted for the establishment of Postal Savings, per-capita
deposits were more than twice as high as other states, suggesting that legislative support may have been influenced
by electorate demand for the system.
8

9

following the implementation of deposit insurance, postal deposits in these states grew 16.5% less
than in other states. The collapse of these deposit insurance systems in the 1920s correlated with
even larger increases in postal deposits (50% faster in the year following the discontinuation than
in other states). This suggests that the relative security of Postal Savings affected the demand for
postal deposits.
In addition to security, Postal Savings offered convenience. The Post Office created depositories at more than 13,000 post offices by 1913, and the distribution filled existing geographic gaps
in banking services. In 1913, the average depository with at least $1 on deposit was 4 km from
the nearest state bank and 11 km from the nearest national bank. However, many post offices
(especially fourth-class post offices) saw no deposits. As a result of low usage, thousands of depositories were removed, bringing the number of depositories in 1917 to 7,161. Fourth-class post office
were specifically targeted for removal. Because post office classes were a function of revenue, this
meant that low revenue-generating post offices lost their postal savings designation, while otherwise
identical third-class post offices did not. A significant regional variation existed in the pattern of
closed offices. More than 60% of Southern offices closed, while less than one-third of offices in the
Northeast closed. One effect of this was that blacks were significantly more affected by closures.
In 1913, about 13% of blacks lived in counties without any postal savings deposits (compared to a
nationwide average of 4%); by 1919, more than 30% did (while the nationwide average was 12%).
Postal Savings’ popularity appeared to be hampered by two factors: the $500 limit on deposits
and the program’s interest rate structure. In 1915, 30,000 of the 525,000 depositors had reached
the $500 limit (Congressional Record, 64th Congress, 1 Sess (1915), LIII, Part 1). According to
one local postmaster, “...if the limit were raised from $500 to $1,000 for each depositor, it would
increase deposits, as I have had several that would not deposit because they could not deposit
over $500” (Dockery, 1916, Pg. 44). The cap was increased to $1,000 in 1916, and the real value
of deposits grew by 44% in the following year. The cap was again raised to $2,500 in 1918 but a
similar jump in deposits did not occur, suggesting that the deposit limit was no longer a binding
constraint.
With the exception of 1915 and 1929, the Post Office provided no records on how many accounts

10

were at the limit. In 1929, only 2.7% of accounts held the $2,500 maximum. Because the average
account size in 1929 ($374 in nominal dollars) was close to the highest observed average deposit size
for any preceding year, it is unlikely that accounts holding the maximum deposit constituted any
more than 3% of all accounts during this period. For a better picture of how many accounts were
at the limit at other points, we estimated the number of accounts holding the maximum amount
using the procedure described in the Appendix. The estimated number of maximum deposits in
1919 was only 0.54% of all accounts, and stayed relatively unchanged until the late 1920s when it
rose to 2-3%.
The structure of interest payments also lessened the attractiveness of the System, especially
for short-term depositors. Initially, the 2% simple interest rate only accrued annually, increasing
the opportunity cost of short-term deposits. Beginning in 1921, depositors were allowed to transfer
funds from one post office to another without losing interest, and starting in 1924, interest was
credited on a quarterly basis.
Despite the penalty for holding funds for less than a year (before 1924), the average postal
depositor withdrew their funds in less than 12 months. The volume of deposits and withdrawals, as
seen in Figure 4, also suggests substantial short-term holdings. Through the 1930s, the sum of total
withdrawals and deposits was more than 120% of the balance held within the system, indicating
large within-year movement into and out of the system.9 For example, in 1915, at least 56% of money
was withdrawn from the system earned no interest at all. Year-end snapshots therefore understate
the total amount of money that passed through the system, especially in times of distress (i.e.
following the 1920-1921 depression and the 1929 Stock Market Crash).
Bond redemption data also indicate that depositors used Postal Savings for short-term liquidity,
rather than as the long-term savings tool designers of the program envisioned. Because deposits
could be redeemed for 20-year bonds, which had a 2.5% yield, long-term depositors would make
more money with bonds than ordinary deposits and carry no additional default risk. However,
bonds never gained popularity in the period for which the data were reported (1912-1935). In any
year, less than 2% of deposits were converted to bonds, indicating that most depositors sacrificed
9

For comparison, for New York and Massachusetts savings banks this ratio was about 0.5 in 1915 (The Bradstreet
Company, 1916; Massachusetts Bank Commissioner, 1915). For Postal Savings in that year, the ratio for those two
states was 1.8.

11

higher interest payments in exchange for liquidity.
The use of Postal Savings for small-scale, short-term deposits is consistent with the System’s
popularity with working class immigrant populations, which had been heavily affected by the failure
of immigrant banks during the Panic of 1907. Immigrants were heavy users of the System, and had
previously been using postal money orders while avoiding commercial banks. When Postal Savings
was being planned, postmasters flooded the federal office with letters claiming that immigrants,
who were using money orders to send money to foreign bank accounts, would use a Postal Savings
system if it was offered (Committee on Post-Offices and Post-Roads, 1910). Between 1900 and
1911, the amount of money (in nominal dollars) leaving the United States through postal money
orders increased by 483%, while domestic money orders increased by only 147%. Following the
establishment of Postal Savings, this increase in outbound transfers stopped. Domestic money
orders increased by 15% from 1911 to 1914, while foreign-bound money orders decreased by 7%
(Post Office Department, 1920).
Once the United States ceased money orders to many European countries during WWI, there
was significant growth in postal deposits, especially in cities with larger immigrant populations.
Among the cities with at least 250,000 people in 1910, the five cities with the fastest growth in postal
deposits had an average of 32.6% foreign-born residents, while the five cities with the slowest growth
had only 19.5%. Given the high use of Postal Savings among immigrants, immigration restrictions
in the 1910s and 20s likely limited the growth of the System. Nonetheless, the Post Office began
making efforts to attract more business from immigrants. Following a large private bank failure in
New York City in 1923, the Post Office initiated an advertising campaign in foreign languages to
draw new customers (Freeport Journal-Standard , 1923). We explore the question of who used the
Postal Savings System further in Section 5.1.

4.2 A Sudden Shift: 1930-1941
Banking instability was a worry through the 1910s and 1920s, but the events of 1929 and 1930
turned bank safety into a primary concern. Consequently use of the federally backed Postal Savings
System changed considerably. The 1929 Stock Market Crash and ensuing run on commercial banks

12

in 1930 coincided with a large rise in postal deposits. Between 1930 and 1934, the amount on
deposit increased by almost 760% in real 1913 dollars (584% in nominal dollars) from $103 million
to $887 million. The number of postal depositors increased from 0.9% of all bank savings accounts
to 6% (Sissman, 1936). Lawmakers saw this surge in postal deposits as a flight-to-quality. For
example, Representative Emanuel Celler of New York stated that, “While banks were failing all
over the country and a veritable avalanche of funds came out of other banks, it was the Postal
Savings System that salvaged much of the money withdrawn by the frightened and the timid”
(Congressional Record, December 9, 1931, Pg. 235).
Between 1928 and 1930, the total balance of deposits (provided by the year-end snapshots)
increased by 15%, yet the total amount deposited and withdrawn from the system, as shown in
Figure 4, increased by 55%. Once again, depositors increasingly relied on Postal Savings for shortterm savings during times of financial distress.
The Postal Savings System was also gaining millions of new customers. The growth of postal
deposits was mostly due to an increase in depositors, instead of existing depositors increasing the
size of their deposits. Almost 70% of the growth in the total balance of postal deposits in 19301933 is explained by an increase in the number of depositors. In the Midwest, where Postal Savings
growth was the highest during the period, the growth was almost completely due to an increase in
the number of depositors (98.9%).
This increase in deposits in the early 1930s was greatest where the Depression was most severe.
Using the difference in county-level log retail sales between 1929 and 1933 from Fishback et al.
(2005) we find that a 1% drop in retail sales corresponds with a 130% increase in postal savings
deposits. As a result, by 1933 people in the Mountain and East South Central states held about
$15 per-capita on deposit, while New England and South Atlantic states had $5.80 per-capita.10
Figure 3(b) shows that the South’s use of the program was still low compared to the rest of the
nation but that many more southern counties had deposits than did in 1919. Few counties have
zero deposits, and the Northeast no longer had highest level of deposits, which can also be seen in
Figure 2(b).
10

Rosenbloom and Sundstrom (1999) show that the drop in employment growth between 1929 and 1933 was
smallest in New England and South Atlantic states and largest in Mountain and East South Central states.

13

The continued low usage of Postal Savings in the South may have stemmed from the Post
Office’s decision to close thousands of offices from 1914-1917. The case of South Carolina suggests
that southern states experienced low per-capita deposits because of closures more than a decade
earlier, not because demand in these places was necessarily lower. South Carolina lost 81% of
its Postal Savings depositories, and had 1 depository per 51,000 people in 1929, compared to a
nationwide average of 1 for every 22,000 people. While South Carolinians only had below average
per-capita deposits ($0.88 compared to $1.27), the average depository in the state held significantly
more than the average in other states ($44,118 compared to $25,785). Overall, states that lost higher
percentages of postal depositories from 1914-1917 had fewer depositories per-capita in 1929, and
this lack of access may have depressed postal deposits.
Though the rapid rise of postal deposits halted after the establishment of the FDIC in 1933,
the total number of depositors and nominal balances increased until every year until 1938. This
increase was driven by the Midwest, which saw real per-capita deposits rise 21% between 1933 and
1940, while the rest of the country averaged an 11% decrease over the same period. These increases
also seem to be tied to banking safety: 54% of all FDIC-reported bank failures took place between
1934 and 1939 happened in the Midwest (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2017).
The 1930s, banks began to refuse Postal Savings funds, finding the 2.5% interest that they
had to pay for postal deposits too costly (Friedman and Schwartz, 1970). By 1939, only 5% of
Postal Savings was re-deposited. The Post Office instead used deposits to purchase U.S. Treasury
bonds and notes, which offered yields high enough to fund the Postal Savings System. Between
1931 and 1941, the Post Office increased their holding of Treasury bonds and notes from $0 to
$1.1 billion, during which time the total outstanding of non-special bonds and notes increased from
$16.52 billion to $43.05 billion. As such, the Postal Savings System seems to have helped fund an
economically significant portion (4.18%) of New Deal spending.

4.3 Rise and Fall: 1942-1966
While the safety of deposits drove how Postal Savings was used in its first 30 years in operation,
economic changes in the 1940s drastically altered the place of Postal Savings in American finance.

14

Between 1942 and 1947, deposits grew by 90% in real dollars (158% in nominal dollars). As shown in
Figure 2(c), all regions saw increases of between 44% and 99%, cresting in the late 1940s followed by
a prolonged decline through the remaining years of the program. Despite the safety of commercial
banks, the number of customers, amount on deposit, and average account size all peaked during
this period.
While the growth in Postal Savings following the 1929 Crash was due to new depositors, 70%
of the 1940s increase was caused primarily by an increase in the average size of deposits. By 1948,
the average postal depositor had $816 in the system, and fewer than 4% of post offices had average
deposit sizes below $200.11 This suggests that the system was used by people with above-average
incomes. The 1948 Survey of Consumer Finances supports this view, as respondents who had
money in postal saving had, on average, 6 times as much in other savings bank accounts and 12
times as much in checking bank accounts as those who did not have Postal Savings accounts.
Likewise, we estimate that by 1949, 24% of all accounts held the maximum amount, constituting
approximately two-thirds of all of the money deposited in Postal Savings.12 These numbers suggest
that the size of Postal Savings was now constrained by the $2,500 limit on deposits, and that
the service was mostly used by upper income individuals rather than the poor and marginalized
individuals the system was meant to serve. While some unbanked or underbanked households may
have used Postal Savings during this period, many users were financially secure.
While the Postal Savings boom in the early 1930s followed a slew of bank failures, banks were
much safer in the 1940s. Instead, low returns on investments made postal deposits more attractive.
The 2% interest rate offered by Postal Savings was meant to ensure that the system did not
compete with banks. However, Congress did not predict the arrival of an extremely low interest
rate environment. Indeed, the Fed committed in 1942 to keep market rates extremely low in order
to allow the government to borrow at cheaper rates during WWII. The prime rate was generally
under 2% from 1940-1948, and the yields on high-grade municipal bond rates were generally under
11

$816 is more than $8,000 in 2015 purchasing power and was more than 25% of the median household income
in 1948.
12
This fraction is in line with the few contemporary account accounts from newspapers. In 1948 in Abilene, TX,
21.7% of depositors in 1948 held the maximum amount (Havins, 1948), while in Marshall, TX, 20.6% held that
amount (Moyers, 1948).

15

2% from 1943-1947.13
Monthly data reveal that postal deposits moved with yields on securities (with a correlation
of about -0.64). Figure 5 shows that periods of higher (lower) yields coincided with decreases
(increases) in postal deposits. The period of sustained growth of Postal Savings starting in 1942
also had consistently low bond yields. Money then began leaving the Postal Savings System when
yields rose in the late 1940s and the pace of the flow of money out of Postal Savings quickened
as rates continued to rise in the 1950s. By the mid-1950s, when yields on municipal bonds were
near 3%, postal deposits were decreasing by 1-2% a month. Although interest rates were also high
during the rapid growth of postal deposits during the early 1930s, Postal Savings maintained the
advantage of security through federal guarantee. Now having neither the advantage of security nor
high interest rates, the system experienced a rapid decline.
In 1955, the Congressional Accounting Office recommended the termination of Postal Savings,
arguing that the expansion and increased security of other savings opportunities made it obsolete
(Stuart, 1955). Postmaster General Arthur Summerfield made the same recommendation in 1957.
A bill to end the program was finally passed in 1965 and signed into law in 1966. Post offices
stopped accepting new accounts, and officially ended the system on July 1, 1967.
Despite the decline in usage, the program held more money in its final years than at any time
during its first decade. In real dollar terms, the amount on deposit in 1964 was 25% more than
in 1918, the peak of the pre-Depression years. However, the program had returned to primarily
serving small-scale depositors. The average depositor in 1965 held, in real dollar terms, less than
one-third as much as the average depositor did in 1948. Similarly, we estimate that only about 10%
of depositors were holding the $2,500 maximum.
13

The passage of Regulation Q in 1933 prohibited the payment of interest on demand deposits and installed
an interest rate ceiling on time deposits of 3% in 1933-34 and 2.5% afterwards. While conceptually this may have
prevented banks from attracting the new flood of deposits, the ceiling was not binding as most commercial banks
were providing much lower interest rates during the 1930s and 1940s.

16

5 What Groups Used Postal Savings?
The previous section’s discussion of the aggregate data provides an overview of when Postal Savings was popular and how it was used. It suggests specific individual characteristics that might
be important (e.g., demographic characteristics or bank proximity) to postal savings usage. This
section tests the hypotheses from the historical narrative in Section 2 as well as further refining
the aggregate analysis of Section 4 using disaggregated data.
We carry out to two similar multivariate analyses. First, we study the county-level demographic
characteristics that are correlated with postal savings use. While we would have liked to have used
city-level data on demographics, they are not available for these periods. These county-level data
allow us to see whether certain marginalized communities were more likely to use postal savings
than others, and to disentangle the overlapping trends in usage, such as foreign-born and urban
population, or farming communities and racial composition. Second, we make use of the more
disaggregated bank data to understand whether postal savings was primarily used by those who
lacked access to traditional banks. We still control for county-characteristics, but focus on the local
nature of banks and whether the entry of a bank affected postal deposits.

5.1 Demographics
Anecdotal evidence provides numerous hypotheses for what groups were most attracted to the
program. Contemporary accounts emphasize the popularity of postal deposits among foreign-born
people (Kemmerer, 1917). In 1915, the only year for which nativity data on depositors were gathered, the nationwide average for deposits was $0.6 per person, but Russian-born ($7.31 per person), Italian-born ($6.48), $5.32 for Hungarian-born ($5.32) people heavily relied on Postal Savings.
Many immigrants were coming from countries with postal banking systems. They also may have
distrusted banks, as immigrant banks were hit particularly hard by the Panic of 1907:
There is scarcely a community in the country with an immigrant population of any
proportions which has not its record of immigrant-bank failures.... Occasionally a national, state, or savings bank closes its doors, but it is seldom the case that the bank’s
depositors lose any considerable amount by the failure.... Upon the failure of an irre17

sponsible immigrant banker, however, there are seldom any funds or resources to which
the creditor may have recourse. (Immigration Commision, 1916)
Kemmerer (1917) also noted that whites were far more likely to use the program than blacks,
noting that only 1.6% of depositors in 1916 were black. However, as much of the black population
remained in the South where Postal Savings use was low, Kemmerer’s observation could be picking
up regional differences rather than racial ones.14 Additionally, the relationship between race and
postal savings usage likely changed over time, given the Great Migration, which was just beginning
when Kemmerer was writing, led blacks to places with greater Postal Savings access. In 1913, 32.2%
of blacks lived in counties that would not have postal savings depositories in 1925. By 1930, the
percentage of blacks living in those same counties dropped to 27.7%. In 1960, it would be 16.8%.
The traditional narrative suggests that urban populations were most likely to use Postal Savings,
while early supporters believed the program could bring money out from under the mattress in
farming communities, and rural bankers initially worried that Postal Savings would draw money
out of their communities. Did farmers make use of Postal Savings, as people before its inception
hoped/feared or did they mostly ignore it as the latter narrative suggests? One might believe that
farmers would have appreciated the convenience of Postal Savings. However, farmers had many
others uses for excess funds, such as investing in land or equipment, leaving their demand for
Postal Savings low.
Another local factor that could have influenced the popularity of Postal Savings is the presence
of other banking options. During the early years of the program, trips between towns were slowed
by the lack of good road and automobiles. Therefore, if a bank was not present in their area, they
would have had no choice but to either be unbanked or use the Postal Savings system. Postal
deposits still were sizable in developed financial centers such as New York City, Boston, Chicago,
and Philadelphia, but that does not mean the size of those deposits were not affected by local
banking opportunity.
Aside from a survey of depositors in 1915, we know little about the demographic characteristics
of the areas where the system was heavily used, especially after the early years. By looking at
14

Harris (1996) claims that advocates for black banks believed blacks’ heavy use of Postal Savings in cities
suggested an opportunity for black bankers.

18

several years throughout the life of the system at the county level, we estimate how much of the
cross-sectional variation can be explained by variation in key demographic and economic measures
at each point in time. We chose the following years: 1913, the first year for which postal deposit
data exists; 1936, the final year in which FDIC county-level bank information is available; and
1919, 1929, 1939, 1949, and 1959, to match Census demographic data. We explore the relationship
between postal deposits, demographic characteristics, and banking using the following OLS model
for each year separately:

Ln(Deposits)c = β0 + β1 N atBankc + β2 StateBankc + βXc + γs + c

(1)

where Ln(Deposits)c is the natural log of Postal Savings deposits in a county c;15 StateBankc and
N atBankc are the number of state and national banks, respectively, in a county; γs are state fixed
effects; and Xc is a vector of demographic and economic characteristics: the log of population;
percent of population living in towns with populations above 2,500; percent of population living in
towns with populations above 25,000 (through 1949); the percent of the population that is male;
percent of males that are of voting age (21+); percent of population that is white and foreign-born;
percent of population that is black; percent of acreage in a county that is farmland; and a measure
of the value of farmland (which differs across census years).16
Our results, presented in Table 1, shows the changing relationship between Postal Savings and
demographic characteristics. Some coefficients remain stable throughout the history of the program.
When controlling for population, large cities relied on Postal Savings less than rural areas. A 10%
increase in the number of people living in large urban areas (instead of rural areas) is associated
with a decrease of 0.23 to 0.34 in the log of postal deposits (a 21%-28% drop). This finding conflicts
with the normal narrative that Postal Savings was most popular in urban areas. Instead, it was
smaller urban areas (those with between 2,500 and 25,000 residents) that saw the highest level of
per-capita deposits. Additionally, in all years but 1913, the percent of farmland improved and land
15

In all regressions, we use real dollars deflated to 1913 levels using the CPI inflation calculator from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics.
16
We impute values for the 1913 and 1936 values by assuming linear changes in demographic variables from the
two nearest Census years.

19

value per acre are strongly correlated with lower levels of deposits, suggesting that Postal Savings
was less popular in more developed farming communities.
In Section 4 we suggested that the aggregate data showed three distinct periods of use. Here
we see one of those breaks reflected in a large shift in the type of people who used postal savings
before and after 1929. In early years, the system was heavily used by foreign-born people and was
unpopular in farming communities. After 1929, the association between demographic characteristics
and postal deposits weakens, and the negative correlation with farming communities disappears.
With the widespread distress affecting the banking system and low agricultural prices, farming
communities start to use the System. This persists through the farm boom of the 1940s, as the
correlation between farming and Postal Savings usage becomes positive. At the same time, the
immigration acts of 1921 and 1924 strongly restricted immigration, leading to a large change in
the composition and behavior of immigrant communities. These demographic correlations reflect
the regional variation in Postal Savings usage over this time, as the center of activity moved from
the Northeast to the heavily farmed (and largely white) Midwest.
When controlling for other county characteristics, the percent of black population is not statistically significant between 1913 and 1936. Kemmerer’s (1917) finding that black communities
avoided Postal Savings was driven by other observable demographic characteristics, which is a
striking result, given the large wage gap between blacks and whites. The change over time in the
coefficient on “% black” reveals the interaction between black migration, regional variation, and
disproportional access across racial lines. In the early years, low levels of deposits for blacks were
similar to levels throughout the south, even though blacks were less likely to have access to Postal
Savings. We confirm the role of access by dropping counties without Postal Savings from our regressions. The coefficient on % black our estimates become statistically insignificant for all years
but 1950, showing that access, not differences in demand, drove the negative relationship between
% black and postal savings usage.17 This negative relationship in later years is likely due to the
17

Three all-black town in Oklahoma maintained postal depositories: Boley (Okfuskee county), Langston (Logan
County), and Taft (Muskogee County). Comparing these offices to others in their counties (excluding the county
seat) shows that while levels of deposits were constantly below nearby white towns, the number of depositors (per
office) in black towns was consistently higher in the 1913-1930 period. Boley, the black town with the highest number
of depositors, also contained a bank and had the highest number of depositors per office in its county even including
the county seat into the mid-1920s.

20

northern migration of blacks, who found themselves in states with higher rates of Postal Savings
usage. Since our regressions include state fixed effects, we are comparing blacks only to others in
their own states.
As banks were potential substitute for Postal Savings and bankers viewed Postal Saving as a
threat, it is notable that state bank sorting across counties is negatively correlated with Postal
Savings in all years (suggesting they were substitutes); except for 1939, no strong relationship
between national banks and Postal Savings exists at the county level in the cross-section. However,
given that coarseness of county-level data and the possibility of omitted variable bias, we cannot
make any causal claims using these regressions. Additionally, geographic bank and Postal Savings
sorting can tell us little about the underlying relationship between Postal Savings and banks.
Though postal savings was not particularly large before the 1930s, it initially reached some of
the more marginalized population as was intended. Immigrants tended to be wary of commercial
banks and thus took the chance to save in the federally insured system. After 1929, the role of
Postal Savings drifted far from the purposes for which it was designed, first becoming attractive to
the wider population as the banking system destabilized and then becoming a high interest savings
vehicle.

5.2 Distance to Banks
While the county-level data allow us to understand the use of postal savings by marginalized
populations and other groups, town-level data is better suited to examining the extent that postal
savings was driven by those who were unbanked because they had no nearby bank. The number of
banks in a county is a coarse measure of banking access because individuals would not generally
have traveled to another city for banking services. Using town-level data, we estimate the effect
of bank proximity on postal deposits. This allows us to directly test whether the program was
being used by the unbanked over and above controlling for the demographic characteristics of the
location’s county.
We carry out our city-level examination over three periods: 1913 -1919, 1919-1929, and 19291940. These periods offer different windows into the relationship between banks and postal savings.

21

1913-1919 allows us to observe the normal operation of postal savings and cleanly observe the
importance of having access to a bank. This was a period where interest rates on stocks, bonds,
and commercial bank accounts were higher than the low fixed rate of postal savings banks. As seen
in Section 4 as well as the county-level analysis, the inversion of interest rates attracted high-income
investors to Postal Savings. Moreover, in periods where banks are closing, we cannot separate the
effect of the flight to quality from the simple presence of a bank. While banks were growing steadily
through WWI, the sudden collapse of crop prices in the early 1920s led to a steady stream of bank
closures. Coupled with the bank closures of the Great Depression and slow growth of banking
thereafter, the 1910s are the only period when we see if Postal Savings served as a substitute for
banking during a stable period. The specific choice of 1913 is made because it is the first year that
town-level postal savings deposits are reported.
Looking at 1919-1940 allows us to study the historical role of Postal Savings in the tumultuous
inter-war period. Much of the variation in bank location was driven by bank closures, so we are
capturing a different effect than in the 1910s.
Using a nationwide dataset of state and national banking for 1913, 1919, 1929, and 1940, we
measured the distance, in kilometers, from each postal depository to the nearest state and national
bank for each year.
We use a first-difference specification to control for unobserved place characteristics associated
with both bank location and postal deposits:

∆Ln(Deposits)it = β1 ∆N atBankit + β2 ∆StateBankit + β∆Xct + γs + it

(2)

where ∆Ln(Deposits)it is the change in the natural log of postal deposits at office i between period
t and t-1;18 ∆Xct is the change for a vector of county-level Census demographic characteristics
as above; and γs are state fixed effects. N atBankit and StateBankit are dummy variables equal
to 1 if there is a bank within a a specified distance, and 0 otherwise. Therefore ∆N atBankit and
18

Postal depositories are only included if they had at least $1 in deposits in any year from 1913 to 1919. We
also exclude any offices that were established after 1913. We keep this sample constant throughout, though we lose
some observations in later years because demographic data is not available. We get very similar results if we only
use offices with at least $1 in deposits during the period being examined (1919-1929, 1929-1940).

22

∆StateBankit are equal to 1 if a community did not have a bank nearby in earlier year, but had
one in later year (and -1 if the opposite it true). A negative coefficient on these variables implies
that the entry (exit) of a bank is followed by a decrease (increase) in postal deposits, which is
consistent with the hypothesis that Postal Savings served as a substitute for banking in places that
did not have close access to state or national banks.
The first difference specification addresses any time-invariant omitted variable bias. The most
obvious potential remaining source of bias from the first-difference specification is a failure to fully
control for unobserved shocks to general banking demand. However, as our regressions show, this
would bias our estimates toward zero, leading to a possible underestimate of causal effect, but not
to an erroneous conclusion that banks led to a decrease in postal deposits. Additionally, concerns
of reverse causality are mitigated by the small size of Postal Savings. Since postal deposits were
re-deposited in nearby banks, it is conceivable that banks could choose to locate based on Postal
Savings levels. However, the total amount on deposit at postal depositories was about 1% of savings
deposits in the 1910s, so it does not seem likely that banks chose where to locate based on the
potential to receive re-deposits.
Another potential bias would come from banks anticipating a decrease in demand for Postal
Savings, and then opening in a town to gain that business. In this case, the negative relationship
would be observed, but not due to the banks entering or leaving a market. However, due to the
re-deposit structure of postal savings, banks would get those deposits regardless of whether or not
people were using postal savings. In fact, some bankers preferred funds that came first through
postal savings, since it was cheap business to acquire, and the 2.5% interest rate was often lower
than the interest paid on other deposits before 1935 (Sissman, 1938). Therefore, in order for this
mechanism to bias our estimates, banks would 1) have to prefer individual deposits to postal savings
re-deposits, even though the interest rate paid on postal re-deposits was lower; and 2) anticipate
a town-specific time shock that would decrease the demand for postal savings while also making
private banking more profitable. These circumstances seem very unlikely.
We believe that 1913-1919 is the most suitable period for obtaining unbiased estimates, given
the relative stability of the banking sector.19 The 1920s and 1930s were decades with local regional
19

During this period, only a handful of branches were established outside of the parent bank’s own city due to

23

economic shocks that could have simultaneously led to banking panics while also increasing the
demand for Postal Savings. This omitted variable would lead to a negative correlation between
Postal Savings and banking presence, even if there was no causal relationship. We also cannot
rule out reverse causality during this period: if people turned to Postal Savings in moments of
economic uncertainty, their decision to take their money out of banks may have caused bank
closures. Nonetheless, we present the findings here because they show what happens then banks
leave, even if we cannot make strong causal claims.
Table 2 presents the results for each period. For 1913-1919, shown in Panel A, we find that
gaining a bank, especially a national bank, led to a significant decrease in postal deposits. When
using a 1 km cutoff, gaining a national bank is associated with a statistically significant 0.305 drop
in the log of deposits (26.3%). For state banks, a bank is associated with a 0.202 (18.3%) drop,
but this estimate is only statistically significant at the 10% level. While the estimates for national
banks are always significant at the 5% level for thresholds smaller than 10 km, the point estimates
move toward zero. As most individuals would not be able to make everyday usage out of a bank
that was 10 km away or more, it makes sense that we would find little effect of gaining a bank at
this distance or greater.
The decay in the coefficient as the radius expands also supports our identification strategy. Any
unobserved shocks likely have spatial auto-correlation, meaning that any omitted variable bias in a
regression using 1 km as the threshold would likely also bias a regression using 10 km. But since we
observe the effect of banks on postal deposits diminishing as we move the threshold further away,
the confounding, unobserved shock would need to be unique to very small areas (less than 10 km)
to be driving our results.
Although postal deposits decreased when banks moved into an area, the effect of not having
a bank is small enough that other factors were also driving deposits. Using the point estimates
found in Column 1, Panel A of Table 2, we estimate that if every post office gained a national bank
within 1 km in 1919, then total postal deposits would have decreased by about 8.3%. This change
the state and federal restrictions during the period. Moreover, with the automobile still in its infancy and paved
roads almost nonexistent in rural areas, it would have been impractical for most farmers to obtain services from a
bank located more than a few miles from their home. As such, there is little worry that individuals would travel to
another city in order to use its banking services or that banks would invest a sizable portion of their deposits in
another location.

24

is small compared to the changes in deposits when state deposit insurance programs were put in
place that we saw in Section 4, suggesting that Postal Saving’s security, not its proximity, was its
main selling point. These results are consistent with the fact that gaining national banks led to a
larger decrease in postal deposits than gaining state banks. National banks were generally larger,
subject or more regulations and supervision, and less likely to fail than state banks (Anderson
et al., 2018). Moreover, national banks were required to join the Federal Reserve in 1914, which
allowed them to access nationwide check clearing and the discount window, whereas state banks
were given a choice, and less than 6% opted to join. To the extent that individuals put deposits in
Postal Savings accounts due to their government guarantee, they might have been more likely to
trust those same deposits to a national bank rather than a state bank.
The effect of bank proximity differed with deposit insurance. We test this by interacting the
independent variable of interest with a dummy variable equal to one if a state had deposit insurance.20 As seen in the Appendix, states with deposit insurance saw no effect of bank entry on Postal
Savings, while states without deposit insurance saw large decreases. One way to interpret this result
is that deposit insurance depressed demand for Postal Savings overall, leaving less opportunity for
bank location to affect depositor behavior. These results also suggest that deposit security drove
postal deposits in the early years at least as much as convenience did.
If Postal Savings’s biggest appeal was is security, we would expect the marginal response to
changes in bank proximity to grow during the interwar period, when bank failure was much more
common. The results for regressions using 1919-1929 and 1929-1940 are presented in Panels B
and C of Table 2. In both regressions, we continue to find a large correlation between national
bank locations and postal deposits. Again using the coefficient on 1 km, we find that the entry
of a national bank is associated with a 45.8% decrease in postal deposits in 1919-1929 and a
52.7% decrease in 1929-1940. Of course, these results cannot tell us whether Postal Savings was
a substitute for banks in a normally-functioning market. The large coefficients for national banks
when the 20 km threshold is used suggests that either regional shocks were affecting both bank
stability and the demand for Postal Savings, or people moved their money into Postal Savings even
20

For this analysis, we dropped Mississippi, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Washington as they had changes in
the deposit insurance regimes over this period. This leaves Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska to be examined.

25

when banks 20 km away closed. Since these banks were unlikely to be the bank a person regularly
used, it suggests a region-wide flight to quality.
Though the magnitude of the coefficients on national banks grew compared to 1913-1919, the
coefficient on states banks moved towards zero. Given that much of the variation in this period
is driven by bank closures, it is worth noting that state banks were less likely to repay depositors
when they failed. This failure to repay would dampen the responsiveness of depositors to move
to Postal Savings. The larger marginal responses to national bank location seen in Panel B and
C are coupled with higher levels of Postal Savings deposits during these years, meaning that the
total amount of money entering Postal Savings following changes in bank location was especially
large in later periods. In 1913-1919 losing a local national bank would increase postal deposits by
an average of $2,762. For 1919-1929, this number is $9,270 and for 1929-1940, it’s $68,450. This
final figure is still small compared to the amount on deposit in an average national bank, which
(in 1939) would have had about $1 million (deflated to 1913 dollars). However, since most national
bank failures for our 1929-1940 sample occurred in the first few years of the 1930s, this number
indicates that several years following a bank closure, depositors were still holding large amounts of
money in Postal Savings.

6 Conclusion
While the United States Postal Savings System was explicitly intended to reach the unbanked and
marginal populations, a close study of the data show that it served several different functions and
customers throughout its history. In the first several decades of service, at least up to the establishment of the FDIC, demand for Postal Savings was associated with a lack of access to safe banking
opportunities. Our findings for this period suggest that postal savings served several different groups
of unbanked households. For those who lived in towns with no commercial banks, postal savings
provided a convenient option. Gaining a bank nearby significantly decreased postal deposits, as
did the establishment of state deposit insurance systems. For other people who distrusted banks,
Postal Savings, with its guarantee of the federal government, was especially attractive. Following
banking crises or the collapse of state deposit insurance programs, people turned to postal savings.
26

This meant that Postal Savings served many marginalized groups, such as immigrants, who were
often distrusting of traditional banks, and were more likely to live in mining communities, where
banking options were scarce.
In later years, especially once the probability of bank failures became diminishingly small and
the FDIC was established, the appeal of Postal Savings depended primarily on the interest rates
offered by other savings mechanisms. Though the 2% return offered by Postal Savings was relatively
low in 1911 when the system was established, by the 1940s it was higher than most bond interest
rates with no corresponding increase in risk. We also see a shift in the demographics of Postal
Savings customers, as the system became more popular in the Midwest and in farming communities.
Overall, the United States Postal Savings System may have reached some of its intended clients,
but over time the structure of the program led to changes in how it was used. The fixed interest
rate caused the system to not only become an investment vehicle for wealthy individuals during
the Great Depression and World War II, but also to compete directly with the commercial banking
sector.
This history also provides important lessons for those hoping to re-establish the system. First,
the interest rates offered by Postal Savings heavily shape the nature of the system, and the type
of customers who use it. The fixed interest rate of the historical system bound the hands of the
System’s administrators and led to the dominance of wealthy depositors rather than the targeted
demographics. Second, the destination of any deposited funds should be carefully considered. During the historical period, the re-deposit system only worked when interest rates were high enough
for banks to be willing to accept re-deposits. Given the low interest rates currently offered at
commercial banks, re-depositing Postal Savings funds in local banks might not be possible for a
self-sustaining program. Will funds be used to purchase government debt, make loans, fund infrastructure, or be deposited in banks (despite possible losses)? Finally, law-makers must determine
an acceptable level of competition between Postal Savings and banks. Our results indicate that
Postal Savings was at least a partial substitute for banks. Though the banking environment is very
different than it was in the 1910s, law-makers should be prepared to address concerns of the Postal
Savings drawing money from local banks.

27

Appendices
Appendix 1: Estimating the Number of Maximum Deposits
We estimate the distribution of account sizes from the several hundred offices with only one depositor. For years throughout our sample these accounts follow an exponential distribution with
a heavy right tail. The average size of deposits for offices with one depositor is smaller than the
overall average, but we only assume that the shape of the distribution for these offices is representative. Because the only parameter for the exponential distribution is the mean, we can estimate
the number of accounts in each post office at the $2,500 limit. Using the 1929 figure as a reference,
we see that this method underestimates the total number, so we scale our result to match that
figure, and apply that same scale to all other estimates. This procedure provides a good match for
the few cases where the number of maximum deposits were reported in newspapers.

Bibliography
Anderson, H., Calomiris, C. W., Jaremski, M., and Richardson, G. (2018). Liquidity Risk, Bank
Networks, and the Value of Joining the Federal Reserve System. Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 50(1):173–201.
Baradaran, M. (2013). How the Poor Got Cut Out of Banking. Emory Law Journal, 62(3):483–548.
Baradaran, M. (2014). It’s Time for Postal Savings. Harvard Law Review Forum, 127:165–175.
Columbus Republican (1898). Dec. 30, 1898. p. 4.
Commercial and Financial Chronicle (1909). September 25, 1909.
Committee on Post-Offices and Post-Roads (1910). Postal Savings Depositories. 61st Congress.
2nd Session. Report No. 125. GPO, Washington, DC.
Davidson, L. and Ramirez, C. D. (2016). Does Deposit Insurance Promote Financial Depth?
Evidence from the Postal Savings System During the 1920s. GMU Working Paper in Economics
No. 16-37.
Dockery, A. (1916). The United States Postal System. Statement of Hon. Alexander M. Dockery,
Third Assistant Postmaster General Before the Subcommittee of the Joint Committee on Rural
Credits Relative to the Proposal to Invest Postal Savings Depostis in Federal Farm-Loan Bonds.
Government Printing Office, Washtington, D.C.
FDIC Unbanked/Underbanked Survey Study Group (2016). FDIC National Survey of Unbanked
and Underbanked Households .

28

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (1984). Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Data on
Banks in the United States, 1920-1936 [Computer file].
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2017). Failures and Assistance Transactions - Historical
Statistics on Banking. Accessed: 2017-11-8.
Fishback, P., Horrace, W., and Kantor, S. (2005). The Impact of New Deal Expenditures on
Local Economic Activity: An Examination of Retail Sales, 1929-1939. The Journal of Economic
History, 65(1):36–71.
Freeport Journal-Standard (1923). ”Postal Savings for Aliens”. May 18, 1923. p. 18.
Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A. J. (1970). Monetary Statistics of the United States: Estimates,
Sources, Methods. Columbia University Press, New York.
Garon, S. (2012). Beyond Our Means: Why America Spends While the World Saves. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Haines, M. R. (2010). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
1790-2002 [Computer file].
Harris, A. L. (1996). The Prospects of Black Bourgeoisie. In Wintz, C. D., editor, The Politics and
Aesthetics of “New Negro” Literature, pages 131–134. Routledge, Abingdon.
Havins, B. (1948). “Postal Savings is ’Poor Folks’ Bank’, But Deposits in Millions”. Abilene
Reporter-News. June 20, 1948.
Immigration Commision, T. (1916). Immigrant Banks. 61st Congression. 2nd Session. Document
381. Government Printing Office, Washtington, D.C.
Kemmerer, E. (1917). Six Years of Postal Savings in the United States. The American Economic
Review, 7(1):46–90.
Kuwayama, P. H. (2000). Postal Banking in the United States and Japan: a Comparative Analysis.
Monetary and Economic Studies, 18(1).
Los Angeles Times (1897). “Postal Savings Banks”. Oct. 24, 1897. p. 1.
Massachusetts Bank Commissioner (1915). Annual report of the Bank Commissioner for the year
1915.
Moyers, J. (1948). ”Marshallites Line Up Regularly For Deposits in Postal Savings”. The Marshall
News Messenger. July 7, 1948.
National Bureau of Economic Research (2012). Index of Yields of High Grade Municipal Bonds
for United States [M13023USM156NNBR].
National Monetary Commission (1910). Notes on the Postal Savings-Bank Systems of the Leading
Countries. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
O’Hara, M. and Easley, D. (1979). The Postal Savings System in the Depression. The Journal of
Economic History, 39(3):741–753.
29

Post Office Department. Annual Report of the Postmaster General. GPO, various issues, Washington, DC.
Post Office Department. Operations of the Postal Savings System. GPO, various issues, Washington,
DC.
Reid, C. J. J. (2016). America’s First Great Constitutional Controversy: Alexander Hamilton’s
Bank of the United States. University of St. Thomas (Minnesota) Legal Studies Research Paper
No. 16-21.
Roberts, G. E. (1907). Objections to a Postal Savings-Bank. The North American Review,
184(609):364–370.
Rosenbloom, J. L. and Sundstrom, W. A. (1999). The Sources of Regional Variation in the Severity
of the Great Depression: Evidence from U.S. Manufacturing, 1919-1937. The Journal of Economic
History, 59(3):714–747.
Sacramento Record-Union (1898). “Postal Savings and Investment”. Feb. 4, 1898. p. 2.
Schewe, D. B. (1971). A History of the Postal Savings System in America, 1910-1970. Ph.D.
Dissertation, Department of History, The Ohio State University.
Sissman, L. (1936). Development of the Postal Savings System. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 31(196):708–718.
Sissman, L. (1938). The Postal Savings System and the Banks. Southern Economic Journal,
31(3):339–351.
Stuart, R. (1955). ”End Postal Savings, U.S. Urged”. Pittsburgh Press. Feb 9, 1955.
The Bradstreet Company (1916). Bradstreet’s Weekly: A Business Digest. Vol. 44. March 25, 1916.
The St. Louis Star and Times (1924). ”Coolidge Acts to Stop Rise in Bank Failures”. Jan. 19,
1924. p. 3.
Treasury Department (1917). Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

30

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Deposits in Postal Savings System

Notes: This figure provides the aggregate amount of deposits in the Postal Savings System in July of each
year. In addition to the nominal values, we provide the real values deflated to 1913 dollars using CPI
inflation calculator from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. See data section for a description of the Postal
Savings Data.

31

Figure 2: Postal Savings Deposits per Capita by Region
(a) 1911-1929

(b) 1930-1940

(c) 1941-1966

Notes: These figures show the average amount of per-capita deposits in the Postal Savings System across
Census Regions. All measures are deflated to 1913 dollars using CPI inflation calculator from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics.
32

Figure 3: County-Level Distribution of Postal Savings Deposits
(a) Deposits per Capita 1919

(b) Deposits per Capita 1936

Notes: These figures provide per capita measures of postal savings deposits for all counties in 1919 and
1936. All measures are deflated to 1913 dollars using CPI inflation calculator from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Post office location was found by using list of populated places maintained by the U.S. Board
on Geographic Names and the AniMap 3.0.2 County Boundary Historical Atlas.

33

Figure 4: Yearly Activity in the Postal Savings System

Notes: This figure shows the ratio of the sum of all deposits and withdrawals into and out of the Postal
Savings System divided by the year-end balance. All data come from the Operations of the Postal Savings
System.

34

Figure 5: Monthly Changes in Postal Deposits and Bond Yields

Notes: This figure shows the monthly percent change in postal savings deposits, compared to the yield on
municipal bonds, from which we subtract two so as to compare it to the 2% interest rate offered by postal
savings. Data come from the Operations of the Postal Savings System and National Bureau of Economic
Research (2012).

35

36
2,681
0.627

-0.00720
(0.0105)
-0.0219***
(0.00796)
1.927***
(0.114)
0.0129***
(0.00349)
-0.0231***
(0.00292)
-0.0555
(0.0371)
0.179***
(0.0177)
0.0234*
(0.0119)
-0.0121**
(0.00600)
-0.00768**
(0.00297)
-0.00413
(0.00417)
-

2,681
0.654

-0.00227
(0.0202)
-0.0191
(0.0117)
2.074***
(0.149)
0.0350***
(0.00438)
-0.0233***
(0.00438)
0.0521
(0.0637)
0.184***
(0.0174)
0.0601***
(0.0187)
-0.00805
(0.00783)
-0.00859*
(0.00483)
-0.0139***
(0.00453)
-

2,668
0.522

-0.547***
(0.114)

0.0112
(0.0264)
-0.0299***
(0.00985)
2.326***
(0.157)
0.0402***
(0.00392)
-0.0338***
(0.00442)
-0.0254
(0.0724)
0.176***
(0.0317)
0.0928***
(0.0291)
-0.00528
(0.00659)
-0.0135***
(0.00488)
-

2,668
0.451

-0.1392***
(0.0459)

-0.0256
(0.0212)
-0.0560***
(0.0198)
1.909***
(0.176)
0.0321***
(0.00380)
-0.0281***
(0.00383)
-0.0665
(0.0660)
0.102***
(0.0279)
0.0371*
(0.0202)
-0.0217***
(0.00739)
0.00309
(0.00280)
-

2,689
0.431

-0.0908***
(0.0314)

-0.0241**
(0.0115)
-0.0353**
(0.0150)
1.898***
(0.167)
0.0310***
(0.00410)
-0.0275***
(0.00374)
-0.0615
(0.0610)
0.0950***
(0.0257)
0.0217
(0.0215)
-0.0213***
(0.00739)
0.00241
(0.00277)
-

2,669
0.425

-0.193*
(0.107)

1.727***
(0.158)
0.0269***
(0.00468)
-0.0272***
(0.00434)
-0.0589
(0.0474)
0.108***
(0.0235)
0.0307
(0.0203)
-0.0226***
(0.00721)
0.00675**
(0.00300)
-

-

-

(6)
1949

2,654
0.437

-0.299**
(0.144)

-0.0999**
(0.0378)
0.0819***
(0.0273)
0.0240**
(0.0104)
-0.0149*
(0.00847)
0.00747**
(0.00366)
-

1.526***
(0.126)
0.0231***
(0.00475)
-

-

-

(7)
1959

Notes: Table provides the results of a linear regression model. Each observation is a county and the column headings provide the year that
is included. State fixed effects are included in all regressions. For 1939 regressions, measrues of national and state bank data come from 1940
town-level data. Standard errors clustered by state are provided in parentheses below the coefficients. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. See data
section for description of data.

Observations
R-squared

Log Land Value Per Acre

Percent of Farmland Improved

Percent Farmland

Percent Black

Percent White Foreign-Born

Percent Voting Age (of Males)

Percent Male

Percent Urban 25K+

Percent Urban

Log(Population)

# of State Banks

# of Nat. Banks

VARIABLES

Dependent Variable: Log of Postal Savings Deposits (1913 USD)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
1913
1919
1929
1936
1939

Table 1: Determinants of Postal Savings Bank Deposits at the County-Level

Table 2: Effect of a Change in Bank Proximity on Postal Savings Deposits
Dependent Variable: ∆ Log of Real Postal Savings Deposits (1913 USD)
Panel A: 1913-1919
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
∆<
∆<
∆<
∆<
∆<
VARIABLES
1 km
5 km
10 km
15 km
20 km
∆ Nat. Banks

Observations
R-squared

-0.305**
(0.129)
-0.202*
(0.113)
8,276
0.133

VARIABLES

∆<
1 km

∆ State Banks

∆ Nat. Banks
∆ State Banks

-0.612***
(0.121)
-0.0719
(0.0726)

Observations
R-squared

8,260
0.207

VARIABLES

∆<
1 km

∆ Nat. Banks
∆ State Banks

Observations
R-squared

-0.280**
-0.140
(0.134)
(0.121)
-0.135
-0.159
(0.108)
(0.126)
8,276
8,276
0.132
0.132
Panel B: 1919-1929
∆<
∆<
5 km
10 km
-0.611***
(0.135)
-0.0963
(0.0920)

-0.532***
(0.148)
-0.139
(0.118)

8,260
8,260
0.207
0.206
Panel C: 1929-1940
∆<
∆<
5 km
10 km

-0.189
(0.124)
-0.172
(0.201)
8,276
0.132

-0.00223
(0.167)
0.0881
(0.311)
8,276
0.132

∆<
15 km

∆<
20 km

-0.408***
(0.127)
-0.0710
(0.151)

-0.286**
(0.142)
-0.198
(0.200)

8,260
0.205

8,260
0.204

∆<
15 km

∆<
20 km

-0.748***
(0.172)
-0.0308
(0.110)

-0.729***
(0.165)
0.0146
(0.120)

-0.623***
(0.149)
0.0610
(0.128)

-0.438***
(0.148)
-0.0209
(0.127)

-0.351***
(0.125)
0.0778
(0.165)

8,260
0.070

8,260
0.070

8,260
0.069

8,260
0.067

8,260
0.066

Notes: Table provides the results of a first-difference linear regression model. The sample includes any post
offices in the contiguous United States that had at least $1 in postal savings deposits at any time from
1913-1919. Each observation is a post office and the column headings provide the distance threshold used.
The independent variable of interest is the change in a dummy variable indicating whether the nearest
national (or state) bank to the post office is within a specified distance (1 km, 5 km, etc). State fixed
effects are included in all regressions. County-level controls include the change each of the following: log
of population the percent of population living in an urban area with 2,500-25,000 in population, percent
of population living in an areas with greater than 25,000 in population, percent male, percent of voting
age males, percent white foreign born, percent black, percent of acreage under farmland, and percent of
farmland improved. Standard errors clustered by state are provided in parentheses below the coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

37

Table A1: Summary Statistics
VARIABLES
Log(Postal Deposits)
# of National Banks
# of State Banks
Log(Population)
% Urban
% Urban 25K+
% Male
% Voting Age (of Males)
% White Foreign-Born
% Black
% Farmland
% of Farmland Improved
Log Land Value Per Acre

N

1913
6.44
(3.05)
2.74
(3.86)
6.43
(6.48)
9.89
(0.90)
19.34
(23.9)
4.98
(17.64)
52.17
(2.70)
54.54
(7.10)
8.08
(8.96)
11.92
(19.60)
67.60
(28.02)
56.59
(23.03)
-

2,681

1919

1929

1936

1939

1949

1959

4.98
5.97
10.56
10.24
10.80
10.61
(4.06) (4.36) (3.66) (3.63) (3.79) (3.73)
2.87
2.7
1.93
2.16
(3.86) (4.09)
(3.15
(3.98)
7.42
5.80
3.40
3.95
(7.56) (7.82) (3.75) (4.99)
9.93
10.00
10.03
10.04
10.07
10.09
(0.92) (0.96) (0.98) (0.99) (1.07) (1.15)
21.29
23.33
24.64
25.56
30.37
34.03
(24.92) (25.09) (24.58) (24.64) (26.12) (26.97)
5.59
6.60
6.79
6.86
7.75
(19.01) (20.02) (19.89) (20.04) 20.53
51.73
51.54
51.31
51.23
50.61
49.91
(2.26) (2.05) (1.89) (1.90)
(1.7)
(1.60)
55.03
56.33
59.06
60.27
60.74
57.99
(6.78) (6.34) (5.93) (5.84) (5.02) (4.34)
7.15
5.00
4.23
3.91
2.98
8.44
(8.06) (6.09) (5.06) (4.71) (3.57) (10.86)
11.35
10.76
10.46
10.28
9.51
9.19
(18.78) (17.95) (17.59) (17.41) (16.05) (15.38)
67.57
66.07
67.53
67.99
70.27
64.82
(27.3) (26.88) (26.49) (26.71) (26.46) (28.03)
57.26
(22.68)
3.50
3.11
2.93
4.22
4.81
(0.78) (1.14) (1.49) (0.81)
0.78)
2,681

2,668

2,668

2,689

2,669

2,654

Notes: Table provides summary statistics for all counties used in regressions for Table 1. For 1939, measrues
of national and state bank data come from 1940 town-level data. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
The unit of observation is the county. Deposit data are the log of aggregate level of postal savings deposits
in a county. See Data section for sources

38

Table A2: Effect of a Change in Bank Proximity, With and Without Deposit Insurance
Dependent Variable: Change in Log of Postal Savings Deposits: 1913-1919
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
∆<
∆<
∆<
∆<
∆<
VARIABLES
1 km
5 km
10 km
15 km
20 km
∆ Nat. Bank*No Deposit Insurance
∆ Nat. Bank*Deposit Insurance
∆ State Bank*No Deposit Insurance
∆ State Bank*Deposit Insurance
Observations
R-squared

(6)
∆<
25 km

-0.430***
(0.151)
-0.0473
(0.156)

-0.400**
(0.159)
-0.0249
(0.223)

-0.223
(0.145)
-0.138
(0.180)

-0.326**
(0.133)
-0.277*
(0.159)

-0.00781
(0.156)
-0.0882
(0.648)

0.0417
(0.208)
0.0383
(0.600)

-0.220*
(0.126)
0.105
(0.156)

-0.140
(0.118)
0.102
(0.169)

-0.175
(0.129)
0.261
(0.143)

-0.174
(0.227)
0.215
(0.160)

0.114
(0.347)
0.597***
(0.151)

-0.125
(0.382)
0.159
(0.191)

7,749
0.134

7,749
0.134

7,749
0.134

7,749
0.134

7,749
0.134

7,749
0.133

Notes: Table provides the results of a first-difference linear regression model. The sample includes any post
offices in the contiguous United States that had at least $1 in postal savings deposits at any time from
1913-1919 and were established before 1913, with ND, SD, MS, WA omitted. Each observation is a post
office and the column headings provide the distance threshold used. The independent variable of interest is
the change in a dummy variable indicating whether the nearest national (or state) bank to the post office
is within a specified distance (1 km, 5 km, etc). State fixed effects are included in all regressions, along
with interaction terms for the existence of deposit insurance. County-level controls include the change each
of the following: log of population the percent of population living in an urban area with 2,500-25,000 in
population, percent of population living in an areas with greater than 25,000 in population, percent male,
percent of voting age males, percent white foreign born, percent black, percent of acreage under farmland,
and percent of farmland improved. Standard errors clustered by state are provided in parentheses below
the coefficients. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

39

