                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INSTITUTIONAL TRADING AROUND M&A ANNOUNCEMENTS

                                           Eliezer Fich
                                      Viktoriya Lantushenko
                                         Clemens Sialm

                                       Working Paper 25814
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25814


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We thank Andriy Bodnaruk, Alon Brav, Chris Clifford, Spencer Couts, Kevin Crotty, Dalia
Marciukaityte, Laura Starks, Sheridan Titman, and participants at the 2018 Financial
Management Association, the 2018 Luxembourg Asset Management Summit, the 2018 Southern
Finance Association, the 2018 TCU Finance Conference, the 2019 Eastern Finance Association,
Drexel University, St. Joseph's University, Syracuse University, the University of Alabama, the
University of Texas at Austin, Villanova University, and Washington State University for
comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Sergey Maslennikov for sharing his data on hedge
fund holdings and to Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim for sharing their data on hedge
fund activism. Clemens Sialm is an independent contractor with AQR Capital Management. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25814.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Eliezer Fich, Viktoriya Lantushenko, and Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Institutional Trading Around M&A Announcements
Eliezer Fich, Viktoriya Lantushenko, and Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 25814
May 2019
JEL No. G14,G23,G24,G34

                                           ABSTRACT

Takeover targets often experience substantial share price appreciations around public
announcements of mergers and acquisitions. We analyze hedge fund and mutual fund holdings
around takeover announcements to assess the differences in investment strategies across
institutions. Our results indicate that hedge funds in the aggregate increase their holdings of soon-
to-be takeover targets by 7.2% during the quarter prior to the public announcement. Conversely,
mutual funds reduce their equity holdings in impending targets by 3.0% during the quarter before
M&A announcements and therefore potentially forgo profitable investment opportunities.


Eliezer Fich                                      Clemens Sialm
Finance Department                                University of Texas at Austin
Drexel University                                 McCombs School of Business
Philadelphia, PA 19104                            2110 Speedway; B6600
efich@drexel.edu                                  Austin, TX 78712-1276
                                                  and NBER
Viktoriya Lantushenko                             clemens.sialm@mccombs.utexas.edu
Saint Joseph's University
Haub School of Business
5600 City Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19131
vlantush@sju.edu
1        Introduction

Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) often generate substantial appreciation of the targets’

equity. As Figure 1 illustrates, the stock prices of target companies increase on average by

more than 20% immediately after the public announcements of M&A transactions. Trading

in anticipation of these announcements can significantly improve the performance of an

investment strategy.1 In this paper, we analyze the holdings of hedge funds and mutual

funds around takeover announcements to better understand the investment strategies of

these two types of institutions.

        Different types of investors might have different access to private information or distinct

abilities to process public information since they exhibit various regulatory restrictions,

compensation structures, and trading strategies. For example, whereas mutual funds face

significant regulatory restrictions and disclosure requirements, hedge funds are less reg-

ulated and offer limited transparency. Also, the compensation of hedge fund managers

is typically more performance sensitive than the compensation of mutual fund managers.

Moreover, although mutual funds frequently follow more straight-forward long-only invest-

ment strategies, hedge funds often take advantage of more complex investment strategies

that use derivatives, short-selling, and leverage.2 Consequently, the incentives and the abil-

ity to obtain private information and process complex public information is likely to vary

by institutional type.

        To study the trading strategies of institutional investors around M&A deals, we analyze

a sample of 7,184 M&A announcements from 1990 through 2015. Our main results show that

    1
    As noted by Jensen and Ruback (1983), Holmström and Kaplan (2001), Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn
(2008), and many others, M&A deals are among the main events of corporations.
    2
    See for example, Brown and Goetzmann (1997), Fung and Hsieh (1997, 2001), Ackermann, McEnally,
and Ravenscraft (1999), Liang (2000), Goetzmann, Ingersoll, and Ross (2003), Agarwal and Naik (2004),
Brunnermeier and Nagel (2004), Kosowski, Naik, and Teo (2007), Brown, Goetzmann, Liang, and Schwarz
(2008), Griffin and Xu (2009), Eling and Faust (2010), Jagannathan, Malakhov, and Novikov (2010), Ivashina
and Sun (2011), Massoud, Nandy, Saunders, and Song (2011), Titman and Tiu (2011), Aragon and Martin
(2012), Sun, Wang, and Zheng (2012), Agarwal, Jiang, Tang, and Yang (2013), Aragon, Hertzel, Shi (2013),
Maslennikov and Hund (2015), Swem (2015), Gao and Huang (2016), Gargano, Rossi, and Wermers (2017),
Crane, Crotty, and Umar (2018), Kumar, Mullally, Ray, and Tang (2018), and Qian and Zhong (2018).




                                                    2
hedge funds substantially increase their holdings in takeover candidates before the merger

announcement. In contrast, we find that mutual funds reduce their exposure to takeover

candidates before the merger announcement. The target ownership changes in takeover

targets by both mutual funds and hedge funds are not only statistically significant but also

economically important. On average, hedge fund ownership in impending takeover targets

increases by 7.2% (from 3.74% to 4.02% of shares outstanding) during the quarter prior to

the merger announcement. On the other hand, mutual fund ownership in takeover targets

decreases by 3.0% (from 11.82% to 11.46% as a fraction of the target’s shares outstanding)

during the calendar quarter preceding the public merger announcement. The decline in

mutual fund ownership of to-be takeover targets becomes more pronounced if we adjust

for the change in mutual fund ownership in peer firms with similar characteristics over our

sample period. Notably, at least some of the decline in mutual fund ownership can be

attributed to an equilibrium response to the increase in ownership of hedge funds.

   Although our analysis focuses mostly on the portfolio changes in the quarters prior

to the public announcement of an M&A transaction, we find that the ownership changes

further accelerate during the announcement quarter. Mutual fund ownership decreases by

27.2% (from 11.46% to 8.39% of shares outstanding) and hedge fund ownership increases by

53.0% (from 4.02% to 6.13% of shares outstanding) during the quarter the M&A transaction

is publicly announced. Using daily mutual fund returns we find that, during the M&A

announcement quarter, most of the ownership change occurs after the deal is announced.

Mutual funds are less interested in the target stock after the M&A announcement, since the

stock price of the target will depend primarily on the stock price of the acquirer (if the target

shareholders are paid in shares of the acquiring company) or on the offer price (if the target

shareholders are paid in cash). Conversely, the increase in hedge fund ownership during

the announcement quarter is consistent with merger arbitrage strategies, as discussed by

Mitchell and Pulvino (2001), Baker and Savasoglu (2002), Hsieh and Walking (2005), and

Jiang, Li, and Mei (2016).

   To investigate whether our results are affected by Regulation Fair Disclosure (Reg-FD),


                                               3
which requires that all material information be shared with all investors at the same time,

we compare the ownership changes before and after 2001. Our results indicate qualitatively

similar effects before and after the regulatory change. Furthermore, the ownership changes

are also robust across transactions of different sizes, different takeover premia, and different

deal characteristics.

   In an analysis of all publicly-traded firms, we find that increases in hedge fund ownership

and decreases in mutual fund ownership over several quarters increase the probability that

a company becomes a takeover target in subsequent quarters. This analysis also allows

us to control for common characteristics of the companies (e.g., industry, size, market-to-

book, momentum) that might be used as trading signals by institutional investors. We

find that the ownership changes by mutual funds and hedge funds remain an economically

and statistically significant predictor of M&A transactions after controlling for these style

characteristics. These results indicate that the trading decisions of mutual funds and hedge

funds are not subsumed by these common characteristics.

   Our results on ownership changes might be affected by the affiliation of fund manage-

ment companies with the advisors for the acquirers and targets, as previously discussed by

Bodnaruk, Massa, and Simonov (2009). These asset management firms might obtain early

access to the information about a forthcoming acquisition. We find that the ownership in

a target firm by mutual funds affiliated with the target’s M&A advisor increases slightly

several quarters prior to the M&A announcement. Conversely, we note that the ownership

in a target firm by mutual funds affiliated with the acquirer’s M&A advisor declines in

the quarters prior to the M&A announcement, consistent with our overall results. Thus,

trading by affiliated investors does not explain our results in the overall sample.

   We also study whether our hedge fund results are driven by the activist hedge funds

identified by Brav, Jiang, and Kim (2015). Of the 7,184 M&A takeover targets in our

sample, only 76 are associated with hedge fund activism. Our results show that hedge

fund activists significantly increase their stakes in these 76 target companies prior to M&A

deal announcements. In contrast, ownership changes by non-activist hedge funds are less


                                               4
pronounced. These findings suggest activism as a possible channel that some hedge funds

may use to generate gains. However, the ownership changes by activist hedge funds cannot

explain the vast majority of the trading in takeover targets prior to the announcement.

      Next, we analyze whether there are important cross-sectional differences among insti-

tutional investors who trade the targets’ equity prior to merger announcements. We find

significant persistence in the ownership stakes held across time by both mutual funds and

hedge funds. Specifically, funds that allocate a higher weight in to-be targets a quarter

prior to the announcement tend to allocate a higher portfolio weight to future targets as

well. This evidence indicates that there are systematic differences in allocations toward

upcoming targets across funds.

      While a substantial literature documents that the performance of mutual funds and

other investors is related to several fund characteristics,3 there is a paucity of research on

the specific investment strategies that they use to generate abnormal performance. We

study whether the allocation to future target companies is related to the activeness of a

fund. We use three different proxies for active management: the Active Share of Cremers

and Petajisto (2009), the R2 of Amihud and Goyenko (2013), and the absolute value of the

Return Gap of Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008). We find that mutual funds that are

more actively managed tend to decrease their ownership of future takeover targets to a lesser

extent. Thus, less active funds, which have been shown to exhibit lower investment ability

than more active mutual funds, tend to forgo the largest benefits of takeover announcements

by selling out their shares in takeover targets prematurely.

      Our work contributes to the active debate on whether institutional investors profit from

takeover announcements. Jegadeesh and Tang (2010) find that institutional investors whose

main broker is also a target advisor are net buyers of target shares before announcements

and their pre-announcement trades are significantly profitable. Similarly, Lowry, Rossi, and

  3
    See for example, Carhart (1997), Wermers (2000), Chen, Jagadeesh, and Wermers (2000), Kacperczyk,
Sialm, and Zheng (2005, 2008), Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2006), Massa and Rehman (2008), Bodnaruk,
Massa, and Simonov (2009), Cremers and Petajisto (2009), Agrawal and Nasser (2012), Edmans, Goldstein,
and Jiang (2012), Amihud and Goyenko (2013), Berk and Van Binsbergen (2015), Pastor, Stambaugh, and
Taylor (2015), Cremers, Ferreira, Matos, and Starks (2016), and Jiang and Zheng (2018).


                                                  5
Zhu (2018) use evidence from options holdings to find that advisor banks trade in client

firms ahead of merger announcements In contrast, Griffin, Shu, and Topaloglu (2012) do

not find much evidence to support that investment bank clients take advantage of takeover

advising connections. Whereas those papers are primarily interested in short-term trading

immediately prior to the merger announcement, we analyze trades over longer horizons

for a broader set of mutual fund and hedge funds. We add to this literature by showing

that, unlike mutual funds, some hedge funds accumulate large stakes in soon-to-be takeover

targets. In a related study, Dai, Massoud, Nandy, and Saunders (2017) analyze the trading

by short- and long-term hedge funds around merger announcements. Our paper focuses on

the overall trades of institutional investors and contrasts mutual funds and hedge funds.

   This study also contributes to the literature that investigates the specific methods that

institutional investors use to create value for their investors. Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy

(2008) find that fund managers exhibit superior performance when they trade shares of

firms they are connected through their educational networks. Baker, Litov, Wachter, and

Wurgler (2010) find that a significant amount of outperformance of mutual funds takes

place around corporate earnings announcements. Our paper moves this literature forward

by showing that some investment managers create value by increasing their holdings in

prospective takeover targets.

   Our paper also adds important evidence to the strand of the M&A literature evaluating

the role of institutional investors during these transactions (see, for example, Officer, Ozbas,

and Sensoy (2010), Greenwood and Schor (2009), and Fich, Harford, and Tran (2015)).

   The paper proceeds as follows. We describe the sample construction and the summary

statistics in Section 2. Section 3 includes the empirical results on trading by mutual funds

and hedge funds. Section 4 provides cross-sectional evidence. Section 5 concludes.




                                               6
2        Data and Sample Construction

We obtain information on M&A deals for the period of 1990 through 2015 from the SDC

database. The initial sample of completed and withdrawn deals consists of 34,144 trans-

actions with the following deal characteristics: mergers, acquisitions, and acquisitions of a

majority interest. We eliminate targets that are not publicly traded and those that have a

market capitalization of less than $25 million four quarters prior to the deal announcement

(in real 2015 dollars). This yields 7,184 transactions.

        The Thomson holdings database provides data on mutual fund equity holdings. To

merge the Thomson holdings database with the CRSP Mutual fund database, we use

MFLINKS from the Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS). To examine the evolution of

hedge fund trading in target firms, we identify those within the pool of all 13F institutions

reported in Thomson Financial. We use the hedge fund identifier from Maslennikov and

Hund (2015).4

        We obtain mutual fund monthly returns, expenses, total net assets, turnover ratio, and

other fund characteristics from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) Survivor-

Bias-Free Mutual Fund database. Individual stock prices and returns are from the CRSP

monthly stock file and firm characteristics are from the COMPUSTAT database.

        Panel A of Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the 7,184 M&A offers in our sample.

These deals have a completion rate of 82.1%. About 42.4% of the transactions in our sample

are paid fully in cash, and 26.6% are paid fully in stock. Deals with multiple bidders

constitute 9.6% of our sample. In 68.1% of the offers, the deals are diversifying since both

the target and the bidder operate in different industries. About 18.7% of the transactions are

tender offers and 9.3% are characterized as hostile. The premium offered according to the

SDC database is 40.7%. This premium is measured relative to the price four weeks prior to

the announcement date. The average market capitalization of the targets is $1,420 million.

However, the distribution of market capitalizations is fairly wide: the 5th percentile equals

    4
        We are grateful to Sergey Maslennikov for sharing his data on hedge fund holdings.




                                                       7
$33 million and the 95th percentile equals $5,776 million. The average market-to-book ratio

of the target firms is 2.4. These summary statistics are similar to those reported in other

M&A studies (e.g., Gaspar, Massa, and Matos (2005), Chen, Harford, and Li (2007), and

Fich, Harford, and Tran (2015)).

   The benefit of owning a target’s equity during the M&A announcement is substantial.

Figure 1 illustrates the evolution of the average cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) around

M&As during the trading day window [-250; +55] relative to the deal announcement date.
                                                       Pt
We calculate cumulative abnormal returns as CARij =       j=1 (rij − rmj ), where rij is a

firm’s i0 s return and rmj is the CRSP value-weighted market return at time j. To mitigate

the effect of delisting on CARs after announcements, we set abnormal returns of delisted

targets to zero. The three-day average CAR for the targets in our sample is 20.5%. We find

a significant increase in the prices of target companies prior to the M&A announcement, as

shown previously by Keown and Pinkerton (1981) and Schwert (1996). The mean return in

the year prior to the announcement for the target stock is 9.3%.

   To obtain the aggregate holdings of takeover candidates by mutual funds, we sum the

holdings by any mutual funds in the Thomson holdings mutual fund database over the

period from 1990-2015.

   For the cross-sectional results in Sections 3.7.2, 3.9, and 4, we focus on a smaller sample

of actively-managed domestic equity mutual funds. We start with a sample of 3,864 funds

for the period 1990-2015 in the Thomson holdings database with available fund names and

with the following investment objective styles: aggressive growth, growth, and growth and

income. We eliminate index funds by screening out fund names for the following words:

“Index,” “Indx,” “Market,” “S&P,” “ETF,” and “NYSE.” Consistent with other studies

(e.g. Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng, 2008), we remove fund observations with fewer than 11

stocks in a portfolio. As a result, we obtain 3,640 funds. Next, we record fund returns, total

net assets under management (TNA), and other fund characteristics (e.g., turnover, expense

ratio) from the CRSP Survivor-Bias-Free Mutual Fund database and merge these data with

the Thomson holdings database. There are a number of mutual funds with multiple share


                                              8
classes. Typically, fund share classes differ in fee structure and clientele (e.g., institutional

or retail). Similar to the procedure used by Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008) and

Wermers, Yao, and Zhao (2012), we combine multiple share classes into one fund. We then

calculate the TNA for each fund as the sum of all values of assets across multiple fund shares.

Fund age is the maximum age of its share classes. For the remaining fund characteristics, we

aggregate different share classes by taking the TNA-weighted average across all share classes

of a fund. We exclude the first 18 months of fund returns to decrease the impact of the

incubation bias reported by Evans (2010). In addition, we require non-missing fund returns

and non-missing total net assets under management. Because Elton, Gruber, and Blake

(2001) suggest that the returns of funds with TNA less than $15 million are biased upwards

in the CRSP Mutual Fund database, we exclude all funds with TNAs below $15 million

as of the beginning of the month. In addition, we require non-missing fund characteristics

(age, turnover, and expense ratio). Our smaller sample of actively-managed domestic funds

contains 1,926 unique funds.

    Panel B of Table 1 provides summary statistics for our sample of mutual funds. These

are calculated from 70,200 fund-quarter observations. The average fund manages around

$2 billion in assets, is 19 years old, has an expense ratio of 1.22%, and exhibits a turnover

ratio of 80%. On average, funds achieve a raw portfolio return net of expenses of 2.22% per

quarter and attract flows of 2.29% per quarter. These summary statistics are consistent

with those documented in the literature (e.g., Huang, Sialm, and Zhang (2011), Amihud

and Goyenko (2013), and Jiang and Verardo (2018)). The activeness of a mutual fund is

captured by its Active Share following Cremers and Petajisto (2009), the R-squared from

Amihud and Goyenko (2013), and the absolute Return Gap over the prior 12 months from

Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008).5 The funds in our sample have an average Active

Share of 81.4%, an average 1 − R2 of 13.3%, and an absolute Return Gap of 0.26%.

    To construct our sample of hedge funds, we obtain institutional holdings from the Thom-

   5
     Active Share data are obtained from https://activeshare.nd.edu/. See Cremers and Pareek (2016) for
additional information on the construction of the data.




                                                  9
son institutional holdings database over the period of 1990-2015. There are 6,569 unique

institutional investors who file a 13F schedule during this time period. Using the updated

identifier from Maslennikov and Hund (2015), we obtain 1,162 unique hedge funds. Based

on the reported 13F holdings across 31,089 fund-quarter observations, an average hedge

fund holds about 93 stocks in its portfolio. This constitutes about $885 million in equity

holdings. The average hedge fund reports its holdings over a period of six years.



3        Mutual Fund and Hedge Fund Trading in Takeover Targets

In this section we analyze the holdings of mutual funds and hedge funds around takeover

announcements. We present both univariate and multivariate analyses.


3.1       Univariate Analysis for the Overall Sample

We start by examining the aggregate mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in takeover

targets around the M&A announcement. For each target, we calculate the total number of

shares held by all mutual funds as a fraction of total shares outstanding in each of the four

quarters prior to the M&A announcement quarter, which are denoted as Q(t) − 4 through

Q(t) − 1.6 Similarly, we aggregate hedge fund ownership for each to-be target and analyze

the ownership by these investors as a fraction of shares outstanding. We also report the

holdings of mutual funds and hedge funds at the end of the announcement quarter Q(t).

        Figure 2 compares the evolution of mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in to-be

targets from several quarters prior to the M&A announcement until one quarter after.

Panel A depicts the aggregate ownership of takeover targets, whereas Panel B reports the

difference in aggregate ownership between takeover targets and matched control firms. The

figures show that hedge funds start building their positions in takeover targets well ahead of

the merger announcement date. In contrast, mutual funds gradually reduce their positions

in these firms. According to Figure 2, mutual funds are net sellers of takeover targets, and

    6
    We adjust holdings for stock splits by multiplying the reported number of shares by the CRSP adjustment
factor.


                                                    10
hedge funds, in aggregate, are net buyers of these potentially profitable stocks.

       For both mutual funds and hedge funds, we test the statistical significance of the changes

in takeover target ownership during the merger pre-announcement period. We cluster the

standard errors by time, since several takeover announcements can take place in the same

quarter and since the mutual fund and hedge fund holdings are available at a quarterly fre-

quency. Table 2 reports the results. We find that mutual fund ownership in takeover targets

significantly decreases by 36 basis points (from 11.82% to 11.46% of shares outstanding)

one quarter prior to the announcement quarter. The average change in aggregate mutual

fund ownership during the previous quarters is small in magnitude. In contrast, we observe

persistent increases in target ownership by hedge funds during the quarters preceding the

M&A announcement quarter. Hedge fund ownership in takeover targets increases by 27

basis points (from 3.74% to 4.02%) during the quarter prior to the announcement and by

63 basis points (from 3.38% to 4.02%) during the three quarters prior to the announcement.

       The largest ownership changes occur during the announcement quarter. Mutual funds

decrease their holdings of target stocks from 11.46% to 8.39% of shares outstanding, whereas

hedge funds increase their ownership from 4.02% to 6.13%. We do not know whether the

positions in takeover targets are adjusted before or after the public M&A announcements.

The accumulation of target stocks by hedge funds might be due to merger arbitrage strate-

gies by hedge funds.7 On the other hand, mutual funds might reduce their holdings in

the targets after the M&A announcement since they might not be interested in holding the

shares of the acquiring firm if the deal is stock financed or since they might not be interested

in holding a stock where the value depends primarily on the offer price if the deal is cash

financed. We explore these issues in more detail in Section 3.7.

       Panel B summarizes the number of separate mutual funds and hedge funds that own

shares in the target firms. We observe that the number of mutual funds significantly de-

   7
    A common strategy of hedge funds is to purchase target company stocks immediately after the public
announcement, as discussed by Mitchell and Pulvino (2001), Baker and Savasoglu (2002), and Hsieh and
Walking (2005). Jiang, Li, and Mei (2016) provide evidence that activist shareholders can change the course
of an announced M&A deal through public campaigns.




                                                    11
creases from 64.39 to 62.43 and the number of hedge funds significantly increases from 5.11

to 5.47 in the quarter prior to the announcement.8 The change in the number of mutual

funds and hedge funds (i.e., extensive margin) accounts for most of the change in the ag-

gregate ownership proportion of these institutions. On the other hand, the change in the

ownership share conditional on owning the target firm (i.e., intensive margin) is relatively

small. Thus, the ownership changes are driven primarily by exits and entries of institutions

and not by partial reallocation or rebalancing among institutions owning the target stocks.

       It is at first glance surprising that mutual funds reduce their holdings in companies that

are subsequently becoming takeover candidates. These funds might forgo significant gains

by prematurely selling these companies due to the large announcement effects. However,

it must be recognized that if one type of investor accumulates some securities then it is

necessary that another type of investor decumulates these securities in equilibrium. Thus,

as hedge funds build up positions in impending takeover candidates other investors, such

as mutual funds, have to liquidate their positions. These results are consistent with the

hypothesis that hedge funds have superior information or better information processing

ability than mutual funds, as least with respect to M&A announcements.


3.2      Economic Magnitude

We estimate the economic effects of changing institutional ownership prior to merger an-

nouncements by calculating the dollar amount of these changes in target holdings. We

multiply the change in aggregate mutual fund shares (in the quarter prior to the M&A

announcement) by the end-of-quarter target share price. Mutual funds, on average, reduce

their holdings in to-be targets on average by $2.95 million. In contrast, hedge funds increase

their holdings in target firms, on average, by $3.83 million.

       To consider various scenarios of the dollar amount associated with declining mutual

   8
    The number of hedge fund owners corresponds to the number of management companies that own
specific stocks, since the 13-F filings by hedge funds are reported at the management company and not the
fund level. The number of unique hedge fund owners can therefore be larger since a management company
can have multiple distinct hedge funds.




                                                   12
fund ownership (including price run-ups, announcement premiums, and price markups), we

multiply the aggregate change in shares during the quarter prior to the announcement by

the price change from the end of the prior quarter to the day prior to the announcement

(i.e., run-up), the price change from one day before to one day after the announcement

(i.e., premium), and the price change from one day after to 60 days after the announcement

(i.e., markup).9 The average values for mutual funds across the 7, 184 deals amount to

−$344, 523 for the run-up, −$775, 006 for the premium, and −$350, 818 for the markup.

Thus, the mutual fund sector as a whole leaves significant “money on the table” by trading

the target stocks prematurely.

       Using a similar procedure, we find that the hedge fund sector gains, on average, for

each deal as a result of increasing their ownership in to-be targets in the quarter prior to

the announcement: $204, 571 from the run-up, $350, 062 from the premium, and $101, 325

from the markup. Overall, our evidence suggests that mutual funds in the aggregate are

not informed about upcoming merger announcements. In contrast, many hedge funds are

either informed about future deal announcements or are skillful enough to predict these

events.


3.3      Matched Subsample

Table 3 reports the ownership proportion by mutual funds and hedge funds for the target

firms and for the matched control firms. Firms are matched by industry classification,

market capitalization, and book-to-market ratio.10 Although mutual fund ownership in

   9
    The run-up is defined as (NQ(t)−1 − NQ(t)−2 ) × (Pt−1 − PQ(t)−1 ), where NQ(t)−1 is the number of shares
held at the end of the quarter immediately preceding the announcement quarter, NQ(t)−2 is the number of
shares held at the end of the quarter two quarters prior to the announcement quarter, Pt−1 is the price of
the target stock on the trading day prior to the announcement, and PQ(t)−1 is the price of the target stock
at the end of the quarter immediately preceding the announcement quarter. The premium is defined as
(NQ(t)−1 − NQ(t)−2 ) × (Pt+1 − Pt−1 ), where Pt+1 is the price of the target stock on the trading day after
the announcement. Finally, the markup is defined as (NQ(t)−1 − NQ(t)−2 ) × (Pt+60 − Pt+1 ), where Pt+60 is
the price of the target stock 60 trading days after the announcement.
  10
    To assemble the matching sample, we use the following procedure. We have 7,146 out of 7,184 target
firms with non-missing industry codes and market capitalizations. We impute the book value data with any
available observations going back up to four quarters from Q(t) − 4. This results in 6,589 target firms with
available book values (557 targets are with missing book values). Next, we match on the 48 Fama-French



                                                    13
target firms decreases by 36 basis points in the quarter prior to the announcement, it

increases by 18 basis points for the matched firms.11 The decline in mutual fund ownership

of target firms is further strengthened if we adjust for the change in mutual fund ownership

of peer firms during our sample. This decline can therefore not be explained by changes

in ownership triggered by the style characteristics of the target stocks. In contrast, the

increase in hedge fund ownership of target firms of 28 basis points in the quarter prior to

the announcement is slightly reduced if we adjust for the increase in hedge fund ownership

of matched control firms of 8 basis points. Thus, the change in the average hedge fund

ownership in target stocks can partially be explained by changes in hedge fund ownership

for stocks with similar style characteristics as target stocks.

    We also observe that the matched control firms tend to exhibit lower ownership by

both mutual funds and hedge funds than the actual target firms in the quarters prior to

the merger announcement. We discuss next whether this could be due to the fact that

institutional ownership might increase the probability of takeovers.


3.4    Institutional Ownership and Takeover Probability

Hedge funds might purchase stocks with specific characteristics (e.g., small stocks, value

stocks, momentum stocks). These stocks, in turn, might also be more likely to become

takeover targets, because acquiring companies might consider similar characteristics when

selecting potential takeover targets, as discussed by Edmans, Goldstein, and Jiang (2012).

Furthermore, hedge funds might not only increase their positions in eventual takeover can-

didates, they might also increase their positions in similar firms that fail to become takeover

industry classification and time and make sure that the book-to-market ratios and the market capitalizations
of the potential control firms at the end of quarter Q(t) − 4 are between 0.5 and 2 times the corresponding
values of the target firms. We eliminate self-matches and other firms that become takeover targets in any of
the six quarters Q(t) − 4, Q(t) − 3, Q(t) − 2, Q(t) − 1, Q(t), and Q(t) + 1. We also require non-missing shares
outstanding in four quarters prior to and in the announcement quarter. If there are multiple candidates,
we pick the firm with the closest market capitalization to that of the target firm. This process yields 6,259
matches.
   11
      The ownership changes differ slightly between Tables 2 and 3 since we do not have valid control firms for
all takeover targets. Table 2 is based on 7,184 takeover targets, whereas Table 3 is based on 6,259 takeover
targets.



                                                      14
candidates and therefore might experience a decline in their stock prices since the antici-

pated acquisition does not materialize.

      To address these concerns, we estimate linear probability specifications modeling the

probability that a company receives a takeover bid using the universe of publicly traded

firms and controlling for firm characteristics.12 Our tests explore the effect of mutual fund

and hedge fund ownership (both in levels and in changes during the M&A pre-announcement

period) on the probability of a takeover. In Table 4, the dependent variable is one if a firm

is a takeover target during the announcement quarter, Q(t), and 0, otherwise. The variables

of interest in these regressions include the mutual and hedge fund level ownership in firms

in Q(t) − 4, as well as the changes in ownership by these institutional investors during the

quarters preceding the M&A announcement quarter.

      The control variables are the target firm’s market capitalization, market-to-book ratio,

and one-year stock return. These controls capture popular quantitative investment strate-

gies based on size, value, and momentum. The standard errors are clustered at the quarter

level and the regressions include time-fixed effects and two-digit SIC fixed effects.

      Consistent with our univariate results, the results in Table 4 show that ownership

changes in the quarters prior to the announcement are related to the likelihood of a com-

pany becoming a target. The likelihood decreases if mutual funds raise their ownership and

increases if hedge funds raise their ownership prior to the public announcements.

      Controlling for style characteristics of the target firms does not qualitatively affect the

results. In fact, the magnitude of the hedge fund results increase after controlling for

style characteristics. The results also show that both mutual and hedge fund ownership in

Q(t) − 4 are positively associated with the probability of a firm becoming a takeover target

four quarters later. The coefficients on the control variables indicate that smaller firms and

firms with lower market-to-book ratios are more likely to become takeover targets.

      The fact that the effects of institutional ownership on the takeover probability are spread

over several quarters indicates that the ownership changes are not just due to the anticipa-

 12
      Our results from logit regressions are consistent.


                                                       15
tion of imminent takeovers. Changes in holdings have long-lasting associations with firms

that are becoming takeover targets.


3.5     Changes Around Regulation FD

Regulation Fair Disclosure (Reg-FD), passed in 2000, requires that all material information

be shared with all investors at the same time. In Table 5, we separate the takeovers

according to whether they were announced during 1990-2000 or during 2001-2015. Despite

these changes, we find consistent results across the two sub-samples. Mutual funds reduce

and hedge funds increase their holdings of takeover targets prior to the announcement

during both time periods. The magnitudes of the portfolio changes appear stronger during

the more recent time period (2001-2015). However, this result is primarily due to the growth

of the holdings for both fund types. Thus, changes in regulation and other changes over our

time period do not qualitatively affect institutional trades around merger announcements.


3.6     Univariate Subsamples by Deal Characteristics

We also perform univariate tests for partitions of targets with different deal characteristics.


3.6.1    Target Size

We divide in Panel A of Table 6 the sample based on the market capitalization of the

targets four quarters prior to the announcement. The results are broadly consistent across

the three subsamples. For all size groups, mutual funds reduce their ownership prior to

the M&A announcement, whereas hedge funds increase it. The ownership levels by mutual

funds and hedge funds tend to be more substantial for larger targets (in terms of their

market capitalizations). For example, four quarters prior to the takeover announcement,

mutual funds hold 5.06% of shares outstanding for targets below $100 million and 17.04%

for targets above $250 million.




                                              16
3.6.2      Target Premium

Panels B and C of Table 6 examine whether funds’ purchases are stronger in targets with

higher premiums and three-day CARs around the deal announcements. We sort targets

based on SDC premiums and three-day CARs around M&A announcements. Overall, we

find qualitatively similar results across subsamples. We do not find that hedge fund buying

activity is more pronounced for more profitable transactions. Indeed, the increase in hedge

fund ownership is stronger for targets that experience lower CARs around announcements.

It is possible that hedge fund trading increases the pre-announcement price of to-be targets

which, in turn, may lower the price appreciation during the public M&A announcement.


3.6.3      Tender Offers

An interesting finding is that mutual funds substantially reduce their ownership in targets

associated with tender offers (by 128 basis points) relatively to non-tender deals (by 15 basis

points) in the quarter prior to the announcement, as reported in Panel D. Tender offers are

generally more of a surprise than non-tender offers, which may explain why we see stronger

selling activity among mutual funds for this type of deals. Mutual funds might be less

reluctant to sell securities if they cannot anticipate an impending merger announcement.


3.6.4      Multiple Bidders

Panel E of Table 6 separates the sample between transactions with multiple bidders and

transactions with single bidders. Slightly less than 10% of target companies attract multiple

bidders. While our baseline findings for both mutual funds and hedge funds are unaltered,

we observe more pronounced ownership changes in the minority of deals with multiple

bidders.


3.6.5      Deal Completion

Our sample includes complete and incomplete (or withdrawn) takeover attempts. We ob-

serve results consistent with our main findings across both subsamples, as summarized in

                                              17
Panel F. Interestingly, the ownership changes are slightly stronger in the subsample of

incomplete deals. The increase in ownership by hedge funds in the subset of withdrawn

deals is notable given that Malmendier, Opp, and Saidi (2016) find that many targets in

withdrawn deals experience a permanent revaluation of 15% for all cash targets.

   In general, the subsample results in Table 6 corroborate our main findings: prior to

M&A announcements, mutual funds tend to decrease and hedge funds tend to increase

their ownership in takeover candidates across different time periods and for deals with

different characteristics.


3.7     Dynamic Ownership Changes

We can only observe institutional ownership at a quarterly frequency. This prevents us

from studying trades during a shorter window around takeover announcements. In this

subsection, we indirectly infer the higher-frequency trading of institutional investors by

evaluating ownership changes for deals announced at different times during a quarter and

by taking advantage of daily fund returns.


3.7.1    Timing of Announcements

Table 7 divides our sample of deals based on the timing of the M&A announcement during

the event quarter. Such timing is informative because it helps us to understand the timing

of trades within a quarter. For example, if a merger announcement takes place at the

beginning of quarter Q(t), then the holdings at the end of quarter Q(t)−1 are more likely to

incorporate the trades by institutions that anticipate an imminent takeover announcement.

On the other hand, the holdings at the end of quarter Q(t) − 1 are less likely to incorporate

a takeover announcement that occurs at the end of quarter Q(t). Of the 7,184 deals, 1,479

are announced within the first 20 calendar days of the quarter, 4,073 are announced in

the middle of the quarter, and the remaining 1,632 deals become public within the last 20

calendar days of the announcement quarter.

   The estimates in Table 7 show stronger ownership changes in the quarter prior to the


                                             18
M&A announcement by funds for transactions announced at the beginning of the event

quarter. This evidence indicates that trading by mutual funds and hedge funds in takeover

targets accelerates immediately prior to the M&A announcement. Thus, the trades in

quarter Q(t) − 1 prior to the announcement (reported in Table 2) likely understate the

overall trading activity prior to the M&A announcement because additional trading occurs

just before the announcement during quarter Q(t).


3.7.2      Daily Fund Returns

An alternative way to infer the timing of trades is to compare the daily returns of mutual

funds on the announcement dates with the returns of the holdings of the mutual funds

including and excluding the target stock holdings. The actual fund return will correspond

more closely to the holdings return including the target stock if the mutual fund continues

to hold the target stock on the announcement day. On the other hand, the actual fund

return will correspond more closely to the holdings return excluding the target stock if the

mutual fund sells the target stock prior to the announcement.

       Conditional on the mutual fund owning of a target at the end of quarter Q(t) − 1, we

compare the actual (reported) fund return with the holdings-based-return including and

excluding the target’s stock over a three day window around the M&A announcement.13

We focus in this subsection on the sample of domestic equity mutual funds, as summarized

in Panel B of Table 1 and described in Section 2.

       The results are reported in Panel A of Table 8. Mutual funds holding target stocks at

the end of the prior quarter generate an actual return of 21.1 basis points during a three-

  13
    The holdings-based return is calculated as the value-weighted average three-day return across various
asset classes of the portfolio composition. For each fund at Q(t) − 1, we obtain the percent of a portfolio
allocated to equities, cash, and bonds/preferred stocks from the CRSP fund summary file. The return on the
equity part of the portfolio is based on the mutual fund holdings at Q(t) − 1 and is obtained by multiplying
the stock weight by the corresponding three-day stock return around the deal announcement date, and
summing these products at the portfolio level. We proxy for the cash and bond/preferred stock returns
using published indices. For bonds and preferred stocks, we use the total return of the Bloomberg Barclays
US Aggregate Bond Index, while for cash holdings we use the one-month Treasury bill rate. We adjust the
holdings-based returns for the three-day expense ratio, obtained by dividing the annual fund expense ratio
into 250 and multiplying by 3. The weights of the equity positions are rebalanced for the portfolio that
excludes the target stock.


                                                    19
day window around the announcement of the M&A transaction. In addition, the average

three-day return based on the previously-disclosed holdings amounts to 24.3 basis points

including the target stock and 16.5 basis points excluding the target stock. The difference

between the holdings returns including and excluding the target stock of 7.8 basis points is

due to the announcement effect of the target stock.

   We also compare the actual fund returns with the holdings returns for our sample of

control firms. We consider mutual funds that invest in the control firms at the end of

the quarter prior to the acquisition announcements. This comparison with control funds

is important since the reported fund return might be systematically different from the

holdings return due to unobserved trading costs or interim trading benefits, as discussed

by Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008). We find that the funds holding the control firm

exhibit a return of 14.5 basis points over the three-days around the announcement. The

difference in the holdings returns including and excluding the control firm of 0.1 basis points

is much smaller than the corresponding difference of 7.8 basis points for the funds holding

the target stock. Interestingly, the small return difference of 0.1 basis points is statistically

significant, indicating that matched firms also appreciate slightly on the announcement day.

For the control funds, the reported fund return underperforms the holdings return including

the target by 2.1 basis points, indicating that trading costs exceed interim trading benefits.

   In Panel B of Table 8, we explore the announcement effects in a regression framework.

We regress the three-day reported fund return in excess of the holdings return including the

target firm around the announcement day on the announcement effect and on the holdings

return including the target. The announcement effect is defined as the product of a fund’s

allocated portfolio weight to the target firm at the end of Q(t)−1 and the target’s three-day

return around the M&A announcement day. The holdings-based return including the target

is defined as the return of a fund holding the disclosed fund positions at the end of the prior

quarter, Q(t) − 1.

   The coefficient on the announcement effect estimates the proportion of the target stock

that is sold prior to the M&A announcement. If all funds completely sell their holdings


                                               20
of the target stock before the announcement, then the coefficient on the announcement

effect will be −1. However, if all funds continue to hold the target until after the M&A

announcement, then the coefficient on the announcement effect will be equal to zero.

   The results in Panel B of Table 8 indicate that around one-third of mutual fund holdings

in the target are, on average, liquidated prior to the M&A announcement. Thus, the

liquidation behavior of mutual funds actually accelerates during the announcement quarter.

We repeat this analysis on the control firms and find that the results are in contrast to those

for target firms in that the coefficient on the announcement effect for the control firms is

insignificantly positive.

   Our findings suggest that mutual funds are generally uninformed about forthcoming

M&A announcements. For hedge funds, possible drivers of their accumulation of the tar-

gets’ stock prior to the M&A announcements could be related to the possession of private

information, or superior managerial ability to identify to-be targets, or both. While we do

not take a particular stand on the mechanism behind this behavior, it appears that mu-

tual funds, in the aggregate, “leave money on the table,” and hedge funds pick it up. Our

results provide a striking contrast between mutual funds and hedge funds with respect to

their trading behavior in to-be M&A targets.


3.8     Short Selling Activities

Institutional investors are only required to disclose their long positions in their 13F filings.

This restriction is particularly important for hedge funds, who frequently participate in

short selling. Ignoring short positions might result in misleading inferences if the long

positions by some investors are offset by the short positions by other investors of the same

type.

   We examine short selling activity in targets and bidders prior to M&A announcements

using data from COMPUSTAT following Rapach, Ringgenberg, and Zhou (2016). The

aggregate amount of short selling is reported monthly in the middle of each calendar month.

For deals announced in the first half of a month (that is, before the short interest report),


                                              21
we treat the short interest report one month prior to the M&A announcement month as a

report in month M (t) − 1. For deals announced after the short interest report is announced,

we treat the short interest report in the M&A announcement month as a report in month

M (t) − 1. We normalize the short selling by the number of shares outstanding on the

corresponding dates.

   Although we do not know the identity of the short-sellers, it is likely that a substantial

fraction of short selling derives from hedge funds. Retail investors, and to a lesser extent,

mutual funds might also contribute to the short selling.

   Table 9 reports the aggregate proportion of short positions as a proportion of shares

outstanding for targets and bidders. We do not find a significant increase in the proportion

of short selling in the target during the month prior to the public M&A announcement.

The increase in short selling in the target stock is slightly larger, but still insignificant, if

we consider a longer window. Since we do not uncover a decline in short selling prior to the

announcement, short sellers in the aggregate do not appear to be anticipating the M&A

announcement. The change in short selling before the M&A announcements is substantially

smaller than the change in the long positions of hedge funds over the same time period.

Thus, even if we attribute all the changes in short selling to hedge funds, we would still

observe an increase in net holdings of target companies by hedge funds in the months prior

to the announcement. We also find a slight increase in the short selling of the bidder

companies over several months prior to the announcement.

   The changes in short selling in targets and bidders after the M&A announcement are

more pronounced than the changes prior to the announcement. We observe a decline in short

selling in target firms from 3.98% to 3.45% in the month of the takeover announcement.

Furthermore, we also find an increase in short selling in bidder firms from 3.28% to 3.75% in

the month of the takeover announcement. This increase in short selling for acquirers could

be due to the activities of merger arbitrageurs who go long the stock of the target and go

short the stock of the acquiring company immediately after the acquisition announcement.




                                               22
3.9   Mutual Fund Affiliation with M&A Advisors

Fund management companies that serve as M&A advisors to targets and acquirers may

provide information about forthcoming deal announcements to their affiliated funds. We

therefore analyze trading by mutual funds whose management company serves as an M&A

advisor to targets or acquirers.

   Growing evidence suggests that financial conglomerates may exploit their access to pri-

vate information in various ways. Bodnaruk, Massa, and Simonov (2009), for example,

document that financial conglomerates in which affiliated investment banks advise acquirer

firms take positions in target companies before M&A deal announcements. Massa and

Rehman (2008) find that mutual fund managers increase their holdings in companies that

borrow from their affiliated banks. Jegadeesh and Tang (2010) also study institutional

trades around takeover announcements. They provide evidence that funds whose main bro-

ker is also a target advisor are net buyers of target shares before announcements and their

pre-announcement trades are significantly profitable.

   In our sample, some mutual funds are affiliated with financial conglomerates that also

provide M&A advisory services. Out of the 1,926 funds in our sample, 1,901 have informa-

tion about the identity of their affiliated management company. The target M&A advisor’s

identity is available for 6,527 (out of 7,184) deals, and the acquirer M&A advisor’s name

is available for about 67% of our sample offers (4,854 transactions). Some companies have

multiple M&A advisors. We identify funds affiliated with M&A advisors by name matching

and examine their ownership in to-be targets prior to deal announcements.

   Table 10 reports the ownership of the target company by mutual funds whose manage-

ment company advises M&A targets or acquirers. The funds affiliated with M&A target

advisors do not exhibit an increase in their ownership in the quarter immediately preceding

the merger announcement. However, over the three quarters prior to the merger announce-

ment, their ownership in affiliated takeover targets increases by about 1.6 basis points. This

longer-term increase in ownership of target firms by affiliated advisors is not necessarily due

to trading based on private information. It could also occur because financial firms with

                                              23
increasing mutual fund ownership stakes might be more likely to be selected as advisors by

potential takeover targets.

   In contrast, the ownership in the target firm by funds that are affiliated with M&A

bidder advisors declines by about 1.4 basis points during the three quarters prior to the

deal announcement quarter. An indication that ownership changes are not driven by short-

term information about an upcoming takeover is provided by the fact that fund ownership

in an impending target does not change significantly in the quarter immediately prior to the

M&A announcement. This finding is consistent with those reported for all mutual funds in

our sample, as reported in Table 2.


3.10    Hedge Fund Activism

A number of studies provide evidence that hedge fund managers are able to influence cor-

porate management and act as informed monitors. For example, Brav, Jiang, Partnoy,

and Thomas (2008) find a relatively large average abnormal return for a firm subject to

activism of about 7% over the period beginning 20 days prior to the filing of a Schedule

13D to 20 days after. Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and Thomas (2008) document improvements

in the affected firms’ operating performance associated with hedge fund activism. Such

positive outcomes can be explained by activists’ intervention and the disciplinary mecha-

nism imposed on the management of firms subject to activism. and Wu and Chung (2019)

also show that hedge fund activism increases shareholder wealth by forcing corporate M&A

to be more efficient and disciplined. In contrast, Greenwood and Schor (2009) argue that

most of the activism announcement returns are explained by activists’ ability to force ac-

tivism firms into a takeover. Greenwood and Schor (2009) suggest that activists pursue

certain firms because they anticipate that those companies will soon be acquired. Gantchev

and Jotikasthira (2018) show that institutional sales raise a firm’s probability of becom-

ing subject to activism and Boyson, Gantchev, and Shivdasani (2017) find that activist

interventions substantially increase the probability of a takeover offer.

   While it is not straightforward to disentangle the drivers of the market reaction to


                                              24
activism announcements, it is plausible that hedge fund activists influence corporate man-

agement decisions; and through this relation with a firm’s management, hedge fund may

have access to information that other market participants do not.

       We explore this plausible channel between hedge funds and their holdings in activism

firms that become takeover targets. The expanded sample from Brav, Jiang, Partnoy, and

Thomas (2008) includes 4,058 activism-firm observations over the period 1994-2014 for the

sample of 663 unique hedge funds.14 The number of unique hedge funds in our sample is

1,162. After matching by fund name, we find that 114 out of 663 activists appear in our

sample of hedge funds. A total of 548 activism firms are held by these 114 activists. Out

of 548 firms subject to activism, 76 firms are also acquisition targets held by activists who

filed 13D during the 365-day period before the M&A announcement date.

       We next examine the trading activity by activists in takeover targets prior to M&A

announcements. The first column of Table 11 reports the ownership for the identified

activists holding shares of all M&A target firms in our sample regardless of whether these

firms are subject to activism. Consistent with our baseline results for hedge funds reported

in Table 2, activists increase their ownership in M&A targets from 0.048% to 0.090% of

shares outstanding over the three quarters prior to deal announcements. The ownership

levels by activist hedge funds is very small since they only account for a small fraction of

hedge fund investors.

       The second column reports hedge fund ownership for transactions excluding the activist

hedge funds. The findings in this subsample are consistent with the baseline results for all

hedge funds: the ownership by non-activist hedge funds also increases significantly in the

quarters prior to the M&A announcement. Thus, our baseline hedge fund results are not

primarily driven by this sample of activist hedge fund investors.

       The third column of Table 11 includes hedge fund activist ownership in the 76 activism

  14
     We are grateful to Alon Brav, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim for sharing their data on hedge fund
activism between 1994 and 2014. By law, investors are required to file Schedule 13D within 10 days after
transactions that cause them to go over the 5% ownership threshold. Typically, crossing this 5% threshold
is aimed at pursuing activism by hedge funds.




                                                   25
firms that are also M&A targets held by funds who file a Schedule 13D within one year

before the merger announcement date. We observe a very significant increase in their

holdings from 6.59% to 11.57% during the three quarters before the M&A announcement.

Thus, activist hedge funds contribute to a significant increase in ownership in a relatively

small sample of firms targeted by activism.

    The fourth column reports the percentage ownership in the 76 activism firms that are

also acquisition targets by non-activist hedge funds. Holdings in these firms by non-activist

hedge funds is fairly high and also increases gradually over time. Thus, non-activist hedge

funds might cooperate explicitly and implicitly with activist hedge funds in increasing own-

ership in firms targeted by hedge fund activism, as also discussed by Brav, Dasgupta, and

Mathews (2018), Kedia, Starks, and Wang (2016), and Apple, Gormley, and Keim (2018).

The last column reports the aggregate ownership by all hedge funds in the 76 activism

firms. In the small subset of firms that are both subject to activism and an M&A bid, the

increasing trend in hedge fund ownership prior to deal announcements is primarily driven

by activists’ trading.

    The evidence in Table 11 shows that hedge fund activism is one of several possible

channels for value creation vis-a-vis their accumulation of ownership in eventual takeover

targets.



4    Cross-Sectional Evidence

In this section we study whether there are systematic differences in trading across mutual

funds around takeover announcements. Consequently, we transition in this section to fund-

level analyses. We focus in this section on the sample of domestic equity mutual funds, as

summarized in Panel B of Table 1.




                                              26
4.1   Persistence

We explore whether this tendency of allocating higher (lower) portfolio weights to target

firms by mutual funds or hedge funds is persistent over time. If institutional investors

have an ability to identify takeover targets, then we should observe that they persistently

overweigh these companies. On the other hand, if they are just lucky to once hold a

high stake in a takeover target, then we should not observe that the same institutions will

continue to overweigh takeover targets in subsequent periods. To evaluate this, we sort all

mutual funds based on the total portfolio weights of holdings in one or more M&A targets

at the end of the quarter prior to the announcement quarter. The first group corresponds

to the funds that do not hold at the end of quarter Q(t) − 1 any companies that become

takeover targets in the subsequent quarter Q(t). The remaining three groups correspond

to terciles based on the weights invested at the end of quarter Q(t) − 1 in companies that

become takeover targets in the subsequent quarter. We then examine the portfolio weights

allocated to future target firms in the following four quarters. Every quarter we average

the proportional holdings in takeover companies across the funds within each group. In a

second step, we take the time-series average of the cross-sectional averages.

   Panel A of Table 12 reports the average weights allocated to takeover targets by mutual

funds in the four groups formed at the end of quarter Q(t) − 1. In the formation period,

the lowest tercile with positive holdings exhibits a weight of 0.45%, whereas the highest

tercile exhibits a weight of 3.33% in to-be targets. Although we observe a mean reversion

in ownership weights, we detect significant persistence in the weights invested in takeover

targets across time. For example, mutual funds that do not own any takeover targets in the

prior quarter will only invest 0.49% of their portfolios in new takeover candidates in the next

quarter. In contrast, funds in the highest tercile of target ownership in the prior quarter

will invest 0.74% of their portfolios in new takeover targets in the subsequent quarter. We

compute the differences in average weights for the highest and lowest terciles, and report

Newey-West-adjusted t-statistics with a lag length of five quarters. This evidence suggests

that mutual funds dedicating higher portfolio weights to target firms announced in the next

                                              27
quarter tend to allocate significantly higher weights to future M&A targets.

   We perform similar tests on the hedge funds’ portfolio weights in to-be takeover targets.

The results are reported in Panel B of Table 12. Similar to the outcomes for the mutual fund

sample, we observe significant persistence in portfolio weights in takeover targets allocated

by hedge funds over an extended time period. For example, hedge funds that do not own

any takeover targets in the prior quarter will only invest 1.21% of their portfolios in new

takeover candidates in the next quarter, whereas funds in the highest tercile will invest

2.02% of their portfolios in new takeover targets in the subsequent quarter.

   These results demonstrate that propensity to hold impending takeover targets is a per-

sistent feature of their investment strategies of mutual funds and hedge funds and not simply

the result of lucky draws.


4.2   Fund Activeness

The activeness of mutual funds has been associated with positive investment ability (e.g.,

Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008), Cremers and Petajisto (2009), Amihud and Goyenko

(2013)). Funds need to deviate from their benchmarks to be able to outperform these

benchmarks. In this section, we explore whether trading in takeover targets depends on the

activeness of mutual fund managers.

   We consider several measures of mutual fund activeness. First, we use the Active Share

measure proposed by Cremers and Petajisto (2009). Active Share is computed as the

share of portfolio positions that differ from the benchmark index holdings. We follow the

methodology of Amihud and Goyenko (2013) and construct the second measure of stock-

selectivity, Fund (1 − R2 ). The R2 comes from four-factor regressions using the previous 36

monthly return observations. Since a lower R2 is indicative of greater investment ability,

we subtract its value from one for easier comparability with the other activeness measures.

Our third measure of activeness is the absolute value of the Return Gap, proposed by

Kacperczyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2008). This measure is the difference between the reported

fund return and the return on the portfolio that consists of previously disclosed holdings.


                                             28
       For each target, we merge all funds in the sample that exist at the time of the deal

announcement. We repeat this procedure with the control firms, and integrate the two

datasets. The unit of observation is at the fund-firm level, where firm refers to either a

target company or its corresponding control firm. The control group is obtained from the

procedure described in Table 3. The T arget f irm indicator variable equals one if a firm

is a takeover target, and is zero if a firm is a corresponding control group company. The

dependent variable is a fund’s difference in log(1 + sharesQ(t)−1 ) and log(1 + sharesQ(t)−2 ),

given that Q(t) is the announcement quarter. If a fund does not hold a potential target

(or a firm from the control group), its number of adjusted shares is zero. The independent

variable of interest is the interaction term between activeness measures and a target firm

dummy. Other independent variables include fund and firm characteristics.

       Table 13 reports the results. We find a strong positive relation between the change in

fund ownership in takeover targets prior to M&A announcements and the three measures

of fund activeness. Consistent with the base-case specification in Table 2, we find that the

holdings of impending target firms decrease in the quarter prior to the announcement. This

decline is significantly less pronounced for funds that exhibit a higher level of activeness.

This evidence suggests that more active mutual funds do not decrease their stake in to-

be targets as much as other mutual funds do. The cross-sectional differences in holdings

adjustments of target firms are also economically substantial. For example, a mutual fund

with a mean level of Active Share (i.e., 0.814 according to Table 1B) tends to reduce

positions in to-be target stocks by around 0.88 basis points in the quarter before the M&A

announcement (i.e., (0.247 × 0.814 − 0.289)/1000 = −0.88bp). In contrast a fund with a

one-standard deviation higher active share than the mean fund tends to reduce positions

in to-be target stocks by only 0.48 basis points prior to the announcement (i.e., (0.247 ×

(0.814+0.160)−0.289)/1000 = −0.48bp).15 Even though the mutual fund sector, as a whole,

  15
    The average decrease in target stocks for an average fund is small because few individual mutual funds
actually hold the target stock in the quarter prior to the announcement. Furthermore, the difference log(1 +
sharesQ(t)−1 ) − log(1 + sharesQ(t)−2 ) does not exactly correspond to the log-change in number of shares
since we add one to the number of shares. However, the difference corresponds closely to the log-change if
a fund holds a significant number of shares in both periods.


                                                    29
significantly decreases their holdings in targets prior to deal announcement, more actively-

managed funds appear to be either better informed or more skillful to predict takeover

targets than more passively-managed funds.

    These results show that less active funds are most likely to sell impending target candi-

dates prior to the public announcement of an M&A transactions. Consistent with the prior

literature, we find that the mutual funds exhibiting high activeness are more skilled and its

trading strategies around merger announcements correspond more closely to the strategies

of hedge funds.



5    Conclusion

We analyze the holdings of institutional investors around takeover announcements to bet-

ter understand the investment strategies of institutions facing different regulatory environ-

ments, compensation policies, and investment restrictions. We find that while mutual funds

generally reduce their exposure to takeover candidates in the quarters prior to the merger

announcement, hedge funds increase it. Overall, our results suggest that mutual fund man-

agers are generally uninformed about future M&A deals. In contrast, either due to better

information about an impending merger or superior ability in identifying takeover targets,

hedge funds are more likely than mutual funds to benefit from their ownership in target

firms during M&A transactions.




                                             30
References
[1] Ackermann, Carl, Richard McEnally, and David Ravenscraft, 1999. The performance of
    hedge funds: Risk, return, and incentives. Journal of Finance 54, 833-874.

[2] Agarwal, Vikas and Narayan Naik, 2004. Risks and portfolio decisions involving hedge
    funds. Review of Financial Studies 17, 63-98.

[3] Agarwal, Vikas, Wei Jiang, Yuehua Tang, and Baozhong Yang, 2013. Uncovering hedge
    fund skill from the portfolio holdings they hide. Journal of Finance 68, 739-783.

[4] Agrawal, Anup and Tareque Nasser, 2012. Insider trading in takeover targets. Journal
    of Corporate Finance 18, 598-625.

[5] Amihud, Yakov and Ruslan Goyenko, 2013. Mutual fund’s R2 as predictor of perfor-
    mance. Review of Financial Studies 26, 667-694.

[6] Apple, Ian R., Todd A. Gormley, and Donald B. Keim, 2018. Standing on the shoulders
    of giants: The effect of passive investors on activism. Forthcoming: Review of Financial
    Studies.

[7] Aragon, George O. and J. Spencer Martin, 2012. A unique view of hedge fund derivatives
    usage: Safeguard or speculation? Journal of Financial Economics 105, 436-456.

[8] Aragon, George O. Michael Hertzel, and Zhen Shi, 2013. Why do hedge funds avoid dis-
    closure? Evidence from confidential 13F Filings. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
    Analysis 48, 1499-1518.

[9] Baker, Malcolm, Lubomir Litov, Jessica Wachter, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2010. Can mutual
    fund managers pick stocks? Evidence from their trades prior to earnings announcements.
    Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 45, 1111-1131.

[10] Baker, Malcolm and Serkan Savasoglu, 2002. Limited arbitrage in mergers and acqui-
    sitions. Journal of Financial Economics 64, 91-115.

[11] Betton, Sandra, Espen Eckbo, and Karin Thorburn, 2008. Corporate takeovers. Hand-
    book of Corporate Finance 2, 291-430.

[12] Berk, Jonathan and Jules Van Binsbergen, 2015. Measuring skill in the mutual fund
    industry. Journal of Financial Economics 118, 1-20.

[13] Bodnaruk, Andriy, Massimo Massa, and Andrei Simonov, 2009. Investment banks as
    insiders and the market for corporate control. Review of Financial Studies 22, 4989-5026.

[14] Boyson, Nicole M., Nickolay Gantchev, and Anil Shivdasani, 2017. Activism mergers.
    Journal of Financial Economics 126, 54-73.

[15] Brav, Alon, Amil Dasgupta, and Richmond Mathews. 2018. Wolf pack activism. Work-
    ing Paper.



                                             31
[16] Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, Frank Partnoy, and Randall Thomas, 2008. Hedge fund ac-
    tivism, corporate governance, and firm performance. Journal of Finance 63, 1729-1775.
[17] Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, and Hyunseob Kim, 2015. The real effects of hedge fund ac-
    tivism: Productivity, asset allocation, and labor outcomes. Review of Financial Studies
    28, 2723-2769.
[18] Brown, Stephen and William Goetzmann, 1997. Mutual fund styles. Journal of Finan-
    cial Economics 43, 373-399.
[19] Brown, Stephen, Goetzmann William, Bing Liang, and Christopher Schwarz, 2008.
    Mandatory disclosure and operational risk: Evidence from hedge fund registration. Jour-
    nal of Finance 63, 2785-2815.
[20] Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Stefan Nagel, 2004. Hedge Funds and the Technology
    Bubble. Journal of Finance 59, 2013-2040.
[21] Carhart, Mark, 1997. On persistence in mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance
    52, 57-82.
[22] Chen, Xia, Jarrad Harford, and Kai Li, 2007. Monitoring: Which institutions matter?
    Journal of Financial Economics 86, 279-305.
[23] Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000. The value of active
    mutual fund management: An examination of the stockholdings and trades of fund
    managers. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 343-368.
[24] Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, 2008. The small world of
    investing: Board connections and mutual fund returns. Journal of Political Economy
    116, 951-979.
[25] Crane, Alan, Kevin Crotty, and Tarik Umar, 2018. Do hedge funds profit from public
    information? Working paper.
[26] Cremers, Martijn and Antti Petajisto, 2009. How active is your fund manager? A new
    measure that predicts performance. Review of Financial Studies 22, 3329-3365.
[27] Cremers, Martijn and Ankur Pareek, 2016. Patient capital outperformance: The in-
    vestment skill of high active share managers who trade infrequently. Journal of Financial
    Economics 122, 288-306.
[28] Cremers, Martijn, Miguel Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Laura Starks, 2016. Indexing and
    active fund management: International evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 120,
    539-560.
[29] Dai, Rui, Nadia Massoud, Debarshi Nandy, and Anthony Saunders, 2017. Hedge fund in
    M&A deals: Is there exploitation of insider information? Journal of Corporate Finance
    47, 23-45.
[30] Edmans, Alex, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2012. The Real Effects of Financial
    Markets: The Impact of Prices on Takeovers. Journal of Finance 67, 933-972.

                                             32
[31] Eling, Martin, and Roger Faust, 2010. The performance of hedge funds and mutual
    funds in emerging markets. Journal of Banking and Finance 34, 1993-2009.

[32] Elton, Edwin, Martin Gruber, and Christopher Blake, 2001. A first look at the accuracy
    of the CRSP mutual fund database and a comparison of the CRSP and Morningstar
    mutual fund databases. Journal of Finance 56, 2415-2430.

[33] Evans, Richard, 2010. Mutual fund incubation. Journal of Finance 65, 1581-1611.

[34] Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1997. Industry costs of equity. Journal of Finan-
    cial Economics 43, 153-193.

[35] Fich, Eliezer, Jarrad Harford, and Anh Tran, 2015. Motivated monitors: The impor-
    tance of institutional investors’ portfolio weights. Journal of Financial Economics 118,
    21-48.

[36] Fung, William and David Hsieh, 1997. Empirical characteristics of dynamic trading
    strategies: The case of hedge funds. Review of Financial Studies 10, 275-302.

[37] Fung, William and David Hsieh, 2001. The risk in hedge fund strategies: Theory and
    evidence from trend followers. Review of Financial Studies 14, 313-341.

[38] Gao, Meng and Jiekun Huang, 2016. Capitalizing on Capitol Hill: Informed trading
    by hedge fund managers. Journal of Financial Economics 121, 521-545.

[39] Gantchev, Nickolay and Chotibhak Jotikasthira, 2018. Institutional trading and hedge
    fund activism. Management Science 64, 2930-2950.

[40] Gargano, Antonio, Alberto G. Rossi, and Russ Wermers, 2017. The freedom of infor-
    mation act and the race toward information acquisition. Review of Financial Studies 30,
    2179-2228.

[41] Gaspar, Jose-Miguel, Massimo Massa, and Pedro Matos, 2005. Shareholder investment
    horizons and the market for corporate control. Journal of Financial Economics 76, 135-
    165.

[42] Gaspar, Jose-Miguel, Massimo Massa, and Pedro Matos, 2006. Favoritism in mutual
    fund families? Evidence on strategic cross-fund subsidization. Journal of Finance 61,
    73-104.

[43] Goetzmann, William, Jonathan Ingersoll, and Stephen Ross, 2003. High-watermarks
    and hedge fund management contracts. Journal of Finance 58, 1685-1718.

[44] Greenwood, Robin and Michael Schor, 2009. Investor activism and takeovers. Journal
    of Financial Economics 92, 362-375.

[45] Griffin, John, and Jin Xu, 2009. How smart are the smart guys? A unique view from
    hedge fund stock holdings. Review of Financial Studies 22, 2531-2570.




                                            33
[46] Griffin, John, Tao Shu, and Selim Topaloglu, 2012. Examining the dark side of finan-
    cial markets: Do institutions trade on information from investment bank connections?
    Review of Financial Studies 25, 2155-2188.
   99, 27-39.

[47] Holmström, Bengt, and Steven Kaplan, 2001. Corporate governance and merger activ-
    ity in the U.S.: Making sense of the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Economic Perspectives
    15, 121-144.

[48] Hsieh, Jim and Ralph Walkling, 2005. Determinants and implications of arbitrage
    holdings in acquisitions. Journal of Financial Economics 77, 605-648.

[49] Huang, Jennifer, Clemens Sialm, and Hanjiang Zhang, 2011. Risk shifting and mutual
    fund performance. Review of Financial Studies 24, 2575-2616.

[50] Ivashina, Victoria and Zheng Sun, 2011. Institutional stock trading on loan market
    information. Journal of Financial Economics 100, 284-303.

[51] Jagannathan, Ravi, Alexey Malakhov, and Dmitry Novikov, 2010. Do hot hands exist
    among hedge fund managers? An empirical evaluation. Journal of Finance 65, 217-255.

[52] Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Yue Tang, 2010. Institutional trades around takeover an-
    nouncements: Skill vs. inside information. Working paper.

[53] Jensen, Michael, and Richard Ruback, 1983. The market for corporate control: The
    scientific evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5-50.

[54] Jiang, Wei, Tao Li, and Danqing Mei, 2016. Influencing control: Jawboning risk arbi-
    trage. Working Paper.

[55] Jiang, Hao and Michela Verardo, 2018. Does herding behavior reveal skill? An analysis
    of mutual fund performance. Journal of Finance 73, 2229-2269.

[56] Jiang, Hao and Lu Zheng, 2018. Active fundamental performance. Review of Financial
    Studies 31, 4688-4719.

[57] Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005. On the industry concentra-
    tion of actively managed equity mutual funds. Journal of Finance 60, 1983-2011.

[58] Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2008. Unobserved actions of mu-
    tual funds. Review of Financial Studies 21, 2383-2416.

[59] Kedia, Simi, Laura Starks, and Xianjue Wang, 2018. Institutional investors and hedge
    fund activism. Working paper.

[60] Keown, Arthur and John Pinkerton, 1981. Merger announcements and insider trading
    activity: An empirical investigation. Journal of Finance 36, 855-869.

[61] Kosowski, Robert, Narayan Naik, and Melvyn Teo, 2007. Do hedge funds deliver alpha?
    A Bayesian and bootstrap analysis. Journal of Financial Economics 84, 229-264.

                                           34
[62] Kumar, Nitish, Kevin Mullally, Sugata Ray, and Yuehua Tang, 2018. Prime (Informa-
    tion) Brokerage. Working paper.

[63] Liang, Bing, 2000. Hedge funds: The living and the dead. Journal of Financial and
    Quantitative Analysis 35, 309-326.

[64] Lowry, Michelle, Marco Rossi, and Zhongyan Zhu, 2018. Informed trading by adviser
    banks: Evidence from options holdings. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

[65] Malmendier, Ulrike, Markus Opp, and Farzad Saidi, 2016. Target revaluation after
    failed takeover attempts: Cash versus stock. Journal of Financial Economics 119, 92-
    106.

[66] Maslennikov, Sergey and Parker Hund, 2015. Best ideas of hedge funds. Working paper.

[67] Massa, Massimo and Zahid Rehman, 2008. Information flows within financial conglom-
    erates: Evidence from the banks-mutual funds relation. Journal of Financial Economics
    89, 288-306.

[68] Massoud, Nadia, Debarshi Nandy, Anthony Saunders, and Keke Song, 2011. Do hedge
    funds trade on private information? Evidence from syndicated lending and short-selling.
    Journal of Financial Economics 99, 477-499.

[69] Mitchell, Mark and Todd Pulvino, 2001. Characteristics of risk and return in risk
    arbitrage Journal of Finance 56, 2135-2175.

[70] Officer, Micah, Oguzhan Ozbas, and Berk Sensoy, 2010. Club deals in leveraged buy-
    outs. Journal of Financial Economics 98, 214-240.

[71] Pastor, Lubos, Robert Stambaugh, and Lucian Taylor, 2015. Scale and skill in active
    management. Journal of Financial Economics 116, 23-45.

[72] Qian, Hong and Zhaodong Zhong, 2018. Do Hedge Funds Possess Private Information
    in IPO Stocks? Evidence from Post-IPO Holdings. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 8,
    117-152.

[73] Rapach, David E., Matthew C. Ringgenberg, and Guofu Zhou, 2016. Short interest
    and aggregate stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 121, 46-65.

[74] Schwert, G. William, 1996. Markup pricing in mergers and acquisitions. Journal of
    Financial Economics 41, 153-192.

[75] Sun, Zheng, Ashley Wang, and Lu Zheng, 2012. The road less traveled: Strategy
    distinctiveness and hedge fund performance. Review of Financial Studies 25, 96-143.

[76] Swem, Nathan, 2015. Information in financial markets: Who gets it first? Working
    paper.

[77] Titman, Sheridan and Cristian Tiu, 2011. Do the best hedge funds hedge? Review of
    Financial Studies 24, 123-168.


                                            35
[78] Wermers, Russ, 2000. Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into
    stock-picking talent, style, transaction costs, and expenses. Journal of Finance 55, 1655-
    1695.

[79] Wermers, Russ, Tong Yao, and Jane Zhao, 2012. Forecasting stock returns through an
    efficient aggregation of mutual fund holdings. Review of Financial Studies 25, 3490-3529.

[80] Wu, Szu-Yin, and Kee H. Chung, 2019. Hedge fund activism and corporate M&A
    decisions. Working paper.




                                             36
   Figure 1: Cumulative abnormal returns around merger announcements

    This figure illustrates the evolution of the equal-weighted average cumulative abnor-
mal returns (CARs) P   around merger announcements. We calculate cumulative abnormal
returns as CARij = tj=1 (rij − rmj ), where rij is a firm’s i’s return and rmj is the CRSP
value-weighted market return at time j. To mitigate the effect of delisting on CARs after
announcements, we set abnormal returns of delisted targets to zero.
         0.4
    Cumulative Abnormal Returns (CARs) around M&As




                                                     0.3




                                                     0.2




                                                     0.1




                                                      0
                                                      −250   −200      −150        −100         −50         0   50
                                                                    Trading days relative to announcement




                                                                               37
   Figure 2: Mutual and hedge fund ownership in takeover targets

    These figures illustrate the evolution of the mutual and hedge fund ownership in acqui-
sition targets around M&A announcements. We sum up all shares held by mutual funds
(hedge funds) for each company in each quarter. We then obtain aggregate ownership by
dividing the summed shares held by total shares outstanding. Panel A displays the average
ownership by mutual funds (hedge funds) across all deals. Panel B displays the difference in
average ownership between the target firm and the matched control firm by mutual funds
(hedge funds) across all deals with valid matches.

                                                                           Panel A: Aggregate Ownership of Target Firms
                                                                      14
               Aggregate ownership in takeover targets (%)




                                                                      12


                                                                      10


                                                                       8


                                                                       6


                                                                       4


                                                                       2
                                                                               Hedge funds
                                                                               Mutual funds
                                                                       0
                                                                                 Q(t)-4        Q(t)-3       Q(t)-2      Q(t)-1   Q(t)
                                                                                              Quarter relative to announcement

    Panel B: Difference in Aggregate Ownership Between Target and Control Firms
                                                                       4
               Aggregate adjusted ownership in takeover targets (%)




                                                                       3

                                                                       2

                                                                       1

                                                                       0

                                                                      −1

                                                                      −2

                                                                      −3       Hedge funds
                                                                               Mutual funds
                                                                      −4
                                                                                 Q(t)-4        Q(t)-3       Q(t)-2      Q(t)-1   Q(t)
                                                                                              Quarter relative to announcement




                                                                                                        38
                                      Table 1: Summary statistics

Panel A of this table reports the summary statistics of 7,184 deal characteristics. The sample runs from
January 1990 to December 2015. The target stock characteristics are measured as of the quarter-end prior
to the deal announcement quarter. Panel B of this table reports the descriptive statistics of 1,926 mutual
funds in our sample. These statistics are calculated from 70,200 mutual-fund-quarter observations. Panel C
shows the summary statistics of 1,162 hedge funds based on 31,089 hedge-fund-quarter observations. Hedge
fund age is calculated based on the date of the first 13F report. All continuous variables are winsorized at
the 1% level.

     Panel A : Firm, deal, and ownership characteristics summary statistics
                                                                                    5th        95th
                                                  Mean     Median    Std Dev    percentile   percentile
     Complete                                     0.821     1.000     0.383        0.000       1.000
     All cash                                     0.424     0.000     0.494        0.000       1.000
     All stock                                    0.266     0.000     0.441        0.000       1.000
     Competing                                    0.096     0.000     0.294        0.000       1.000
     Diversif ying                                0.681     0.000     0.465        0.000       1.000
     T ender                                      0.187     0.000     0.389        0.000       1.000
     Hostile                                      0.093     0.000     0.290        0.000       1.000
     SDC premium                                  0.407     0.333     0.656       -0.058       1.069
     T arget CAR3                                  0.205    0.165      0.221      -0.059       0.615
     T arget market capitalization (mil$)         1,420      231      4,994         33         5,776
     T arget market-to-book                       2.408     1.617     3.816        0.272       7.649
     M utual f und ownership in a target (%)      11.464    8.028     11.248      0.000       35.168
     Hedge f und ownership in a target (%)         4.018    1.023      6.421      0.000       18.502
     One-year target0 s stock return              0.093     0.039     0.491       -0.699       1.044
     %Shares of target0 s stock held short        3.980     2.189     5.504        0.028      14.217
     %Shares of bidder0 s stock held short        3.282     1.841     4.228        0.058      11.271

     Panel B : Mutual fund summary statistics
                                                                                   5th         95th
                                                  Mean     Median    Std Dev    percentile   percentile
     T N A (mil$)                                 1,994      437      5,378        31.4        8,567
     Age (years)                                    19        16         15         5            52
     Expense ratio (%)                            1.218     1.181      0.396      0.650        1.952
     T urnover ratio (%)                          0.802     0.620      0.683      0.100        2.160
     1Q f und return (%)                          2.222     2.676     10.294     -16.305      17.314
     F lows (%)                                   2.287    -1.649     12.054     -12.142      18.005
     Active Share                                 0.814     0.861     0.160       0.518        0.987
     F und (1 − R2 )                              0.133     0.091      0.132      0.019        0.420
     | Return Gap | (%)                           0.260     0.148      0.338      0.017        0.906
     Panel C : Hedge fund summary statistics
                                                                                   5th         95th
                                                  Mean     Median    Std Dev    percentile   percentile
     N umber of stocks held                        93        35        218          5           378
     $V alue of reported equities (mil$)          885       229       2,514      15.848        3,510
     Age (years)                                   6         5          6           1           19




                                                     39
                Table 2: Mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in takeover targets

Panel A of this table reports the average mutual fund and hedge fund ownership (in %) and changes in
ownership in takeover targets around M&A announcements. We denote Q(t) as the merger announcement
quarter. Mutual (hedge) fund ownership is the total number of shares held by mutual (hedge) funds in our
sample as a fraction of total shares outstanding. Panel B reports the average number of mutual funds and
hedge funds that hold a takeover firm. If none of mutual (hedge) funds in our sample hold a target firm,
this number, as well as the percent ownership, is set to 0. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level.
The t-statistics are shown in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                  Panel A : Percent ownership in target firms
                                         Number of deals Mutual funds           Hedge funds

                  Q(t) − 4                       7,184              11.77            3.38
                  Q(t) − 3                       7,184              11.93            3.56
                  Q(t) − 2                       7,184              11.82            3.74
                  Q(t) − 1                       7,184              11.46            4.02
                  Q(t)                           6,935               8.39            6.13
                  [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]        7,184             -0.36**         0.27***
                                                                   (-2.25)          (6.12)
                  [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]        7,184            -0.47***         0.46***
                                                                   (-3.15)          (7.01)
                  [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]        7,184              -0.31          0.63***
                                                                   (-1.24)          (7.83)
                  [Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]            6,935            -3.12***         2.13***
                                                                  (-11.20)         (14.00)

                  Panel B : Number of funds that hold target firms
                                         Number of deals Mutual funds           Hedge funds

                  Q(t) − 4                       7,184              64.28            4.79
                  Q(t) − 3                       7,184              63.73            4.91
                  Q(t) − 2                       7,184              64.39            5.11
                  Q(t) − 1                       7,184              62.43            5.47
                  Q(t)                           6,935              48.50            8.38
                  [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t − 2)]        7,184            -1.96**          0.36***
                                                                   (-2.24)          (5.23)
                  [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t − 3)]        7,184              -1.30          0.56***
                                                                   (-1.43)          (6.00)
                  [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t − 4)]        7,184              -1.85          0.68***
                                                                   (-1.04)          (6.29)
                  [Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]            6,935           -13.93***         2.91***
                                                                   (-8.10)         (14.19)




                                                      40
  Table 3: Mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in takeover targets and control group firms

This table reports the average mutual fund and hedge fund ownership (in %) and changes in ownership
in takeover targets and control group firms around M&A announcements. We denote Q(t) as the merger
announcement quarter. Mutual (hedge) fund ownership is the total number of shares held by mutual (hedge)
funds in our sample as a fraction of total shares outstanding. We match our sample of targets based on
the Fama-French 48 industry classification and time, and obtain all firms with book-to-market and market
capitalization between 0.5x and 2x of that of the target firm at Q(t) − 4. We also eliminate self-matches
and other companies that become takeover targets in any of the six quarters Q(t) − 4, Q(t) − 3, Q(t) − 2,
Q(t) − 1, Q(t), and Q(t) + 1. We require non-missing total shares outstanding in four quarters prior to and
in the announcement quarter. If there are multiple candidates, we pick the firm with the closest market
capitalization to that of the target firm. This results in 6,259 matches. Standard errors are clustered at
the quarter level. The t-statistics are shown in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                       Mutual funds                              Hedge funds
                               Treatment Control Difference          Treatment     Control Difference
                                 group    group                        group        group
                                  (1)      (2)      (1)-(2)             (3)          (4)     (3)-(4)

     Q(t) − 4                    12.10      11.59      0.51**           3.59        2.80     0.79***
                                                       (2.48)                                 (8.08)
     Q(t) − 3                    12.24      11.72      0.52**           3.77        2.86     0.91***
                                                       (2.50)                                 (9.01)
     Q(t) − 2                    12.14      11.99       0.15            3.97        2.98     0.99***
                                                       (0.72)                                 (9.53)
     Q(t) − 1                    11.78      12.17      -0.39*           4.25        3.06     1.19***
                                                       (-1.88)                               (11.13)
     Q(t)                        8.57       12.32     -3.75***          6.55        3.22     3.33***
                                                      (-19.66)                               (26.66)
     [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]    -0.36**     0.18*     -0.54***        0.28***      0.08***   0.20***
                                (-2.22)     (1.74)     (-5.73)         (5.74)       (2.69)    (5.16)
     [Q(t) − 1 − Q(t) − 3]     -0.46***    0.45***    -0.91***        0.48***      0.20***   0.28***
                                (-3.02)     (3.10)    (-10.85)         (7.07)       (4.82)    (5.46)
     [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]     -0.32     0.58***    -0.90***        0.66***      0.26***   0.40***
                                (-1.22)     (2.46)     (-8.35)         (7.69)       (5.08)    (6.50)
     [Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]       -3.25***      0.15     -3.40***        2.30***      0.16***   2.14***
                               (-11.23)     (0.67)    (-31.29)        (14.06)       (4.34)   (29.28)




                                                     41
                         Table 4: Linear probability model of takeover decisions

This table reports the linear probability regression results relating mutual and hedge fund ownership levels
and changes with the probability of a firm becoming a takeover target. We use all firms in CRSP for the
period 1990-2015 as the universe of stocks. We run the linear probability model with a dependent variable
equal to 1 if a firm is a takeover target, and 0 otherwise. The key explanatory variables are the mutual fund
(MF) and hedge fund (HF) ownership in levels and changes. To obtain the aggregate ownership by mutual
(hedge) funds, we sum up all shares held by mutual (hedge) funds and divide by total shares outstanding
(TSO). Other controls include the natural logarithm of market capitalization, the market-to-book ratio, and
the one-year return. All continuous variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Standard errors are clustered at
the quarter level. p-values are reported in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

       Dependent variable = Target (0, 1) in Q(t)

                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)             (5)
       ∆(MF ownership/TSO)t−2 →t−1                    -0.031***   -0.031***                             -0.032***
                                                        (-5.80)     (-5.01)                               (-5.26)
       ∆(MF ownership/TSO)t−3 →t−2                    -0.030***   -0.029***                             -0.032***
                                                        (-6.89)     (-5.32)                               (-5.93)
       ∆(MF ownership/TSO)t−4 →t−3                      -0.004       0.002                                 -0.001
                                                        (-1.18)     (0.43)                                (-0.30)
       ∆(HF ownership/TSO)t−2 →t−1                                            0.044***    0.096***       0.092***
                                                                               (3.80)      (6.16)          (5.87)
       ∆(HF ownership/TSO)t−3 →t−2                                            0.033***    0.087***       0.085***
                                                                               (2.83)      (6.06)          (5.90)
       ∆(HF ownership/TSO)t−4 →t−3                                            0.042***    0.117***       0.117***
                                                                               (3.59)      (7.15)          (7.16)
       (MF ownership/TSO)t−4                                      0.010***                               0.006***
                                                                   (5.09)                                  (3.19)
       (HF ownership/TSO)t−4                                                                0.119***     0.118***
                                                                                             (17.28)      (17.21)
       Log(mkt cap)t−1                                            -0.001***                -0.001***    -0.001***
                                                                    (-9.67)                  (-7.98)      (-9.17)
       Market-to-bookt−1                                          -0.0001**               -0.0001***   -0.0001***
                                                                    (-2.33)                  (-3.10)      (-2.84)
       1-year stock returnt−1                                      -0.0003                 -0.001***     -0.0007*
                                                                    (-0.90)                  (-3.14)      (-1.91)
       Intercept                                       0.001      0.024***    -0.001***     0.012***    0.015***
                                                       (0.89)       (8.73)      (-0.99)       (4.40)       (5.52)
       Time (quarter) and 2-digit SIC fixed effects     Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
       N                                              651,424      435,588     651,424       435,588      435,588




                                                           42
        Table 5: Mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in takeover targets by subperiods

This table reports mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in target firms during the period of 1990-2000
(before Regulation Fair Disclosure) and during the period of 2001-2015 (after this regulatory change). We
denote Q(t) as the merger announcement quarter. Mutual (hedge) fund ownership is the total number of
shares held by mutual (hedge) funds in our sample as a fraction of total shares outstanding. Standard errors
are clustered at the quarter level. The t-statistics are shown in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                        Deals announced                 Deals announced
                                            1990-2000                       2001-2015
                                            (N=3,668)                       (N=3,516)
                                    Mutual funds Hedge funds        Mutual funds Hedge funds

          Q(t) − 4                       7.22            1.33           16.52            5.52
          Q(t) − 3                       7.34            1.45           16.72            6.76
          Q(t) − 2                       7.28            1.52           16.57            6.07
          Q(t) − 1                       7.00            1.65           16.12            6.49
          Q(t)                           5.40            2.79           11.47            9.56
          [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]       -0.28          0.13***         -0.45**         0.42***
                                       (-1.18)          (3.28)         (-1.99)          (5.83)
          [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]      -0.34**         0.20***         -0.60**         0.27***
                                       (-1.99)          (3.64)         (-2.43)          (7.15)
          [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]       -0.22          0.32***          -0.40          0.97***
                                       (-0.57)          (5.61)         (-1.32)          (7.31)
          [Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]         -1.58***         1.14***        -4.71***         3.07***
                                       (-4.70)          (9.24)        (-15.61)         (17.67)




                                                      43
       Table 6: Mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in takeover targets by subsamples

This table reports mutual fund and hedge fund ownership associated with the target firms sorted on the
basis of market capitalization, SDC premium, CAR, tender, multiple bidders, and complete status. This
table reports the average mutual fund and hedge fund ownership (in %) and changes in ownership in takeover
targets around M&A announcements. We denote Q(t) as the merger announcement quarter. Mutual (hedge)
fund ownership is the total number of shares held by mutual (hedge) funds in our sample as a fraction of
total shares outstanding. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The t-statistics are shown
in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.
 Panel A : Split by target’s market capitalization
                                [$25M; $100M)              [$100M; $250M)                   ≥$250M
                                  (N=2,099)                   (N=1,584)                    (N=3,501)
                           Mutual         Hedge        Mutual          Hedge           Mutual       Hedge
                            funds         funds         funds          funds            funds       funds
 Q(t) − 4                    5.06          2.45          9.00           3.62            17.04        3.92
 Q(t) − 3                    4.98          2.54          9.04           3.85            17.41        4.12
 Q(t) − 2                    4.72          2.65          8.87           4.02            17.42        4.35
 Q(t) − 1                    4.36          2.81          8.52           4.23            17.05        4.67
 Q(t)                        3.27          3.65          6.21           5.61            12.40        7.88
 [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2] -0.36***        0.16***      -0.35***        0.21***          -0.37*      0.35***
                           (-2.73)        (3.15)       (-2.65)         (3.94)          (-1.81)      (4.79)
 [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3] -0.62***        0.27***      -0.52***        0.38***           -0.36      0.55***
                           (-4.80)        (4.00)       (-3.30)         (5.27)          (-1.62)      (5.39)
 [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4] -0.70***        0.36***       -0.48*         0.61***            0.01      0.75***
                           (-3.02)        (4.87)       (-1.92)         (6.41)          (0.02)       (5.58)
 [Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]      -1.04***       0.84***      -2.37***        1.38***         -4.69***     3.21***
                           (-6.50)        (7.22)      (-10.39)         (9.34)         (-11.65)     (15.41)


Panel B : Split by SDC premium (available for 6,709 deals)
                                     Deals with premium                 Deals with premium
                                 above the median (N=3,354)        below the median (N=3,355)
                                 Mutual funds Hedge funds          Mutual funds Hedge funds
Q(t) − 4                             11.35             3.31             12.80           3.45
Q(t) − 3                             11.58             3.46             12.85           3.64
Q(t) − 2                             11.51             3.62             12.76           3.85
Q(t) − 1                             11.04             3.87             12.46           4.15
Q(t)                                  7.74             6.38             9.41            5.91
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]            -0.47***         0.25***            -0.30*         0.30***
                                    (-2.50)           (5.00)           (-1.71)         (5.03)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]            -0.54***         0.41***           -0.39**         0.51***
                                    (-3.28)           (5.81)           (-2.49)         (6.16)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]              -0.31          0.56***             -0.34         0.70***
                                    (-1.19)           (6.65)           (-1.26)         (6.84)
[Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 2]                -3.33***         2.51***          -3.09***         1.76***
                                   (-11.25)          (14.10)          (-10.07)        (10.92)


Continued on next page


                                               44
 Table 6 – Continued

Panel C : Split by targets’ CARs
                                         Deals with CARs               Deals with CARs
                                   above the median (N=3,551)   below the median (N=3,551)
                                   Mutual funds Hedge funds     Mutual funds Hedge funds
Q(t) − 4                               12.50           3.75          11.08           3.04
Q(t) − 3                               12.81           3.92          11.11           3.22
Q(t) − 2                               12.65           4.09          11.06           3.42
Q(t) − 1                               12.21           4.22          10.76           3.83
Q(t)                                    8.41           6.94          8.37            5.38
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]              -0.44***        0.13***        -0.30*         0.41***
                                      (-2.48)         (2.75)       (-1.72)          (6.70)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]              -0.60***        0.30***      -0.35***         0.61***
                                      (-3.39)         (4.55)       (-2.40)          (7.30)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]                -0.29         0.47***         -0.32         0.79***
                                      (-1.14)         (5.91)       (-1.21)          (7.36)
[Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]                  -3.86***        2.72***      -2.44***         1.55***
                                     (-12.51)        (14.52)       (-8.99)         (11.08)

Panel D : Split by tender offers
                                           Tender offers             Non-tender offers
                                             (N=1,343)                   (N=5,841)
                                   Mutual funds Hedge funds     Mutual funds Hedge funds
Q(t) − 4                               13.25            4.02       11.43           3.24
Q(t) − 3                               13.25            4.10       11.63           3.43
Q(t) − 2                               13.30            4.30       11.49           3.62
Q(t) − 1                               12.01            4.54       11.34           3.89
Q(t)                                    6.86            6.35        8.70           6.08
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]             -1.28***          0.24***      -0.15         0.27***
                                      (-4.09)          (2.76)     (-1.11)         (6.30)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]             -1.24***          0.44***     -0.29**        0.46***
                                      (-5.33)          (4.09)     (-2.05)         (7.23)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]             -1.24***          0.52***      -0.09         0.65***
                                      (-3.51)          (3.70)     (-0.39)         (8.34)
[Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]                 -5.36***          1.81***    -2.66***        2.19***
                                     (-11.60)          (7.18)     (-9.87)        (13.94)

Continued on next page




                                             45
 Table 6 – Continued

Panel E : Single vs. multiple bidders
                                         Multiple bidders               Single bidders
                                             (N=690)                      (N=6,494)
                                   Mutual funds Hedge funds     Mutual funds Hedge funds
Q(t) − 4                              13.54            3.95         11.58            3.32
Q(t) − 3                              13.49            4.26         11.76            3.48
Q(t) − 2                              13.34            4.69         11.66            3.64
Q(t) − 1                              12.09            5.70         11.39            3.84
Q(t)                                   9.33            8.55         8.29             5.87
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]             -1.25***         1.01***       -0.27*          0.20***
                                     (-4.42)          (5.45)       (-1.68)          (5.03)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]             -1.40***         1.44***     -0.37***          0.36***
                                     (-4.26)          (6.74)       (-2.62)          (5.82)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]             -1.45***         1.75***        -0.19          0.52***
                                     (-3.42)          (7.13)       (-0.76)          (6.63)
[Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]                 -2.87***         2.85***     -3.15***          2.03***
                                     (-6.62)          (7.69)      (-11.41)         (13.88)

Panel F : Complete vs. Withdrawn deals
                                              Complete                   Withdrawn
                                             (N=5,896)                   (N=1,288)
                                   Mutual funds Hedge funds     Mutual funds Hedge funds
Q(t) − 4                               11.80            3.34       11.63           3.60
Q(t) − 3                               11.97            3.51       11.76           3.75
Q(t) − 2                               11.89            3.70       11.51           3.96
Q(t) − 1                               11.58            3.93       10.94           4.39
Q(t)                                    8.13            6.13        9.54           6.14
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]               -0.31*          0.23***    -0.57***        0.43***
                                      (-1.90)          (5.74)     (-2.88)         (4.44)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]             -0.39***          0.42***    -0.82***        0.64***
                                      (-2.56)          (6.57)     (-4.39)         (5.25)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]                -0.22          0.59***     -0.69**        0.79***
                                      (-0.90)          (7.47)     (-2.34)         (5.83)
[Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]                 -3.49***          2.20***    -1.46***        1.75***
                                     (-11.75)         (13.71)     (-5.61)         (8.91)




                                             46
  Table 7: Mutual fund and hedge fund ownership in takeover targets by announcement timing

This table reports the average mutual fund and hedge fund ownership (in %) for the target firms sorted
based on the timing of the deal announcement during the event quarter. The first two columns report the
average ownership in takeover targets associated with the deals announced in the first 20 calendar days of
the announcement quarter. The middle two columns report the average fund ownership in targets associated
with the deals announced in the last 20 days of the event quarter, and the last two columns show these
statistics for the remaining deals. We denote Q(t) as the merger announcement quarter. Mutual (hedge)
fund ownership is the total number of shares held by mutual (hedge) funds in our sample as a fraction
of total shares outstanding. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The t-statistics are shown
in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.


                                     Deals announced        Deals announced      Deals announced
                                    in the first 20 days   in the last 20 days    in the middle of
                                       of the quarter         of the quarter     the event quarter
                                         (N=1,479)              (N=1,632)            (N=4,073)
                                     Mutual      Hedge      Mutual      Hedge    Mutual     Hedge
                                      funds       funds      funds      funds     funds     funds

          Q(t) − 4                    12.23      3.47        11.37      3.29       11.76      3.39
          Q(t) − 3                    12.34      3.59        11.36      3.43       12.02      3.59
          Q(t) − 2                    12.17      3.78        11.49      3.59       11.84      3.80
          Q(t) − 1                    11.35      4.14        11.28      3.85       11.56      4.04
          Q(t)                         7.63      5.92        9.56       5.82        8.16      6.32
          [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]   -0.82***   0.36***       -0.21    0.26***      -0.28    0.24***
                                     (-3.98)    (4.35)      (-1.16)    (3.97)     (-1.41)    (4.86)
          [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]   -0.99***   0.55***       -0.08    0.42***    -0.46***   0.45***
                                     (-4.74)    (4.84)      (-0.34)    (4.91)     (-2.73)    (6.23)
          [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]   -0.88***   0.67***       -0.09    0.56***      -0.20    0.65***
                                     (-2.96)    (5.26)      (-0.33)    (5.00)     (-0.72)    (7.48)
          [Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]       -3.73***   1.78***     -1.75***   1.97***    -3.48***   2.28***
                                    (-10.17)    (9.50)      (-6.09)   (12.71)    (-12.13)   (12.09)




                                                      47
                             Table 8: Tests with daily mutual fund returns

Conditional on fund ownership of target at Q(t) − 1, we compare the actual (i.e., reported) fund return with
the holdings-based return including and excluding the target stock over a three-day window around the
announcement. When the target firm is excluded, we rebalance the portfolio proportionally. The holdings-
based-return is calculated as the value-weighted average three-day return across various asset classes of the
portfolio composition. For each fund at Q(t) − 1, we obtain the percent of a portfolio allocated to equities,
cash, and bonds/preferred stocks from the CRSP fund summary file. The return on the equity part of the
portfolio is based on mutual fund holdings at Q(t) − 1 and is obtained by multiplying the stock weight by
the corresponding three-day stock return around the deal announcement date, and summing these products
at the portfolio level. We proxy for the cash and bond/preferred stock returns using published indices. For
bonds and preferred stocks, we use the total return of the Bloomberg Barclays US Aggregate Bond Index,
while for cash holdings we use the one-month Treasury bill rate. We adjust the holdings-based returns for
the three-day expense ratio, obtained by dividing the annual fund expense ratio into 250 and multiplying by
3. Panel A reports these returns for both the treatment and control groups. The control group is obtained
following the methodology described in Table 3, and the analysis is also conditional on fund ownership of
control firm at Q(t) − 1. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. We explore the announcement
effects in a regression framework in Panel B. The dependent variable is the reported three-day fund return
around the deal announcement minus the fund’s holdings return including the target. The announcement
effect is defined as a product of a fund’s allocated portfolio weight to the target firm at the end of Q(t) − 1
and the three-day target’s return around the announcement day. Similarly, we define the announcement
effect for the control group. The standard errors in both regressions are clustered at the quarter level. The
t-statistics are shown in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels, respectively.

Panel A : Tests with daily fund returns - univariate
                              Reported     Holdings         Holdings      Difference   Difference   Difference
                                fund         return          return
                               return     incl. target     excl. target
                                 (1)           (2)              (3)        (1)-(2)       (2)-(3)      (1)-(3)

Funds (A)                         0.211         0.243         0.165       -0.032***     0.078***     0.046***
(2,719 deals)                                                               (-4.42)      (24.87)      (6.05)

Control funds (B)                 0.145         0.166         0.165       -0.021***     0.001***     -0.020**
(2,392 deals)                                                               (-2.70)      (2.59)       (-2.50)

Difference (A-B)                  0.066*       0.077*         0.000        -0.011*      0.077***     0.066***
                                  (1.67)       (1.69)         (0.00)       (-1.72)       (30.79)      (9.95)

Panel B : Dependent variable is the reported fund return net of the holdings return including the target
                                    Funds holding target firm             Funds holding control firm

Announcement effect                            -0.312***                                 0.201
                                                (-11.70)                                 (1.41)
Holdings return incl. target                    -0.029**                               -0.029**
                                                 (-2.43)                                (-2.44)
Number of observations                         2,497,504                               2,170,053




                                                 48
           Table 9: Short selling of targets and acquirers prior to M&A announcements

We examine the short selling activity of targets and acquirers around M&A announcements. This table
reports the percentage of shares shorted between six months prior and the M&A announcement month,
M (t). The report with shares held short is published in the middle of each month. For deals announced
in the first half of a month (that is, before the short interest report), we treat the short interest report
one month prior to the M&A announcement month as a report in month M (t) − 1. For deals announced
after the short interest report is published, we treat the short interest report in the M&A announcement
month as a report in month M (t) − 1. Standard errors are clustered at the quarter level. The t-statistics
are shown in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.


                                              Targets                          Acquirers
                                  % shares held Number of deals     % shares held Number of deals
                                      short                             short

      M (t) − 6                        3.84            3,335              3.15             1,818
      M (t) − 5                        3.86            3,335              3.20             1,818
      M (t) − 4                        3.90            3,335              3.24             1,818
      M (t) − 3                        3.92            3,335              3.25             1,818
      M (t) − 2                        3.96            3,335              3.29             1,818
      M (t) − 1                        3.98            3,335              3.28             1,818
      M (t)                            3.45            3,285              3.75             1,818
      [M (t) − 1] − [M (t) − 2]       0.02                                -0.01
                                     (0.83)                             (-0.27)
      [M (t) − 1] − [M (t) − 3]       0.06                                0.03
                                     (1.37)                              (0.82)
      [M (t) − 1] − [M (t) − 4]       0.08                                0.04
                                     (1.23)                              (0.88)
      [M (t) − 1] − [M (t) − 5]       0.12                                0.08
                                     (1.45)                              (1.35)
      [M (t) − 1] − [M (t) − 6]       0.14                              0.13**
                                     (1.48)                              (2.03)
      [M (t)] − [M (t) − 1]         -0.53***                            0.47***
                                     (-7.65)                            (11.15)




                                                     49
                Table 10: Ownership by mutual funds affiliated with M&A advisors

This table reports the target ownership by mutual funds whose management company serves as an M&A
advisor to target and bidder firms in quarters around M&A announcements. Standard errors are clustered
at the quarter level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                               Management company is affiliated with:

                                                 Target’s           Acquirer’s
                                               M&A advisors        M&A advisors

                                                (N=1,939)            (N=1,770)

                     Q(t) − 4                       0.054                0.074
                     Q(t) − 3                       0.066                0.067
                     Q(t) − 2                       0.071                0.063
                     Q(t) − 1                       0.070                0.060
                     Q(t)                           0.034                0.035
                     [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]       -0.001               -0.003
                                                   (-0.12)              (-0.67)
                     [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]        0.004               -0.007
                                                   (0.82)               (-1.44)
                     [Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]      0.016**             -0.014***
                                                   (2.52)               (-2.16)
                     [Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]         -0.036***            -0.025***
                                                   (-6.09)              (-5.56)




                                                     50
                             Table 11: Ownership by hedge fund activists

The first column reports the percentage of total shares outstanding held by hedge fund activists in all M&A
target firms in our sample. The second column reports hedge fund ownership for transactions excluding the
activist hedge funds in all M&A target firms in our sample. The third column reports the hedge fund activist
ownership in 76 activism targets that are also M&A targets held by hedge funds that file a Schedule 13D
within one year before the merger announcement date. The fourth column shows the evolution in ownership
in these 76 firms by non-activist hedge funds. The last column reports the total hedge fund ownership for
all hedge fund ownership in the 76 activism and takeover targets, respectively. Standard errors are clustered
at the quarter level. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                           Ownership       Ownership         Ownership        Ownership         Ownership
                             of Any          of Any         of Activism       of Activism      of Activism
                              M&A             M&A            and M&A           and M&A          and M&A
                            Targets          Targets          Targets           Targets          Targets
                           by Activist   by Non-Activist     by Activist    by Non-Activist      by Any
                          Hedge Funds     Hedge Funds       Hedge Funds      Hedge Funds       Hedge Funds
                           (N=7,184)       (N=7,184)          (N=76)            (N=76)           (N=76)

Q(t) − 4                      0.048             3.25             6.59            12.54             19.13
Q(t) − 3                      0.061             3.40             7.83            14.85             22.69
Q(t) − 2                      0.073             3.58             9.17             15.81            24.98
Q(t) − 1                      0.090             3.83            11.57             16.47            28.04
Q(t)                          0.083             8.26             9.88            21.61             31.15
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 2]     0.017***          0.25***          2.40***            0.66            3.06***
                             (3.60)            (5.85)           (2.96)           (0.97)            (2.57)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 3]     0.029***          0.43***          3.73***            1.62            5.35***
                             (3.68)            (6.68)           (3.65)           (1.28)            (3.26)
[Q(t) − 1] − [Q(t) − 4]     0.042***          0.58***          4.97***           3.93**           8.91***
                             (4.68)            (7.43)           (5.09)           (2.39)            (4.57)
[Q(t)] − [Q(t) − 1]          -0.007           4.43***          -1.69**           5.14**             3.11
                             (-1.48)          (20.68)          (-2.04)           (2.36)            (1.32)




                                                51
                    Table 12: Persistence in mutual fund and hedge fund weights

We sort all mutual funds based on the total portfolio weights of holdings in M&A targets at the end of the
quarter prior to the announcement quarter. The first group corresponds to funds which do not own any
M&A target stocks at the end of Q(t) − 1. The remaining funds that own at least one M&A target stock are
divided into terciles based on the weight invested in target stocks at the end of Q(t) − 1. We compute their
portfolio weights in future to-be targets in subsequent quarters between Q(t) and Q(t) + 3. Panel A reports
average weights allocated to to-be targets by mutual funds in each group formed in Q(t) − 1. Following
this approach, we report average weights allocated to future takeover targets by hedge funds in Panel B.
We calculate the differences in average weights for the highest and lowest terciles, and report Newey-West-
adjusted t-statistics. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.
                   Panel A : Weights in M&A target stocks by mutual funds

                              Zero              Terciles        Difference      Difference
                             Holdings    Low     Mid High       High - Low      High - Zero
                 Q(t) − 1       0        0.45    1.29 3.33         2.88            3.33

                 Q(t)          0.49      0.57    0.67    0.74     0.17***         0.25***
                                                                   (4.34)          (4.86)
                 Q(t) + 1      0.43      0.70    0.82    0.86     0.16***         0.43***
                                                                   (4.57)          (7.73)
                 Q(t) + 2      0.50      0.56    0.69    0.73     0.17***         0.23***
                                                                   (3.98)          (4.58)
                 Q(t) + 3      0.46      0.70    0.79    0.88     0.18***         0.43***
                                                                   (5.67)          (9.99)

                 Panel B : Weights in M&A target stocks by hedge funds

                              Zero              Terciles        Difference      Difference
                             Holdings    Low     Mid High       High - Low      High - Zero
                 Q(t) − 1       0        0.39    1.53 7.07         6.68            7.07

                 Q(t)          1.21      1.24    1.34    2.02     0.78***         0.81***
                                                                   (2.79)          (3.19)
                 Q(t) + 1      1.18      1.21    1.28    1.71     0.50***         0.53***
                                                                   (5.77)          (5.32)
                 Q(t) + 2      1.19      1.19    1.33    1.70     0.51***         0.51***
                                                                   (5.45)          (5.25)
                 Q(t) + 3      1.14      1.20    1.41    1.64     0.44***         0.50***
                                                                   (5.29)          (6.54)




                                                        52
             Table 13: Mutual fund trading in takeover targets and fund activeness


This table shows the relation between trading targets and fund activeness. For each target, we merge all
funds in the sample that exist at the time of the deal announcement. We repeat this procedure with the
control group firms, and integrate the obtained two datasets. The unit of observation is fund-firm level,
where firm refers to either a target company or its corresponding control group firm. The control group
is obtained from the precedure described in Table 3. T arget f irm equals 1 if a firm is a takeover target,
and is 0 if a firm is a corresponding control group company. The dependent variable is a fund’s difference
in log(1 + sharesQ(t)−1 ) and log(1 + sharesQ(t)−2 ), given that Q(t) is the announcement quarter. If a
fund does not hold a potential target (or a firm from the control group), its number of adjusted shares
is 0. A vector of controls consists of firm and fund characteristics: a fund’s TNA, a fund’s age, a fund’s
expense ratio, a fund’s turnover ratio, a fund’s flows, a firm’s market capitalization, a firm’s stock return
in quarter (t − 1) and its stock return in (t − 2), as well as a firm’s stock turnover ratio. The activeness
variable is either Active Share (Model (1)), Fund (1-R2 ) (Model (2)), or the absolute value of Return
Gap (Model (3)). Since Active Share data is annual, for each fund×quarter observation, we take Active
Share of a fund for the year preceding the merger announcement year. All independent variables (except
Active Share) are measured as of quarter Q(t) − 2, plus a firm’s stock return that is measured at Q(t) − 1.
In model (1), Active Share is measured as of year before the merger announcement year. All continuous
variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Standard errors are clustered at the fund level. All coefficients are
multiplied by 1,000. t-statistics are reported in parentheses. Symbols ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

                                                  Active Share      Fund (1-R2 )     | Return Gap |

                                                        (1)              (2)                (3)

        Activeness×Target firm                      0.247***           0.246***          0.071***
                                                      (3.96)             (4.54)           (7.21)
        Activeness                                     0.001            0.094**         -0.031***
                                                      (0.02)             (2.05)           (-3.97)
        Target firm                                 -0.289***         -0.117***         -0.101***
                                                      (-5.34)          (-10.77)          (-12.33)
        Intercept                                   0.543***           0.539***          0.559***
                                                      (5.96)             (7.13)           (8.35)
        Firm and fund controls                          Yes               Yes               Yes
        Time and 2-digit SIC fixed effects              Yes               Yes               Yes
        R2 (%)                                          0.82              0.97              0.96
        Number of observations                      4,800,549         7,068,999         7,156,118




                                                      53
