NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE POLITICS OF CEOS
Alma Cohen
Moshe Hazan
Roberto Tallarita
David Weiss
Working Paper 25815
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25815

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019

This paper is part of the work of the Project on Corporate Political Spending of the Harvard Law
School Program on Corporate Governance. We would like to thank Lucian Bebchuk and Itay
Saporta for valuable comments and discussions. We have also benefitted from invaluable
research assistance by Shay Acrich, Omer Braun, Zoe Piel, and Ewelina Rudnicka. We gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business
and the Program on Corporate Governance at Harvard Law School, the Israel Science
Foundation, and Tel-Aviv University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Alma Cohen, Moshe Hazan, Roberto Tallarita, and David Weiss. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Politics of CEOs
Alma Cohen, Moshe Hazan, Roberto Tallarita, and David Weiss
NBER Working Paper No. 25815
May 2019
JEL No. G3,G34,K2,K22
ABSTRACT
CEOs of public companies have influence over the political spending of their firms, which has
been attracting significant attention since the Supreme Court decision in Citizens United.
Furthermore, the policy views expressed by CEOs receive substantial consideration from
policymakers and the public. The political preferences of CEOs, we argue, are therefore
important for a full understanding of U.S. policymaking and politics. To contribute to this
understanding, we provide empirical evidence on the partisan leanings of public-company CEOs.
We use Federal Election Commission (FEC) records to put together a comprehensive database of
the political contributions made by over 3,500 individuals who served as CEOs of S&P 1500
companies during the period 2000-2017. We find that these political contributions display
substantial partisan preferences in support of Republican candidates. We identify how this pattern
is related to the company’s industry, geographical region, and CEO gender. To highlight the
significance of CEO’s partisan preferences for some corporate decisions, we show that public
companies led by Republican CEOs tend to be less transparent to investors with respect to their
political spending. We conclude by discussing the potential policy implications of our analysis.

Alma Cohen
Harvard Law School
1525 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
alcohen@law.harvard.edu

Roberto Tallarita
1563 Massachusetts Ave
Pound 509
Cambridge, Mass 02138
United States
rtallarita@law.harvard.edu

Moshe Hazan
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel-Aviv University
P.O. Box 39040
Tel-Aviv 69978
Israel
and CEPR
moshehaz@tauex.tau.ac.il

David Weiss
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978
Israel
davidweiss@post.tau.ac.il

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Introduction ................................................................................... 1
2. The Policy Stakes .......................................................................... 5
2.1 Corporate Political Spending ............................................... 6
2.2 CEOs’ Direct Influence on Policymaking ........................... 8
CEOs as Policy Players ................................................ 8
CEOs as Advisers to Policymakers .............................. 9
The Business Roundtable ............................................. 10
3. Companies, CEOs, and Contributions .......................................... 11
3.1 Companies and CEOs .......................................................... 11
3.2 Matching CEOs with Political Contributions ...................... 12
3.3 Classifying Political Contributions...................................... 14
3.4 CEO Political Preferences ................................................... 17
4. The Politics of CEOs..................................................................... 19
4.1 CEO Political Preferences: The Big Picture ........................ 20
4.2 The Dominance of Republicans over Time ......................... 22
4.3 CEO Political Preferences and Company Size .................... 23
4.4 Industry and CEO Political Preferences .............................. 25
4.5 Region of Headquarters ....................................................... 27
4.6 CEO Gender ........................................................................ 30
4.7 Regression Analysis ............................................................ 32
4.8 Assets Controlled by Republican and Democratic CEOs ... 33
5. CEO Politics and the Disclosure of Political Spending ................ 35
5.1 Voluntary Disclosure ........................................................... 36
5.2 Association with CEO Political Preferences ....................... 38
6. Going Forward .............................................................................. 41
6.1 Corporate Political Spending ............................................... 41
6.2 CEOs’ Influence on Policy .................................................. 42
6.3 Political Preferences and Corporate Decisions .................... 43
6.4 Explaining the Pro-Republican Tilt ..................................... 44
7. Conclusion .................................................................................... 44
References ......................................................................................... 46

The Politics of CEOs

1

1. INTRODUCTION
Chief executive officers (CEOs) of public companies preside over a
significant fraction of the American economy and wield substantial power
over a majority of the assets held by business firms. Their power over
corporate resources, as well as their significant stature and prestige in the
economic system, enable public-company CEOs to have significant influence
over policy and political decisions. In this Paper, we argue that understanding
the political preferences of CEOs is valuable for understanding the inner
dynamics of U.S. policymaking and politics, and we seek to contribute to this
understanding.
To this end, we conduct an empirical study of the political preferences of
public-company CEOs during the 18-year period of 2000 - 2017. Our study
examines more than 3,800 individuals who served as CEOs of S&P 1500
companies. Our goal is to investigate whether and to what extent CEOs show
disproportionate support for one of the two main parties and how this pattern
varies across time, industry, region, and CEO gender.
We find that, during the period we examine, CEOs donate
disproportionately more to the Republican Party and its candidates. We
classify CEOs as “Republican” if they contribute at least two-thirds of their
donations to Republican candidates, “Democratic” if they contribute at least
two-thirds of their donations to Democratic candidates, and “Neutral” if they
do not contribute two-thirds of their spending to either one of the two major
parties. We find that more than 57% of CEOs are Republicans (so defined),
19% are Democrats (so defined), and the rest are Neutral (so defined).
Therefore, Republican CEOs are more than three times as many as
Democratic CEOs. Furthermore, Republican CEOs lead companies with
almost twice the asset value of companies led by Democratic CEOs.
We also investigate the extent to which the predominance of Republican
CEOs varies across industries, geographical regions, and CEO gender.
Finally, to highlight the significance of CEO political preferences, we study
the relationship between CEOs’ partisan leanings and corporate decisions on
whether to disclose to investors information about the company’s political
spending. We find that companies with Republican CEOs tend to make their
political spending transparent to investors than companies with Democratic
CEOs.
Scholars have used the political contributions of corporate directors and
executives as a variable in a number of prior empirical studies, but these
studies have largely focused on issues other than the partisan leanings of

2

The Politics of CEOs

CEOs. 1 To the best of our knowledge, our paper provides the first systematic
evidence on the partisan leanings of the CEOs of contemporary public
companies. 2 The patterns we identify, we believe, should inform subsequent
examination of policymaking, politics, and corporate decision-making.
Our analysis is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the potential
importance of CEO political preferences for public policy and politics. We
examine the impact of CEO political preferences through two main channels:
corporate political spending and policy activism. Especially since the
Supreme Court’s decision in Citizens United, which allowed corporations to
make unlimited independent political expenditures, corporate spending can
substantially affect politics and policymaking. Thus, an understanding of
CEO political preferences is important for assessing the long-term effects of
corporate political spending and Citizens United on U.S. politics and policy.
Furthermore, CEOs, both individually and through the Business
Roundtable—their most prominent association—express policy views and
provide policy advice, and their expertise and leadership positions enable
such views and advice to have significant influence.
Section 3 describes the dataset we have built. We first put together public
information about individuals who served as CEOs of S&P 1500 companies
between 2000 and 2017. We then sought to locate within the massive
electronic records of the Federal Elections Commission (FEC) all political
contributions by the CEOs in our sample. Section 3 describes the problems
we had to address to match CEOs to their contributions. Overall, we were
able to identify political contributions for 89% of S&P 500 CEOs, 82% of the
mid-cap CEOs, and 72% of the CEOs of smaller companies.
Section 4 presents our findings. Section 4.1 provides an overview of CEO
political preferences and presents evidence that Republican CEOs
substantially outnumber Democratic CEOs. We show that the median CEO
directs 75% of his or her total contributions to Republicans. As mentioned
above, we find that Republican CEOs are more than 57% of the whole
—————————————————————————————————
1

See, e.g., Fremeth et al. 2013 (presenting evidence that individuals increase the amount
of their political contributions when they become a CEO); Borghesi et al. 2014 (presenting
evidence on the difference between CEOs donating to both Republican and Democratic
parties and those donating to one party). Indeed, Fremeth et al. 2013, p. 175, notes that a
majority of CEOs donate to both Republican and Democratic candidates and views this fact
as evidence that CEOs do not contribute primarily to Republicans. Our analysis also finds
that most CEOs contribute to both parties but shows that a majority of those who contribute
to both parties give primarily to Republicans.
2
An early paper published in 2001 suggested that contributions to the 1980 elections
display pre-Republican preferences by “individual capitalists.” (Burris 2001, presenting
evidence based on data relating to the 1980 elections). However, subsequent work did not
focus on this issue, and Fremeth et al. 2013, p. 175, even questioned whether the patterns
suggested by that early paper existed in data from subsequent periods.

The Politics of CEOs

3

sample, while Democratic CEOs are only about 19%.
The rest of Section 4 examine the findings in more detail and show the
extent to which CEO political preferences are associated with industry
sectors, regions, and CEO gender. CEOs disproportionately support
Republican candidates in each year of the period we examine, in all 12 FamaFrench industry sectors, in all four U.S. census regions, and for both male and
female CEOs. However, CEOs’ Republican leanings are most pronounced in
some industries (energy, manufacturing, and chemicals) than others (such as
telecom, business equipment and money). Similarly, pro-Republican
preferences are strongest for CEOs of companies headquartered in the
Midwest and the South, and least strong for CEOs of companies in the
Northeast and West. Furthermore, CEO gender is significantly associated
with partisan preferences, with male CEOs being much more likely to have
pro-Republican preferences than female CEOs. These correlations persist
also after controlling for all other variables in a regression analysis.
It might be argued that the “personal” preferences reflected by CEO
spending of their own monies on politics generally do not affect decisions
they make in their “CEO capacity.” On this view, CEO decisions how to
spend their company’s monies on politics will be completely unaffected by
their personal political preferences and, similarly, the policy views and advice
that CEOs will provide to the public and policymakers will reflect only their
corporate persona and in no way their own “personal” political and policy
views. We believe, however, that the “personal” political and policy
preferences of CEOs are likely to affect their professional decisions, at least
when such decisions have political and policy dimensions.
To explore this issue, Section 5 investigates the association between CEO
political preferences and a corporate decision with a political and policy
dimension that has attracted much attention from investors and researchers in
recent years. In particular, we test whether there is a relationship between the
partisan preferences of CEOs and the willingness of their companies to
disclose information about their political spending. To measure the scope and
quality of such corporate disclosure, we use the CPA-Zicklin Index in 2015,
2016, and 2017, a measure of transparency of corporate political spending
among public companies. We find that companies led by Republican CEOs
are less transparent to their investors on whether, how, and how much they
spend on politics.
Section 6 discusses the potential policy implications of our analysis and
findings. We argue that an understanding of CEOs’ disproportionate support
for the Republican Party should inform an assessment of the effects of
corporate political spending and Citizens United on policymaking and
politics. In addition, an understanding of CEOs’ partisan leanings should
inform the assessment of CEO policy activism. Furthermore, students of

4

The Politics of CEOs

corporate law and finance should take into account the potential impact of
political preferences on corporate decisions, at least when such decisions
have political and policy dimensions.
Before proceeding, we wish to clarify that we take no position on whether
the disproportionate support of CEOs for Republicans is socially desirable.
Focusing on shareholder-value maximization, some might argue that support
for Republicans is consistent with shareholder interests because share value
would benefit from the low-tax and deregulatory policies that receive more
support from Republicans. Furthermore, looking at the political system as a
whole, some might argue that the partisan leanings of CEOs provide a
desirable balance against the opposite partisan leanings of other influential
groups such as labor unions. By contrast, others might worry that a significant
partisan imbalance among CEOs, and as a result among public companies,
could be unhealthy for democracy. These are claims on which individuals
may reasonably disagree, and we do not wish to contribute to a debate on the
normative assessment of CEO support for Republicans. Our contribution is
to provide an empirical foundation on which any examination of this subject
can build.
Similarly, we also would like to clarify and emphasize that we do not seek
to criticize or portray as negative the documented association between
Republican CEOs and resistance to voluntary disclosure of the company’s
political spending. There is an intense ongoing debate on the desirability of
such disclosure. 3 Some might argue, for example, that company contributions
to unpopular causes can provoke backlash from customers or other
stakeholders (Verret 2013, pp. 468-70), 4 and that transparency, at least in
some cases, might therefore be detrimental to shareholders.
We do not take a position on these issues either. Our contribution in this
connection is to provide evidence that, for better or worse, the spread of
voluntary disclosure practices could have been slowed down or impeded by
the dominance of Republican CEOs, as well as to highlight in this way the
importance of considering CEO political preferences in predicting
understanding certain corporate decisions. The association of pro-Republican
preferences with less transparency, together with the commonness of such
preferences, should inform any assessment of the prospect that considerable
transparency of corporate spending would be achieved via private ordering.
—————————————————————————————————
3

For articles putting forward different positions on the merits of such disclosure, see,
e.g., Atkins 2013; Bebchuk & Jackson 2013; Bebchuk et al. 2019; Coates & Lincoln 2011;
Copland 2013; Lepore 2013; Smith & Dickerson 2013; and Strine 2019.
4
Cf. Bebchuk et al. 2019, pp. 7-10 (arguing that the empirical evidence on the beneficial
effects of corporate political spending is mixed and that even demonstrable beneficial effects
could not justify a lack of transparency).

The Politics of CEOs

5

2. THE POLICY STAKES
This Section discusses the importance of the political preferences of
CEOs for public policy and politics. The CEOs of S&P 1500 companies are
a very small group, numbering less than 0.001% of U.S. voters. However, as
this Section explains, public-company CEOs are likely to have a
disproportionate influence over American policymaking and politics, and
understanding their political preferences is therefore important for
understanding the inner dynamics of the U.S. democracy.
Although public companies represent only 0.06% of the total number of
U.S. firms, they account for 31.3% of private-sector employment, 41.3% of
sales, and 51.1% of pre-tax profits (Asker et al. 2010). 5 As key decisionmakers within their firms, CEOs thus preside over a significant portion of the
nation’s economy. Their decisions can have an enormous impact on jobs,
wealth, tax revenues, and even the social fabric of local communities. These
facts naturally make public-company CEOs important agents in the economy.
Most importantly for the purposes of this Paper, however, their positions
enable CEOs to influence policymaking and politics through two important
channels. 6
Section 2.1 discusses the ability of CEOs to influence policymaking and
politics through the political spending of the companies they head. Especially
since the Supreme Court’s decision in Citizens United, which allowed
corporations to make unlimited independent political expenditures (Citizens
United v. FEC, 558 U.S. 310 (2010)), corporate political spending can
substantially affect politics and policymaking. CEOs can influence the
amounts and recipients of the political spending made by their companies.
Section 2.2 discusses the significant impact that the expressed views of
CEOs have on policy discourse and policymakers. CEOs often participate in
such discourse and express policy views either individually or through the
Business Roundtable. Because CEOs are (rightly) viewed as individuals of
high standing, authority, and expertise, their expressed policy positions have
long been relatively influential.
—————————————————————————————————
5

Data as of the end of 2010.
A significant body of literature argues that wealthy individuals in general have a
disproportionate impact on policymaking and politics (Bartels 2008; Gilens 2012; Domhoff
2014.) Yet one needs not accept such a view of American democracy to believe that publiccompany CEOs are politically influential. As we explain below, the positions of publiccompany CEOs provide them with substantial channels of influence that even individuals of
similar wealth do not have.
6

6

The Politics of CEOs
2.1 Corporate Political Spending

Public companies may and do spend money on politics. Business
corporations are prohibited from contributing directly to federal political
candidates (11 C.F.R. §114.2), 7 but they can donate to state and local
candidates in many states (National Conference of State Legislature 2017),
fund party conventions and presidential inaugurations (11 C.F.R. §
9008.52(b); Federal Election Commission, Advisory Opinion 1980-144), and
pay for ads that focus on political issues rather than specific candidates
(Bebchuk et al. n.d.).
Furthermore, after Citizens United, corporations may also make
independent expenditures—that is, expenditures made without coordinating
or consulting with the candidate’s campaign—without limits (Citizens
United, 558 U.S. , pp. 20-51). 8 In addition, corporations may also spend
money on “electioneering communications,” which are those ads that identify
a candidate in the vicinity of the election without expressly advocating for or
against her. 9 Finally, corporations may also donate to political committees
that make independent expenditures only (so called super PACs) or
contribute to the independent-expenditure account of hybrid PACs
(Speechnow v. Federal Election Commission, 599 F.3d 686 (D.C. Cir. 2010)
(en banc); Carey v. FEC, 791 F. Supp. 2d 121 (D.D.C. 2011)).
The current level of corporate political spending is uncertain because
public companies are generally not required to disclose their political
spending to their investors and much spending can take place without the
—————————————————————————————————
7

The prohibition dates back to the Tillman Act of 1907, which banned corporate
donations to political campaigns in the wake of the revelations of the Armstrong Committee
about the political donations made by large life insurance companies (Mutch 2014, pp. 3644).
8
An independent expenditure is “an expenditure made by a person (A) expressly
advocating the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate; and (B) that is not made
in concert or cooperation with or at the request or suggestion of such candidate, the
candidate’s authorized political committee, or their agents, or a political party committee or
its agents.” 52 U.S.C. § 30101(17).
9
The concept of “electioneering communications” was introduced by the Bipartisan
Campaign Reform Act (BCRA) sponsored by Republican senator John McCain and
Democratic senator Russ Feingold to regulate political ads made in the vicinity of an election.
See 11 C.F.R. §100.29 (“Electioneering communication means any broadcast, cable, or
satellite communication that: (1) Refers to a clearly identified candidate for Federal office;
(2) s publicly distributed within 60 days before a general election for the office sought by the
candidate; or within 30 days before a primary or preference election, or a convention or
caucus of a political party that has authority to nominate a candidate, for the office sought
by the candidate, and the candidate referenced is seeking the nomination of that political
party; and (3) Is targeted to the relevant electorate, in the case of a candidate for Senate or
the House of Representatives.”)

The Politics of CEOs

7

investors or the public knowing (Bebchuk et al. n.d.). While direct political
spending and donations to political committees must be documented to the
Federal Election Commission or one of the state election agencies, the
information is scattered through hundreds of federal and local filings, and
putting it together in an aggregate picture takes substantial expertise and
effort.
Moreover, corporations can contribute funds through intermediaries
without these contributions appearing in any FEC records. Intermediaries,
such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, spend large amounts on elections. 10
Although these organizations are not required to disclose the identity of their
donors, researchers have concluded after piecing together voluntary
disclosures, journalistic reports, or disclosure in legal proceedings, that public
companies likely donate significantly to political intermediaries (Bebchuk &
Jackson 2013; Riley 2012; Vandewalker 2015).
While the current level of corporate political spending is unknown, it is
clear that the vast resources of public companies would enable them to have
a large influence on the political process should they choose to do so. In the
2015-2016 cycle, the two major presidential candidates raised a total of $1.2
billion (Center of Responsive Politics 2016), the average winning Senate
candidate spent about $20 million and the average winning House candidate
spent $1.5 million (Kim 2016). With S&P 1500 companies currently having
aggregate profits of about $1.2 trillion in 2017, 11 directing even an extremely
small fraction of these profits to politics would have a major impact. For
example, using 0.1% of corporate profits for this purpose would produce $1.2
billion of political spending.
The current and potential future significance of corporate political
spending, and the fact that such spending is not generally transparent, make
the political preferences of CEOs of interest to any student of the U.S.
political system. Does corporate political spending, and its expansion after
Citizens United, benefit one of the two main parties more than the other? If
so, to what extent does this party get an advantage? Understanding the
political preferences of CEOs can help to answer these questions.
Furthermore, this evidence will also be valuable to investors in public
companies and those seeking to assess the impact of corporate political
—————————————————————————————————
10

For example, in the 2015-2016 election cycle alone, the Chamber of Commerce spent
almost $30 million. See Center for Responsive Politics, US Chamber of Commerce,
http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/summary.php?id=D000019798.
11
This figure is based on an analysis of data retrieved from Compustat North America.
It reflects the aggregate net income, with respect to fiscal year 2017 (12-month fiscal period
ending from June 30, 2017 to May 31, 2018) of all companies belonging to S&P 1500
Composite Index as of the end of 2017, with the exclusion of companies reporting a negative
net income.

8

The Politics of CEOs

spending on the interests of shareholders. Regardless of the financial impact
of political spending on the corporation’s bottom line, political speech could
well have an expressive significance that transcends its economic return:
Investors might be concerned about their money being spent on, and their
company being associated with, political causes that they do not favor or even
actively oppose (Bebchuk & Jackson 2010). 12
Thus, understanding whether CEOs systematically favor one of the main
parties is important for understanding the potential magnitude of the
expressive significance problem. If CEOs disproportionately favor one of the
two major political parties, the vast number opposing that party will have to
recognize that their investments in diversified portfolios of companies
implies that funds of these companies are likely to be disproportionately spent
for political causes they oppose. The evidence we present can identify the
extent to which some part of the public, and which parts of the public, should
be concerned about the political spending of the public companies in which
they are invested.
2.2 CEOs’ Direct Influence on Policymaking
As we discuss in some detail in this Section, CEOs are active and
influential participants in the policy discourse and their views seem to get
substantial attention and to wield substantial influence. The substantial
attention and influence might owe to the fact that CEOs are viewed as thought
leaders with much stature and a great deal of expertise and authority on
business, leadership, and policy issues. 13
It is worth clarifying that we do not seek to question the substantial weight
that the expressed views of CEOs should have in policymaking. Rather,
accepting this weight as given and understandable, we wish to stress that
analyzing whether CEOs systematically favor one major party might be
important for evaluating their policy influence. This recognition should
inform the way in which the public, the media, and policymakers analyze the
views expressed by CEOs and CEO groups.
CEOs as Policy Players
CEOs often express views on policy issues that are unrelated to their
companies’ core business. A recent study by Harvard Business School
professors Aaron Chatterji and Michael Toffel documents many instances in
—————————————————————————————————
12

See also Section 6.1 below.
We do not argue that CEOs are the only group that have such disproportionate
influence. There might be other groups – for example: TV talk show hosts – that might have
such an influence.
13

The Politics of CEOs

9

which CEOs publicly expressed views on a broad range of topics, from
Indiana’s Religious Freedom Restoration Act to LGBTQ rights, race
relations, and climate change (Chatteji & Toofel 2018a). Furthermore, CEOs’
views enjoy attention and influence. A survey by the communication firm
Edelman indicates that people consider CEOs more credible than journalists
or government officials, with 64% of respondents believing that CEOs
“should take the lead on change rather than waiting for the government to
impose it,” and 84% thinking that CEOs should inform and shape ongoing
policy debates (Edelman 2018). 14
CEOs seem to recognize their ability to influence the policy discourse and
some have explicitly embraced such a public role. Bank of America’s CEO,
Brian Moynihan, for example, recently said that their “jobs as CEOs now
include driving what [the CEOs] think is right.” Marc Benioff of Salesforce
has declared that CEOs need to stand up not just for their shareholders but
for employees, customers, partners, the community, and the environment.
And Jeff Immelt, the former CEO of GE, has said that CEOs should act as
representatives of the people who work with them and “take a position
occasionally on those things that are really consistent with […] where our
people stand.” (Chatterji & Toffel 2018b, p. 78). Furthermore, a recent study
found that 28% of S&P 500 CEOs made policy statements on national media
between 2000 and 2018, and that 68% of the 166 S&P 1500 CEOs with an
active personal Twitter feed have tweeted at least once on social,
environmental, or political issues (Larcker et al. 2018).
CEOs as Advisers to Policymakers
Consistent with their perceived policy expertise and stature, CEOs often
act as nonpartisan advisers to policymakers. For example, in 2016, Presidentelect Donald Trump created an advisory committee, composed of 16 CEOs
—————————————————————————————————
14
Professors Chatterji and Toffel also did two experiments to measure the influence of
CEOs’ views on the general public and concluded that their studies “provide some evidence
that CEOs can shape public opinion.” Indeed, they showed that their respondents’ opinion on
the Indiana’s Religious Freedom Restoration Act was influenced, by a statistically significant
measure, by the public comments made by Apple CEO Tim Cook (who thought that the law
would allow discrimination against gays and lesbians).
Respondents presented with Cook’s comments were significantly more likely to dislike
the law than the control group exposed to a neutral statement. However, CEOs’ influence
was not statistically distinguishable from the influence of politicians or even from the effect
of a generic preamble reporting that according to some unidentified people the Indiana law
would discriminate against gays and lesbians. Furthermore, a second experiment on a
different topic (climate change) found no statistically significant effect of the reported
opinion of prominent CEOs. It is not clear, therefore, whether CEOs can change people’s
mind by simply voicing their opinion, but they likely contribute to the shaping of public
opinion (Chatterji & Toffel 2018a).

10

The Politics of CEOs

of large public corporations, from J.P. Morgan’s Jamie Dimon, to General
Motors’ Mary Barra to Blackstone’s Stephen Schwarzman (Gara 2016). This
committee was tasked with advising the president on business regulation and
economic policy in general. President Trump also formed an advisory council
composed almost exclusively of public-company CEOs—including Ford
Motor Company’s Mark Fields, Johnson & Johnson’s Alex Gorsky, GE’s Jeff
Immelt, Boeing’s Dennis Muilenburg, and Tesla’s Elon Musk—to advise
him on manufacturing growth (Meyersohn 2017).
The practice of nominating public-company CEOs to prominent advisory
committees goes back to earlier administrations (Priest et al. 1984; Balla &
Wright 2001; Karty 2002; Moore et al. 2002). For example, President
Obama’s Economic Recovery Advisory Board included prominent CEOs
(Obama White House 2009). The board was subsequently replaced by the
President’s Council on Jobs and Competitiveness, which was chaired by GE
CEO Jeff Immelt and included several other CEOs, including Xerox’s Ursula
Burns, American Express’ Kenneth Chenault, DuPont’s Ellen Kullman,
Boeing’s Jim McNerney, and Intel’s Paul Otellini (Obama White House
2011).
Obama’s executive order establishing the Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness stated that the council was created to “ensur[e] the
availability of non-partisan advice to the President from participants in and
experts on the economy.” (Exec. Order No. 13,564, 3 C.F.R. 217 (2011)).
Clearly, any inclusion of CEOs in such a body must recognize that market
players do have business interests and inevitably bring those interested views
to the conversation. What might not be salient to those forming such a
committee—and that this paper will try to shed some light on—is that the
inclusion of CEOs might also introduce a disproportionate representation of
certain partisan preferences.
The Business Roundtable
Perhaps the most vivid example of CEOs’ direct involvement in public
policy is the Business Roundtable. The Business Roundtable is an
organization composed of about 200 CEOs of leading U.S. companies that
was established in 1972 for the explicit purpose of formulating and
advocating policy views (Business Roundtable 2011). The organization’s
website proudly lists the numerous policy areas where the CEO members
have expressed views and have had influence—from corporate governance
and education, to environmental, immigration, and fiscal policy.
For example, during the 2017 tax reform debate, the Business Roundtable
succeeded in obtaining the repeal of a corporate alternative minimum tax that

The Politics of CEOs

11

had been included in a Senate bill. 15 Similarly, the group was heavily
involved in shaping the 2001 bipartisan education reform No Child Left
Behind, and in its implementation in several states (Business Roundtable
2002). The Roundtable also defended the reform from several subsequent
attacks in 2005 and again in 2013 (Dillon 2005; Staples 2013).
In the field of corporate governance, the Business Roundtable has been
pushing for stricter requirements for shareholder proposals (to reduce the
current number of proposals voted on at annual meetings), regulatory
oversight of proxy advisors (which are firms advising institutional investors
on how to vote their shares), and measures that facilitate voting by retail
investors (Business Roundtable 2018b). Also, the Roundtable has recently
been involved in policy proposals regarding immigration reform, NAFTA
negotiations, and criminal justice reform (Business Roundtable 2019, 2018a,
2018c).
Clearly, policy views expressed by the 200 CEOs in the Business
Roundtable appear to receive far more attention and have more influence than
would views expressed by an organization made up of, say, 200 academics,
lawyers, or economists. The influence of the views expressed by the Business
Roundtable is likely the product of the perceived standing, authority, and
expertise of CEOs that this Section has discussed, and it confirms the
importance of identifying the political preferences of CEOs.
3. COMPANIES, CEOS, AND CONTRIBUTIONS
To measure CEOs’ political preferences, we analyze their donations to
political candidates, committees, and parties. Doing so requires a sufficiently
large set of public-company CEOs, a procedure for matching those
individuals with the public records of political contributions, and a method
for inferring political preferences from a pattern of contributions. This
Section offers an overview of the data we have compiled and the
methodology we have used for this purpose. We also provide an overview of
the data and some summary statistics about CEO political contributions.
3.1 Companies and CEOs
Our primary source to identify CEOs of public companies is Standard &
Poor’s ExecuComp database, 16 which contains information about the
—————————————————————————————————
15

“The Business Roundtable, desperate to remove the corporate alternative minimum
tax, worked behind the scenes, calling lawmakers and raising concerns about how it would
effectively kill the ability of companies to utilize the prized research and development tax
credit. […] Lawmakers got the message quickly, lobbyists said.” (Vogel & Tankersley 2017)
16
For information about the Execucomp database, see Standard & Poor's/Compustat.
Retrieved from Wharton Research Data Service http://wrds-web.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/.

12

The Politics of CEOs

executives of companies included in the S&P 1500 index. The S&P 1500 is
a composite index that combines three different indices: the S&P 500, which
includes 500 companies with a large market capitalization (currently, $6.1
billion or more); the S&P MidCap 400, which includes 400 companies with
medium capitalization (currently, between $1.6 to $2.8 billion); and the S&P
SmallCap 600, which includes 600 companies with a small capitalization
(currently, between $450 million to $2.1 billion) (S&P Dow Jones 2019, p.
6). We will sometimes refer to each of these indices as a sub-index.
In the aggregate, the S&P 1500 represents about 90% of the whole U.S.
market capitalization. 17 Thus, our sample includes the CEOs of companies
representing the great majority of public-company assets. In addition to their
names, we obtain from ExecuComp information about CEOs’ gender and
their companies’ locations. We also collect financial information about public
companies from the Compustat database. 18 In particular, we obtain
information about market capitalization, industry, state of headquarters, and
the sub-index that each public company in our dataset belonged to in a given
year. 19
At the end of the process, we obtain an average of 487 S&P 500 firms,
384 mid-cap firms, and 570 small-cap firms in any given year. We focus on
the 18-year period between 2000 and 2017. During this period, most
companies changed their CEO, and many did so more than once. As a result,
in our initial sample we have 5,078 individuals who served as a CEO of an
S&P 1500 public company during the period we examine.
3.2 Matching CEOs with Political Contributions
We obtain information on CEO contributions to political parties from the
records made public by the Federal Election Commission (FEC). The FEC is
an independent regulatory agency that was created by the 1974 Amendments
to the Federal Election Campaign Act (FECA Amendments of 1974, Pub. L.
No. 93-443, 88 Stat. 1263 (1974)). The task of the agency is to administer
—————————————————————————————————
17
See
S&P
Dow
Jones
Indices,
S&P
Composite
1500,
https://us.spindices.com/indices/equity/sp-composite-1500. This estimate is confirmed by
our calculations using stock prices from Compustat.
18
For more information about the Compustat database, see Standard &
Poor's/Compustat. Retrieved from Wharton Research Data Service http://wrdsweb.wharton.upenn.edu/wrds/.
19
In particular, to determine size group classification, we merged ExecuComp with
Compustat North America Index Constituents by the unique identifier assigned to each
company in those databases (gvkey). In this process we lose on average, for each year, 13
firms among the large-cap companies of the S&P 500, 16 among the mid-cap companies,
and 30 in the small-cap companies.

The Politics of CEOs

13

and enforce the intricate body of law governing federal campaign finance. 20
All campaign committees affiliated with a candidate for federal office
must register with the FEC and periodically report contributions received
from all donors that exceeds (individually or combined) $200. Party
committees and political committees not affiliated with a candidate (such as,
for example, super PACs) have the same obligation (52 U.S.C. §
30104(b)(3)(A)). The FEC thus collects and makes public in its databases all
nontrivial donations received by all kinds of political committees, which
amount to tens of millions of individual donations each year. Each FEC report
has to indicate the names of donor and recipient and the donor’s home
address, employer, and job title. However, in many reports the information
about the donor’s home address, employer, and job title is missing or
incomplete.
To identify which of these donations are made by public-company CEOs,
we match the FEC database with our CEO database described above. The
process is not as simple as it may initially seem. Sometimes, for example, the
name of the executive appearing on ExecuComp matches more than one
donor on the FEC website; other times the two datasets differ in whether or
not a middle name is included and, if so, whether it appears in full or only as
a middle initial. Moreover, the CEO’s first name might appear as a shorthand
or as a nickname in one dataset and as a full formal first name in the other
(e.g., Bob instead of Robert).
We use a laborious and multi-stage process we used for addressing these
and other issues. In particular, we match the CEO with an FEC record when
we find a record with the same last name, the same first name (or a nickname
that is commonly associated with that first name), no inconsistency in the
middle name, and the same company name. This “strict” matching procedure
is responsible for the great majority of our matches. In addition, when the
company name is missing, we consider the record as associated to the CEO
only if there is a match in the middle name or initial, and the FEC record
contains a home address that is within 50 miles of the company’s
headquarters. 21
Overall, we are able to attach FEC records to more than 89% of S&P 500
CEOs, 82% of the mid-cap CEOs, and 72% of the small-cap CEOs. Out of
—————————————————————————————————
20

In particular, such data can be downloaded from the following webpage of the FEC:
https://classic.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ftpdet.shtml
21
We use the “US Cities Database” from Simplemaps.com to find the longitude and
latitude of each city listed in either the ExecuComp database or the FEC contribution, based
on the name of the city and state (and, if necessary, the zip code) as reported in the two
databases. We then use an algorithm to infer a spherical distance between the two sets of
longitude and latitude.

14

The Politics of CEOs

our initial list of 5,078 CEOs, we are unable to match FEC records for 1,268
(about 24%). As a result of this process, we have data on the political
contributions of 3,810 CEOs. 22
Of the 1,268 CEOs that we are unable to match, some might have made
no contributions while others might have made contributions that, using our
methodology, cannot be matched with FEC records with sufficient
confidence. Because we lack data on them, it is appropriate to view them as
missing observations rather than as Neutral CEOs. However, we note that, if
we were to classify them as Neutral, the fraction of Neutral CEOs would
increase but the ratios of Republican and Democratic CEOs reported below
throughout this Paper would not change.
3.3 Classifying Political Contributions
The next question we address is how to infer a specific political
preference from the data about CEOs’ political contributions. To this end, our
first step is to measure the extent to which contributions given by any CEO
ultimately benefit Republican or Democratic candidates.
To understand the complexity of this analysis, we must note that
contributions are generally made to committees. For many political
committees, the FEC database contains information regarding the
committee’s party affiliation, and we classify contributions to such a
committee based on the party affiliation recorded by the FEC. Some of these
committees are the main campaign committees of specific candidates
affiliated with a major party, are explicitly authorized by these candidates to
raise funds on their behalf, or at least are not expressly disavowed by the
candidate they support. In these cases, there is an official connection between
a committee and a candidate. 23
Other committees, although not explicitly or implicitly authorized by a
candidate, are connected with a political party, either because they are part of
the official party structure (party committees) or because they are established
by officeholders belonging to a political party (so called leadership PACs).
In all of these cases, the FEC database contains information regarding the
—————————————————————————————————
22

For any contribution record, the FEC website provides us with the amount of the
contribution. Because of changes in the real value of nominal dollars during our period of
examination, we translate all dollar figures into 2017 values using the Consumer Price Index
(CPI) All Urban Consumers, series ID CUUR0000SA0. Data on the CPI was obtained from
the
Bureau
of
Labor
Statistics,
https://www.bls.gov/regions/newengland/data/consumerpriceindex_us_table.htm.
23
See 11 C.F.R. §100.5(f)(1) (defining an “authorized committee” as “the principal
campaign committee or any other political committee authorized by a candidate under 11
CFR 102.13 to receive contributions or make expenditures on behalf of such candidate, or
which has not been disavowed pursuant to 11 CFR 100.3(a)(3).”)

The Politics of CEOs

15

committee’s party affiliation. We consider, therefore, all donations made to
authorized candidate committees, party committees, and leadership PACs as
made to candidates of the affiliated party.
Other political committees, however, are not clearly linked to a party
because they are not affiliated in any of the above ways with a political party
or a candidate of that party. In such cases, we analyze the FEC records
regarding the expenditures that these committees make. When a CEO donates
a given amount to such a committee, we allocate this amount between
Republicans and Democrats based on how the committee allocates its total
spending between support for each group. 24
Table 1 provides, for each year during the 2000-2017 period, information
about the political contributions made by individuals serving as CEOs of S&P
1500 companies in that year. The first column indicates the number of
individuals that served as an S&P 1500 CEO in that year—which varies
between 1,103 and 1,211 across the years—for whom we found political
contributions in that year. The other columns provide the number of
contributions by these CEOs, the mean contribution, and the total amount
contributed to Republican and Democratic candidates, during that year. The
Table indicates that CEOs donated twice as much to Republicans as to
Democrats—about $138 million versus $69 million.

—————————————————————————————————
24
This procedure enabled us to categorize a large majority of the contributions made by
CEOs in our sample. Contributions that we were unable to link to a party were excluded from
our calculations of the fraction of total contributions made by a CEO to each of the main
political parties. The practical effect of such exclusion is the same as the effect of assuming
that the excluded contributions benefitted the two main parties in the same proportions as the
categorized contributions. The other assumption—that such “unidentified” contributions
benefitted the two main parties in an equal way—would not change qualitatively our
conclusions regarding the partisan leanings of CEOs.

16

The Politics of CEOs

Table 1: Political Contributions by S&P 1500 CEOs during Their Tenure

For each individual who served as an S&P 1500 CEO at any point during
our period of examination, our matching procedures seek to identify all
political contributions made at any point during this period, not only during
their tenure as CEOs. We have altogether 3,810 individuals who belong to

The Politics of CEOs

17

this CEO set and for whom we were able to identify FEC contribution
records. Table 2 provides information about all of the contributions made by
these individuals during our period of examination. As the Table indicates,
CEOs’ donations to Republicans were more than twice those to Democrats
—about $320 million versus about $155 million.
Note that, during the period under consideration, the individuals in the
CEOs set made aggregate contributions exceeding $420 million, with more
than two-thirds of this amount directed to Republicans. This figure likely
underestimates total CEO contributions because our procedure likely
matches only part of the FEC records of contributions with CEOs. In any
event, although the total contributions made by CEOs are not trivial, our
focus is not on the direct effect of CEO political contributions. Rather, we are
interested in what these contributions tell us about CEO political preferences.
3.4 CEO Political Preferences
Once we have identified how much of CEOs’ political donations go to
Republican and Democratic candidates, we examine the pattern of donations
to infer the political preferences of CEOs.
To be sure, people donate money to politicians for reasons other than
ideological preferences. In particular, CEOs might donate for social reasons
(they have a social relationship with the candidate to whom they contribute)
or for strategic reasons (they would like to curry favor with the candidate).
Political scientists openly debate the extent to which political donations are,
as they put it, a form of “consumption” (that is, a way to satisfy ideological
likings) or a form of investment (that is, a means to advance their interests).25

—————————————————————————————————
25

For studies representing a range of views on this subject, see, e.g., Ansolabehere et al.
2003 (suggesting that political giving is a form of consumption, not unlike donations to
charity); Grier & Munger 1991 (modeling campaign contributions as a form of market for
policies and arguing that this view is consistent with the evidence); Bonica 2016 (arguing
that political donations by corporate directors and executives are more ideological than
donations by corporate PACs).

18

The Politics of CEOs
Table 2: Political Contributions by S&P 1500 CEOs during 2000-2017

However, while the motives behind occasional donations might be social
or strategic, it is plausible to believe that the overall pattern of donations will

The Politics of CEOs

19

be significantly correlated with, if not exclusively determined by, individual
political preferences. Furthermore, whether political donations are the result
of sincere beliefs in the ideology of a party or a candidate, or a belief that the
party or candidate would advance the interests of the donor, a consistent
pattern of donations favoring one party is a reasonable proxy for the donor’s
political leanings and thus a fact with potential analytical and policy
implications. For this reason, political scientists, sociologists, financial
economists, and legal scholars have used campaign contributions as a proxy
for the political preferences of, among others, wealthy individuals, business
elite, law professors, lawyers, and physicians. 26
Since CEOs often make significant contributions in some years but not in
others, we define a CEO’s political preference in a given year based on an
examination of the CEO’s political contributions during the four years that
precede, and the three years that follow, that given year. Thus, we calculate
for each CEO the fraction of their contributions going to each of the two main
parties during this eight-year period. We have verified that basing our
analysis on a time window that is somewhat shorter or longer would result in
qualitatively similar results.
Most CEOs donate to both parties, although to different degrees. In our
dataset, in 70% of all observations the CEO makes one or more donations to
each of the major parties (or its candidates). Although this pattern might give
an impression of partisan balance, a CEO who donates to both parties might
still direct most of the contributions to one party and thus display preference
for it. Therefore, as explained below in Section 4, our empirical analysis
classifies a CEO as supporting one of the main parties if the percentage of the
CEO’s contributions going to that party exceeds a specific threshold.
4. THE POLITICS OF CEOS
In this Section, we present our empirical findings on the political
preferences of CEOs. Section 4.1 provides an overview of CEO political
preferences and presents evidence that Republican CEOs significantly
outnumber Democratic CEOs under various definitions of partisanship. We
then show that the prevalence of pro-Republican preferences is present in
each of the large-cap, mid-cap, and small-cap sub-indices (Section 4.2),
throughout the period that we examine (Section 4.3), in each of the 12 FamaFrench industry sectors (Section 4.4), in all four U.S. geographical regions
(Section 4.5), and for both male and female CEOs (Section 4.6).
In analyzing the effects of size, industry, region, and gender, however, we
identify substantial variation. The prevalence of pro-Republican preferences
—————————————————————————————————
26

See, e.g., Bonica et al. 2018; Burris 2001; Borghesi et al 2014; McGinnis et al. 2005;
Bonica et al. 2017; Bonica et al. 2014.

20

The Politics of CEOs

is much greater in certain regions and industry sectors and among male
CEOs. We conclude with a regression analysis (Section 4.7) that shows that,
after controlling for other variables, region, industry sector, and gender are
strongly associated with the strength of pro-Republican preferences.
4.1 CEO Political Preferences: The Big Picture
As noted earlier, most CEOs donate to both Democrats and Republicans.
However, even for CEOs who donate to both parties, how they split the
contributions between the two parties can display partisan preferences.
Figure 1 below displays the full probability distribution of partisan
preferences in CEO donations. As it vividly shows, among the minority of
CEOs who support only one of the major parties (extreme ends of the
distribution), the fraction of those who support only Republicans is much
higher than the fraction who support only Democrats. In general, among
those who donate to Republicans, the distribution is heavily skewed to the
right, that is, concentrated at high levels of support for Republicans.
For all the observations in our 2000-2017 dataset of S&P 1500 CEOs, the
mean percentage donated to Republicans is 66.1% and the median percentage
donated to Republicans is 75.0%.
Below we refer to a CEO as supporting a main party if the fraction of
contributions by the CEO to that party exceeds a certain threshold. If neither
donations to Republicans nor those to Democrats exceed the threshold, the
CEO is classified as “Neutral.” The Table below provides results on the
partition of CEO support between the two main parties using 50%, 60%,
66.7%, and 75% thresholds

The Politics of CEOs

21

.15

.2

Figure 1: Probability Distribution of CEO Partisan Preferences

Fraction
.1

75% Dem

0

.05

67% Dem

100% Dem

75% Dem

50%-50%

75% Rep

100% Rep

Partisan Preferences

Note: This figure indicates the fraction of CEOs in our sample for each
level of partisan preferences. The middle of the x-axis represents perfectly
balanced preferences (50% of contributions to Democrats and 50% to
Republicans); the extreme left end represents CEOs directing 100% of their
contributions to Democratic candidates; the extreme right end represents
CEOs directing 100% of their contributions to Republican candidates;
intermediate points represent intermediate mixes of preferences. The dashed
lines denote 25% 75% and the solid lines denote 33% and 67%. The figure is
based on observations for which CEOs made more than 10 contributions
(different number of contributions do not change the distribution).
.

22

The Politics of CEOs
Table 3: CEO Political Preferences under Alternative Thresholds

As could have been expected from the probability distribution displayed
in Figure 1, Table 3 above indicates that, under all alternative definitions,
CEOs’ preferences are disproportionately in favor of the Republican Party,
by a substantial margin. In particular, Republican CEOs outnumber
Democratic CEOs by a ratio that varies between 2.6 and 3.1.
Of course, the higher the threshold used, the larger the fraction of CEOs
that are classified as Neutral rather than supporters of one of the main parties.
Going forward, we will use the 66.7% threshold in the results we present.
Under this definition, CEOs are classified as supporters of a given main party
if their contributions to that party are more than twice their contributions to
the other main party. Although we use the 66.7% below, we note that the
results are qualitatively similar if we use any of the other thresholds.
4.2 The Dominance of Republicans over Time
The results presented thus far used all observations during the 2000-2017
period and therefore the identified pro-Republican tilt represents an average
tendency during this period. We now turn to examine whether this pattern has
been persistent throughout the period or there were some points in time in
which CEOs were predominantly Democrats or Neutral.
To examine this issue, Figure 2 displays for the full S&P 1500 sample the
partition of CEOs between Republicans, Democrats, and Neutral, for each
year during the period 2000-2017. The Figure shows that, notwithstanding
some fluctuations in the Republicans/Democrats ratio, Republican CEOs
significantly outnumbered Democratic CEOs at every point in time.

The Politics of CEOs

23

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Figure 2: CEO Political Preferences for the S&P 1500 – Changes over
Time

2000

2005

Rep

2010
year
Dem

2015

Neutral

4.3 CEO Political Preferences and Company Size
We now turn to examine whether the pro-Republican tilt is driven by one
of the sub-indices making up the S&P 1500 index. Table 4 presents the
distribution of CEO political preferences separately for each of the three size
groups: large-cap, mid-cap, and small-cap companies. It indicates that the
ratio of Republicans to Democrats is at least 2.7 in each of the size groups,
and is the highest at 3.6 for large-cap CEOs. The percentage of Republicans
exceeds 54% in each of the size sub-groups and is the highest at 59.8% for
small-cap companies. The percentage of Democrats is below 22% in each of
the size sub-groups and is the lowest at 15.4% for large-cap companies.

24

The Politics of CEOs
Table 4: The Political Preferences of CEOs by Company Size Groups

Figure 3 displays for each of the size subgroups, the partition of CEOs
between Republicans, Democrats, and Neutral, for each year during the
period 2000-2017. The Figure shows that, for each of the sub-indices,
Republican CEOs significantly outnumbered Democratic CEOs at every
point in time during our period of examination.
We note that, although the ratio of Republicans to Democrats was large
throughout, the percentage of Neutral CEOs trended upward, and especially
rose significantly for Large-Cap CEOs. The increase in Neutral CEOs came
at the expense of Republican CEOs, while the percentage of Democrats
remained small throughout at a low stable level.

The Politics of CEOs

25

Figure 3. CEO Political Preferences by Size -- Changes over Time
Small-Cap

Mid-Cap

.6
.4
.2
0

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

.8

.8

.8

Large-Cap

2000

2005

2010
year

2015

2000

Rep

2005

2010
year

Dem

2015

2000

2005

2010
year

2015

Neutral

4.4 Industry and CEO Political Preferences
We turn now to examine how CEO political preferences vary across
industry sectors. We use the Fama-French industry classification that divides
public companies into 12 industry sectors. 27
The first column of Table 5 below provides the percentage of
observations in our dataset that are associated with each of the 12 industry
sectors. The money/finance, business equipment, manufacturing, shops and
other sectors have the largest numbers of observations, each with more than
10% of all observations. Durables, energy, chemicals, and telecoms have the
smallest number of observations, each with less than 5% of the observations.
The remaining columns of Table 5 provide information about the political
preferences of the CEOs in each industry sector. The results in this Table are
for the whole sample of observations in our period of 2000-2017. The table
indicates that the percentage of Republican CEOs significantly exceeds the
percentage of Democratic CEOs in each industry sector. However, the
magnitude of the pro-Republican imbalance greatly varies across industries.
The industry with the strongest pro-Republican tilt is energy; in this
industry sector, 89.1% of CEOs favor Republican candidates while only 4.7%
favor Democrats, which results in a Republicans/Democrats ratio of 19. Two
other industries with ratios at least 5 are manufacturing and chemicals; these
two industries are composed of 72.7% and 63.5% Republicans, respectively,
—————————————————————————————————
27

The Fama-French 12-industry classification scheme was extracted from Kenneth
French’s web site. The classification was first put forward in Fama & French 1997.

26

The Politics of CEOs

with only 11% and 12.7% Democrats, respectively.
Only two industries—business equipment and telecoms—have a
Republicans/Democrats ratio below 2. In these two industries, however,
Republican CEOs still outnumber Democrats significantly: 48.6%
Republicans vs. 30.2% Democrats for business equipment, and 37.1%
Republicans vs. 22.8% Democrats for telecoms.
Table 5: CEO Political Preferences by Industry

Figure 4 shows for each industry how the patterns of CEO support vary
over time. It indicates that, for any given industry and any year during our
period of examination, the percentage of Republicans greatly exceeds the
percentage of Democrats. The only exceptions are business equipment and
telecoms in the years 2016 and 2017: During this period, in these two sectors

The Politics of CEOs

27

Republicans and Democrats were similarly represented among CEOs.
Figure 4. CEO Political Preferences by Industry -- Changes over Time
Non-Durables

2015

Chemicals

2005

2010
year

2015

2015

2010
year

2015

.2 .4 .6 .8
0
1

2010
year

2015

2010
year

Rep

2000

2005

2015

Dem

2010
year

2015

Other
1

1

2005

2015

.2 .4 .6 .8

2005

0

2000

2010
year

0

2000

.2 .4 .6 .8

.2 .4 .6 .8
0

2015

2005

Money

1

1
.2 .4 .6 .8

2010
year

2000

Utilities

1

2005

Health

0

2005

2015

0

2000

Shops

2000

2010
year

.2 .4 .6 .8

.2 .4 .6 .8
0

2010
year

2005

Telecoms

1

1
.2 .4 .6 .8

2005

2000

Bus-Equipment

0

2000

1

1

2000

.2 .4 .6 .8

2010
year

0

2005

0

0

.2 .4 .6 .8

.2 .4 .6 .8

1
.2 .4 .6 .8
0

2000

Energy

Manufacturing

1

Durables

2000

2005

2010
year

2015

2000

2005

2010
year

2015

Neutral

4.5 Region of Headquarters
We now move to see whether there are differences in the political
preferences of CEOs across the United States. It is well known that the
various regions of the country differ in their support for the two main parties
(Pew Research Center 2014; Jones 2017). We therefore study below whether
CEO preferences are correlated with the political preferences prevailing in
the region in which the company headquarters are located.
To study this question, we use the United States Census Bureau’s
classification of the country into four geographical regions: 28
• Northeast: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont;
• Midwest: Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota,
Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and
Wisconsin
• South: Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,
Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North
—————————————————————————————————
28

https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/gtc/gtc_census_divreg.html.

28

The Politics of CEOs

Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia,
West Virginia; and
• West: Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho,
Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and
Wyoming.
The first column of Table 6 below shows the percentage of observations
for each of the four regions. As the Table indicates, each of the regions has
between 20% and 31% of the observations. The largest numbers of
observations are from the South (30.9%). The Midwest, Northwest and West
have somewhat smaller numbers, 24.5%, 24.5% and 20.2% respectively.
Columns 2 through 5 of Table 6 provide, for each region, the partition of
CEO support between the two main parties. The Table indicates that, in each
of the regions, the number of Republican CEOs exceeds the number of
Democratic CEOs. However, the regions vary greatly in the magnitude of
their pro-Republican tilt in ways that reflect an association between CEO
preferences and the political preferences of the region in which they are
headquartered.
In particular, the Republican/Democrat ratio is only between 1 and 2 in
the Northeast and the West, with Republicans making up 40.2% and 45.3%
of CEOs, respectively, and Democrats 29.5 and 27.0. By contrast, Republican
CEOs are about seven times as numerous as Democratic CEOs in both the
Midwest and the South, with Republicans making up more than 68.2% of
CEO and Democrats no more than 10% in either of these regions.

The Politics of CEOs

29

Table 6: The Political Preferences of CEO by Region of Headquarters

Finally, Figure 5 tracks the partition of CEO preferences by region over
time. Its graphs indicate that, in all regions, the percentage of Republicans is
greater than the percentage of Democrats. However, the difference between
these percentages varies greatly across regions. In the Midwest and South,
the percentage of Republican CEOs exceeds that of Democratic CEOs by a
large margin at all points in time during our period of examination. By
contrast, in the Northeast and West, the difference between the percentage of
Republicans and Democrats was smaller to begin with, and almost
disappeared during the time of our study.

30

The Politics of CEOs
Figure 5. CEO Political Preferences by Region -- Changes over Time
Northeast

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

.8

.8

Midwest

2000

2005

2010
year

2000

2015

2005

2010
year

2015

West

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

.8

.8

South

2000

2005

2010
year

2000

2015

Rep

Dem

2005

2010
year

2015

Neutral

4.6 CEO Gender
Women represent a small minority among the ranks of public-company
CEOs. 29 In our sample, the percentage of female CEOs was 2.8% during our
time period (with 1.2% of CEOs in 2000 and 4.4% in 2017).
Table 7 examines whether male and female CEOs displayed different
political preferences during the period 2000-2017. It indicates that a clear
pro-Republican tilt characterizes the male CEOs but not the female CEOs.
While male Republican CEOs are more than three times as numerous as male
Democratic CEOs, the fraction of female Republican CEOs is only slightly
larger than that of female Democratic CEOs, with a ratio of only 1.1.
Furthermore, Republican CEOs are 58.3% of male CEOs, but only 34.3% of
female CEOs.

—————————————————————————————————
29

The gender composition of the CEO group has been the subject of significant
empirical work. For empirical studies on the subject see, e.g., Adams & Ferreira 2009; Cook
& Glass 2014; Faccio et al. 2016; Frye & Pham 2018.

The Politics of CEOs

31

Table 7: CEO Political Preferences by Gender

To what extent is the significance of Democratic preferences among
female CEOs driven by a particular point in time? To answer this question,
Figure 6 displays, separately for male and female CEOs, the partition of
political preferences at each point in time during our period of examination.
The Figure shows a greater tendency of female CEOs to support Democrats
throughout the period of examination. For male CEOs, the graph depicting
the percentage of Republicans is higher by a large margin than the graph
depicting the percentage of Democrats. For female executives, the two graphs
are in the vicinity of each other throughout, with each graph exceeding the
other at some points in time.

32

The Politics of CEOs
Figure 6. CEO Political Preferences by Gender -- Changes over Time

FEMALE

0

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

.6

.8

.8

MALE

2000

2005

2010
year

2015

Rep

2000

Dem

2005

2010
year

2015

Neutral

4.7 Regression Analysis
Thus far, we have examined how CEO political preferences are
associated with each of several variables—in particular, the company’s size,
industry, and geographical region and the CEO’s gender—without
controlling for other variables. We now examine such association using a
regression that allows us to isolate the effect of each variable while keeping
the other variables constant.
Table 8 presents the results of two regressions. In the first regression (first
column), we test the relationship between each of the variables examined
above and the CEO’s partisan preference. In particular, we use a dummy
dependent variable equal to 1 if the CEO is a Republican and 0 otherwise. In
the second regression (second column) we test the relationship between those
variables and the fraction of political contributions that CEOs give (directly
or indirectly) to Republican candidates.
The results of Table 8’s regressions are largely consistent with the results
presented in the preceding sections. Female CEOs are 20.1 percentage points
less likely to be Republican than male CEOs and donate 31.6 percentage
points less of their contributions to Republican candidates. CEOs of
companies headquartered in the Midwest or the South are 17-19 percentage

The Politics of CEOs

33

points more likely to be Republicans. Finally, compared to the our baseline
sector, utilities, the energy, manufacturing, and chemicals sectors are
associated with more pro-Republican preferences (31.2, 16.6, and 11.3
percentage points, respectively) while the telecom sector is associated with
14.4% lower probability of pro-Republican preferences.
4.8 Assets Controlled by Republican and Democratic CEOs
The power that a public-company CEO potentially has to influence
politics and policymaking is likely to depend on the size and resources of the
company. A CEO heading a large-capitalization company might have more
resources available for political spending should the CEO decide to spend in
this way, and might receive more attention and have more influence if the
CEO decided to publicly advocate for certain policies. Thus, whereas the
analysis above implicitly gives the same weight to all public companies, it
might be worth examining the political preferences of CEOs while attaching
weight to company size. Therefore, in this Section we analyze and compare
the aggregate market capitalization in millions of dollars of companies
headed by Republican, Democratic, and Neutral CEOs. 30 Table 9 presents the
results of our analysis.

—————————————————————————————————
30

Market capitalizations are based on prices as of December 31, 2017, obtained from
Compustat.

34

The Politics of CEOs
Table 8: CEO Political Preferences: A Regression Analysis

The Politics of CEOs

35

The companies in our dataset had an aggregate market capitalization of
about $21 trillion as of the end of 2017. Out of this aggregate value,
companies headed by Republican CEOs had an aggregate market
capitalization of $8.3 trillion (39%), whereas companies headed by
Democratic CEOs had an aggregate market capitalization of only $4.8 trillion
(about 23%), and companies headed by Neutral CEOs had an aggregate
market capitalization of $8 trillion (about 38%). Thus, Republican CEOs
control 70% more market capitalization than Democratic CEOs.
Table 9: Aggregate Market Cap by CEO Political Preferences, 2017

5. CEO POLITICS AND THE DISCLOSURE OF POLITICAL SPENDING
This Section considers the potential significance of CEO political
preferences for corporate decisions that have a political or policy dimension.
To this end, we investigate corporate decisions with such a dimension that
have attracted much recent attention – decisions whether and to what extent
the company should disclose its political spending to shareholders and the
general public. Our analysis shows that Republican CEOs are less likely to
make the political spending of their companies transparent to investors.
Section 5.1 describes the current landscape of voluntary disclosure
practices adopted by public companies and discusses the CPA-Zicklin Index,
a measure of transparency of corporate political spending. Section 5.2
analyzes whether and in what way CEOs’ political leanings predict their
companies’ decisions on the disclosure of political spending.

36

The Politics of CEOs
5.1 Voluntary Disclosure

Public companies are not required to disclose their corporate political
spending to shareholders. As noted in Section 2, while some of this spending
can be traced back to the company through a review of federal and state
records (although this exercise requires substantial knowledge and effort),
significant resources can potentially be funneled through untraceable
channels. Shareholders, therefore, do not have accurate or reliable
information on how much money their companies spend on elections, directly
or indirectly, or which candidates they support.
After Citizens United, the potential for corporate political spending
increased enormously. 31 Many investors have therefore intensified their
efforts to urge public companies to disclose their political spending
voluntarily, through the submission of shareholder proposals recommending
the adoption of political spending disclosure policies. 32
An analysis of the shareholder proposals put to a vote in S&P 500
companies from 2005 to 2018 shows that proposals for the transparency of
political spending represent a significant fraction of the overall proposals
submitted by shareholders on any topic. 33 Political spending in general is the
single topic with the greatest number of proposals over the period considered
(626 proposals out of a total of 5,092), 45% more than proposals for the
separation of the roles of CEO and chairman and 51% more than proposals
on environmental issues (the second and third most frequent topic for
—————————————————————————————————
31

Indeed, the court indicated in the Citizens United decision that disclosure would allow
for shareholders to judge the speech of corporations. Specifically, the opinion of the court
stated that “[w]ith the advent of the Internet, prompt disclosure of expenditures can provide
shareholders and citizens with the information needed to hold corporations and elected
officials accountable for their positions and supporters. Shareholders can determine whether
their corporation’s political speech advances the corporation’s interests in making profits,
and citizens can see whether elected officials are ‘in the pocket’ of so-called moneyed
interests"
32
Federal laws allow shareholders of public companies to submit proposals for a vote
on the company’s proxy statement, although within stringent limits. 17 C.F.R. §240.14a-8.
33
We have analyzed all shareholder proposals in S&P 500 companies in the period
between January 1, 2005 and December 31, 2018, as recorded in the database of FactSet
SharkRepellent. We exclude proposals that were not voted on. To identify shareholder
proposal on political spending, we refer to those proposals classified in SharkRepellent’s
“Political issues” category. We exclude proposals concerning lobbying expenditures based
on a textual research for the word “lobbying,” confirmed with a random check of a sample
of proposals. (This likely underestimates the number of proposals on campaign
contributions, since some proposals might concern both campaign contributions and
lobbying.) To rank the most frequent topics of shareholder proposals, we refer to the 61
categories used by SharkRepellent to classify the 5,092 proposals voted on in the period
considered.

The Politics of CEOs

37

shareholder proposals, respectively). If we exclude proposals concerning
disclosure of lobbying expenditures (a kind of political spending different
from campaign contributions), political spending is still the third most
frequent topic for shareholder proposals. More importantly, shareholder
proposals on political contributions have progressively gained significant
support among investors. Over the past fourteen years, the average fraction
of votes cast in favor of such proposals more than quadrupled. 34
In response to such increasing investor demand, many S&P 500
companies have been adopting voluntary disclosure arrangements. The
Center for Political Accountability (CPA) has played a key role in promoting
voluntary disclosure of political spending and facilitating agreements
between institutional investors and corporations (Center for Political
Accountability 2019a). According to the 2018 CPA-Zicklin Index, an annual
report measuring the quality of political spending transparency among large
public companies, 294 S&P 500 companies disclose at least some political
expenditures or prohibit political contributions altogether (Center for
Political Accountability 2018, p. 33).
However, S&P 500 companies substantially vary in their level of
disclosure of political spending. In this Section we use the CPA-Zicklin Index
score (CZI Score) as a metric to measure the quality of corporate disclosure
on political contributions and to test whether there is a statistical relationship
between the political preferences of CEOs and their companies’ quality of
political spending disclosure.
Although the CZI has been published since 2011, it covers all of the S&P
500 companies only from 2015. We therefore focus on 2015 to 2017, the
years for which we have data about both the quality of disclosure and CEO
political preferences. 35
The CZI Score is based on the disclosure policies and disclosure reports
on political contributions made public by companies on their websites. Each
company is assigned three sub-scores for the quality of its disclosure, policy,
and oversight of political spending, and a total score that combines these three
(Center for Political Accountability 2018, pp. 33-37, 2019b).
The first sub-score measures the quality of disclosure. It is based on nine
questions concerning how much information the company makes public with
respect to contributions given to candidates, parties, PACs, or intermediaries
such as trade associations and non-profit groups. The answer to each of these
—————————————————————————————————
34

At the beginning of the period mentioned (2005), the average number of votes in favor
of the proposal represented 7.28% of all votes cast, while at the end of the period (2018) the
average votes in favor of this kind of proposal is 29.67% of the votes cast.
35
CPA-Zicklin indices for 2015, 2016, and 2017 are available at
https://politicalaccountability.net/index/past-cpa-zicklin-index-reports-2.

38

The Politics of CEOs

questions is scored with a maximum number of points between 2 and 6. The
maximum total “raw” score for disclosure quality is 36.
The second sub-score measures the quality of disclosure policies, based
on seven questions regarding procedures and criteria used by the company to
decide whether and how to spend money on politics. The maximum total raw
sub-score is 16. 36
The third and final sub-score measures the quality of internal oversight
over the spending process. It is based on eight questions concerning
governance safeguards such as whether political spending policies and
decisions are reviewed by a board committee, whether independent directors
are involved, and how easy it is for investors (and the general public) to
access information on political spending on the company’s website. The
maximum raw sub-score is 18. Therefore, the total raw CZI Score is a
combined 70 points. The CZI Score then reports final sub-scores and total
score as a percentage score from 0% to 100% of the maximum raw scores.
The average Total CZI Score for all companies in the S&P 500 studied
during from 2015 to 2017, is 42.1 on a scale of 0 to 100. For the sub-scores,
the average scores during that period are 36.5 for the disclosure sub-score,
60.3 for the policy sub-score, and 37 for the oversight sub-score.
5.2 Association with CEO Political Preferences
To test whether there is an association between CEO political preferences
and the level of political-spending transparency, we run regressions with the
CZI total score and single sub-scores as dependent variables. Table 10
displays the results of the regressions. In the first column, the dependent
variable is the total CZI Score. In the three other columns, the dependent
variable is one of the three sub-scores for disclosure, oversight, and policy. 37
Our chief explanatory variable is a dummy equal to one if the CEO is a
Republican and zero otherwise. In addition, we control for a number of other
potential explanatory variables: gender of the CEO, market capitalization of
the company, region of company headquarters, industry sector, and year of
the observation.
The results show that the association of having a Republican CEO with
transparency of corporate political spending is negative and significant at the
95% level. This means that there is a statistically significant association
—————————————————————————————————
36
One of these questions is actually used for research purposes only and does not affect
the company score. It is therefore more accurate to say that the sub-score is based on 6
questions and the total combined score on 23 questions.
37
A study by Goh, Liu, and Tsang examines how these scores are associated with various
company characteristics, such as quality of corporate governance, investor activism, or
industry competition (Goh et al. forthcoming). This study, however, does not examine the
association of these scores with CEO political preferences, which is our focus.

The Politics of CEOs

39

between having a Republican CEO and a lower CZI score. This is the case
for the total CZI Score as well as each of the three sub-scores. The effects are
not only statistically significant but also of a meaningful size. For example,
having a Republican CEO is associated with a reduction of 6.9 percent in the
CZI Score. This reduction is meaningful given that the average value of the
CZI Score during 2015-2017 was 42.1 percent.
Some of the control variables are also significant. Having a female CEO
is associated with increased transparency. In addition, companies in the
energy, health and utility sectors are associated with greater transparency.
These are heavily regulated areas, and the pressure for transparency might
thus be especially strong for such companies.

40

The Politics of CEOs
Table 10: CEO Political Preferences and Transparency of Corporate
Political Spending

The Politics of CEOs

41

Disclosing political spending is an important decision that, as we have
seen, has attracted substantial attention from investors. The association
between company decisions on this issue and the political preferences of
CEOs, however, is just an illustration of how the partisan leanings of the CEO
might have a qualitative effect on decisions that are important to investors.
Further research would shed light on other potential relationships between
CEO politics and other aspects of corporate decisions or performance.
6. GOING FORWARD
This Section briefly discusses several potential implications of our
analysis and findings that are worthy of further attention and research.
Section 6.1 discusses the relevance of our findings for assessing corporate
political spending and its impact on the political system. Section 6.2
considers potential implications regarding the role of CEOs as contributors
of policy views and advice to policymakers and as participants in the policy
discourse. Section 6.3 discusses the importance of taking CEO political
preferences into account when analyzing corporate decision-making. Finally,
we comment on the question, which future research should examine, of why
CEOs disproportionately display pro-Republican preferences.
6.1 Corporate Political Spending
Our analysis has documented that CEO political preferences are not
evenly divided between the two main political parties but rather are
disproportionately supportive of Republicans. This evidence might have
significant implications for the understanding of the consequences of
corporate political spending and Citizens United on the political system and
on corporate governance.
As noted above, the lack of disclosure makes the levels of corporate
political spending uncertain. Given this lack of transparency, our findings
could inform any assessment of how corporate political spending likely
affects US politics and policymaking. In deciding whether and how to spend
corporate funds on politics, CEOs might be influenced by their own political
preferences. Due to this factor, corporate political spending could
disproportionately benefit Republicans and disadvantage Democrats. Our
findings thus provide useful insights about the potential spending patterns of
public companies and imply that, to the extent that public companies would
over time take substantial advantage of the expanded freedom to spend
money on politics established by Citizens United, Republicans could
disproportionately benefit from this freedom.
These findings also have implications for understanding the political
consequences of a scenario in which public companies would increase over

42

The Politics of CEOs

time their levels of political spending from current levels. As stressed in
Section 2, public corporations have massive financial resources, and directing
even a tiny fraction of them to politics could have a profound impact. In
particular, because our evidence indicates that public companies are
disproportionately headed by Republican CEOs, the emergence of such a
scenario could have a significant impact on the balance of power and
advantages between the two main political parties.
Finally, the Supreme Court has interpreted the ban on direct corporate
political contributions to federal candidates not just as a way to “preven[t]
corruption and the appearance of corruption” 38 but also to protect “the
individuals who have paid money into a corporation […] from having that
money used to support political candidates to whom they may be opposed.” 39
In other words, the Court has recognized that individuals may attach
“expressive significance” to the political spending of organizations with
which they are affiliated. 40 Thus, if the political preferences of CEOs lead to
a disproportionate support of Republicans by public companies, a problem of
expressive significance could arise for the potentially large set of investors
who oppose Republican policies.
6.2 CEOs’ Influence on Policy
As discussed in Section 2.2, the policy views and policy advice of CEOs
enjoy substantial attention and influence. Because of the stature, experience,
and expertise of CEOs, we view such attention and influence as
understandable and justified. However, our findings can be useful for
analyzing or assessing such CEO policy views and advice. Although policy
and political positions should be assessed on their merits, regardless of the
identity or political leanings of their advocates, the frequent characterization
of CEO groups and committees as bipartisan or politically balanced might be
inaccurate in many cases. In fact, our findings show that public-company
CEOs disproportionately display pro-Republican preferences, and users of
—————————————————————————————————
38
Fed. Election Comm'n v. Nat'l Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U.S. 480,
496 (1985).
39
Fed. Election Comm'n v. Beaumont, 539 U.S. 146, 154 (2003) (citing Fed. Election
Comm'n v. Nat'l Right to Work Comm., 459 U.S. 197, 208 (1982)).
40
Id. at 147. Also the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) “has recognized that
shareholders may have an interest in social policy issues that goes beyond the issues‘ direct
financial relevance.” (Bebchuk & Jackson 2010, p. 96). For example, the SEC has allowed
that the “ordinary business exclusion”—that prevents shareholders from submitting
precatory proposals on business issues—does not apply to proposals in which shareholders
have an opportunity to express their views on social policy issues. See Amendments to Rules
on Shareholder Proposals, 63 Fed. Reg. 29,106, 29,108 (May 28, 1998).

The Politics of CEOs

43

CEO policy advice should be aware of this pattern.
To illustrate, consider the Business Roundtable, which is often
characterized as a nonpartisan or bipartisan organization. 41 The group’s
current president and CEO Joshua Bolten, for example, recently described
the Business Roundtable as a “bipartisan organization” before the U.S. Senate
Committee on Foreign Relations (2018). We therefore have used our dataset
to examine the distribution of the political preferences of the members of the
Business Roundtable. 42
We identified donations from 167 members of the Business Roundtable
in 2018, out of a total of approximately 200 members. Notice that these CEOs
represent firms that are not necessarily in the S&P 1500 index. Many are
either not publicly traded, subsidiaries of foreign firms, or simply members
of a different index. Using a cutoff of 67% (60%) [50%], we find that 47%
(60%) [77%] of CEOs are Republican, while 13% (16%) [23%] are
Democrats, with the remainder Neutral. Furthermore, among the 23 members
of the Roundtable’s board of directors, of whom we identify the contributions
of 19 members, the partisan imbalance is also stark. Using a cutoff of 67%
(60%) [50%], 8 (11) [17] are Republican and 1 (1) [2] are Democrats, with
the remainder Neutral. Thus, although the Roundtable is “bipartisan” in the
sense that it is not formally affiliated with a specific political party and its
membership includes at least some individuals who support each of the main
parties, its composition is far from having a partisan balance: It leans heavily
Republican.
6.3 Political Preferences and Corporate Decisions
Our analysis of corporate disclosure decisions highlights that, at least
when such decisions have a political or policy dimension, they might well be
associated with the political preferences of the CEO heading the company.
We believe that it would be worth taking these preferences into account in
analyzing such corporate decisions.
We are planning to conduct additional research that would use political
preference as an explanatory variable for other dimensions of corporate
decisions. For some types of decisions, political preferences might be an
important explanatory variable. Thus, taking political preferences seriously
could enrich our understanding of some significant dimensions of corporate
decision-making.
—————————————————————————————————
41

See, e.g., Stewart 2016 (“[t]he Business Roundtable has been officially nonpartisan
since its founding in 1972, and it does not endorse any candidate for political office”)
42
The list of members of the Business Roundtable is published on its official website,
at https://www.businessroundtable.org/about-us/members.

44

The Politics of CEOs
6.4 Explaining the Pro-Republican Tilt

We have documented in this Paper the persistent pro-Republican tilt in
the preferences of public company CEOs. This pattern raises the question of
what explains this systematic pattern..
One possible explanation is that supporting Republicans is consistent
with the personal interests of the CEOs, or those of the company as the CEO
sees them. CEOs might view Republican policies as being more favorable to
high-wealth individuals or to business organizations. Under this explanation,
CEOs need not be individuals who disproportionately started their career with
pro-Republican preferences. CEOs might have simply developed such
preferences as they advanced up the executive ladder and acquired interests
that would be better served by Republican policies.
Another potential explanation is selection. It might be that CEOs are
individuals who had disproportionately pro-Republican preferences at the
outset of their career. In order to work, this theory must explain why
individuals who started with Republican preferences are more likely to
become a CEO. To explore the validity of this explanation, it would be useful
to get and use data, which our dataset does not include, regarding the political
preferences that CEOs had at the outset of their careers.
These two possible explanations are not meant to be exhaustive, and
future work might identify additional mechanisms. Explaining the patterns
we have identified would be a worthwhile challenge for future work.
7. CONCLUSION
The CEOs of public companies, who preside over organizations that own
most of the productive assets of the American economy, have substantial
influence on the political spending of their companies, on policymaking, and
on the policy discourse. In this Paper, we have carried out a systematic
empirical analysis of the political preferences of the CEOs of S&P 1500
companies, which represent 90% of the market value of U.S. public
companies.
Our analysis has shown that CEOs disproportionately display proRepublican preferences. We have also analyzed the association of CEO
political preferences with their company’s region, size, and industry, as well
as with the gender of the CEO. Finally, we have documented that firms led
by Republican-leaning CEOs tend to be less transparent with respect to their
political spending.
The Paper has also outlined the implications of our analysis and findings.
These findings should be useful for understanding the political process and
the effect of corporate political spending on it, for assessing the policy input
and advice provided by CEOs, and for understanding corporate decisions.

The Politics of CEOs

45

Further research should expand the scope of the analysis and investigate the
potential relationships of CEO political preferences with a wide range of
corporate policies and practices. We hope that our work will lead to
recognition of the partisan preferences of public-company CEOs, and that it
will provide a starting point and an empirical foundation for subsequent
discussions of this subject.

46

The Politics of CEOs
REFERENCES

Adams, Renée B. & Daniel Ferreira. 2009. Women in the Boardroom and
Their Impact on Governance and Performance. 94 J. Fin. Econ. 291.
Ansolabehere, Stephen, John M. de Figueiredo, & James M. Snyder Jr.
2003. Why Is There So Little Money in U.S. Politics? 17 J. Econ. Persp. 105.
Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa & Alexander Ljungqvist. 2015. Corporate
Investment and Stock Market Listing: A Puzzle? 28 Rev. Fin. Stud 342.
(presenting data as of the end of 2010).
Atkins, Paul. 2013. Materiality: A Bedrock Principle Protecting
Legitimate Shareholder Interests against Disguised Political Agendas. 3
Harv. Bus. L. Rev. 363.
Balla, Steven J. & John R. Wright. 2001. Interest Groups, Advisory
Committees, and Congressional Control of the Bureaucracy. 45 Am. J. Pol.
Sci. 799.
Bartels, Larry M. 2008. Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of
the New Gilded Age. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bebchuk, Lucian A. & Robert J. Jackson, Jr. 2010. Corporate Political
Speech: Who Decides? 124 Harv. L. Rev. 83, 95-97.
———. 2013. Shining Light on Corporate Political Spending. 101 Geo.
L.J. 923.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., Robert J. Jackson, James D. Nelson & Roberto
Tallarita. 2019. The Untenable Case for Keeping Investors in the Dark. 10
Harv.
Bus.
L.
Rev.
forthcoming,
available
at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3281791
———. n.d.. Bringing Sunlight to Corporate Political Spending.
(unpublished book manuscript) (on file with authors)
Bonica, Adam. 2016. Avenues of Influence: On the Political
Expenditures of Corporations and their Directors and Executives. 18 Bus. &
Pol. 367.
Borghesi, Richard, Joel F. Houston & Andy Naranjo. 2014. Corporate
Socially Responsible Investments: CEO Altruism, Reputation, and
Shareholder Interests. 26 J. Corp. Fin. 164.

The Politics of CEOs

47

Burris, Val. 2001. The Two Faces of Capital: Corporations and Individual
Capitalists as Political Actors. 66 Am. Sociol. Rev. 361.
Business Roundtable. 2002. The No Child Left Behind Act: Where We
Stand
After
One
Year,
available
at
https://advance.lexis.com/api/permalink/e32f323e-3a14-454a-9ea68d8063a6c188/?context=1000516
———.
2011.
History,
available
http://businessroundtable.org/sites/default/files/legacy/uploads/studiesreports/downloads/BRT_History_1172011.pdf

at

———. 2018a. Letter from Joshua Bolten, President, Business
Roundtable, et al., to the Hon. Robert Lightizer, U.S. Trade Representative,
available
at
https://www.uschamber.com/sites/default/files/nafta_association_letter.pdf
———. 2018b. Letter from Business Roundtable to Brent J. Fields, Secr.
of
the
U.S.
Sec.
&
Exch.
Comm.,
available
at
https://s3.amazonaws.com/brt.org/2018.11.09BRT.SECProxyRoundtableCommentLetter.pdf
———. 2018c. Statement on Passage of the FIRST STEP Act,
https://www.businessroundtable.org/business-roundtable-statement-onpassage-of-the-first-step-act
———. 2019. Immigration, https://www.businessroundtable.org/policyperspectives/immigration (last visited April 8, 2019)
Center for Political Accountability. 2018. The 2018 CPA-Zicklin Index
of Corporate Political Disclosure and Accountability 33, available at
http://files.politicalaccountability.net/index/2018_CPAZicklin_Index_web.pdf
———.
2019a.
Our
Impact,
available
https://politicalaccountability.net/impact (last visited April 8, 2019)

at

———. 2019b. Index Scoring Guidelines, available at
https://nmcdn.io/e186d21f8c7946a19faed23c3da2f0da/5006ff10fe6f450fa2f
1f01321ac6b5a/files/index/Index_Scoring_Guidelines.xlsx (last visited
April 8, 2019)
Center for Responsive Politics. 2019. 2016 Presidential Race.

48

The Politics of CEOs

https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/ (last visited April 10, 2019).
Chatterji, Aaron K. & Michael W. Toffel. 2018a. Assessing the Impact
of
CEO
Activism.
Working
Paper,
available
at
https://www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/download.aspx?name=16-100.pdf
———. 2018b. The New CEO Activists. Harv. Bus. Rev. Jan-Feb,
available at https://hbr.org/2018/01/the-new-ceo-activists.
Coates, John C., IV & Taylor Lincoln. 2011. Fulfilling Kennedy’s
Promise: Why the SEC Should Mandate Disclosure of Corporate Political
Activity
(unpublished
manuscript),
available
at
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1923804
Cook, Allison and Christy Glass. 2014. Above the Glass Ceiling: When
Are Women and Racial/Ethnic Minorities Promoted to CEO? 35 Strat. Mgmt.
J. 1080.
Copland, James R. 2013. Against an SEC Mandated Rule on Political
Spending Disclosure: A Reply to Bebchuk and Jackson. 3 Harv. Bus. L. Rev.
381.
Dillon, Sam. 2005. Report From States Faults Bush's Education Initiative.
N.Y. Times. Feb. 24, 2005, at A18.
Domhoff, G. William. 2014. Who Rules America: The Triumph of the
Corporate Rich (7th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Edelman. 2018. Edelman Trust Barometer: Expectations for CEOs, May
1, 2018, available at https://www.edelman.com/post/trust-barometerexpectations-for-ceos.
Faccio, Mara, Maria-Teresa Marchica & Roberto Mura. 2016. CEO
Gender, Corporate Risk-Taking, and the Efficiency of Capital Allocation. 39
J. Corp. Fin.193.
Fama, Eugene & Kenneth French. 1997. Industry Costs of Equity. 43 J.
Fin. Econ. 153.
Fremeth, Adam, Brian Kelleher Richter & Brandon Schaufele. 2013.
Campaign Contributions over CEOs’ Careers. 5 Am. Econ. J. App. Econ. 170.
Frye, Melissa B. & Duong T. Pham. 2018. CEO Gender and Corporate
Board Structures. 69 Q. Rev. Econ. & Fin. 110.

The Politics of CEOs

49

Gara, Antoine. 2016. Trump Taps Steve Schwarzman, Jamie Dimon and
Mary Barra for Advice on Job Creation, Growth. Forbes, Dec. 2, 2016,
available at https://www.forbes.com/sites/antoinegara/2016/12/02/trumptaps-steve-schwarzman-jamie-dimon-and-mary-barra-for-advice-on-jobcreation-growth/#1cb71c2a4359.
Gilens, Martin. 2012. Affluence and Influence: Economic Inequality and
Political Power in America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Goh, Lisa, Xuejiao Liu, & Albert Tsang. Voluntary Disclosure of
Corporate Political Spending. J. Corp. Fin. (forthcoming)
Grier, Kevin B. & Michael C. Munger. 1991. Committee Assignments,
Constituent Preferences, and Campaign Contributions. 29 Econ. Inq. 24.
Jones, Jeffrey M. 2017. GOP Maintains Edge in State Party Affiliation in
2016.
Gallup.
Jan.
30,
2017,
available
at
https://news.gallup.com/poll/203117/gop-maintains-edge-state-partyaffiliation-2016.aspx
Karty, Kevin D. 2002. Closure and Capture in Federal Advisory
Committees. 4 Bus. & Pol. 213.
Kim, Soo Rin. 2016. The price of winning just got higher, especially in
the
Senate.
Opensecrets.org.
Nov.
9,
2016.
https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2016/11/the-price-of-winning-just-gothigher-especially-in-the-senate/
Larcker, David F., Stephen A. Miles, Brian Tayan, & Kim WrightViolich. 2018. The Double-Edged Sword of CEO Activism. Working Paper,
available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3283297.
Lepore, Matthew. 2013. A Case for the Status Quo: Voluntary Disclosure.
3 Harv. Bus. L. Rev. 413.
Meyersohn, Nathaniel. 2017. Trump Launches Manufacturing Initiative
with Business Leaders. CNN Money. Jan. 27, 2017, available at
https://money.cnn.com/2017/01/27/news/trump-manufacturing-jobsinitiative/index.html.
Moore, Gwen, Sarah Sobieraj, Joseph A. Whitt, Olga Mayorova & Daniel
Beaulieu. 2002. Elite Interlocks in Three U.S. Sectors: Nonprofit, Corporate,
and Government. 83 Soc. Sci. Q. 726.

50

The Politics of CEOs

Mutch, Robert E. 2014. Buying the Vote. A History of Campaign Finance
Reform 36-44.
National Conference of State Legislatures. 2017. State Limits on
Contributions to Candidates: 2017-2018 Election Cycle, June 27, 2017,
available at http://www.ncsl.org/research/elections-and-campaigns/statelimits-on-contributions-to-candidates.aspx.
Obama White House. 2011. President’s Council on Jobs and
Competitiveness,
available
at
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/administration/advisory-boards/jobscouncil (last visited April 10, 2019).
———. 2019. President’s Economic Recovery Board, available at
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/administration/eop/perab/about (last
visited April 10, 2019).
Pew Research Center. 2014. Party Affiliation by Region, available at
http://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-study/compare/partyaffiliation/by/region/ (last visited April 10, 2019).
Priest, T.B., R. T Sylves & D. F. Scudder. 1984. Corporate Advice: Large
Corporations and Federal Advisory Committees. 65 Soc. Sci. Q. 100.
Riley, Charles. 2012. Oops! Aetna discloses political donations. CNN
Money.
June
14,
2012.
http://money.cnn.com/2012/06/14/news/economy/aetna-politicalcontributions/index.htm
S&P Dow Jones Indices. 2019. S&P U.S. Indices Methodology, available
at https://us.spindices.com/documents/methodologies/methodology-sp-usindices.pdf.
Smith, Bradley A. & Allen Dickerson. 2013. The Non-Expert Agency:
Using the SEC to Regulate Partisan Politics. 3 Harv. Bus. L. Rev. 419.
Staples, Brent. 2013. Republicans versus the Business Community. N.Y.
Times:
Taking
Note.
Apr.
18,
2013,
available
at
https://takingnote.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/04/18/republicans-versus-thebusiness-community/
to

Stewart, James. B. 2016. For Trump, Business Leaders Are More Elites
Resist.
N.
Y.
Times.
Jul.
14,
2016,
available

The Politics of CEOs

51

at https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/15/business/for-trump-businessleaders-are-more-elites-to-resist.html
Strine, Leo E., 2019. Fiduciary Blind Spot: The Failure of Institutional
Investors to Prevent the Illegitimate Use of Working Americans’ Savings for
Corporate Political Spending. 97 Wash. U. L. Rev., forthcoming, available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract =3304611.
U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. 2018. Hearing on Tariffs:
Implications for U.S. Foreign Policy and the International Economy, July 12,
2018,
available
at
https://www.foreign.senate.gov/hearings/tariffsimplications-for-us-foreign-policy-and-the-international-economy-071218
Vandewalker, Ian. 2015. Brennan Center for Justice, Coal Miner
Bankruptcy
Uncovers
Political
Spending,
Aug.
28,
2015.
http://www.brennancenter.org/blog/coal-miner-bankruptcy-uncoverspolitical-spending.
Verret, J. W. 2013. The Securities Exchange Act is a Material Girl, Living
in a Material World: A Response to Bebchuk and Jackson’s “Shining Light
on Corporate Political Spending,” 3 Harv. Bus. L. Rev. 453, 468-70.
Vogel, Kenneth P. and Jim Tankersley. 2017. Boring or Brass-Knuckled,
Lobbyists Swarmed During Tax Debate. N.Y. Times. Dec. 16, 2017, at A12.

