                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE STRUGGLE TOWARDS MACROECONOMIC STABILITY:
                             ANALYTICAL ESSAY

                                          Assaf Razin

                                      Working Paper 25816
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25816


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




I acknowledge many insightful comments from two referees. No financial relations to disclose.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Struggle Towards Macroeconomic Stability: Analytical Essay
Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 25816
May 2019
JEL No. E0,F0

                                            ABSTRACT

This essay offers an economic-history perspective of the long struggle towards macroeconomic
stability. The paper is a broad analytical overview of major exogenous shocks and shifts in
macroeconomic policy and institutions in Israel since the 1977-1985 great inflation through the
global financial crisis and the effects of those shifts on long term growth, inflation, the business
cycle, the Phillips curve and related economic developments. The paper will discuss three main
issues. The first one on the inflation crisis focuses on the 1985 stabilization and on its impact on
subsequent reform of monetary institutions. The second discusses the impact of globalization on
growth, inflation and the Phillips curve. The third contains a discussion of the reasons for the
relatively good performance of Israel during the 2008 global crisis, including foreign exchange
market intervention. Henceforth we highlight: (1) the role of macro-populism in generating
hyperinflation; (2) the role of seigniorage revenue in generating the hyperinflation; (3)
distributive effects of inflation stabilization, which are political driving forces behind the need for
across-the-broad-coalition for a successful stabilization policy; (4) the effects of globalization on
the Philips Curve and thereby on domestic inflation-- means of transforming an inflation regime
to a one with price stability; (5) the role of financial prudence regulatory institutions, which serve
to explain the Israeli macroeconomic robustness in the face of the 2008 external depression-
deflation global forces; and, (6) Israel’s government-deficit and money-creation experience,
which help evaluate recent theory—the Modern Monetary Theory (MMT).


Assaf Razin
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Cornell University and CEPR
and also NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
Introduction


The State of Israel has registered remarkable economic achievements over its lifetime. It

emerged in 1948 as a rather weak and impoverished agricultural economy. Over the past seven

decades, though, Israel thoroughly transformed itself into a strong and wealthy industrial

economy, one that has become a world leader in many areas of high technology, ranging from

computers to medicine, as attested to by its membership in the Organization for Economic Co‐

operation and Development (OECD). Thanks in large part to its steadily advancing integration

into the global economy; Israel has moved ﬁrmly out of the developing world and into the

developed world.2[1] Israel’s strong growth since it stabilized inflation in 1985 owes much to an

international economy in which capital, labor, and ideas are mobile and in which trade and

investment flow readily across far-flung international borders.


The essay begins with an inquiry into the causes and consequences of the hyperinﬂation that

rocked the Israeli economy in the mid 1980s, as well as into the stabilization measures

instituted by Israeli policymakers that eventually after a decade and a half, tamed the problem.

The reduction in inﬂation, coupled with the mass migration of highly skilled immigrants from

the former Soviet Union throughout the 1990s, allowed the Israeli economy to gather a head of

steam. The worldwide ﬁnancial crisis that began in2008, which was followed by the “Great

Recession”, had only a minor and ﬂeeting eﬀect on the Israeli economy in comparison to many

other advanced economies, in large part because of the financial, fiscal, and monetary reforms

Israeli policy‐makers had put in place to contain the hyper‐inﬂation of the mid‐1980s.



2 See Razin (2018a,b).
The essay offers an economic‐history perspective of the long struggle with Inflation. It covers

the early acceleration to three‐digit levels, lasting 8 years; The stabilization program, based

on political backing triggered sharp fall in inflationary expectation, and consequently to sharp

inflation reduction to two‐ digit levels; The convergence to the advanced countries’ levels

during the “great Moderation”; And Israel’ resistance to the deflation‐depression forces that

the 2008 crisis created. The emphasis is on the forces of globalization and the building of

institutions, political, regulatory, financial, budget design, and monetary, which helped stabilize

prices and output. Analysis identifies the crucial role played by inflation expectations in

constraining policy makers regulating inflation pressures.


Globalization, the integration of markets in goods, services and capital, whose pace accelerated in

the 1990s with the fall of communism, is currently under attack. Globalization and new-technology

forces accelerated the decline in low-tech manufacturing industries, the rise of the financial and

the surge of immigration. Brexit may have been the first wave of anti-globalization and rising

populism that gushes over most advanced nations. Then came the 2017 change of guards in the

US. Meanwhile, European countries, straightjacketed inside the confines of the single currency

area like Germany, France, Greece, the Netherland, Spain, Poland and others, witness the anti-EU

forces gather strength. Israel in many ways provides a counter example. Globalization-technology

forces, like the technology surge, the new markets in East Asia, and immigration waves, have been

a boon. Israel’s remarkable developments provides an historical counter example.3




3
    Israel fast development although unique, is not unknown elsewhere. Ireland somewhat

parallels Israel in awesomely benefitting from globalization. Ireland entered the 1950s as a very
Israel has had a remarkable development, emerging from a low-income high-inflation developing

economy in the 1970s, to a medium to high income advanced economy in the 2000s; at all stages

of its development globalization played a key role.


The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 outlines the inflation crises. Section 2 discusses the

political-economy underpinning of the inflation crisis. Section 3discusses the end to the political

deadlock. Section 4 analyzes the interactions between inflation and fiscal revenues. Section 5

analyzes balance-of-payment crises. Section 6 emphasizes the role of globalization in taming

domestic inflation. Section 7 describes the climb down from two-digit to one-digit inflation rates.

Section 8 observes the convergence of Israel’s inflation rates to those of the industrial world

economy. Section 9 analyzes the resistance in Israel to the depression-deflation forces coming

from the “great recession”. Section 10 concludes.


     1.   Inflation Crisis




poor post-colonial society. However, it realized major successes by the integration into the EU,

and reaching an elite hi-tech status. Ireland, was able to attract from the rest of the world (other

than the EU) massive FDI, thanks to its being a tax-sheltered gate to the EU massive markets.

Ireland however had relatively little regulation of its banking sector: this allowed the credit

bubble to flourish in the wake of the 2008-global-financial crash. It’s over exposed banking

sector collapsed during the financial crisis. Ireland has continued to be burdened by the

Eurozone’s nearly secular stagnation.3 Israel robust performance during the crisis is partly

attributable to not being a member of a single currency area.
Israel’s Inflation accelerated in the 1970s, rising steadily from 13% in 1971 to 111% in 1979.

Some of this higher inflation was "imported" from the world economy, instigated by extreme oil

price rises in 1973 and 1979. Inflation kept gathering pace. From 133% in 1980, it leaped to 191%

in 1983 and then to 445% in 1984, threatening to become a four-digit figure within a year or two.

After several failed efforts, the successful phase of the stabilization of the Israeli economy began

with the heterodox program introduced in July 1985. The initial success of the stabilization

program included a decrease in inflation, from 445 percent in 1984 to 185 percent in 1985 and 20

percent in 1986. There was also an increase in real economic activity, with the annual growth in

business sector product per capita rising from 0.4 percent in 1984 to 4.3 percent in 1985 and 3.6

percent in 1986. However, in the second half of 1987, the economy slid into recession, an after-

shock event. Inflation however did not converge to advanced countries’ inflation.4


Figure 1.1 describes the price level and the exchange rate paths for the inflation-rising period in

the wake of the hyperinflation crisis, and the aftermath of the 1985 stabilization program.




4
  Calvo and Vegh (2001) observe that in many high-inflation stabilization programs around the world inflation failed
to converge to world averages. Real economic activity expanded in the early years of the stabilization program.
Later in the program, a recession set in. Unlike Israel stabilization program, in many developing economies the
program later collapsed.
 Figure 1: Price Level and Exchange Rate, 1977-1986

   3.5


    3


   2.5


    2

                                                                          Inflation‐Stabilization
   1.5                                                                           Program

    1


   0.5


    0




                       log of Consumer Price Index    log of US Dollar Exchange Rate



 Source: Bank of Israel


The figure demonstrates the accelerated path of inflation, and the lagging path of exchange-rate

depreciations in the 1980s. It highlights the sharp flattening of inflation that took place

immediately after the implementation of the 1985 stabilization-policy package. All along, the

depreciations fell short of inflation; therefore, the real exchange has been markedly appreciated

throughout the period. The real-exchange-rate appreciation naturally corresponds also to the rise

in unemployment, and output growth decline. Figure 1.2 describes the path of major output-and-

employment indicators. They point out to severe slackness in economic activity during the

hyperinflation crisis leading to unprecedented unemployment.
 Figure 2: Output Growth and Unemployment, 1977-1986


   8%



   6%



   4%



   2%



  -1%



  -3%
          1977    1978     1979      1980       1981         1982    1983     1984      1985   1986

                          GDP per capita growth (annual %)          Unemployment Rate



 Source: Israel CBS, World Bank


Economic activity was impacted severely by the swelling credit frictions. Because the inflation

crisis undermined the well-functioning of credit institutions. Banks and financial market regulation

also failed during the 1980s. At the time, bank stocks accounted for more than 90% of all issued

stocks in the stock market. Their monopoly power in the stock market allowed the large banks to

build up low-cost loan portfolio, and give it out to borrowers with poor selection, and poor

monitoring. Central bank oversight of commercial banks was almost non-existent. Israel’s

Securities and Exchange Commission was powerless, legally and administratively. Massive stock

issues allowed banks to increase their available capital as a source of investments, loans, etc. To

get market participants to continue investing in the large bank's stock, it began buying back its
own stock. On October 6, 1983, known as the “Black Thursday", an onslaught of banks’ stock

sales brought down the stock market. Largest banks became state-owned through a swift bailout.




      2.   Political-economy policy shift

        The economic crisis started to develop when the opposition “Gahal” (now “Likkud”)

party gained power for the first time since independence. The political upheaval in 1977, the so-

called “Maapach”, was a game changer for economic policy in Israel. The newly elected

government, adopting macroeconomic populistic policy, abruptly switched away from a long-

running economic regime, which had been able to maintain fiscal discipline in the presence of

strong external shocks (the Yom Kippur War and the first Oil Crisis). 5 Monetary policy was

moderately accommodative, underpinned by a fixed exchange rate regime; shielded from capital

flights by capital controls. Notwithstanding the oil price shock, inflation was low double digit.




5
  Dornbusch and Edwards (1989) address macroeconomic populism in Latin America, which they roughly
defined as policies that are favoured by a substantial part of the voting population, but which ultimately
harm the majority of the population. They found that populism surfaces when the economy has
endured a period of external shocks and domestic upheavals, and “a highly uneven income distribution
usually presents a serious political and economic problem, providing the appeal for a radically different
economic program”. In the first phase after their policies are enacted, the populists are vindicated.
Growth and wages indeed rise as a combination of profligate spending and intrusive government control
do expand the economy. The surging government spending and mandated wage hikes tend to produce a
temporary “sugar high”, followed by a crash. Beneath the surface, however, the country’s economic
potential is deteriorating. Financial disorders appear. Rather than make the hard choice of returning to
principled economic oversight, the populist leader recommits to harmful policies and steers the country
towards decline, capital flight, and sometimes debt crises. In all cases, write Dornbusch and Edwards,
“There were disastrous effects for those groups who were supposed to be the beneficiaries of the
policies”.
        A useful way to understand the framework within which the economic policy was

conducted prior to the political regime switch, and afterwards, is to think about the basic tri-

lemma in international finance.6 In international finance, the tri-lemma stems from the fact that,

in almost every country, economic policy makers would like to achieve the following goals:

First, make the country’s economy open to international capital flows, because by doing so,

policy makers of a country enable foreign investors to diversify their portfolios overseas and

achieve risk sharing. The country also benefits from the expertise brought to the country by

foreign investors. Second, use monetary policy as a tool to help stabilize inflation, output, and

the financial sector in the economy. This is achieved as the central bank can increase the money

supply, reduce interest rates when the economy is depressed and reduce money growth, and raise

interest rates when it is overheated. Moreover, the central bank can serve as a lender of last resort

in case of financial panic. Third, maintain stability in the exchange rate. This is because a

volatile exchange rate, at times driven by speculation, can be a source of broader financial

volatility and makes it harder for households and businesses to trade in the world economy and

for investors to be able to plan.


        The problem, however, is that a country can only achieve two of these three goals. In

order to maintain a fixed exchange rate and capital mobility, the central bank loses its ability to

control the interest rate or equivalently the monetary base—its policy instruments—as the

interest rate is anchored to the world interest rate by the interest rate parity, and the monetary

base is automatically adjusted. This is the case of individual members of the European Monetary



6
  The trilemma as a situation in which someone faces a choice among three options, each of which comes with some
inevitable problems. In international finance it is cast in terms of economic regime choices. The international
finance trilemma goes back to the classical works of Flemming (1962), and Mundell (1963). See Mankiw for blog
interpretation (2010). For a balance of payments crisis model in the trilemma regime-switch framework, see
Appendix 1A.
Union. In order to keep control over the interest rate or equivalently the money supply, the

central bank has to let the exchange rate float freely, as in the case of the United States. If the

central bank wishes to maintain both exchange rate stability and control over the monetary

policy, the only way to do it is by imposing capital controls, as in the case of China.


Following the 1977 political change the economic regime switched from pegged exchange rate,

capital controls and fiscal discipline to loosely managed exchange rate, relaxed controls on

outgoing capital flows, and fiscal laxness. Right from the beginning, the new government lifted

some capital controls without putting safe guards in place; that is, no prudent financial and banking

regulatory measures existed. Intensive shifts in demand and supply for foreign exchange followed

almost instantly. Key to the steady increase in inflation, the new populistic government also

embarked on an uncontrolled path of fiscal expansion accommodated by monetary expansion.

Exchange rate and capital flow fluctuations called for the Bank of Israel to intervene occasionally,

at first, and significantly later, in the foreign exchange market on a day-to-day basis to smooth out

these fluctuations;. A massive wave of capital flight caused over a few years a fast depletion of the

stock of international reserves, which weakened the ability of Bank of Israel to intervene in the

foreign exchange market. Following up on the open economy tri-lemma; asserting that a fixed

exchange rate regime and perfect capital mobility must erode the ability of the central bank to

stabilize employment and price fluctuations. Therefore, Israel lost control over inflation. Lax

safeguards brought stock market crashes. The lesson learned from the first-generation currency

crisis literature is that such inconsistent set of policies become quickly unsustainable; leading to

massive speculative attacks on international reserves, followed rounds of financial and stock

market crashes.
      3.    Populism and Seigniorage Finance




Israel's high inflation posed sharp challenges to both political and economic institutions. Failing

economic governance made it essential for the government to raise revenue through money

expansion. At the time when the newly elected government was catering to populistic demands,

the printing press was used to finance the fast-expanding government spending and transfers.7


Dividends from seigniorage (the profit made by a government by issuing currency) are derived

from the exclusive ability of the central bank to issue bank notes. In addition, central bank can

hold required reserves from commercial bank deposits, which pay no interest. Central banks can

also inflate the non-indexed portion of the public debt and raise the real revenue intake with

progressive tax schedule. However, how much can the central bank lower the consolidated-

government fiscal burden depends not just, on how actual inflation is consistent with expected

inflation. 8




7
  The temptation to inflate during the 1977-1985 high inflation period was moderated by the fact that, due to a
preexisting stock of nominal loans to by government to the private sector and the Olivera-Tanzi effect, government
revenue from seignorage was much smaller than would appear to be the case at first blush, and at times, perhaps
even negative. The jump to a high inflation plateau was due to a series of policy actions, or inactions. Once
inflationary expectations adjusted upward this process became a persistent feature of the economy making it costly
to stabilize due to the expected reduction in economic activity associated with stabilization. The traditional analysis
of steady state seignorage appears therefore of secondary importance and I would consider dropping it or drastically
reducing it.


8
 Indeed, Edi Karni (1983), made rough calculations and found significant seignorage revenue that Israel’s
hyperinflation generated. In a related context, Cukierman (1998) brings evidence for a significant share of revenue
attributable to seigniorage in the 1920s’ German hyperinflation.
A central lesson from the Friedman (1971) is that steady-state seigniorage from revenue

maximizing central bank is small. However, Israel, as well as previous historical episodes, offer a

counter example. Inflation spikes can be a significant source for government revenue. Time

inconsistency on the part of the central bank in producing these spikes are due to harmful

incentives. They lead policymakers to implement inflation levels that they may eventually come

to regret. These incentives are no rarity; they are very common in economies that do not have the

instruments to reach a first-best equilibrium. Moreover, these incentives cannot be ruled out, even

under rational expectations in such a time-inconsistent setup.


One crucial issue about inflation is to identify whether existing inflation is temporary in nature,

reflecting short-term spikes, or whether it is useful to analyze it as if it is a steady state

phenomenon. An empirical paper which analyzed the Israeli inflation in those years is Sokoler

(1985), but his sample ends before arriving at the peak of the hyper-inflation.


The steady state seigniorage curve in the Figure, which shows two distinct (steady state) inflation

levels for a given amount of seigniorage, led some economist to attribute the cause of the high

inflation to just expectations-based phenomenon that can be rectified by synchronizing wages,

                               9
prices and exchange rates alone .




9
   Liviatan (1984) offered a heuristic explanation for the nature of Israel’s hyper-inflation based on “inflation inertia”.
Inflation inertia, he argued, is caused due to the government’s periodic attempts to boost exports, the indexation of wages
to the cost of living and the adjustment of public expectations to this vicious cycle. Each time the government devalued the
currency to support exporters, prices rose and wages followed. Liviatan suggested using the US dollar as an anchor by
fixing the Israeli shekel exchange rate to it: this “will lower inflation to the level of the inflation in the United States,” and
it would not require the use of administrative and coercive powers which “undermine the foundation of the liberal
regime”. Bruno and Fischer (1984) argue that contrary to the orthodox economic view, for a similar level of public
spending, there are multiple levels of inflation due to the “meta-stable equilibrium” that is caused by indexation, the
financial structure, and the exchange rate system.
See Kempf (2018).
Figure 3: Steady state seigniorage and inflation


Steady State Seigniorage




                                                   Seigniorage Laffer
                                                         Curve




                                                                        Inflation
On this issue, Calvo (2016) writes: “Repeated use of surprise inflation is unlikely to be successful

in increasing seigniorage, because the public will start to expect a rate of inflation larger than the

one that optimizes steady-state revenue from inflation. Thus, eventually the economy may land on

the excessive-inflation territory highlighted in Friedman (1971). However, this is not due to an

elementary economics error on the side of the central bank, as Friedman's results might lead us to

conclude. An inflation spike is, in the short run, one of the cheapest and most expeditious manners

for securing additional fiscal revenue. Moreover, this "carrot" is always there. As noted, though, a

problem arises if the government repeatedly reaches out for the carrot. However, even in this case,

the evidence presented in Friedman (1971) does not prove that authorities were making an error.

To assess that, one needs information of how quickly the public catches up with the inflation-spike

strategy".
Even in the time inconsistency paradigm10, however, there is room for policy. One could try to

neutralize the harmful incentives if the central bank banned from extending loans to the fiscal

authority. Following almost 8 years of the hyperinflation economic chaos, from 1977 to 1985, the

Israeli voters brought about some major political rebalancing towards the political center. The

newly established Unity Government (“Likkud” plus “Avoda”) implemented successfully key

stabilization measures; all of them required political consensus.11 Following 8 years in which the

seigniorage served as a means of financing the deficit, a new legislation (“Khok Hahesderim”)

allowed the government to exercise tighter control over its spending and taxation. A new law

forbade the Central Bank to monetize the budget deficit (“Khok Iee Hadpassa”), and ended the

accommodating monetary policy. A Tri-Party agreement between the government, the Federation

of Labor (“Histadrut”) and the association of private-sector employers stabilized the wage-price

dynamics and enabled a sharp nominal devaluation that ended in a competitiveness-boosting real

devaluation. The exchange rate depreciation had not passed through to wages and prices; in high

likelihood because the entire macro regime has changed; as in the modern expectations-based

macroeconomic setup. Because of the credibility of the policy measures, backed by the Tri-Party

agreement between the unified government, the Federation of Labor and the industry employer




10
   See Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978).
11
   Schneider and Tornell (2004) provide a model of boom-bust episodes in middle-income countries which may
explain the logic of the boom-bust episodes which followed the stabilization program. It is based on sectoral
differences in corporate finance: the non-tradable sector (e.g., real estate and financial services) is special in that it
faces a contract enforceability problem and enjoys bailout guarantees (e.g. bailing out mortgages). As a result,
currency mismatch in the balance sheet arise endogenously in that sector. This sectoral asymmetry allows the model
to replicate the main features of observed boom-bust episodes. In particular, episodes begin with a lending boom and
a real appreciation, peak in a self-fulfilling crisis during which a real depreciation coincides with widespread
bankruptcies, and end in a recession and credit crunch. Israel’s economy fully recovered in the late 1980s and early
1990s, a time when there was a new wave of immigrants from the former Soviet Union (Chapter 2). For detailed
account of the stabilization policy, see Razin and Sadka (1993).
organization, and the greater independence of the central bank, inflation expectations adjusted

rapidly to the policy steps.12


      4.   The Distributive Effects of Inflation Stabilization

Sargent (1999) argues that high inflation can be stopped quickly, and at a low cost. His argument

is that inflationary expectations are quick to adjust when the economic regime shifts considerably.

However, he ignores the fiscal burden and the income distribution that follow.


What are the fiscal implications of deep-rooted inflation expectations, before hyperinflation is

stopped?13


Stopping hyperinflation has major distributive implications. This explains why a cross-party

government, where each party represents different economic interests is often needed to enact

credible sustainable policies. To understand the essentials of these matters, imagine a simple

economy where there is a stock of public debt denominated in domestic currency, 𝐷. 14 We denote

one-period nominal interest rate by𝑖. Then, the next-period full service of the government debt

(i.e., principal plus interest) will be 1           𝑖 𝐷. We choose the units of measurement so that the

present price level is equal to one, and assume that the real interest rate is equal to zero. We also

denote the one-period expected inflation rate,𝜋 , so that inclusive of the inflation premium, the

nominal (gross) interest rate is 𝑖           1    𝜋 , and the next-period price level is equal to 1              𝜋 . If




12
   This expectations-changing episode is akin to Volcker-policy effect on inflationary expectations in the US, see
Sargent (1999).
13
   With the benefit of hindsight, it can be concluded that the 1985 cold turkey stabilization produced a large
permanent drop in the rate of inflation. However, at the time of the stabilization, there was substantial uncertainty
about the extent to which this dramatic drop would persist. The uncertainty was induced by wide gyrations in
inflation and several failed attempts to stabilize prior to the 1985 successful stabilization. See Cukierman et al (2018.
14
   See Calvo (1992).
the government surprise market participants by setting the actual inflation rate equal to zero, so

that the actual bond-return gross return is equal to one, the actual real burden of servicing the next-

period debt is equal to:


 1   𝜋 𝐷.


On the other hand, if the government fulfills the private sector entrenched inflationary expectations

and set the actual inflation equal to expected inflation, the real burden of the debt is just


𝐷.


Thus, a temptation not to stop inflation in its tracks may be irresistible.


Similarly, if the government surprise market participants by abrupt stopping of hyperinflation in

the presence of entrenched inflation expectations, the fiscal burden of public sector wage bill and

subsidies to basic food must rise. Therefore, the government may hesitate to do so.


To overcome this difficulty there must be a full-fledged social agreement between the government,

savers (who hold government bonds), public sector wage earners, and recipients of food subsidies.

To fix the inflated outlays on debt service, wage bill, and subsidies, some major redistribution of

income must accompany the inflation-halting step. This is in essence the lesson from Israel’s

inflation stabilization policy.
     5.   A Balance-of-Payments Crisis

Inflation crises are often intertwined with balance-of-payment crises. Budget deficits were the root

cause of the balance-of-payment- cum - inflation crisis. The high-inflation period (1977-1985)

comprised with prolonged balance-of-payments crisis. Large budget deficits make the inflation-

employment tradeoff acute, under the regime of pegged exchange rate and liberalized international

capital flows; the pre-stabilization regime in Israel. In order to maintain a pegged exchange rate

and liberalized capital mobility, the central bank lost its ability to control the interest rate. Both

inflation and unemployment ensued. The stabilization package resulted in a regime switch; the

government effectively shifted the regime from the first goal of the tri-lemma to the second goal,

while being able to sharply reduce budget deficits. Balance-of-payment crises occur when a

country lift restrictions on capital mobility (in Israel it begun in 1977) without the consolidation

its fiscal stance and regulatory institutions; especially those overseeing the financial

intermediaries. If under these conditions the country is trying also to maintain a fixed exchange

rate regime, it then unavoidably faces conflicting policy needs (such as fiscal imbalances, or a

fragile financial sector) that need to be resolved by independent monetary policy.


Governments try to maintain certain financial and monetary arrangements, most notably a fixed-

exchange rate regime. Their goal is to stabilize the economy. At times, these arrangements become

unstable and collapse leading to financial crises. This strand of the literature analyzes currency

crises characterized by a speculative attack on a fixed exchange- rate regime.
Currency crises occur when the country is trying to maintain a fixed exchange rate regime with

capital mobility, but faces conflicting policy needs, such as fiscal imbalances or fragile financial

sector, that need to be resolved by independent monetary policy, and effectively shift the regime

from the first solution of the tri-lemma to the second solution.i

Krugman (1979) describes a government attempting to maintain a fixed exchange rate regime. But,

it is subject to a constant loss of reserves, due to the need to monetize persistent government budget

deficits. These two features of the policy are inconsistent with each other, and lead to an eventual

attack on the international reserves of the central bank, that culminate in the collapse of the fixed

exchange rate regime.

        In what follows we provide a simple description of this model. Recall that the asset-side of

the central bank’s balance sheet at time t is composed of domestic assets 𝑩𝑯,𝒕 , and the domestic-

currency value of foreign assets 𝑺𝒕 𝑩𝑭,𝒕 , where 𝑺𝒕 denotes the exchange rate, i.e., the value of

foreign currency in terms of domestic currency. The total assets have to equal the total liabilities

of the central bank, which are, by definition, the monetary base, denoted by𝑴𝒕 .

Due to fiscal imbalances, the central bank domestic assets grow at a fixed and exogenous rate:
                                           𝑩𝑯,𝒕 𝑩𝑯,𝒕 𝟏
                                                               𝝁.
                                             𝑩𝑯,𝒕 𝟏


Because of perfect capital mobility, the domestic interest rate is determined through the interest

rate parity, as follows:

                                                                𝑺𝒕 𝟏
                                       𝟏    𝒊𝒕    𝟏      𝒊∗𝒕
                                                                 𝑺𝒕

Where 𝒊𝒕 denotes the domestic interest rate at time t and 𝒊∗𝒕 denotes the foreign interest rate at time

t. Finally, the supply of money, i.e., the monetary base, has to be equal to the demand for money,

which is denoted as𝑳 𝒊𝒕 , a decreasing function of the domestic interest rate.
       The inconsistency between a fixed exchange rate regime, 𝑺𝒕           𝑺𝒕   𝟏    𝑺, with capital

mobility and the fiscal imbalances comes due to the fact that domestic assets of the central bank

keep growing, but total central bank assets cannot change since the monetary base is pinned down

by the public at large demand for money, 𝑳 𝒊∗𝒕 , which is anchored by the foreign interest rate.

Hence, the obligation of the central bank to keep financing the fiscal needs, puts a downward

pressure on the domestic interest rate, which, in turn, puts an upward pressure on the exchange

rate. In order to prevent depreciation, the central bank has to intervene by reducing the inventory

of foreign reserves. Overall, 𝑺𝑩𝑭,𝒕 decreases by the same amount as 𝑩𝑯,𝒕 increases, so the

monetary base remains the same.


       The problem is that this process cannot continue forever, since the reserves of foreign

currency must have a lower bound. Eventually, the central bank will have to abandon the solution

of the tri-lemma through a fixed exchange rate regime and perfect capital mobility to a solution

for the tri-lemma through flexible exchange rate, with stabilizing monetary policy (i.e., flexible

monetary base or equivalently domestic interest rate) and perfect capital mobility.

       The question is this. What is the critical level of domestic assets 𝑩𝑯,𝑻 and the corresponding

period of time T, at which the fixed-exchange rate regime collapses? As pointed out by, Flood and

Garber (1984), this happens when the shadow exchange rate, defined as the flexible exchange rate

under the assumption that the central bank’s foreign reserves reached their lower bound while the

central bank keeps increasing the domestic assets to accommodate the fiscal needs, is equal to the

pegged exchange rate.
Figure 4: Exchange rate and international reserves
       The figure describes the critical value of central bank domestic assets where foreign assets

are suddenly depleted and a switch to fully flexible exchange rate regime occurs.15


Some of the macroeconomic institutional changes, brought about by the inflation stabilization

have lasted until these very days. The hyperinflation cum financial collapse episode has not

reoccurred. Thanks to more disciplined monetary and fiscal policies, and well-regulated banks,

the inflation rate converged to low rates, enjoyed by the advanced economies during the Great

Moderation era.


           In contrast, inflation stabilization programs adopted by other developing countries,

especially in Latin America, proved not to have similar long-term durability. Argentine’s

stabilization program, relying on a rigid currency-board setup as its major pillar, was different. A

lack of adequate budget discipline and importantly inadequate bank regulations, were some of

the major weaknesses of the program. With a sovereign debt crisis and international capital flow

reversal, “all hell broke loose”. The abruptly collapsed currency board and the run on the banks

created a severe liquidity shortage. Sovereign debt default ensued. The world had cut Argentina

from the international capital market. More than 10 years later, prices are not stabile. The

country was able only recently to have better access to the international capital markets. Chile’s

stabilization program, however, had long-lasting outcomes, similarly to the Israeli program.




15
     Appendix 1 describes alternative currency-crisis mechanisms.
       In contrast to the crisis-management experience in Latin America, the Asian crisis has

been a game changing event that put the Asian Economies (particularly South Korea and

Indonesia) on a durable growth track. To a large measure, the post-crisis Asian financial and

monetary institutions restructuring enabled the entire region to escape the 2008 global crisis.




     6.   Disinflation and Globalization

The globalization wave has swept emerging markets in Latin America, European transition

economies, East Asian emerging economies, and Israel, over the last decades. The 1992 single-

market reform in Europe and the formation of the euro zone were watersheds of globalization.

Emerging markets, including China and India, likewise became significantly more open. Wynne

and Kersting (2007) note that in the 1970s more than three quarters of industrial countries had

restrictions of some sort on international financial transactions. By the 2000s, none did. Likewise,

restrictions on these transactions among emerging markets fell from 78 percent in the 1970s to 58

percent in the 2000s. Israel was exposed intensively in the globalization forces and was able to

exploit them to climb down from three-digit inflation rates in the early 1980s, and the double-digit

rates in the late 1980s and early 1990s.


The “Great Moderation” refers to the significant in business-cycle volatility starting in the mid-

1980s, believed at that time to be permanent, in developed nations in the later part of the twentieth

century. Sometime during the mid-1980s major economic variables such as real GDP growth,

industrial production, monthly payroll, and the unemployment rate began to decline in volatility.
These reductions are primarily due to greater independence of the central banks from political and

financial influences which has allowed them to follow macroeconomic stabilization.


Figure 5 describes deviations from trend of the unemployment rate and the bond-yield corporate-

treasury spread, for the period 1953-2014. The figure highlights the significant reduction in the

fluctuations of the unemployment rate and the bond-yield spread between Baa corporation rates

and the treasury rate.




   Figure 5: HP Filter de-trended unemployment rate and 5-year bond-yield (corporate/treasury)

   spread, US, 1953-2014


           0.6

                                                                The Great Moderation
           0.4                                                         Period

           0.2


           0.0


          ‐0.2


          ‐0.4                                                                 Unemployment
                                                                               Spread
          ‐0.6
                 '53 '56 '59 '62 '65 '68 '71 '74 '77 '80 '83 '86 '89 '92 '95 '98 '01 '04 '07 '10 '13


       Source: FRED, BLS, FRED, BLS, an extension to Eckstein, Setty and Weiss (2015).
     Notes: De-trended unemployment rate obtains through HP-filter, in SD. Bond yield spread is
     defined as the difference between two things: 5-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate, and
     Moody's Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield, HP filtered, in SD.




     Global inflation declined from 30 percent to 4 percent between 1993 and 2003.16 Rogoff (2003,

     2004) conjectures that globalization—interacting with deregulation and privatization—has

     played a strong supporting role in the past decade’s disinflation. An important feature of

     openness relates to international labor flows. International migrants constituted 2.9 percent of

     the world population in the 2000s, up from 2.1 percent in 1975. In some countries, changes

     have been more dramatic. In Israel in the 1990s, there was a surge of immigrants of up to 17

     percent of the population, and the central bank achieved a sizable decline of inflation. It is

     possible that the two events are related. In Spain in 1995, the percentages of foreigners in the

     population and in the labor force were below 1 percent and below 0.5 percent. At the end of

     2006, these rates were around 9 percent and 14 percent.


     By easing labor bottlenecks, migrants help to keep down prices of goods and services. Pass

     through of world low inflation, and low interest rates, to domestic prices and interest rates, the

     effects of migration on wages, is to be addressed by the standard Phillips curve analysis.17


      7.   The Flattening of the Phillips Curve

The core mechanism in the New Keynesian paradigm depends on the Phillips Curve; that is, the

tradeoff between surprise inflation and the level of economic activity. The reason why the New


16
   Kenneth Rogoff’s paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on "Monetary
Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy" Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2003.
17
   Bentolila, Dolaldo, and Jimeno (2007) have addressed the impact of the Spanish immigration boom on the Phillips
curve.
Keynesian framework is capable of generating such a trade-off between inflation and economic

activity is that producer-desired prices (once prices are adjusted) rise with the economy’s output,

when marginal costs slope upward due to diminishing returns to scale. Furthermore, when the

labor supply increases, workers tend to experience increasing marginal disutility of labor efforts.

The resulting increased real-wage demands must rise. Increased wage demands put an upward

pressure on the marginal cost, and consequently on the producer-desired price setting.


Bean (2006) succinctly summarizes the effect of globalization on the Phillips curve in the era of

globalization:


      “One of the most notable developments of the past decade (that is, the 1990s) has been the

      apparent flattening of the short-run trade-off between inflation and activity. The seventies

      were characterized by an almost vertical relationship in the United Kingdom, in which

      attempt to hold unemployment below its natural rate resulted in rising inflation. In the

      eighties, the downward sloping relationship reappears, as inflation was squeezed out of the

      system by the slack of the economy. However, since the early nineties, the relationship looks

      to have been rather flat. Three factors—increased specialization; the intensification of

      product market competition; and the impact of that intensified competition and migration on

      the behavior of wages—should all work to flatten the short-run trade-off between inflation

      and domestic activity.”18



18
  Similarly, Mishkin (2007) writes about the U.S. inflation-output trade-off: “The finding that inflation is less
responsive to the unemployment gap, suggests that fluctuations in resource utilization will have smaller implications
for inflation than used to be the case. From the point of view of policy makers, this development is a two-edged
sword: On the plus side, it implies that an overheating economy will tend to generate a smaller increase in inflation.
On the negative side, however, a flatter Phillips curve also implies that a given increase in inflation will be more
costly to wring out of the system.”
Independence of central banks is a way to overcome dynamic inconsistency: Expected inflation

leads to output, employment, and financial-market distortions; surprise inflation is employment

and output boosting (through the Phillips Curve mechanism). In the absence of central bank

independence, the non-commitment equilibrium is one of high-expected inflation. Central bank

independence is a necessary condition for overcoming the dynamic inconsistency and

consequently weakening the inflation bias. Accordingly, Rogoff (2003, 2004) attributes the

moderation in world inflation to a broad-based move towards having them run by conservative

anti-inflation oriented central bankers; similar developments happened also in Israel. The

increased competitiveness was a result of the interplay of globalization, deregulation and a

decreased role for governments in many economies. Given this diagnosis he foresaw continued

disinflation and even deflationary pressures (which came into a stark relief in the Great Recession)

arguing that the most important factor supporting world-wide disinflation has been the mutually

reinforcing mix of goods market and financial deregulation and globalization, and the consequent

significant reduction in monopoly pricing power. These developments increased competitiveness;

diminishing the gains, a central bank can reap via unanticipated inflation, because it reduces the

gap between the economy's monopolistically competitive equilibrium, and the more socially

desirable competitive equilibrium. In addition, both theory and empirics suggest that economies

that are more competitive have more flexible nominal prices, making smaller the Barro-Gordon-

type output gain the central bank can achieve by inflating; and making them more ephemeral. In a
standard, stylized political economy model, Rogoff shows that it is easier to credibly sustain low

inflation in a competitive than in a highly monopolistic economy.19


Evidence of the effect of globalization on the Phillips curve is provided by Loungani, Razin, and

Yuen (2001), Razin and Loungani (2007), and Clarida (2008). Previously, Romer (1993, 1998)

and Lane (1997) showed that inflation and trade liberalization are negatively (significantly)

correlated among the large (flexible exchange rate) OECD economies.


Evidently, changes in the foreign price pass through into domestic inflation in the open-economy

case even if the exchange rate depreciation trend does not change. If, in addition, the exchange

rate depreciation tapers down, and once the foreign exporters to the home country are also given a

chance to adjust prices in response to the moderation in the exchange rate depreciation, the home

country import price inflation moderates as well. In the world of the Great Moderation the home

country inflation abates.


Opening up of the economy to capital, goods, and labor mobility also flattens the Phillips curve.

In the New Keynesian framework, Binyamini and Razin (2010) show how increased volume of

trade in goods, greater financial openness, and labor migration affect the trade-off between output

and inflation by flattening the Phillips curve.20 Minimizing the (utility-based) loss function implies

moderate inflation, akin to the Great Moderation. They demonstrate analytically how the opening



19
     Rogoff’s prediction has proven correct. Global inflation moved sideways also after 2003, and

then fell sharply asymptotically, approaching zero after 2008, despite massive monetary and credit

expansion in the United States and the European Union.


20
     See Appendix 2.
up of the domestic economy to trade in goods, international borrowing and lending and migration

flatten the Phillips Curve (see Appendix). Every successive round of the opening up of the

economy contributes to flatten the aggregate supply curve. The intuition is that when an economy

opens up to trade in goods, it tends to specialize in production but to diversify in consumption.

This means the number of domestically produced goods, is less than the number of domestically

consumed goods. Consequently, the commodity composition of the consumption and output

baskets, which are identical if the trade account is closed, are different when trade in goods is

possible. As a result, the correlation between fluctuations in output and in consumption (which is

equal to unity in the case of a closed trade account) is less than unity if the economy opens up to

international trade in goods. The decomposition of utility based Phillips Curve to the various forces

of migration, output gap, and real exchange rate is shown in an Appendix. In words, these

globalization forces work analytically as follows.


When the capital account is open, then the correlation between fluctuations in consumption and

domestic output is further weakened, this is because with open capital accounts the representative

household can smooth consumption through international borrowing and lending and thereby

separate current consumption from current output. The inflation effects of shocks to the marginal

cost are therefore reduced, because the fluctuations in labor supply are also smoothed, because of

the consumption smoothing.


When the labor market is internationally closed to outward-migration, wage demands faced by

domestic producers are upward sloping, both under in-migration and under a completely closed

labor market. However, when the labor market is open to in-migration, domestic producers face

an expanded labor supply: additional to the skilled native-born labor supply (with upward sloping

wage demand), they also face a complementary unskilled foreign labor supply (with exogenously
determined wage demand). That means that in-migration acts on the Phillips Curve essentially like

a domestic productivity shock.


There has been some evidence of greater restraints on domestic prices and wage growth in sectors

more exposed to international competition, such as textiles and electronics. Chen, Imbs, and Scott

(2004) analyzed disaggregated data for EU manufacturing over the period 1988–2000. They find

that increased openness lowers prices by reducing markups and by raising productivity. This

finding implies a downward shift of the Philips Curve. In response to an increase in openness,

markups show a steep short-run decline, which partly reverses later, while productivity rises in a

manner that increases over time. If globalization reduces the markup, our model predicts that this

effect, by itself, leads to a more forceful anti-inflation policy and lessens the attention given by the

policy maker to the fluctuations in economic activity. One can conjecture that more frequent price

updating steepens the trade-off between inflation and activity; however, to our knowledge, neither

theory nor empirical evidence exists in support of any systematic relationship between

globalization and frequency of price updating. Notably, Gopinath and Rigobon (2007) report that

the time frequency of price adjustment of U.S. imported goods trended downward, on average,

during the Great Moderation. Gopinath and Itskhoky (2008) exploit the open economy

environment, which provides a well-identified cost shock; namely sizeable exchange rate shocks.

They use this identification method to test the effects of price-adjustment frequencies and pass

through. They demonstrate that high frequency adjusters have a long-run pass-through that is at

least twice as high as low frequency adjusters in the data are. Borio and Filardo (2007) present
cross-country evidence in support of their contention that global factors have recently become

empirically more relevant for domestic inflation determination. 21




      8.   Convergence of inflation rates

Globalization—interacting with deregulation and privatization—has played a strong supporting

role in Israel’s disinflation. The moderation is due to a large extent to the increasing independence

of the Bank of Israel, conducting effective anti-inflation policies in the presence of worldwide dis-

inflation.22


Figure 6 shows the convergence of Israel inflation rate to US, Germany and OECD rates. Inflation

fall started after the 1985 inflation stabilization policy but converged to the low one-digit rates of

advanced economies in the 1990s.23




21
   See Binyamini and Razin (2010). See also Gali (2008) for a comprehensive treatise of the open-economy New
Keynesian model. Borio and Filardo (2007) present cross-country evidence in support of their contention that global
factors have recently become empirically more relevant for domestic inflation determination. But Ihrig et al. (2007)
have shown that their result is very specific to the econometric method used. Based on cross-country analysis,
Badinger (2007) finds that globalization is also correlated with more aggressive policy toward inflation. Tetlow and
Ironside (2007), although not dealing with globalization, find that for the United States, the slope of the Phillips
curve has—largely and continuously—lessened during recent years. However, Ihrig et al. (2007) have shown that
results are very specific to the econometric method used. Based on cross-country analysis, Badinger (2007) finds
that globalization is also correlated with more aggressive policy toward inflation. Tetlow and Ironside (2007),
although not dealing with globalization, find that for the United States, the slope of the Phillips curve has—largely
and continuously—lessened during recent years.
22
   Globalization affected also conduct of central banks. Inflation targeting was born in New Zealand in 1990.
Admired for its transparency and accountability, it achieved success there, and soon in Canada, Australia, the UK,
Sweden and Israel. It subsequently became popular as well in Latin America (Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Colombia, and
Peru) and in other developing countries (South Africa, South Korea, Indonesia, Thailand and Turkey, among
others).
23
   Leiderman (1999) comprehensively analyze Israel’s dis-inflation with a focus on monetary policies related to
inflation and disinflation in Israel. He especially focus on inflation targeting as an instrument of disinflation.
 Figure 6: Inflation Rates (Annual GDP Deflator, percentage)

           28
                                                       Israel
           23

           18
                                                                  OECD
                                                                 members
           13
                                                                               United
                                                                               States                                Canada
             8
                                                                                                        Germany

             3

            -2
                  1988
                  1989
                  1990
                  1991
                  1992
                  1993
                  1994
                  1995
                  1996
                  1997
                  1998
                  1999
                  2000
                  2001
                  2002
                  2003
                  2004
                  2005
                  2006
                  2007
                  2008
                  2009
                  2010
                  2011
                  2012
                  2013
                  2014
 Source: The World Bank


           Full international financial integration requires that in the long run (when prices adjust to

various shocks and markets clear), the following arbitrage equation holds.


                                                                               𝑞⁄               ,
                                           1           𝑟        1      𝑟                                 ,
                                                                                𝑞⁄                  ,



Where 𝑖 stands for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom; and q stands for the real

exchange rate Vis a Vis the US dollar24:


                                                                               𝑃 ,
                                                       𝑞⁄   ,     𝐸⁄       ,       ,
                                                                                𝑃,




24
     Recall that by the Fisher equation:
                                                                                ⁄       ,                                    ⁄       ,
                      1 𝑟         1 𝑖              ,
                                                        , That is, 1   𝑟                                     1   𝑖       ,
                                                                                                                                             .
                                               ,                                    ⁄       ,                        ,           ⁄       ,
In addition, 𝐸 stands for the nominal exchange rate, Vis a Vis the US dollar; and 𝑃 stands for the

price level.


        Figure 7 plots the graphs of the real-interest-rate, adjusted for real exchange rate changes,

the yields on three-month government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United

Kingdom, and the yields on three-month US government bonds. International financial

integration generates more synchronized country-specific yields. Time series are filtered to wash

out short-run idiosyncratic fluctuations. Figure 7 demonstrates strikinglythat in the 1990sIsrael

integraes sufficiently into the world capital market, while convergence occurred at the beginning

of the 2000s. demonstrates strikingly that in the 1990s Israel integrate significantly into the

world financial markets.
 Figure 7: Gross Real Interest Rate Adjusted for Real Exchange Rate Changes (US benchmark)
 1.25

 1.20
                                Israel
 1.15            UK

 1.10

 1.05

 1.00                 Germany
                         Canada                      USA
 0.95                                        (real exchange rate)

 0.90
        1988
        1989
        1991
        1992
        1993
        1995
        1996
        1997
        1999
        2000
        2001
        2003
        2004
        2005
        2007
        2008
        2009
        2011
        2012
        2013
        2015
 Note: Series are HP-filtered. Monthly data are shown in the background.

 Source: Stats Bureau, FERD, World Bank, Real-exchange-rate adjusted, yields on three-
 month government bonds for Israel, Canada, Germany and the United Kingdom, and the yields
 on three-month US government bonds.


The absence of constraining rules on actions of the Bank of Israel and on Israel's fiscal authority

has induced strongly accommodative monetary policies and uncontrolled inflation. With improper

financial sector regulation, (e.g., the so-called “Visut Menayot”) banks were on the verge of

collapsing in the 1984 crisis. They were able to recapitalize making their investment portfolios

less risky over the next two decades, thanks to more rigorous bank regulations.


        9. Depression-Deflation Resistance
Israel’s resilience to the external financial shock during the global crisis is rooted in (a) the absence

of credit boom in the wake of the crisis, and (b) the relatively small commercial banks' exposure

in terms of toxic assets that for the European countries played a major role.


The newly emerging macroeconomic paradigm spans the gamut from an analytical framework that

features full capital-market arbitrage, smooth credit, Ricardian-equivalence properties,

representative agents, and efficient monetary management, to a framework with multiple agents,

incorporating debt frictions, liquidity traps, and relatively ineffective monetary management and

provides a role for fiscal policy in aggregate demand management. The analytical framework

based on the frictionless paradigm captures well the role of globalization forces and the reduction

in inflation in the 1990s Great Moderation era. The multiple-agent, market-friction revised

analytical framework captures some key features of the Great Recession that occurred in the

aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis. It gives insight about the macroeconomic effects of

debt overhang on economic activity and inflation, when the monetary policy rate reaches its lower

bound.


The concern at the time was that Israel, being well integrated in to the world markets and the world

finance, might suffer contagion that will be long lasting. At the end of the day, Israel suffered only

a temporary trade shock because of the decline in world demand.


As shown in figure 8, Israel did not have a significant credit boom in the wake of the 2008 crisis.

The US and the UK, in contrast, were vulnerable to a gigantic credit expansion (Germany, as if

Israel escaped such credit bubbles).
 Figure 8: Domestic Credit to Private Non-Financial Sector (% of GDP)


  250

  200                                                                             United
                                                                                  States
  150                                                                             United
                                                                                  Kingdom
  100                                                                             Germany

   50                                                                             Israel

     0
         1970
         1972
         1974
         1976
         1978
         1980
         1982
         1984
         1986
         1988
         1990
         1992
         1994
         1996
         1998
         2000
         2002
         2004
         2006
         2008
         2010
         2012
         2014
 Source: International Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics, data files, and World
 Bank and OECD GDP estimates.

 Note: Domestic credit provided by the financial sector includes all credit to various sectors on
 a gross basis, with the exception of credit to the central government, which is net. The
 financial sector includes monetary authorities and deposit money banks, as well as other
 financial corporations where data are available (including corporations that do not accept
 transferable deposits but do incur such liabilities as time and savings deposits). Examples of
 other financial corporations are finance and leasing companies, moneylenders, insurance
 corporations, pension funds, and foreign exchange companies.


Nevertheless, GDP growth has averaged 4 percent over the 2005-2010 period years, compared

with 0.7 percent on average for OECD countries. The overall living standards continue to improve

gradually, with per capita real GDP growing more rapidly than in other OECD countries. The

economy’s resilience has been underpinned by solid economic fundamentals, including large

foreign reserves, a dynamic high tech export sector, and the absence of economy wide deleveraging

pressures leading to the downfall in economic activity. Because, Israel did not have a credit bubble
in the years preceding the global financial crash, like the other major advanced economies, which

burst during the financial crisis.


Israel's growth performance depicted in Figure 9, during and after the global crisis, however, was

not unique. Figure 3.3 shows that among similar small open economies Israel's GDP grew over

the recent 20 years, including the 2008-2010 period at a similar cumulative rate as Chile; but at a

much higher rate than Greece, Spain and Portugal; which had a financial sector crash.


 Figure 9: Real GDP, Israel and Selected Countries (Jan 2003 = 100)

 170
                                                                                        Chile
 160
                                                                                        Israel
 150
 140                                                                                    Switzerland
 130                                                                                    Canada
 120                                                                                    Norway
 110                                                                                    Spain
 100
                                                                                        Portugal
  90
                                                                                        Greece
  80
  70




 Source: FRED



Furthermore, Figure 10 depicts GNP levels for Israel, Turkey, Brazil and Canada; economies,

which spared financial, sector crash. Israel exhibits a more moderate drop of output than all these

countries.
 Figure 10: Real GNP, Countries with No Financial Crisis (January 1998 = 100)


 180
                                                                 Israel
 160
                                               Turkey
 140
                                                                                      Canada
 120                                                                         Brazil


 100

   80
        1996
        1996
        1997
        1998
        1999
        2000
        2001
        2002
        2003
        2004
        2005
        2006
        2007
        2007
        2008
        2009
        2010
        2011
        2012
        2013
        2014
 Source: FRED


Capital flows provide another measure of the resilience of the Israeli Economy to the shocks. In

the aftermath of the global financial crisis, expansionary monetary policy in advanced economies

conventional or unconventional, that were conducted to boost up the economy, has affected

emerging market economies and others, such as Israel, through four channels: capital inflows;

exchange rate appreciation; reduced exports; and, effects of capital inflows on the domestic

financial system.


A number of studies have found an effect of monetary policy on specific gross flows. Bruno and

Shin (2015) for example, using a VAR methodology over the pre-crisis period (1995:4 to 2007:4)

find an effect of the federal funds rate on cross-border bank to bank flows; the effect is however

barely significant. Fratzscher et al (2013), using daily data on portfolio equity and bond flows, find
significant effects of different monetary policy announcements and actions since the beginning of

the crisis. Their results however point to the complexity of the effects of apparently largely similar

monetary measures. For example, they find QE1 announcements decreased bond flows to EMs,

while QE2 announcements increased them. In terms of the equations above, this suggests that, in

each case, monetary policy worked partly through its effects on the risk premium. These studies

cannot settle the further issue of whether or not total gross inflows increase with advanced

economies monetary expansions: The increase in the inflows the researchers have identified may

be offset by a decrease in other inflows25. However, studies of total inflows, or of the set of inflows

adding up to total inflows, yield some mixed conclusions. A representative and careful paper, by

Cerutti et al (2015), using quarterly flows over 2001:2 to 2013:2, suggests two main conclusions.

The most significant observable variable in explaining flows into Emerging Markets (EMs) is the

VIX index26: An increase in the VIX leads to a decrease in inflows to EMs. The coefficients on

the monetary policy variables, namely the expected change in the policy rate and the slope of the

yield curve, typically have the expected sign. Several studies found that movements in the VIX

are strongly associated with global capital flows.27


It is worth looking now at capital inflows to EMs and Israel from the US, the epicenter of the

global financial crisis, and the country, which adapted with virtually no lag a brief expansionary

fiscal policy and a persistent expansionary monetary policy.




25
   See Blanchard (2016) who surveyed the literature about post 2008 crisis in advanced economies and emerging
economies that were hit to different degrees by the global financial crisis. To a large extent, the emerging markets
escaped the brunt of the crisis. Israel evidently belongs to the second group.
26
   The VIX is the Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility Index. It is a measure of the implied volatility
of S7P 500 index options. The VIX
27
   See Rey (2015).
Figure 11 describes the portfolio capital outflows from the US to selected countries. Israel is in the

middle of the pack of countries that enjoy inflow of portfolio capital investments in the aftermath

of the 2008 global financial crisis. These inflows put appreciation pressures on the exchange rates.

Some central banks, including BOI, conducted a policy of a massive purchase of foreign currency

denominated assets, to protect against the declining competitiveness in the world trade.
 Figure 11: Portfolio Flows, Crisis Economies (Index, Dec 1994 = 100)


    8000

    6000                                                                            Portugal

    4000

    2000                                                                              Israel

        0
                                                                                        Chile
   -2000                                                           Greece
                                                                                 Spain
   -4000

   -6000
            1994
            1995
            1996
            1997
            1998
            1999
            2000
            2001
            2002
            2004
            2005
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            2010
            2011
            2012
            2013
            2014
 Source: Anusha Chari

 Figure 11 describes the nominal exchange rate of various countries that engaged in the "currency

 war" period: Israel, Sweden, Switzerland, Brazil and Indonesia. Israel seems to have

 undervalued its currency the least among these countries; possibly because thanks for its

 international financial integration and almost no capital controls, the effectiveness of sterilized

 intervention was weak.



How did the Israeli policy makers react to the 2008 world financial-depression, and global trade-

diminishing shocks? Policy makers’ concern was three-fold: First, banks exposures to toxic assets

such as mortgage based securities and foreigners’ debt obligations. Partly because Israel skipped

the credit bubble, and bank regulations were relatively tight, Israel showed a sound resilience to
the global financial shock. Second, Israel export markets softened and demand conditions

deteriorated. Third, Israel domestic currency was strengthened. Bank of Israel addressed the last

two issues by a massive foreign exchange market intervention to weaken the value of the domestic

currency, and stimulate exports.


In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, expansionary monetary policy in advanced

economies’ conventional or unconventional, that were conducted to boost up the economy, has

appreciated the currencies of the emerging market economies, including Israel. The question for

these economies was whether an expansionary monetary policy, which tends to depreciate the

currency and boost exports requires a direct foreign exchange market intervention, or whether the

latter can succeed without the former.28


Israel monetary authorities were concerned about the “Great Recession” downward pressures on

the demand for Israel’s exports and the strengthening of the Israeli currency as capital inflows

rose. They engaged in an intensive (sterilized) intervention in the foreign exchange market to

prevent the appreciation of the currency. However, there is evidently limits to how much such

policy can stimulate the demand for Israel’s output.


Sterilized intervention is ineffective when there is high private capital mobility to the extent that

domestic and foreign securities viewed by a large group of investors, are close substitutes.

Conditions under which sterilized intervention is effective happen to exist for a crisis economy,

however, when there is a probability of capital flow reversal, liquidity shortage, or major real trade


28
  In the presence of trending capital exports, the central bank cannot persistently appreciate the domestic currency
by selling foreign exchange denominated assets in the foreign exchange market, because depleted international
reserves could quickly reach their lower bound. However, In the presence of trending financial capital imports, the
central bank can persistently depreciate the domestic currency by purchasing foreign exchange denominated assets
in the foreign exchange market through money issue. This is why the foreign exchange market intervention is
referred to as a “half instrument” in the hands of the central bank.
shock, leading to financial-intermediaries collapse. (See Appendix 5B). Under conditions where

foreign and domestic assets are close substitutes, sterilized intervention is ineffective. Through a

central-bank sale of domestic government debt assets, following a purchase of foreign currency in

the foreign exchange market, the money supply fully adjusts to bring back the pre-intervention

expected rates of return on domestic and foreign currency bonds into equilibrium (the standard

interest parity). Sterilized foreign-exchange-market intervention, by the monetary authorities,

where the domestic money supply is unchanged, is incapable of pushing the exchange rate up or

down. However, the proposition may change in the presence of imperfect asset substitutability,

where domestic and foreign bonds command a different liquidity premium and risk premium.

Changing the composition of central bank assets, between foreign and domestic assets (the case of

sterilized foreign exchange rate market interventions), can then have real economic effects in the

presence of credit market spreads and frictions. In this case, sterilized foreign-exchange-market

intervention could effectively change the value of the foreign currency in terms of domestic

currency. A sterilized purchase of foreign assets may change the liquidity premium that domestic

bonds command, relative to foreign bonds, even though the money supply is left unchanged. A

similar outcome may transpire when foreign exchange intervention changes market views of future

foreign-exchange-market interventions. Similarly, liquidity-based imperfect asset substitution

between domestic government and domestic private-sector bonds during liquidity crises can be

exploited by the central bank.29 Israel's foreign exchange market half-decade episode started when

credit frictions were relatively intensive following the Lehman moment in the USA in October

2008.




29
     See Krugman, Obstfeld and Melitz. (2015).
Recall that the most significant observable variable in explaining short-term flows into Emerging

Markets (EMs) is the VIX index: An increase in the VIX leads to a decrease in inflows to EMs.

The VIX index is directly related to the risk adjusted return on domestic government bonds in the

periphery countries, like Israel. Sterilized foreign-exchange market purchase of US government

bonds by the central bank is then capable of blocking exchange rate appreciation. This was the

rationale for the Bank of Israel policy in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. However, the

effectiveness of such policy is short lived. Once the VIX index falls, sterilized-foreign-exchange-

market intervention becomes ineffective. Excessively high foreign reserves also have fiscal

medium term costs. 30




        10. Conclusion


30
     Sorezcky (2015) provides evidence on the effectiveness of the 2008-2009 strong intervention
period and Ribon (2017) provides a broader overview of forex intervention over the entire global
financial crisis. Cukierman (Forthcoming) compares the methods of interventions in Israel and
Switzerland and their implications for forex reserve accumulation. Another reason for the
tameness of inflation despite massive base expansion in the US since 2008 is that this expansion
was in response to a huge increase in the demand for liquidity on the part of banks and the entire
financial sector rather than to a governmental craving for seignorage revenues. Cukierman
(2017) demonstrates and argues that this is very different than the base expansion in post WWI
Germany in which the main motive for base expansion was seignorage for government.
Historical patterns of booms and busts typically exhibit frequent small recessions interrupted by

rare but deep and long recessions. Traditional macroeconomic models, used often by central banks

and many other policy-making institutions, do not capture the full features of crises: frequent small

recessions punctuated by rare depressions. They do not illuminate how small open economies, like

Israel, which are substantially integrated into the world economy, perform when a global financial

shock takes place, leading to recession as deep and persistent as the Great Recession. We discussed

the relatively robust performance of Israel (as well as some other advanced economies (e.g.,

Canada), and major Emerging Markets in the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis. Factors

contributing to this robustness are the absence of credit and real estate bubbles, and banks’ tight

regulation in the wake of the crisis, which precluded the deleveraging process following the

financial crisis.


The state of Israel, founded in 1948, benefited immensely from the post-1945 globalization wave.

Steadily reforming its financial and commercial institutions, and becoming increasingly globalized

in trade, labor market, and finance, Israel became a member of the OECD; the accession took place

in 2010. Currently, Israel’s is a thriving economy, integrated tightly into the world economy, Israel

also feature a remarkable technological prowess. The Israeli economy is a remarkable development

success story. A middle-income economy in the midst of a hyperinflation in the early 1980s, Israel

grew into one of the most thriving economies in the world: and this despite the ongoing security

challenges, that are most certainly a drain on its resources.


Fiscal policy has been recently given greater emphasis in the post-2008 crisis that

nominal interest rates appear to be persistently low — and below the annual growth rate

of nominal GDP. This recent phenomenon generated renewed debate on the role of

“printing money” in financing government deficits. Modern Monetary Theory, or MMT,
argues that a country borrowing in its own currency can finance fiscal stimulus by

printing money. That is, governments able to issue fiat money can’t go bankrupt,

regardless whether investors are willing to buy their bonds. By extension, MMT would

allow the government to control inflation through tax policy. Instead of asking the Fed

to stabilize prices through monetary policy, the government could raise taxes when

prices get too high and cut taxes when prices get too low. However basic

macroeconomics wisdom suggests that deficit finance by money issue won’t leave banks

sitting idle on their newly acquired reserves; they’ll convert them into currency, which

they lend to individuals. So the government indeed ends up financing itself by printing

money, getting the private sector to accept pieces of paper in return for goods and

services, and this would lead to inflation. Recall that a deficit financed by money issue is

more inflationary than a deficit financed by bond issue. When the central bank

purchases a government bond in the open market in exchange for commercial bank

reserves, all it does is substitute a very short‐term liability (reserves have zero maturity)

for a longer‐term liability. That is, a central bank purchase of government bonds simply

alters the maturity structure of the consolidated government’s liabilities, and thereby

pushing up inflationary pressures.



Recently, there has been extensive analysis of changes in the Phillips curve in Israel. Elkayam

and Ilek (2016), gave evidence that between 2003 and 2013 there was a substantial reduction in

the Israeli natural (or NAIRU) rate of unemployment. Such a development likely contributed to

the maintenance of the two percent inflation target in spite of substantial decreases in
unemployment. Another important development that, most likely shifted the Israeli Phillips curve

to the left are the fiscal reforms of the early twenty first century that mandated a long term gradual

reduction in national debt and the imposition of a 3 percent ceiling on public deficits. As argued

by Braude and Flug (2012) and others those policies created a fiscal policy space that could be

used later to moderate the deflationary impact of the GFC on the Israeli economy.




           Appendix 1: Globalization and the Phillips Curve


Binyamini and Razin (2010) show how trade in goods, financial openness, and labor in- and out-

migration affect the trade-off between output and inflation by successively flattening the Phillips

Curve. Let the range of the mass of domestically produced goods, n, is (0,1) and that 𝜔                             𝜔 .


In the case of perfect mobility of labor, capital, and goods, the log‐linear approximate aggregate

supply curve (Phillips Curve) is given by31:


            
           t    
                       p n
                                           xt 
                                                    p  (1  n)  F  N
                                                                 Yt  Yt  
                                                                                   1      
                                                                                         wtW 
                                                                                                1  n   q 
                                                                                                             t 
                      1   p                    1   p                   1   p            n           

                 
                     1  n   q          
                                                           
                                            qt 1    Et  t 1 
                                                                      1  n  q  q  ,
                                                                                         
                                      t                                          t 1 t 
                        n                                               n              




31
     See also Razin (2014), Chapter 11.
where    t         is the deviation of CPI inflation from its target;                  x t  Y t H  Y t N
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                 is the domestic output

gap;   Y
         t
             F     
                  YtN    is the difference between foreign output and domestic natural output; the

parameter  p is the elasticity of the marginal cost with respect to producer's output,  is the

intra industry elasticity of substitution,                  stands for the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,

and   denotes the subjective discount factor. The term n denotes the mass (number) of

domestically produced goods, w is domestic wage, and superscript F, N, and W, denotes Foreign,

Natural and World variable, respectively.


The term  
                        1 -  1 -     , captures the degree of price flexibility; and                     1-   is the probability
                               

of receiving a price‐updating signal. The variable                            is the real exchange rate, formally defined
                                                                         qt


as:


                                                                               
                                                         q t   t  PF , t - Pt   ,


Where,       
             PF ,t   denotes the foreign consumer-price index.


Denote the slope of the Phillips equation by ; for the open-economy expression slope of the

                                                    n  p
aggregate supply, equation is  1                          .
                                                   1   p


Let us turn to the case of no labor mobility and no capital mobility. If the domestic economy is not

integrated to the international financial market, then there is no possibility of consumption

smoothing, and we have that the value of aggregate current spending equals the value of aggregate

domestic output:
                                    PˆC ,t Cˆt  PˆY ,t Yˆt     ; PˆC ,t CˆtN  PˆY ,t Yˆt N ,



Where PˆC ,t the CPI-based price is level, and PˆY ,t is the GDP deflator. In this case, the aggregate

supply curve is


                                     n             (1  n)  F  N 1  n   
                       
                       t                     xt                     
                                                                    Yt  Yt           
                                                                                     qt 
                                   1                 1                  n         

                                1  n                                      1  n q  q  .
                                            q
                                               t    qt 1     Et  t 1 
                                                     
                                                                                        t 1 t 
                                   n                                              n             



The Phillips-curve slope is:


                                                                n    .
                                                     2
                                                                1  


In the closed economy case the aggregate supply equation (Phillips Curve) reduces to


                                                                                  
                                       t                        xt   E t  t 1 ,
                                                   1  


In the case of the closed economy, the Phillips Curve slope is:


                                              n           n  p
                       3                  2               1           .
                                 1               1             1   p


The Phillips curve is steeper in the closed economy case, compared to the open-trade case with

no-labor, no-capital. The latter is steeper than the slope with perfect mobility of labor, capital,

and goods. The model features a moderating impact of in-migration on wages.
Furthermore, changes in the foreign price pass through into domestic inflation in the open-

economy case, but these effects are absent in the closed economy case. This observation validates

the proposition the globalization in the world of great moderation exert inflation moderating

influences.


Badinger, H., (2007). "Globalization, Taylor Rules, and Inflation," mimeo,
Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, Vienna, Austria.

Bean, Charles, (2006). "Globalization and Inflation,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q4,
468-475.

Bentolila, Dolado and Jimeno (2007) “Does      immigration affect the Phillips
curve? Some evidence for Spain,”                European Economic Review Volume 52, Issue
8, November 2008, Pages 1398–1423.

Binyamini, Alon and Assaf Razin, (2008), “Inflation-Output Tradeoffs as Equilibrium Outcomes
of Globalization,” Israel Economic Review,6 (1):109-134.

Blanchard, Olivier, (2016). “Currency Wars, Coordination, and Capital Controls”. NBER
working paper 22388.

Borio, Claudio and Andrew, Filardo, (2007), "Globalization and Inflation: New Cross-Country
Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation," unpublished paper, Bank for
International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March).

Braude K. and K. Flug, (2012), “The Interaction between Monetary and Fiscal Policy: Insights
from two Business Cycles in Israel”.



Bruno, Michael. And Stanley Fischer, (1984), “The Inflationary Process in Israel: Shocks and
Accom- modation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Cambridge, MA.

Calvo, Guillermo, (1978). “On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary
Economy,” Econometrica 46, November, pp. 1411-1428.

Calvo, Guillermo (1992), " Are High Interest Rates Effective for Stopping High Inflation? Some
Skeptical Notes," The World Bank Economic Review, 6:55-69.
Calvo, Guillermo (2016) "From Chronic Inflation to Chronic Deflation: Focusing on
Expectations and Liquidity Disarray Since WWWII,” NBER working paper 22535.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos A. Vegh (2001), “Inflation Stabilization and BOP
Crises in Developing Countries,” in John Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds.)
Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier.

Cerutti, E., Claessens, S., Laeven, L., (2015a). The Use and Effectiveness of Macro prudential
Policies: New Evidence. IMF Working Papers 15/61, International Monetary Fund. 1, 2.1

Chen, Nancy, Jean Imbs and Andrew Scott, (2004), "Competition, Globalization and the Decline
of Inflation," Journal of International Economics 63 (1), 93-118, 312.

Clarida, Richard, J., (2008), "Reflections on Monetary Policy in the Open Economy", NBER
International seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and

Clarida, Richard, J., (2008), "Reflections on Monetary Policy in the Open Economy", NBER
International seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and Richard Clarida.

Cukierman A., (2017), "Money Growth and Inflation: Policy Lessons from a Comparison of the
US since 2008 with Hyperinflation Germany in the 1920s", Economic Letters, 154, 109-112.

Cukierman, Alex, Thomas Lustenberger and Alan H. Meltzer (2018), “The permanent-transitory
confusion: Implications for tests of market efficiency and for expected inflation during turbulent
and tranquil times,” CEPR Discussion Paper 13187.

De Grauwe, Paul. 2011. "The European Central Bank as a lender of last resort". VoxEU, 18th

August.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Sebastian Edwards (1989), The Macroeconomics Populism in Latin America,
WPS 316, World Bank.



Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and

liquidity." Journal of Political Economy 91: 401-419.

Elkayam D. and Ilek, A. (2016), “Estimating the NAIRU for Israel, 1992–2013”, Israel

Economic Review, 14 (1), October.
Fleming, Marcus (1962), “Domestic financial policies under fixed and under floating exchange
rates,” IMF Staff Papers 9, Nov., 369-380.

Flood, Robert, and Peter Garber. 1984. "Collapsing exchange-rate regimes, some linear

examples." Journal of International Economics 17: 1-13.



Fratzscher, M., Lo Duca, M., and Straub, R., (2013). On the international spillovers of US
quantitative easing.

Friedman, Milton, 1971, "Government Revenue from Inflation," Journal of Political Economy,
79, 4, pp. 846-856.


Gali, Jordi, (2008). Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
New Keynesian Framework. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Gopinath, Gita (2004), Lending Booms, Sharp Reversals and the Real, Exchange Dynamics,
Journal of International Economics, 62 (1), 1.

Karni, Edi, (1983), “Revenue from Inflation,” Yediot Aharonot.

Krampf, Arie (2018), The Israeli path to neoliberalism : the state, continuity and change,
Routledge.

Krugman, Paul. 1979. "A model of balance-of-payments crises." Journal of Money, Credit, and

Banking 11: 311-325.


Krugman, Paul, Maurice Obstfeld, And Marc Melitz, (2015), International Economics:Theory
and Policy, Tenth Edition, Pearson.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward C. Prescott, 1977. “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency
of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473-493.


Leiderman, Leonardo. (1999), editor. Inflation and Disinflation in Israel, Bank of Israel.

Liviatan, Nissan , (1984), “Dollarization as a Monetary Reform,” The Economic Quarterly, 848-
858, (Hebrew).
Liviatan, Nissan. and Piterman, Silvia. (1986), “Accelerating Inflation and Balance-of-Payments
Crisis, 1973-1984.” In: Ben-Porath, Yoram. (Ed.), The Israeli Economy: Maturing through
Crises. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 320-346.



Loungani, Prakash, and Assaf Razin (2001), "How Beneficial Is Foreign Direct Investment for
Developing Countries", Finance and Development, 38(2).

Loungani, Prakash, Assaf Razin and Chi-Wa Yuen, (2001). "Capital Mobility and the Output-
Inflation Tradeoff," Journal of Development Economics 64, 255-74.

Mankiw, N. Gregory., (2010). The trilemma of international finance. Available at:
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/11/business/economy/11view.html

Mishkin, Fredric. S., (2007). “Is Financial Globalization Beneficial?,” Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking, Volume 39, Issue 2-3 March–April 2007, Pages 259–294

Mishkin, Fredric. S., (2007). Remarks given at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California.

Mundell, Robert A. (1963), “Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible
Exchange Rates,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 29, pp.475-485.

Obstfeld, Maurice. 1996. "Models of currency crises with self-fulfilling features." European

Economic Review 40: 1037-1047.


Razin, Assaf (2018a). Israel and the world economy: The power of Globalization, MIT Press.

Razin, Assaf (2018b), “ISRAEL’S IMMIGRATION STORY: WINNERS AND LOSERS,”
Israel Economic Review, Vol. 15, No. 1 (2018), 73-106.



Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (1993). The economy of modern Israel: Malaise and promise.
University of Chicago Press.

Ribon S. (2017), “Why the Bank of Israel intervenes in the foreign exchange market, and what
happens to the exchange rate”, Bank of Israel DP No. 2017.04 February.
Rey, Helene (2015) “Dilemma Not Trilemma: Global Financial Cycles and Monetary Policy
Independence,” NBER working paper 21162.

Rogoff, Kenneth, (2003). "Disinflation: An Unsung Benefit of Globalization?", Finance and
Development, Volume 40, No. 4 (December), pp. 55–56.

Rogoff, Kenneth, (2004). "Globalization and Global Disinflation," in Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy, proceedings
of the 2003 Jackson Hole symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.


Romer, D., (1993). "Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CVII (4), November, pp. 869-904.

Romer, David, (1998). "A New Assessment of Openness and Inflation: Reply," Quarterly

Sargent, Thomas. J., (1999). The conquest of American inflation. Princeton University Press.

Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell (2004), “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees

Tetlow R. and B. Ironside, (2007). "Real-Time Model Uncertainty in the United States: The Fed,
1996-2003," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39, No. 7 (October), pp. 1533-1561.

Wynne, Mark, A., and Erasmus K. Kersting, (2007). Openness and inflation. Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, Staff Paper No. 2. Zhang, Yu. 2011. Essays on banking. Ph.D.

Wynne, Mark, A., and Erasmus K. Kersting, (2007). Openness and inflation. Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, Staff Paper No. 2. Zhang, Yu. 2011. Essays on banking. Ph.D.

Reserve Bank of Dallas, Staff Paper 2.

Sorezcky A. (2015). "Was the Bank of Israel intervention in the foreign exchange market
effective?", in Offenbacher A. Maintaining Price Stability: The Bank of Israel’s sixth decade,
The Bank of Israel Press.


.858-848 ‫ עמודים‬,119 ‫ כרך‬,‫" הרבעון לכלכלה‬,‫"דולריזציה כרפורמה מוניטרית‬,(1984) ‫ ניסן‬,‫לויתן‬

‫פורת‬-‫" בספר של יורם בן‬,‫ "האצת האינפלציה ומשברים במאזן התשלומים‬,(1989) ‫ ניסן וסילביה פיטרמן‬,‫לויתן‬
.478-436 ,‫ הוצאת עם עובד ומכון פאלק‬,‫ חבלי צמיחה‬:‫)עורך( המשק הישראלי‬
2
    . See a formal exposition in Piersanti, (2012).
