                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 ON THE EMPIRICAL (IR)RELEVANCE OF THE ZERO LOWER BOUND CONSTRAINT

                                        Davide Debortoli
                                           Jordi Galí
                                         Luca Gambetti

                                       Working Paper 25820
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25820


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We have benefited from comments from Christian Brownlees, Marty Eichenbaum, Barbara Rossi
and by participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Bicocca University, UPF, Bucharest INFER
Workshop, SUFE, ECB, Stockholm School of Economics and Sveriges Riksbank. Luca Gambetti
acknowledges the financial support of the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
through grant ECO2015-67602-P. The three authors acknowledge the support of the Severo
Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563), and the Barcelona
Graduate School of Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25820.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Davide Debortoli, Jordi Galí, and Luca Gambetti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Empirical (Ir)Relevance of the Zero Lower Bound Constraint
Davide Debortoli, Jordi Galí, and Luca Gambetti
NBER Working Paper No. 25820
May 2019
JEL No. E44,E52

                                          ABSTRACT

The zero lower bound (ZLB) irrelevance hypothesis implies that the economy's performance is
not affected by a binding ZLB constraint. We evaluate that hypothesis for the recent ZLB episode
experienced by the U.S. economy (2009Q1-2015Q4). We focus on two dimensions of
performance that were likely to have experienced the impact of a binding ZLB: (i) the volatility
of macro variables and (ii) the economy's response to shocks. Using a variety of empirical
methods, we find little evidence against the irrelevance hypothesis, with our estimates suggesting
that the responses of output, inflation and the long-term interest rate were hardly affected by the
binding ZLB constraint, possibly as a result of the adoption and fine-tuning of unconventional
monetary policies. We can reconcile our empirical findings with the predictions of a simple New
Keynesian model under the assumption of a shadow interest rate rule.

Davide Debortoli                                           Luca Gambetti
Universitat Pompeu Fabra,                                  Collegio Carlo Alberto
CREI and Barcelona GSE                                     Università di Torino
davide.debortoli@upf.edu                                   luca.gambetti@uab.cat

Jordi Galí
Centre de Recerca en Economia Internacional (CREI)
Ramon Trias Fargas 25
08005 Barcelona
SPAIN
and NBER
jgali@crei.cat
1         Introduction
The magnitude of the global …nancial crisis of 2007-2008 and the recession that it trig-
gered, led many central banks to lower their policy rates down to values near zero, their
theoretical lower bound.1 Given the impossibility of further reductions in the short-term
nominal rate –the instrument of monetary policy in normal times–central banks increas-
ingly relied on unconventional monetary policies (UMPs) in their attempt to stimulate
the economy. Two prominent examples of unconventional policies adopted by several
central banks in recent years are (i) forward guidance (i.e. the attempt to manage ex-
pectations on the future path of the policy rate) and (ii) quantitative easing (i.e. central
banks’large asset purchase programs). The adoption of such policies sought to stimulate
economic activity through a variety of channels: lowering expectations of future policy
rates, reducing the term and/or risk premia of longer term debt, increasing the overall
liquidity of the …nancial system, and supporting asset valuation, among other channels.
        How e¤ective have UMPs been at getting around the zero lower bound (ZLB) con-
straint? A growing literature has emerged that aims at answering those questions, using
a variety of empirical approaches. The present paper seeks to contribute to that litera-
ture. More speci…cally, our goal is to evaluate the merits of what we refer to as the ZLB
irrelevance hypothesis, i.e. the hypothesis that the economy’s performance has not been
a¤ected by a binding ZLB constraint. In particular, we focus on two dimensions of that
performance that are likely to have experienced the impact of a binding ZLB: (i) the
volatility of macro variables and (ii) the economy’s response to shocks.
        We start our empirical exploration with an assessment of the possible changes in
the volatility of macro variables during the period in which the ZLB constraint was
    1
     Several central banks lowered their policy rates down to values below zero, thus proving that the
latter should be seen a soft lower bound. From the point of view of our paper what matters is the
existence of a "perceived" value below which a given central bank is not willing to lower the policy rate,
i.e. an e¤ ective lower bound. In the case of the U.S. economy, which is the focus of the present paper,
zero appears to be the Fed’s e¤ective lower bound.


                                                    1
binding. A rise in volatility could have been expected as a result of the Fed’s hands
being tied due to the Federal Funds Rate having hit the ZLB, since this prevented the
"usual" stabilizing policy response to aggregate shocks. Yet, we …nd little evidence of an
increase in the volatility of either real or nominal U.S. macro variables over the period
during which the Federal Funds Rate attained its zero lower bound, i.e. from January
2009 through December 2015 (henceforth, the ZLB period). The previous …nding is at
odds with the predictions of a baseline New Keynesian model, as we show by means of
a number of simulations, under the assumption that the central bank follows a simple
interest rate rule.
   In the second part of our paper we ask ourselves whether the response of di¤erent
macro variables to a variety of aggregate shocks has been a¤ected by the ZLB. Our
empirical approach involves the estimation of a structural vector autoregressive model
with time-varying coe¢ cients (TVC-SVAR), driven by four shocks that are identi…ed by
means of a combination of long run and sign restrictions. Under the "irrelevance hy-
pothesis" there should not be any signi…cant change in the estimated responses over the
binding ZLB period, relative to period before the ZLB was binding. This is indeed what
we …nd. In particular, we show that the estimated response of the long-term interest
rate during the ZLB period is very similar to its counterpart for the pre-ZLB period.
Furthermore, when we estimate a "rule" for the long-term rate we …nd little evidence
of a break during the ZLB period. We interpret the previous results as suggesting that
UMPs may have been highly e¤ective in steering the long rate as desired during the ZLB
period, despite the constant policy rate. We complete our analysis by showing how the
previous …ndings can be reconciled with the predictions of our baseline New Keynesian
model when we assume an interest rate rule based on a shadow interest rate. That rule
can be interpreted as a simple way of capturing the role of forward guidance or other
types of unconventional monetary policies in getting around the constraints imposed by
the ZLB.

                                            2
    Our …ndings should not be interpreted as downplaying the signi…cance of the Great
Recession and the slowness of the subsequent recovery. Together with the associated de-
‡ationary pressures, they were undoubtedly the main factors behind the sharp reduction
in the Federal Funds Rate down to its zero lower bound. Our …ndings suggest, however,
that no special role should be attributed to the ZLB constraint as explanation for the
depth and persistence of the recession. Instead, the size, persistence and …nancial nature
of the shocks experienced by the U.S. economy (before the start of the ZLB episode) are
instead more likely explanations for the severity of the downturn, as had been the case
for many other …nancial crises experienced by di¤erent countries in the past, and which
did not generally involve a binding ZLB constraint.2
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related
literature. Section 3 provides evidence on the impact of the binding ZLB on macroeco-
nomic volatility. Section 4 contrasts that evidence with the predictions of a baseline
New Keynesian model. Section 5 studies how the binding ZLB constraint may have
a¤ected the economy’s response to a variety of shocks. Section 6 analyzes the ability of
a modi…ed interest rate rule to account for the empirical evidence. Section 7 summarizes
and concludes.


2     Related Literature
Our paper seeks to contribute to a growing literature that aims at assessing the e¤ec-
tiveness of unconventional monetary policies through alternative approaches. A large
number of papers in the literature aim to measure the impact of UMP announcements
or their implementation on …nancial variables. Examples of that work include D’Amico
and King (2013), who use security-level data on Treasury prices and quantities to docu-
   2
     Many empirical papers have provided evidence on the unusual depth and persistence of downturns
caused by …nancial crises. See e.g. Reinhart and Rogo¤ (2009), Cerra and Saxena (2008), and IMF
(2009).



                                                3
ment a "local supply" e¤ect along the yield curve during the large-scale asset purchase
(LSAP) interventions starting in 2009, documenting both a substantial response of yields
to changes in supplies outstanding of a given maturity ("stock e¤ect") as well as to the
purchases themselves when they occurred ("‡ow e¤ect"). The segmentation of the Trea-
sury market suggested by their evidence would make it possible for QE programs to
help stabilize the economy in the face of a binding ZLB constraint, thus overcoming the
"neutrality" result that emerges in frictionless settings, and providing a possible inter-
pretation of our …ndings.3 Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) and Hamilton
and Wu (2012) provide related evidence of relative supply e¤ects on the yield curve.
      In a more recent paper, D’Amico and King (2017) use a VAR with sign restrictions
on survey forecasts and uncover strong and persistent e¤ects on in‡ation and output of
forward guidance policies, i.e. of policy interventions that rely on anticipated changes in
future short-term rates. Swanson (2017) provides evidence pointing to large e¤ects on the
yield curve, stock prices and exchange rates of both forward guidance and LSAPs during
the 2009-2015 ZLB period. Those e¤ects are shown to be comparable in magnitude to
the e¤ects of conventional policies in the pre-ZLB period.
      Our work is closer in spirit to papers that seek to evaluate, using di¤erent approaches,
some form of ZLB irrelevance hypothesis. Thus, Swanson and Williams (2014) es-
timate the time-varying sensitivity of yields to macroeconomic announcements using
high-frequency data, and conclude that long-term yields were essentially unconstrained
throughout 2008 to 2012, and short-term yields seemed to be constrained only by late
2011. Similarly, Campbell et al. (2012) provide evidence suggesting that forward guid-
ance announcements by the FOMC have been successful in moving interest rates that
are relevant for household’s’and …rms’decisions, despite the binding ZLB constraint.
      The recent work of Wu and Xia (2016) and Wu and Zhang (2017) is also closely
related to our paper. Thus, Wu and Xia (2016) propose a shadow rate indicator as a
  3
      See, e.g., Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) for a rigorous statement of that neutrality result.


                                                    4
measure of the monetary policy stance that also applies to binding ZLB periods. They
embed their shadow rate in an identi…ed FAVAR model similar to that in Bernanke
et al. (2005), and …nd that (exogenous) changes in the shadow rate have an impact
on the economy during the ZLB period similar to the Federal Funds rate in the pre-
ZLB period. A counterfactual simulation, in which the shadow rate is prevented from
becoming negative, points to large real e¤ects of the having a persistently negative
shadow rate during the ZLB period, which they attribute to the adoption unconventional
monetary policies. Wu and Zhang (2017) study a New Keynesian model where aggregate
demand is a function of a shadow rate which is not subject to a ZLB constraint and
which is determined according to a conventional Taylor-type rule. The equilibrium
dynamics are thus equivalent to those of the standard New Keynesian model without a
ZLB constraint. Wu and Zhang discuss alternative channels through which the central
bank can lower the shadow rate below zero, including purchases of assets by the central
bank (combined with a preferred habitat-like assumption), direct lending to …rms and/or
changes in tax rates on interest income. They conclude that a binding ZLB constraint
on the policy rate does not have to alter the responses of aggregate variables to supply
and demand shocks relative to periods with a non-binding ZLB, as long as the central
bank adjusts the shadow rate suitably.
   Christiano et al. (2015) estimate and analyze a DSGE model that incorporates
a truncated shadow rule similar to (4)-(5) below. They use the estimated model to
interpret the Great Recession. They attribute the bulk of the fall in output to a drop in
TFP and a rise in the cost of working capital, with counterfactual simulations without
a ZLB constraint suggesting that the latter played a small role in accounting for the
drop in output. That …nding contrasts with Gust et al. (2017) who carry out a similar
counterfactual experiment …nd that a 30 percent of the output contraction observed
during the Great Recession can be attributed to the constraint imposed by the ZLB
on the ability of monetary policy to stabilize the economy, with that constraint playing

                                           5
an even larger role in accounting for the slow recovery. Those estimates are, however,
subject to large uncertainty.4
        Our …ndings above point to the bene…ts of adopting a shadow rule with su¢ cient
inertia, which we interpret as a shortcut for UMPs. A number of papers have also uncov-
ered a similar result using alternative models and assumptions, including Reifschneider
and Roberts (2006), Kiley and Roberts (2017), and Bernanke et al. (2019).
        Throughout the paper we have maintained the assumption of an unchanged in‡ation
target, which we have taken as given. A branch of the literature has instead focused on
the determination of the optimal in‡ation rate in the presence of the ZLB constraint,
given the trade-o¤ between the distortions associated with a higher average in‡ation and
the bene…ts from it in the form of a smaller incidence of a binding ZLB. Contributions
to that branch of the literature include Coibion et al. (2012), Dordal-i-Carreras et al.
(2016), Blanco (2016), Kiley and Roberts (2017) and Andrade et al. (2019).


3         Macroeconomic Volatility and the Zero Lower Bound:
          Some Evidence
We start with an empirical assessment of the impact of the binding ZLB constraint
on U.S. macroeconomic volatility. We report statistics for GDP and total hours in
the nonfarm business sector (both in log …rst di¤erences), as well as three measures of
quarterly in‡ation based on the GDP de‡ator, the core CPI and the core PCE de‡ator,
respectively. All data are quarterly. The …rst column of Table 1 reports the standard
deviation of several macro variables over the ZLB episode (2009Q1-2015Q4) relative to
the period 1984Q1-2018Q2 but excluding the binding ZLB episode (henceforth, the no-
ZLB period). Note that 1984 is often viewed as the date marking the beginning of the
    4
    As the Gust et al. (2017) themselves acknowledge, their estimates "are subject to considerable
uncertainty as the 68 percent credible region does not exclude the possibility that the estimated e¤ ects of
the ZLB constraint were much smaller or much larger.”



                                                     6
Great Moderation. The second column reports an analogous statistic, but excluding
from both the no-ZLB and ZLB periods the observations corresponding to the Great
Recession (2008Q1-2009Q2, according to the NBER chronology).
      The previous statistics show little evidence of an increase in macro volatility during
the ZLB period. Many of the reported statistics are below one, suggesting if anything
a decline in volatility over that period. The previous statistics contrast starkly with
the volatility in the pre-1984 period relative to the same benchmark, shown in the last
column. In the latter case the estimated relative standard deviation is well above one
for all the variables considered.5
      Table 2 provides additional evidence pertaining to potential changes in volatility dur-
ing the ZLB episode. It reports the estimates from an OLS regression of the absolute
value of the deviation of each variable (i.e. GDP growth, hours growth and each of the
three in‡ation measures) from a period-speci…c mean, on a constant and a dummy vari-
able for the ZLB episode. Together with each point estimate, we report the correspond-
ing Newey-West standard errors, which are robust to the presence of heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation. As a robustness check we also report estimates from regressions
that include a dummy for the Great Recession in addition to the ZLB period. The
eventual impact of the binding ZLB on the volatility of each variable should be captured
by the estimated coe¢ cient of the ZLB dummy in the corresponding regression. As the
estimates reported in Table 2 indicate, there is no evidence of a signi…cant volatility
increase during the ZLB period in any of the variables considered, for any speci…cation.
By contrast, we …nd two instances of a signi…cant reduction in volatility during that
episode: this is the case for core CPI and core PCE in‡ation.
      The evidence reported in Tables 1 and 2 is re‡ected graphically in Figure 1 which
shows the evolution of GDP growth and in‡ation (based on the GDP de‡ator) over the
  5
    Changes in volatility between the Great Moderation and the pre-Great Moderation periods have
been uncovered by many authors (e.g., McConnell and Pérez-Quirós (2000), Stock and Watson (2002)).


                                                7
period 1984Q1-2018Q2, with the binding ZLB episode marked with a shaded area. It is
not obvious at all to the naked eye that the volatility of any of the two variables was
a¤ected one way or another during the ZLB episode.
    The evidence provided above contrasts with much of the literature on the e¤ects of
a binding ZLB constraint. The next section illustrates that contrast.


4      Macroeconomic Volatility and the Zero Lower Bound:
       Predictions of a Benchmark Model
Next we analyze the predictions of a baseline New Keynesian (NK) model regarding
the implications of a binding ZLB constraint for the equilibrium behavior of di¤erent
macroeconomic variables. Needless to say, we are not the …rst to carry out an analysis of
this kind. Examples of related earlier work include Christiano et al. (2011), Eggertsson
(2011), and Wieland (2019), among many others. In contrast with those papers our
focus here is on the implications of the binding ZLB constraint for macro volatility,
relative to "normal" times.
    Our model is fully standard so we restrict ourselves to describing its main elements.
We assume an in…nitely-lived representative household with expected utility given by
                              (1                        )
                               X                 Nt1+'
                           E0       0;t log Ct
                                t=0
                                                 1+'

where Ct is a CES function (with elasticity of substitution                      > 1) of the quantities
consumed of a continuum of di¤erentiated goods and Nt denotes hours worked. The
discount factor   0;t   is de…ned recursively by       0;t   =   0;t 1   expf zt g, for t = 1; 2; 3; :::with

 0;0   1; and where fzt g is a stochastic discount rate with two components:

                                          zt =     t   +     t


    The …rst component, f t g, follows a two-state Markov process, switching between a
"normal" value     > 0 and a low value       L   < 0. The realization of the latter, which we

                                                 8
interpret as a large adverse demand shock, will pull the short-term interest rate against
the ZLB constraint, given the assumed policy rule. The second component, f t g, is
meant to capture "regular" or "recurrent" demand shocks, and is assumed to follow an
AR(1) process

                                                   t   =     t 1   + "t
                                                                                         2
where        2 [0; 1), and f"t g is a white noise process with variance                      . For concreteness,
in the simulations below we restrict ourselves to shifts in the discount rate fzt g as a
source of aggregate ‡uctuations.
       The supply side is fully standard. We assume a continuum of identical monopolisti-
cally competitive …rms, each facing a constant Calvo probability                         of not being able to
reoptimize its price on any given period. Technology is given by Yt = Nt1                          . All output
is consumed. The labor market is perfectly competitive.
       The log-linearized equilibrium conditions describing the private sector of this econ-
omy are given by the familiar New Keynesian Phillips curve and dynamic IS equations:

                                             bt = Et fbt+1 g + ybt

                                ybt = Et fb
                                          yt+1 g           (it     Et f   t+1 g   zt )

where bt        t     and ybt     yt        y respectively denote the deviation of in‡ation and (log)
output from their steady state values, it is the short-term (one-period) nominal interest
                                       (1    )(1       )(1+') 6
rate,         expf    g and                  (1    +     )
                                                             .     It can be easily checked that under our
assumptions the natural (‡exible price) level of output is constant (and corresponds to
the steady state), while zt has the interpretation of the natural (‡exible price) rate of
interest.
   6
    See, e.g. Galí (2015) for a derivation. By allowing for a nonzero steady state in‡ation we are
implicitly assuming that prices are indexed to that variable. We also solved and simulated a fully non-
linear version of the model with price adjustment cost a-la-Rotemberg, obtaining very similar results
to the linearized version considered here.



                                                            9
     The model is closed by assuming a monetary policy rule. As an empirically plausible
baseline we consider the "truncated" version of a Taylor-type rule with inertia, used in
a variety of applications:

                        it = max 0;       i it 1   + (1     i )(   +   +     bt +     y    ybt )            (1)

     Below we also analyze the equilibrium behavior of a long-term interest rate. We
de…ne the latter as the yield on a pure discount bond with stochastic maturity. More
precisely, the long-term bond is assumed to mature each period with probability 1                          , in
which case it pays one unit of the numéraire (with no coupon payment otherwise). The
(normalized) yield of that bond, denoted by iLt , can be shown to satisfy the following
di¤erence equation in equilibrium (and up to a …rst order approximation):

                                      iLt = (1            )it +    Et fiLt+1 g

     We adopt a quarterly calibration of the model. We assume                             = 0:75, which implies
an average price duration of four quarters. The coe¢ cients of the policy rule are set
to     = 1:5,       y   = 0:5, and    i   = 0:7, in line with the empirical evidence. Steady state
in‡ation    is set to 0:005, consistent with an (annual) in‡ation target of 2 percent. We
assume     = 0:25 and ' = 1, both conventional values. We set                         = 6 implying a ‡exible
price markup of 20 percent. We assume                       = 0:8 and            = 0:001. Under the previous
settings, the standard deviation of quarterly output growth when the ZLB is not binding
is about 0:7 percent, consistent with that of U.S. GDP growth over the 1984Q1-2008Q4
period. We set          = 0:005, implying an average real rate of 2 percent in "normal" times.
We assume       L   =     0:01, so that a large adverse demand shock implies a natural rate of
minus 4 percent in annual terms (and in the absence of other shocks). The probability of
remaining in the "normal" regime is 0:994, while the probability of remaining in the low
demand regime is 0:66. These values imply that ZLB episodes occurs on average once
every 140 quarters, with each episode expected to last 3 quarters. Under the previous

                                                          10
settings, the contemporaneous impact on output of a large adverse demand shock (i.e.
a Markov transition to    L)   is about minus 4 percent, which roughly corresponds to
the observed decline in U.S. GDP over the Great Recession. Most importantly for our
purposes, the realization of a large adverse demand shock generally brings the policy
rate down to zero, where it remains until the "normal" Markov state is restored again.
Finally, we set   = 0:975, consistent with an expected maturity for the long-term bond
of 40 quarters.
   Similarly to Fernández-Villaverde et. al. (2015), we solve the model using a global
projection method to accurately account for the non-linearities associated with the pres-
ence of the occasionally binding ZLB constraint. In particular, we approximate the
policy functions for in‡ation, output, and interest rates with Chebyshev polynomials
(or splines) through a collocation method on a discrete grid for the four state variables
(lagged output and interest rate, and the two components of the demand shocks).
   Figure 2 shows the dynamic responses of several macro variables to a negative         t

shock, under the two possible states of the economy, namely, "normal" times (i.e. when
the ZLB is non-binding, shown in blue circled lines) and under a binding ZLB regime
(shown in red lines with diamonds). The …gure illustrates clearly the destabilizing role
of a binding ZLB in the face of an adverse demand shock, relative to "normal" times:
the inability to bring down the policy rate leads to much larger decline of output and
in‡ation. Note that the long-term rate responds in opposite directions to the negative
demand shock under the two scenarios. It declines in normal times, re‡ecting the expec-
tations of a persistently lower short-term rate. On the other hand, when the negative
demand shock hits the economy during a binding ZLB episode, the long rate increases,
re‡ecting the expectations of a higher path of short-term rates in the future, when the
ZLB stops being binding, since in that case the economy would experience higher output
growth in its transition to the new steady state, having started from a lower output level
due to the current negative demand shock. Note also that the contractionary e¤ect of

                                           11
a expected higher nominal short-term rates (re‡ected in the higher long-term nominal
rate) is further ampli…ed by the de‡ationary expectations caused by the shock, leading
to an even larger increase in the long-term real rate (not shown).
      Figure 3 displays the time series for output growth and in‡ation around the time of
a large adverse demand shock, based on a simulation of the calibrated model described
above. The timing of the large adverse shock and its eventual undoing is indicated with
a vertical line. The "tunnel" within which the time series evolves represents, for each
period, a 95% con…dence interval for the realizations of the plotted variable across 1000
simulations. The …gure illustrates the increase in the volatility of output and in‡ation
during the binding ZLB period relative to the earlier and later periods when the ZLB
constraint is not binding. The model’s predictions in that regard seem to con‡ict with
the patterns of volatility observed in the U.S. economy discussed in the previous section.
Tables 3 and 4, discussed below, formalize that visual intuition.
      Table 3 reports the mean, across 1000 model simulations, of the ratio of the estimated
standard deviation of output growth and in‡ation over the binding ZLB episodes rela-
tive to normal times, together with a 95% con…dence interval. In computing that ratio
we use simulations of the calibrated model for which the realized length of the binding
ZLB period is equal to that observed in the recent U.S. episode, namely, 28 quarters. As
the values reported in the Table make clear, and in a way consistent with the impulse
responses of Figure 2 and the evidence in Figure 3, the binding ZLB episode is charac-
terized by a much larger estimated volatility on average, especially when we exclude the
Markov transition observations from the computation of the standard deviation (right
column).
      Table 4 shows the estimated coe¢ cients, using simulated data, from a regression of
the absolute value of (demeaned) output growth and in‡ation on a ZLB dummy, with
and without a control dummy for the two periods when a Markov transition occurs.7
  7
      As in Table 3 we allow for a speci…c mean during the binding ZLB episode.


                                                  12
The regression uses time series generated by 1000 simulations of the calibrated model.
Each time series has 138 observations, with a binding ZLB episode taking place between
periods 101 and 128, i.e. a pattern that corresponds to that observed in the empirical
sample period used in the previous section. In addition to the mean coe¢ cient estimates,
we report the 95% con…dence band across simulations (shown in brackets), as well as
the fraction of simulations for which we reject the null of a zero coe¢ cient on the
ZLB dummy at the 5 percent signi…cance level, using the Newey-West estimate of the
standard error. Note that the mean (as well as the 95 percent con…dence band) of
the estimated coe¢ cients on the ZLB dummy are systematically positive, re‡ecting
the increase in volatility associated with ZLB episodes. This is true for both output
growth and in‡ation, and independently of whether we control for the periods with
"large shocks," corresponding to the Markov transitions. The previous …nding contrasts
with the estimates of the corresponding regressions using U.S. data and reported in Table
2, and where most of the estimated coe¢ cients on the ZLB dummy were insigni…cant,
with the exception of a few instances in which they were signi…cantly negative (thus
pointing to a reduction in volatility). Finally, note that the large fraction of simulations
(ranging between 86 and 98 percent, depending on the variable and speci…cation) for
which the null of no change in volatility during the ZLB episode is rejected at the 5
percent signi…cance level. The previous …nding suggests that the relatively short ZLB
period is not an obstacle for the change in volatility test to have a high power, when the
data are generated by our baseline calibrated model.


5    Did the Binding ZLB A¤ect the Economy’s Re-
     sponse to Shocks?
In the present section we use a structural vector autoregression model with time-varying
coe¢ cients (TVC-SVAR), to estimate the dynamic responses of a number of macro


                                            13
variables to several identi…ed aggregate shocks. The main motivation for using a model
with time-varying coe¢ cients lies in our interest in assessing the extent to which the
binding ZLB episode implied a change in the way the economy responded to di¤erent
shocks. In addition, the use of a TVC-SVAR provides a ‡exible speci…cation which
allows for other structural changes that the U.S. economy may have experienced over
the sample period used in the estimation.8

5.1      Our Empirical Approach

Let xt = [ (yt        nt ); nt ;   t;   iLt ]0 where yt is (log) output in the nonfarm business
sector, nt denotes (log) hours of all persons in the nonfarm business sector,                t   is GDP
de‡ator in‡ation and iLt is the 10-year Treasury bond yield. Both output and hours
are normalized by civilian population. All data are for the U.S. economy, at a quarterly
frequency, and cover the period 1953Q2 through 2015Q4.9 We assume that the evolution
of xt can be described by the following TVC-VAR model

                    xt = A0;t + A1;t xt     1   + A2;t xt   2   + ::: + Ap;t xt   p   + ut          (2)

where A0;t is a vector of time-varying intercepts, Ai;t , for i = 1; :::; p are matrices of
time-varying coe¢ cients, and ut is a Gaussian white noise vector process with covariance
matrix    t.   We assume the reduced form innovations ut are a linear transformation of
the underlying structural shocks "t given by

                                                ut    Qt " t
   8
     These may include the change in the cyclical behavior of productivity emphasized in Galí and
Gambetti (2009), as well as the change in monetary policy starting with Paul Volcker’s tenure at the
Fed uncovered in Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2000)
   9
     We construct our dataset using the following time series drawn from the FRED database: real out-
put per hour of all persons (nonfarm business sector) (OPHNFB); hours of all persons (nonfarm busi-
ness sector) (HOANBS); civilian noninstitutional population (CNP16OV); GDP de‡ator (GDPDEF);
10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate (GS10).




                                                     14
where Ef"t "0t g = I and Ef"t "0t k g = 0 for all t and k = 1; 2; 3; :::: It follows that
Qt Q0t =   t.

   Following Primiceri (2005), we assume that the coe¢ cients of the autoregressive
matrices fAi;t g and the covariance matrix           t   follow random walks, as described in
detail in the Appendix. The resulting reduced form model is estimated as in Del Negro
and Primiceri (2013). Given the estimated reduced form VAR for any given period t we
recover the reduced form M A representation

                                    xt =   t    + Bt (L)ut

   The identifying restrictions assumed below allow us to determine the linear mapping
Qt . Given the latter, we can write the structural M A representation as

                                    xt =    t   + Ct (L)"t

where Ct (L)     Bt (L)Qt describes the dynamic responses of the economy in period t.
The possible changes over time in those responses are the focus of our analysis. Next
we turn to the determination of Qt , i.e. to the issue of identi…cation.

5.2    Identi…cation

We assume ‡uctuations in xt are driven by four structural shocks, represented by the
elements of vector "t : technology, demand, monetary policy and temporary supply shock.
We use a mix of long run and sign restrictions in order to identify those shocks, as follows:
(i) the technology shock is the only one with a permanent e¤ect on labor productivity;
(ii) a demand shock generates a positive comovement of prices, GDP and the long-term
interest rate; (iii) a monetary policy shock generates a positive comovement between
prices and GDP, but a negative one between the previous variables and the long-term
interest rate; (iv) a transitory supply shock (e.g. a markup shock) implies a negative
comovement of in‡ation and GDP. All the restrictions on the sign of comovements refer

                                                15
to a one-year horizon. The long run restriction used to identify technology was …rst
proposed in Galí (1999). The sign restrictions are consistent with the predictions of a
standard New Keynesian model under a plausible policy rule, and are generally satis…ed
by estimated DSGE models (e.g. Smets and Wouters (2007)). In the Appendix we
discuss how the previous identi…cation strategy is implemented in practice.

5.3    Evidence

Figure 4a displays the estimated impulse responses of output, in‡ation, and the long-rate
(in both nominal and real terms to the four shocks considered. The responses plotted
correspond to the averages of the estimated responses for the pre-ZLB period 2002Q1-
2008Q4 (displayed with blue circled lines) and the ZLB period 2009Q1-2015Q4 (red lines
with diamonds). Note that both subsamples contain 28 periods. We also display 68 and
95 percent con…dence bands for the average impulse responses in the pre-ZLB period,
based on 1000 draws from the posterior distribution of the estimated model.
   The di¤erences in the estimated responses between the two periods are very small,
for all variables and shocks considered. In particular, the estimated responses of output
and in‡ation for the two periods lie almost on top of each other. Most importantly,
note that the lack of a signi…cant gap between the responses in the two periods carries
over to both the nominal and real long-term yields, which are arguably more relevant in
the determination of aggregate demand than the short term nominal rate (which does
not adjust during the binding ZLB period). While the response of both the nominal
and real long-term rate over the ZLB period appears slightly muted relative to the
pre-ZLB period, the di¤erence is quantitatively very small and statistically insigni…cant.
Figure 4b displays the corresponding impulse response di¤erentials with their associated
con…dence bands. One cannot reject the null of a zero di¤erential response for any
variable, even at a 32 percent signi…cance level.
   The …nding of similar responses of the long term rate across the two subsample

                                           16
periods is consistent with our "irrelevance hypothesis." It suggests that through the
use of unconventional policies like forward guidance and quantitative easing the Fed
managed to steer long-term rates "as in normal times," in response to shocks hitting
the economy during the ZLB period, thus leading to similar responses of output and
in‡ation.
       A caveat that might be raised regarding the evidence reported in Figures 4a and 4b is
that the estimated impulse responses may be somehow distorted by the Great Recession,
which overlaps with both the pre-ZLB and ZLB periods. Figure 4c reports estimates
of average impulse responses for the pre-ZLB and ZLB periods, but excluding from the
respective averages the estimated responses for the Great Recession quarters (i.e. those
between 2008Q1 and 2009Q2). None of the qualitative …ndings discussed above seem to
be a¤ected by the exclusion of that episode.
       An additional potential caveat is that the methodology used may not be able capture
changes in dynamics that take place suddenly, as opposed to gradually over time. Figure
4d seeks to dispel that concern by comparing the average impulse responses over the
ZLB period with the median estimated average response across 500 draws, with each
draw corresponding to a sample period of consecutive 28 observations, drawn randomly
from the set f1984Q1:1990Q4,...,2002Q1:2008Q4g.10 The resulting estimates are once
again very similar across the two periods, suggesting a relatively uniform response over
the entire post-1984 period.
       We conclude this section by providing an alternative perspective on the "irrelevance
hypothesis" and the possible role played by the long-term interest rate in getting around
  10
     The average irf are computed as follows. The pre-zlb sample has 100 quarters 1984Q1-2008Q4.
  1. Draw an integer between 1 and 78 with equal probabilitites over the set of possible starting periods.
Call it t0 (j).
  2. Take a draw from the distribution of IRFs (at all the horizons) from t0 (j) up to t0 (j) + 27, call it
x(t; j) with t = t0 (j); :::; t0 (j) + 27 and j = 1; 2; :::; 500 (number of draws).
                                                                                    Pt0 (j)+27
  3. Compute the average IRF over the sample period drawn, x(t) = (1=28) t=t              0 (j)
                                                                                                x(t; j)
  4. Repeat 1-3, 500 times. Compute the median and the percentiles of the corresponding x(t)s.



                                                    17
the ZBL constraint. Consider the following (admittedly ad-hoc) descriptive "rule" for
the long-term interest rate,

                         iLt =   0   +      L
                                         i it 1   + (1        i )[   t   +   y   yt ] + "m
                                                                                         t                 (3)

where f"m
        t g is interpreted as an exogenous monetary policy shock. We estimate (3) and

try to uncover changes in the coe¢ cients on in‡ation and output growth by including as
right-hand variables multiplicative dummies for the binding ZLB period and examining
their signi…cance. Furthermore, and in order to overcome the likely endogeneity of
the regressors with respect to the policy shock f"m
                                                  t g, we estimate (3) using the time

series for fiLt ;   t;   yt g, obtained after subtracting from each of them the corresponding
component associated with the monetary policy shock in the estimated TVC-SVAR
model described above.11 Under our assumptions, the resulting "cleansed" variables
should be uncorrelated with the monetary policy shock, so that (3) can be estimated
consistently using OLS. Table 5 reports the corresponding estimated coe¢ cients, using
two alternative speci…cations (with and without output growth in the rule). The reported
estimates of the in‡ation and output growth coe¢ cients point to a strong and highly
signi…cant response to both variables. In particular, the estimate of                        is well above one,
implying that the estimated rule satis…es the so-called Taylor principle. Most interesting,
however, is the insigni…cance of the estimated coe¢ cient on the multiplicative dummies
associated with the binding ZLB period, suggesting the absence of a discernable change
in the systematic response of the long-term interest rate to in‡ation and output growth
as a consequence of the ZLB constraint becoming binding.
  11
       Note that the monetary polcy shock component for the ith element of xt element is given by
Ci3    m
 t (L)"t .




                                                         18
6       Reconciling Theory and Evidence
The above empirical …ndings lend support, overall, to the irrelevance hypothesis. In
addition, they suggest that the implementation of unconventional monetary policies
during the binding ZLB episode made it possible to steer the long-term interest rate
"as in normal times" in response to developments in the economy. The absence of
unconventional policies in the baseline New Keynesian model analyzed in section 3 may
thus account for the discrepancy between our evidence and the model predictions.
     In the present section we study whether modifying the speci…cation of monetary
policy in our baseline model can help reconcile theory and evidence. In particular, and
following Christiano et al. (2015), Gust et al. (2017) and Andrade et al. (2018), among
others, we replace the baseline interest rate rule (1) with the following shadow rate rule:

                                               it = max[0; ist ]                       (4)

where ist is a shadow interest rate which evolves according to

                       ist =      s
                               i it 1   + (1        i )(   +   +   bt +   y   ybt )    (5)

     Figure 5 displays the dynamic responses to an adverse demand shock (i.e. a negative

 t   realization) under the previous rule, with all the parameters of the model (including
the coe¢ cients in the rule) calibrated as before. Impulse responses are displayed under
the two regimes, characterized by a binding and a nonbinding ZLB. As the …gure makes
clear the responses of output and in‡ation under the two regimes are now very similar,
despite the large discrepancy in the responses of the short-term rate (also displayed
in the …gure) due to the central bank’s inability to lower that rate when the ZLB is
binding. By contrast, the central bank manages to bring down the long-term nominal
rate in response to the adverse demand shock, albeit not as much as under the non-
binding ZLB regime, and despite the lack of an adjustment in the short-term rule. The


                                                      19
channel through which the shadow rate rule (5) manages to stabilize the economy "as
in normal times" is one typically associated with forward guidance policies: the inertial
term in (5), which is not bounded below, implies that the short-term rate will be kept
"lower for longer" relative to the baseline rule (1) in the aftermath of a binding ZLB
episode, with the expected length of that additional stimulus being commensurate to
the size of the decline in in‡ation and output.
   Tables 6 and 7, based on simulations of the calibrated New Keynesian model with the
shadow rate rule in place, report evidence on the implied changes in volatility during the
binding ZLB period, in a way analogous to Tables 3 and 4 for the baseline rule. Note that
the estimates of the standard deviation of output growth and in‡ation in the binding
ZLB period relative to the nonbinding ZLB period, shown in Table 6, are noticeably lower
than those in Table 3, re‡ecting the gains in stability from the adoption of the shadow
rate rule. Furthermore the reported relative standard deviations are comparable to some
of the estimates in Table 1, obtained using actual U.S. data. Similarly, the estimated
volatility regressions reported in Table 7 show very limited evidence of an increase in
volatility during the binding ZLB episodes, with the implied fraction of simulations
for which the null of no change in volatility is rejected at the 5 percent signi…cance
level being very small for most speci…cations (with a largest value of 49 percent). The
previous …ndings are visually captured by Figure 6, which displays the time series for
output growth and in‡ation around the time of a large adverse demand shock, based on
a simulation of our calibrated model under the shadow rate rule. In contrast to Figure
3, which was based on simulations under the baseline rule, neither the volatility of the
simulated series nor width of the "tunnel" appear to change in a discernible way during
the binding ZLB episode (the period between the two vertical lines).




                                           20
7     Concluding Comments
The ZLB irrelevance hypothesis implies that the economy’s performance is not a¤ected
by a binding ZLB constraint. The objective of the present paper was to evaluate that hy-
pothesis for the recent ZLB episode experienced by the U.S. economy (2009Q1-2015Q4).
We have focused on two dimensions of performance that were likely to have experienced
the impact of a binding ZLB: (i) the volatility of macro variables and (ii) the economy’s
response to shocks. Using a variety of empirical approaches, we …nd little evidence
against the irrelevance hypothesis, with our estimates suggesting that macro volatility
did not increase signi…cantly as a result of the binding ZLB constraint. Similarly, the
responses of output, in‡ation and the long-term interest rate to di¤erent shocks do not
appear to have been much a¤ected by that constraint, possibly as a result of the adop-
tion and …ne-tuning of unconventional monetary policies. Our empirical …ndings can
be reconciled with the predictions of a simple New Keynesian model under the assump-
tion of a shadow interest rate rule, which can be viewed as a capturing the e¤ects of
unconventional policies.
    The present paper contributes, albeit indirectly, to a growing literature that aims
to evaluate empirically the e¤ectiveness of unconventional monetary policies during the
recent ZLB episode. We interpret our …ndings as being consistent with (though not a
proof of) the hypothesis that the unconventional monetary policies implemented during
the ZLB years may have succeeded, at least to some extent, at getting around the
constraints imposed by the ZLB on conventional monetary policy.
    Under that hypothesis, the unusual magnitude of Great Recession and the slowness
of the subsequent recovery would be just the consequence of the large size and high
persistence, as well as the …nancial nature, of the shock(s) that impinged on the U.S.
economy during that episode, with no special amplifying role attributed to the binding
ZLB constraint.


                                           21
References
   Andrade, Philippe, Jordi Galí, Hervé Le Bihan, Julien Matheron (2018): "The Op-
timal In‡ation Target and the Natural Rate of Interest," unpublished manuscript.
   Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin and Piotr Eliasz (2005): "Measuring the E¤ects
of Monetary Policy: A Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 387-422.
   Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019): "Monetary
Policy Strategies for a Low Rate Environment," Finance and Economics Discussion
Series 2019-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2019.009.
   Blanco, Andrés (2016): "Optimal In‡ation Target in an Economy with Menu Costs
and Zero Lower Bound," unpublished manuscript.
   Campbell, Je¤rey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justini-
ano (2012): "Macroeconomc E¤ects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 1-54.
   Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and
Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,”Quarterly Journal of Economics,
vol. 105, issue 1, 147-180.
   Cerra, Valerie and Sweta C. Saxena (2008): "Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Eco-
nomic Recovery," American Economic Review, 98(1), 439-457.
   Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2011): "When is the
Government Spending Multiplier Large?," Journal of Political Economy 119(1), 78-121.
   Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt (2015): "Under-
standing the Great Recession," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1),
110-167.
   Coibion, Olivier Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland (2012): "The Optimal


                                          22
Rate of In‡ation in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise their In‡ation
Target in Light of the Zero Lower Bound," Review of Economic Studies, vol 20, 1-36.
   D’Amico, Stefania and Thomas B. King (2013): "Flow and Stock E¤ects of Large
Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply," Journal of
Financial Economics 108(2), 425-448.
   D’Amico, Stefania and Thomas B. King (2017): "What does anticipated Monetary
Policy Do?" unpublished manuscript.
   Del Negro, Marco and Giorgio Primiceri (2013): ”Time-Varying Structural Vector
Autoregressions and Monetary Policy: A Corrigendum” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Sta¤ Report No. 619.
   Dordal-i-Carreras, Marc, Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland
(2016): "Infrequent but Long-Lived Zero-Bound Episodes and the Optimal Rate of In-
‡ation," Annual Review of Economics,
   Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford (2003): “The Zero Bound on Interest
Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1,
139-211.
   Eggertsson, Gauti (2011): "What Fiscal Policy is E¤ective at Zero Interest Rates?"
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2010, 59-112.
   Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Grey Gordon, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, and Juan F.
Rubio-Ramírez (2015): "Nonlinear adventures at the zero lower bound," Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control, 57(C), 182-204.
   Galí, Jordi (1999): "Technology, Employment and the Business Cycle: Do Technol-
ogy Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?," American Economic Review 89, 249-271.
   Galí, Jordi (2015): Monetary Policy, In‡ation and the Business Cycle. An Introduc-
tion to the New Keynesian Framework and its Applications, Second Edition, Princeton
University Press.
   Galí, Jordi, J. David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés (2003): “Technology Shocks and

                                          23
Monetary Policy: Assessing the Fed’s Performance,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
vol. 50, no. 4., 723-743.
   Galí, Jordi and Luca Gambetti (2009): "On the Sources of the Great Moderation,"
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1 (1), 26-57.
   Gust, Christopher, Edward Herbst, David López-Salido and Matthew E. Smith
(2017): "The Empirical Implications of the Interest-Rate Lower Bound," American Eco-
nomic Review 107(7), 1971-2006.
   Hamilton, James and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012): "The E¤ectiveness of alternative
Monetary Policy Tools in Zero Lower Bound Environments," Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 44 (s1), 3-46.
   International Monetary Fund (2009): World Economic Outlook, April issue, Wash-
ington, D.C.
   Kiley, Michael T. and John M. Roberts (2017): "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest
Rate World," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol.2017, no.1, 317-389.
   Krishnamurthy, Arvind and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2011): "The E¤ects of Quan-
titative Easing on Interest Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 43, 215-287.
   McConnell, Margaret M. and Gabriel Pérez-Quirós (2000): "Output Fluctuations
in the U.S.: What has changed since the 1980s?" American Economic Review 90(5),
1464-1476.
   Ou, Shengliang (2018):
   Primiceri, Giorgio E. (2005): "Time Varying Structural Vector Autoregressions and
Monetary Policy," Review of Economic Studies, 72, pp. 821-852.
   Reifschneider, David L. and John M. Roberts (2006): “Expectations Formation and
the E¤ectiveness of Strategies for Limiting theConsequences of the Zero Bound on In-
terest Rates,”Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 314-37.
   Reinhart, Carmen M. and Ken S. Rogo¤ (2009): "The Aftermath of Financial
Crises," American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99:2, 466–472

                                         24
   Rubio-Ramirez, J., D. Waggoner and T. Zha (2010):"Structural Vector Autoregres-
sions: Theory of Identi…cation and Algorithms for Inference," The Review of Economic
Studies, 77: 665-696.
   Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2007): "Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
a Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review, vol. 97 (3), 586-606.
   Stock, James and Mark Watson (2002): "Has the U.S. Business Cycle Changed and
Why?," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol.17, 159-218.
   Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams (2014): “Measuring the E¤ect of the Zero
Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates,” American Economic Re-
view, 104 (10), 3154–3185.
   Swanson, Eric T. (2018): "The Federal Reserve is Not Very Constrained by the Lower
Bound on Nominal Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming
   Wieland, Johannes (2018): "Are Negative Supply Shocks Expansionary at the Zero
Lower Bound?," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
   Wu, Jing Cynthia and Fan Dora Xia (2016): "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact
of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money Credit and Banking
48(2-3), 253-291.
   Wu, Jing Cynthia and Zhang (2017): “A Shadow Rate New Keynesian Model,”
NBER working paper 22856.




                                         25
      APPENDIX

      Let       t   = vec(A0t ) where At = [A0;t ; A1;t :::; Ap;t ] and vec( ) is the column stacking
operator. We assume                    t   evolves over time according to the following equation:

                                                                     t   =   t 1   + !t                                                         (6)

where ! t is Gaussian white noise vector process with covariance matrix                                                           .
      Time variation of                t   is modeled in the standard way. Let                                      t   = Ft Dt F0t , where Ft is
lower triangular, with ones on the main diagonal, and Dt a diagonal matrix. The vector
                                                                     1=2
containing the diagonal elements of Dt , denoted by                                                  t,   is assumed to evolve according
to the process
                                                            log      t   = log     t 1    +     t:                                              (7)

Moreover let             i;t    denote the column vector with the non-zero elements of the (i + 1)-th
row of Ft 1 . We assume

                                                                   i;t   =   i;t 1   +    i;t                                                   (8)

where       t   and       i;t     are Gaussian white noise vector processes with zero mean and (con-
stant) covariance matrices                        and              i,    respectively. We further assume that                           i;t   is in-
dependent of              j;t ,   for all j 6= i, and that ! t , "t ,                           t   and       i;t   (for all i) are mutually
independent. Estimation is carried out as in Del Negro and Primiceri (2013).12
      Reduced form impulse response functions can be derived from the local moving av-
erage (MA) representation of the model. First let us consider the companion form
representation of eq. (2):
                                                            x          ~ tx
                                                            ~t = ~ t + A  ~t          1    ~t
                                                                                          +u

      ~t
where x               [x0t ; x0t 1 ; :::; x0t           0
                                                              ~t
                                                            , u          [u0t ; 0; :::; 0]0 ; ~ t                                    ~ t is the
                                                                                                            [A00;t ; 0; :::; 0]0 and A
                                                p+1 ]

corresponding companion matrix. The (local) time-varying reduced form M A represen-
 12
      We refer the reader to Galí and Gambetti (2016) for details.


                                                                             26
tation of the model is given by
                                              X
                                              1
                                  xt = bt +         Bt;j ut   j
                                              j=0

              ~ jt ]n;n , for j = 1; 2; ::, where [M ]n;n represents the …rst n rows and n
where Bt;j = [A
columns of any matrix M , and where Bt;0 = I.
   The identi…cation is implemented as follows. Let

                                              1  00
                                   Hnt =
                                              0 Htn     1


where 0 is n-dimensional column vector of zeros, Hnt and Htn      1
                                                                      are orthogonal matrices
of dimension n n and n 1 n 1 respectively. To impose the restrictions we follow the
standard algorithm of Rubio-Ramirez, Waggoner and Zha (2010). We draw Htn              1
                                                                                           using
the QR decomposition and compute the potential structural impulse response functions
as in (??) with Qt = Bt (1) 1 St Hnt , where St is the Cholesky factor of Bt           0
                                                                                    t Bt .   We
retain the draw if the sign restrictions are satis…ed. We collect a total of 500 draws at
each point in time. With no loss of generality we order the shocks as follows: technology,
demand, monetary policy and supply.




                                              27
                             Table 1
                        Relative Volatility
                                 ZLB                Pre-84

        GDP                    0:92     0:89         2:19
        Hours                  1:32     0:74         1:60
        GDP De‡ator            1:02     0:88         3:11
        Core CPI               0:52     0:54         3:03
        Core PCE               0:52     0:50         2:52

        Great Recession?        yes      no           no


    Standard deviations are computed relative to the NO-ZLB period given by
1984Q1-2008Q4 and 2016Q1-2018Q2. The ZLB period is 2009Q1-2015Q4. When
the Great Recession is excluded the pre-ZLB sample period ends in 2007Q4 and
the ZLB period starts in 2009Q3. The pre-84 period starts in 1960Q1 and ends in
1983Q4.
                                   Table 2
                           Volatility Regressions
                                  CON ST ZLB                GR

               GDP                    0:41       0:01
                                      (0:04)     (0:05)
                                      0:37        0:01     0:94
                                      (0:03)     (0:05)    (0:19)
               Hours                  0:47       0:05
                                      (0:05)     (0:16)
                                      0:42        0:00     1:39
                                      (0:04)     (0:09)    (0:42)
               GDP De‡ator            0:70       0:03
                                      (0:07)     (0:12)
                                      0:69       0:02      0:37
                                      (0:07)     (0:11)    (0:26)
               Core CPI               0:91        0:47
                                      (0:10)     (0:13)
                                      0:91        0:47       0:05
                                      (0:10)      (0:13)   (0:13)
               Core PCE               0:83        0:41
                                      (0:08)     (0:10)
                                      0:83        0:42     0:13
                                      (0:09)     (0:10)    (0:23)




    The Table reports the estimated coe¢ cients from an OLS regression of the
absolute value of the deviation of each variable’s growth rate from its mean, on a
constant and a dummy for the ZLB period (2009Q1-2015Q4), with and without a
control dummy for the Great Recession period (2008Q1-2009Q2). The sample pe-
riod is 1984Q1-2018Q2. Standard errors obtained using the Newey-West estimator
(4 lags).
                             Table 3
                 Relative Volatility: Simulations
                    Baseline Interest Rate Rule

             Output                       1:49          2:29
                                        [0:86;2:37]   [1:69;2:95]


             In‡ation                     1:94          2:39
                                        [0:91;3:38]   [1:02;3:86]


             Markov transitions?           yes           no


    For each variable the Table reports the mean of the standard deviation in the
ZLB period relative to the no-ZLB period over 1000 model simulations under the
baseline interest rate rule. The no-ZLB period is given by the …rst 100 observations
and the last 8 observations in the simulation. The ZLB period corresponds to the
intermediate 28 observations. 95% con…dence intervals reported in brackets.
                                 Table 4
                   Volatility Regressions: Simulations
                        Baseline Interest Rate Rule
                         CON ST      ZLB       MT   %REJ

              Output        0:32          0:35                       0:86
                           [0:27;0:36]   (0:16;0:56)
                            0:26          0:34          4:15         0:98
                           [0:23;0:3]    [0:19;0:50]   [3:34;4:92]


              In‡ation      0:27          0:47                       0:98
                           [0:23;0:32]   [0:21;0:79]
                            0:26          0:47          0:61         0:98
                           [0:22;0:30]   [0:22;0:79]   [0:02;1:31]




    For each variable the Table reports the mean, over 1000 model simulations
under the baseline interest rate rule, of the estimated coe¢ cients from an OLS
regression of the absolute value of the demeaned growth rate of each variable on a
constant, a dummy indicating the ZLB period and, when it applies, a dummy for
the two periods when a Markov transition occurs (M T ). 95% con…dence bands
reported in brackets. %REJ is the fraction of simulations for which the estimated
coe¢ cient on the ZLB dummy is positive and statistically signi…cant using the
Newey-West estimate of the standard error (4 lags).
                                Table 5
                 Estimated Long-Term Interest Rate Rule

            t                         2:42     2:82     2:26      2:61
                                      (0:61)   (0:82)   (0:23)    (0:32)
            t    ZLBt                   0:08     0:01    0:17       0:45
                                      (0:08)   (0:06)   (0:06)    (0:50)
            yt                                          3:52      4:43
                                                        (0:42)    (0:58)
            yt ZLBt                                       0:16      0:60
                                                         (0:08)   (0:89)


            0   and   i   dummies?     Yes      No       Yes       No



    The Table reports the OLS estimates of the long term rate rule described in the
text, with multiplicative dummies for the binding ZLB period, and using the non-
monetary component of the long-term interest rate, output growth and in‡ation
obtained from the estimated TVC-SVAR model.
                                    Table 6
                        Relative Volatility: Simulations
                                Shadow Rate Rule

                    Output                        1:01         1:50
                                                [0:65;1:9]    [1:03;1:94]


                    In‡ation                      0:82           1:0
                                                [0:50;1:38]   [0:59;1:41]


                    Markov transitions?            yes           no


    For each variable the Table reports the mean of the standard deviation in the
ZLB period relative to the pre-ZLB period over 1000 model simulations under the
baseline interest rate rule. The no-ZLB period is given by the …rst 100 observations
and the last 8 observations in the simulation. The ZLB period corresponds to the
intermediate 28 observations.. 95% con…dence intervals reported in brackets.
                                 Table 7
                   Volatility Regressions: Simulations
                             Shadow Rate Rule
                          CON ST     ZLB      MT     %REJ

            Output           0:31             0:1                      0:15
                            [0:28;0:35]   ( 0:03;0:27)
                             0:26           0:14          3:11         0:49
                            [0:23;0:3]     [0:02;0:26]   [2:66;3:6]


            In‡ation         0:28            0:03                      0:07
                            [0:24;0:32]   [ 0:06;0:14]
                             0:26            0:05         1:37         0:16
                            [0:22;0:29]   [ 0:04;0:14]   [1:07;1:69]




    For each variable the Table reports the mean over 1000 simulations under
the shadow rate rule of the estimated coe¢ cients from an OLS regression of the
absolute value of the demeaned growth rate of the variable on a constant, a dummy
indicating the ZLB period and, when it applies, a dummy for the period of a
Markov transition. 95% con…dence bands reported in brackets. %REJ is the
fraction of simulations for which the estimated coe¢ cient on the ZLB dummy is
positive and statistically signi…cant using the Newey-West estimate of the standard
error (4 lags).
