NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MULTINATIONALS, OFFSHORING AND THE DECLINE OF U.S. MANUFACTURING
Christoph E. Boehm
Aaron Flaaen
Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
Working Paper 25824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25824

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019

We would like to thank Andrei Levchenko, Dan Ackerberg, Pol Antras, Rafael Dix-Carneiro,
Kyle Handley, Brian Kovak, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Linda Tesar and Felix Tintelnot as well as
seminar participants at the NBER SI, NBER ITI spring meetings, CEPR-ESSIM, Michigan,
Princeton, Virginia, Austin, CREI, UCSD, Yale, Colby, Cambridge, University of Oregon,
UIUC, BU, Tufts, IIES, Uppsala, Warwick, Notre Dame, WCTW, SED-AM and UIBE/
Georgetown for valuable suggestions. We especially thank our discussants Lindsey Oldenski,
Kei-Mu Yi and Susan Houseman. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the Board of
Governors, or its research staff. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Christoph E. Boehm, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Multinationals, Offshoring and the Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
Christoph E. Boehm, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
NBER Working Paper No. 25824
May 2019
JEL No. F14,F16,F23,F4,F6
ABSTRACT
We provide new facts about the role of multinationals in the decline in U.S. manufacturing
employment between 1993-2011, using a novel microdata panel with firm-level ownership and
trade information. Multinational-owned establishments displayed lower employment growth than
a narrow control group and accounted for 41% of the aggregate manufacturing employment
decline. Further, newly multinational establishments in the U.S. experienced job losses, while
their parent firms increased input imports from abroad. We develop a model that rationalizes this
behavior and bound a key elasticity with our microdata. The estimates imply that a reduction in
the costs of foreign sourcing leads firms to increase imports of intermediates and to reduce U.S.
manufacturing employment. Our findings suggest that offshoring by multinationals was a key
driver of the observed decline in manufacturing employment.
Christoph E. Boehm
The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Economics
BRB 3.114
2225 Speedway
Austin, TX 78712
chrisboe@umich.edu
Aaron Flaaen
Federal Reserve Board of Governors
20th and C St.
Washington DC. 20551
aaron.b.flaaen@frb.gov

Nitya Pandalai-Nayar
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
3.142 BRB, 2225 Speedway
Austin, TX 78713
and NBER
npnayar@utexas.edu

One of the most contentious aspects of globalization is its impact on national labor markets.
This is particularly true for advanced economies facing the emergence and integration of large, lowwage, and export-driven countries into the global trading system. Contributing to this controversy,
the United States has experienced steep declines in manufacturing employment in the last few
decades, paired with extraordinary expansions of multinational activity by U.S. firms. These job
losses in the manufacturing sector have received disproportionate attention in the public debate, in
part due to the perception that manufacturing jobs offer relatively high skill-adjusted wages.
While a large body of research has studied the connection between international integration
and employment, particularly in developed countries, the results have been mixed and the policy
prescriptions controversial. There are several factors underlying the conflicting results of this research, including gaps in the coverage and detail of the requisite firm-level data. Data constraints
pertaining to multinational firms in the U.S. have been particularly severe, limiting research on
their role in the manufacturing employment decline.
In this paper, we ask whether understanding the behavior of multinational enterprises is important for understanding the U.S. manufacturing employment decline. Since multinationals may
affect U.S. employment for a number of reasons, we narrow our focus to one salient mechanism:
the foreign sourcing of intermediate inputs. That is, we ask whether multinationals accounted for
a substantial portion of the manufacturing employment decline, and if so, whether foreign sourcing
of intermediates was important for explaining this decline.
To answer this question, this paper uses a novel dataset together with a structural model to show
that U.S. multinationals played a leading role in the decline in U.S. manufacturing employment.
Our data from the U.S. Census Bureau cover the universe of manufacturing establishments linked to
transaction-level trade data for the period 1993-2011. Using two directories of international corporate structure, we augment the Census data to include, for the first time, longitudinal information
on the direction and extent of firms’ multinational operations. To the best of our knowledge, our
dataset is the first to permit a comprehensive analysis of the role of U.S. multinationals in the
aggregate manufacturing decline in the United States.
We begin by establishing four new stylized facts. First, U.S. multinationals accounted for 33
percent of 1993 aggregate manufacturing employment but were responsible for 41 percent of the
subsequent decline. Second, U.S. multinationals had high job destruction rates and low job creation

1

rates throughout this period. Third, U.S. multinationals had a 3 percentage point per annum lower
employment growth rate relative to a narrowly-defined control group sharing similar industry, size,
and age characteristics. Finally, we use an event-study framework to compare the employment
dynamics in plants which become part of a firm with multinational operations to a control group
of non-transitioning plants. These transitioning plants experienced substantial job losses relative
to the control group. Together, these four exercises show that U.S. multinationals contributed
disproportionately to the manufacturing employment decline.
We next examine the trading patterns of multinational and other manufacturing firms in our
data. We find that foreign sourcing of intermediate inputs is a striking characteristic of multinationals. Over 90% of overall U.S. intermediate imports in our sample are imported by multinationals.
Moreover, the fraction of U.S. multinationals sourcing inputs from developing countries nearly
doubled from 1993 to 2011. To illustrate the link between these high and increasing intermediate
imports by multinationals and the observed employment declines, we return to the event study.
We show that the relative employment declines in transitioning plants are accompanied by large
increases in imports of intermediates by the parent firm. The increase in imports is largest when
the plant is shut down.
While suggestive, these stylized facts are not sufficient to establish whether a reduction in the
costs of foreign sourcing leads firms to increase or decrease U.S. labor demand. To understand the
causal mechanism and to quantify the aggregate impact, we present a model of importing. In the
model, firms import intermediate inputs from abroad either at arms-length or from foreign affiliates.
The firm’s optimal sourcing decision balances the gains from access to cheaper intermediate inputs
against higher fixed costs.
The impact of foreign sourcing on U.S. employment is determined by two opposing forces. First,
a reduction in the costs of foreign sourcing leads firms to have access to cheaper intermediates. As
a result, their unit costs fall and their optimal scale increases. This “scale effect” raises their U.S.
employment. On the other hand, firms respond by optimally reallocating intermediate production
towards the location with lower costs. This “reallocation effect” reduces U.S. employment. We
will refer to a positive net effect as the complements case, as lower costs of foreign sourcing raise
domestic employment. If the net effect is negative, we refer to foreign sourcing and domestic
employment as substitutes.1
1

We emphasize that we require no assumption on whether intermediate inputs or primary factors are substitutes

2

We show that in partial equilibrium, the value of a single structural constant—the elasticity
of firm size with respect to production efficiency—completely determines which of the two forces
dominates. The range of previous estimates of this constant in the literature is large enough that
foreign sourcing could be either complementary or substitutable with domestic employment. We
therefore develop a method to structurally estimate an upper bound on this constant using our
data on the universe of U.S. manufacturing firms. While a high value of the upper bound leaves
open the possibility that foreign sourcing and domestic employment are complements, a low value
of the bound unambiguously implies that the two are substitutes. Our method builds on the insight
of Blaum, LeLarge, and Peters (Forthcoming) that changes in cost shares are informative about
changes in firm unit costs.
Our estimates of the bound are small. This suggests that increases in intermediate purchases
from abroad reduce U.S. employment at the firm-level when triggered by a reduction in the costs
of foreign sourcing. Our estimates of the upper bound are robust to a number of alternative
specifications and across subsamples.
As a final step, we conduct two exercises to evaluate what our estimates imply for aggregate
manufacturing employment. In the first exercise, we use the observed changes in firm cost shares
together with our parameter bounds to obtain model-implied predictions of the employment loss
due to foreign sourcing. This approach captures both the direct impact of foreign sourcing by
existing firms as well as the first-order impact on domestic suppliers, holding all else equal. It
suggests that about one fifth of the aggregate manufacturing employment decline can be attributed
to offshoring by multinationals.
Second, we use a general equilibrium extension of the model which captures additional features
such as firm entry and exit. We calibrate it using parameters consistent with our estimated bounds
and aggregate import data. Again, the model implies a quantitatively significant employment decline in response to foreign sourcing. The magnitude is similar to the earlier approach as general
equilibrium effects broadly offset one another. We note that all attempts to quantify the consequences of foreign sourcing on aggregate employment require strong assumptions and thus must be
interpreted with caution.
This paper contributes to a growing literature documenting the impact of international inteor complements in production.

3

gration on labor markets. Since many commonly used firm-level datasets do not contain ownership
information, it is often difficult to identify multinationals and their headquarter location. To overcome this constraint, Harrison and McMillan (2011), Ebenstein et al. (2014), and Kovak, Oldenski,
and Sly (2018) study foreign sourcing by multinationals using Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
data. However, as these data only include multinationals, they do not permit analysis of multinationals’ behavior relative to a non-multinational control group.2
Whether foreign sourcing increases or decreases domestic employment remains an active debate
in the literature. A number of papers have found little or no employment reduction in various
countries, including Desai, Foley, and Hines (2009), Kovak, Oldenski, and Sly (2018), Magyari
(2017) [U.S.A], Braconier and Ekholm (2000) [Sweden], and Konings and Murphy (2006) [Europe],
among others. On the other hand, and consistent with our results, several recent papers with data
from other countries have found that firms treat foreign and domestic employment as substitutes.
In particular, Muendler and Becker (2010) find evidence for substitutability between home and
foreign employment using German data in a structural model.3 As in our paper, they emphasize
the role of the extensive margin (in the case of that paper, of new foreign locations). We find
it critical to account for the extensive margin of domestic plant shutdowns when calculating the
employment effects of foreign operations.4
In contrast to the limited studies on the impact of foreign sourcing by multinationals, a larger
literature has examined the impact of international trade on labor markets more generally. In
particular, a number of recent papers have studied the impact of import competition from China
(Autor, Dorn, and Hanson, 2013; Autor et al., 2014; Acemoglu et al., 2016). Unlike our paper,
these studies use regional and industry-level data. In a firm-level study, Pierce and Schott (2016)
find lower employment growth in industries that were most affected by the recent reduction in
trade-policy uncertainty with China. Several papers have focused on the wage effects of trade,
or inequality more generally. For instance, Hummels et al. (2014) find negative wage effects of
offshoring for low skilled workers using firm-level data from Denmark.
2

To study plant closure in multinationals, Bernard and Jensen (2007) made use of a temporary link between the
BEA and the Census.
3
Note that unlike us, Muendler and Becker (2010) hold unit costs constant in their estimation.
4
Artuç, Chaudhuri, and McLaren (2010) estimate U.S. worker switching costs in respose to trade shocks and find
they are high. Monarch, Park, and Sivadasan (2017) also find that offshoring firms in Census data experience declines
in employment. Brainard and Riker (1997) suggest that the substitutability of foreign and domestic employment
depends on the skill level.

4

Finally, the structural model we present draws on a growing literature studying models of firm
imports, including Eaton and Kortum (2002), Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2015), Antràs, Fort,
and Tintelnot (2017) and Blaum, LeLarge, and Peters (Forthcoming). Relative to these papers, we
extend an otherwise standard model of importing to capture key features of our micro data with
the objective of increasing its suitability for empirical analysis. For instance, we make minimal
assumptions on firms’ information sets at the time they choose their sourcing strategy. Further, we
explicitly allow firms to source inputs from abroad inter and intra-firm.
Given its prominent role in the public debate, this paper focuses attention on the manufacturing
sector. Recent work, such as Fort, Pierce, and Schott (2018), finds suggestive evidence that foreign
sourcing has offsetting positive effects in non-manufacturing sectors. Our findings do not rule out
such positive effects, and in fact we present evidence that multinational-owned non-manufacturing
establishments experience higher employment growth during our sample period.5 Since cross-sector
transitions of displaced workers are costly (e.g., Ebenstein et al. (2014)) our findings are nonetheless
important for understanding the labor market implications of foreign sourcing.
The next section presents empirical evidence establishing the role of multinationals in the U.S.
manufacturing employment decline, and links this to their import patterns. Section 3 develops
the partial equilibrium model, lays out the structural estimation and discusses the results. Section
4 presents estimates of the aggregate employment decline due to offshoring, including a general
equilibrium extension of the model. Section 5 concludes.

2

Data and Stylized Facts

This section presents a set of stylized facts key to understanding the role of foreign sourcing of
multinationals in the decline in U.S. manufacturing. The facts in this paper come from a novel firmlevel dataset that contains production and trade information for the universe of U.S. manufacturing
firms, augmented with multinational ownership and affiliate information. With these data, we show
that:
1. U.S. multinationals as a group accounted for a disproportionate share of the aggregate manufacturing decline,
5

Magyari (2017) finds that total firm employment increases after the China shock. This finding is consistent with
ours if the non-manufacturing employment increase offsets the manufacturing employment decline.

5

2. U.S. multinationals consistently had high job destruction rates and low job creation rates
throughout our sample period,
3. U.S. establishments of multinational firms experienced lower employment growth than a narrow control group of establishments with similar characteristics, and
4. establishments transitioning into U.S. multinational status experienced prolonged employment declines while the parent firm increased imports of intermediates.
The first three of these facts highlight that the behavior of multinational enterprises is quantitatively important for the manufacturing employment decline. The fourth fact makes a connection
to their importing behavior and suggests that foreign input sourcing is a potential driver of multinational’s impact on domestic employment. Based on a model of importing, we demonstrate in
Section 3 that the relationship between rising imports and falling domestic employment can be
interpreted as causal.

2.1
2.1.1

Data
Identifying U.S. Operations of Multinational Firms

Most previous research on U.S. multinational firms has used surveys administered by the Bureau
of Economic Analysis (BEA).6 These surveys provide data on the activities of foreign affiliates
of U.S. parent firms; however, information on the U.S. plants of these firms is limited. As an
additional constraint, it is typically not possible to link the data from these surveys to the universe
of U.S. establishments available in the datasets maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau. Without
such linked data, it is difficult to make statements about the behavior of multinationals relative to
non-multinational firms, or to construct aggregate decompositions.7
This paper addresses these shortcomings by merging new indicators of the international activity and ownership characteristics of U.S. firms into the otherwise comprehensive data of the U.S.
6

See for instance Ebenstein, Harrison, and McMillan (2015) and Ramondo, Rappoport, and Ruhl (2016).
A growing literature has used alternative data sources to identify multinationals operating in the U.S. Bernard
et al. (2010) use the presence of related-party firm level trade to identify firms as multinationals in U.S. Census data.
This approach does not permit a distinction between U.S. and foreign multinationals, and rules out non-trading
multinationals by assumption. Other approaches include using Orbis data (Cravino and Levchenko, 2014), and data
from Dun and Bradstreet (Alfaro and Charlton, 2009). Most previous studies of offshoring in the U.S. that have not
used BEA data have been at the industry level.
7

6

Census Bureau. These new variables come from a year-by-year link to two directories of international corporate structure: the LexisNexis Directory of Corporate Affiliations and the Directories
of Multinational Firms published by Uniworld Business Publications. In Appendix A.1 we describe our methodology that links these directories to the Census Bureau Business Register using
a probabilistic name and address matching algorithm. Relative to other research relying on such
“fuzzy merging” methods, we achieve very high coverage of the firm-level variables of interest as
we use establishments as the unit of matching. This increases the probability of a firm-level match.
To ensure that the multinational identifiers are consistent across time and to minimize spurious
switching of firm status, we develop a series of checks and cleaning procedures which are listed in
Appendix A.2.8 We define a U.S. multinational firm as a firm with at least one affiliate abroad
whose ultimate parent company is headquartered in the United States. Similarly, we define a foreign multinational firm as a firm with at least one U.S. affiliate, with an ultimate parent company
headquartered outside the United States.
Our data on multinational firms in the U.S. manufacturing sector are not easily compared to the
survey data from the BEA. First, the BEA data lack detailed information on the unconsolidated
U.S. operations of the multinational firms. For instance, while the BEA uses a firm-level industry
classification and contains little information on establishments, the Census data we use has detailed
industry information for each establishment of the firm. This information allows us to exclusively
focus on manufacturing.9 Second, the sample restrictions we make to ensure a longitudinally consistent definition of manufacturing (see below) creates a wedge in the comparison. Finally, the
ownership thresholds used for our classification and that of the BEA need not align. While our
classification of affiliates is based on the majority-owned definition, the BEA uses thresholds that
vary for the particular statistics under study.
An alternative that provides a more comparable benchmark is the data used by Bernard and
Jensen (2007), which looked specifically at the U.S. manufacturing plants of U.S. multinational firms
in Census data. To identify multinational firms, this study used a special one-year bridge database
linking the BEA and Census data for the year 1987. The authors identified multinational firms as
those that held at least 10 percent of total assets outside of the United States, and then matched
8

Our multinational indicator covers 98% of related party trade—an alternative method to identify multinationals
in U.S. Census data.
9
For information on the distribution of multinational firms across manufacturing industries, see Flaaen (2013b).

7

this firm-level variable to establishments operating in 1992. According to this definition, U.S.
multinationals represented 6 percent of total manufacturing establishments, and 26 percent of total
manufacturing employment. The corresponding values for the closest available year in our data,
1993, are 5 percent of total establishments and 33 percent of total manufacturing employment. The
differences are likely due to the fact that the data from Bernard and Jensen (2007) do not include
any new U.S. multinational establishments in the five years between 1987 and 1992. Nevertheless,
this comparison confirms that our dataset has similar coverage compared to the closest alternative
in the literature.
2.1.2

Other Data

This paper relies on a number of restricted-use Census datasets that we have augmented with
indicators of multinational status. To create a consistent definition of manufacturing for the period
1993-2011, we apply a new concordance between the SIC/NAICS classification changes that is
described in Fort and Klimek (2016). We supplement this concordance with our own set of fixes
to account for known data issues, and apply it to the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), a
longitudinally-consistent dataset comprising the universe of all business establishments in the U.S.
See Appendix A.3 for details on the specific steps underlying the construction of the consistent
manufacturing sample. We obtain annual employment and payroll information from the LBD.
A further core piece of our data is annual information on imports and exports at the firm level.
We use the Longitudinal Foreign Trade Transactions (LFTTD) dataset, which contains the universe
of U.S. trade transactions, linked to the firms engaged in such trade. Information in the LFTTD
includes the date, value, quantity, and detailed product information (HS10) along with whether
the particular transaction was conducted between related parties or at arms-length.
Our focus in this paper is on the impact of firms moving portions of their supply chains abroad.
Many firms in the data import both goods intended for further manufacture within the firm (intermediate goods) as well as those destined for immediate sale (final goods). Using total imports
of the firm as a measure for foreign sourcing could over or understate the impact on employment
because firms could purchase final goods for reasons entirely unrelated to domestic production processes. We therefore develop a novel procedure for classifying firm-level imports into intermediate
inputs and final goods, and focus our analysis only on the subset of all import transactions that

8

are intermediates.10,11
The procedure uses the Census of Manufacturers Products-Trailer File, which lists the detailed
set of products, with SIC/NAICS product codes, produced by U.S. establishments in an industry.
With this information, we can define a set of products intended for final sale for that industry.12
Imported products which match those for final sale for a given firm are then classified as final goods
imports and the remaining imports as intermediate inputs. Importantly, this classification yields
values of the intermediate share of trade that are consistent with prior estimates: 64 percent of
manufacturing imports are classified as intermediates in 2007. See Boehm, Flaaen, and PandalaiNayar (Forthcoming) or Appendix A.4 for more details on this classification procedure.
To estimate our model in Section 3.3, we require data on firm revenues as well as cost shares
from various locations and modes (inter and intra-firm) of sourcing. For revenues, we use the total
value of shipments of the firm’s manufacturing establishments from the Census of Manufacturers
(CMF). Total costs are constructed from information on the cost of materials inputs, firm interplant transfers and total machinery expenditures of the firm (also from the CMF). We aggregate
these variables to the firm-level in each of the Census years in our sample (1997, 2002 and 2007),
and combine these total costs with expenditures on intermediate input imports as identified above
to construct cost shares of inputs from different locations/modes.

2.2

Facts on Foreign Sourcing and Employment Decline

The decline in U.S. manufacturing is reflected in several aggregate statistics of our sample. The
number of establishments we classify as manufacturing falls from nearly 355,000 in 1993 to under
259,000 in 2011. Table 1 shows that the annual rates of decline have been highest in U.S. multinationals and purely domestic, non-trading establishments. The only group to have experienced a
net increase in establishments during this period is foreign multinational firms, due to the extensive (firm entry) margin. This group serves as a reminder that multinational activity could also
10

Bernard et al. (2018) also emphasize the importance of distinguishing intermediate imports and final goods
imports in recent work studying the reorganization of the firm after offshoring.
11
Our approach does not rule out the firm producing high-value intermediates in the U.S. and assembling the
final product abroad prior to re-importing it. Since that final product will have a different HS code than the U.S.
produced intermediates, we would include it in our foreign sourcing measure.
12
We use the concordances outlined in Pierce and Schott (2012) to map these products from an SIC/NAICS basis
to the HS codes found in the trade data.

9

Table 1: Summary Statistics: Establishment Counts by Type: 1993-2011

Year

Domestic
Only

Exporter
Only

Importer
Only

Exporter &
Importer

U.S.
Multinational

Foreign
Multinational

Total

1993
2011

252,965
159,133

41,353
39,034

6,911
6,513

30,237
31,391

17,119
13,488

6,178
8,952

354,763
258,511

2.08
1.82
2.29

-1.74
-1.11
-2.25

Average Annual Percent Change
1993-2011
1993-2001
2001-2011

-2.54
-1.98
-2.99

-0.32
0.55
-1.01

-0.33
0.91
-1.31

0.21
2.16
-1.32

-1.32
-1.33
-1.31

Notes: The data are from the LBD, LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in the text. This table reports the
establishment counts pertaining to the “consistent” manufacturing sample as discussed in Section 2.1.2.

stimulate U.S. employment.13
The employment counts in Table 2 show a similar picture of aggregate decline. Total manufacturing employment in our sample decreases from nearly 16 million workers in 1993 to 10.26 million in
2011. U.S. multinational establishments constituted 33.3% of 1993 manufacturing employment but
contributed a disproportionate share, 41%, of the subsequent decline. While employment at other
exporting and importing establishments grew in the first decade of the sample, U.S. multinationals
have experienced a steady secular decline throughout the sample period. Domestic-only establishments experienced the highest annual rates of employment declines, but since they accounted for
a smaller share of total employment in 1993, they contributed less to the overall manufacturing
decline. Employment in these domestic establishments may also have been affected by the changing sourcing patterns of multinationals, both directly—as the multinationals switched to foreign
suppliers instead of sourcing inputs from purely domestic firms—and additionally, through general equilibrium channels. We show in Section 4.1 that more than half of the employment decline
that can be attributed to multinationals comes from substituting away from domestic arms-length
suppliers to foreign suppliers.14
13

Appendix Table B1 shows that the decline in multinational firms has not been as severe as the decline in
multinational-owned establishments. Hence, establishment shutdown was one of the important margins of the employment decline in U.S. multinationals.
14
The model we develop in Section 3 features such behavior. Further, general equilibrium extension in Appendix
D also suggests that part of the observed manufacturing employment decline resulted from multinationals switching
from purely domestic suppliers to foreign suppliers.

10

Table 2: Summary Statistics: Employment Counts by Type: 1993-2011

Year

Domestic
Only

Exporter
Only

Importer
Only

Exporter &
Importer

U.S.
Multinational

Foreign
Multinational

Total

1993
2011

3,433,510
1,751,504

2,133,327
1,358,061

267,090
181,716

3,663,103
2,614,260

5,314,411
2,975,786

1,102,240
1,380,804

15,913,681
10,262,131

1.26
3.31
-0.35

-2.41
-0.55
-3.87

278,564
-0.05

-5,651,550
1.00

Average Annual Percent Change
1993-2011
1993-2001
2001-2011

-3.67
-1.93
-5.04

-2.48
-0.49
-4.04

-2.12
0.83
-4.41

-1.86
1.00
-4.09

-3.17
-1.90
-4.17

Net Change: 1993-2011
Counts
Share

-1,682,006
0.30

-775,266
0.14

-85,374
0.02

-1,048,843
0.19

-2,338,625
0.41

Notes: The data are from the LBD, LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in the text. This table reports the
employment counts pertaining to the “consistent” manufacturing sample as discussed in Section 2.1.2.

Concurrent with this employment decline has been a large increase in the participation and
intensity of U.S. firms in trade. Figure 1 illustrates the growth of intermediate input imports,
where we have split the sample into U.S. multinationals and other non-multinational U.S. firms.
The rise in intermediate input imports of U.S. multinationals is striking. We also document the
fraction of firms participating in intermediate input sourcing, separately based on whether it occurs
at arms length or intra-firm, in Table 3. The fraction of U.S. multinationals participating in armslength input sourcing from developing countries has increased by nearly 30 percentage points, and
the fraction sourcing related party inputs from these countries has doubled. In contrast, the share of
multinational firms sourcing from developed countries has only increased about 10 percentage points
during our sample period.15 Although non-multinational firms have also experienced increases in
foreign input sourcing, the levels are roughly an order of magnitude smaller and they account for
a small fraction of foreign input sourcing in the data.
15

The non U.S. multinational groups in Figure 1 and Table 3 are not directly comparable, as the group in Table 3
also includes foreign multinationals. This distinction is a result of disclosure limitations in our data as some groups
have relatively few firms and thus pose limitations on the degree to which we can report splits of the sample.

11

Figure 1: Value of intermediate and final goods imports by firm type

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. The figure shows the value of
intermediate and final goods imports by firm type. The value of imports of foreign multinational firms is
excluded from this figure.

2.2.1

Employment Growth Differential of Multinationals

We next decompose the aggregate employment growth rates of different groups of firms into job creation and job destruction rates as in, for instance, Davis and Haltiwanger (2001). We show that job
creation and destruction rates vary substantially by establishment type: “domestic” non-exporting
non-multinational (D), exporter (X), and U.S. multinational (MH).16 We further decompose the job
creation and destruction margins into changes due to establishment births and deaths (extensive
margin) or those due to employment changes at continuing establishments (intensive margin).
Formally, let employment of establishments in group S ∈ {D, X, M H} at time t be denoted as
+
−
ES,t . Defining St−1
and St−1
as the set of establishments in S that increase (decrease) employment
16

Very few manufacturing firms in the data import without exporting. While Table 2 illustrated employment
patterns in more disaggregate groups including importing non-exporting and exporting non-importing establishments
separately, the small sample size of the group of pure importers restricted the set of facts that could be disclosed
without further aggregation. For the same reason we do not report job creation and destruction rates for foreign
multinationals.

12

Table 3: Percentage of Firms Participating in Foreign Input Sourcing

Year

Arms Length
Low Income

1993
2011

44.35
73.18

Year

Arms Length
Low Income

1993
2011

1.88
7.41

U.S. Multinationals
Related Party Arms Length
Low Income
High Income
24.62
49.02

Related Party
High Income

72.63
81.83

48.17
58.69

Non U.S. Multinationals
Related Party Arms Length
Low Income
High Income
0.39
1.42

Related Party
High Income

5.71
8.25

1.30
2.01

Notes: The data are from the LBD, LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in the text. This
table reports the fraction of U.S. multinationals and non U.S. multinationals that source
inputs from foreign countries in percent (see also Appendix Table B1). The group non-U.S.
multinationals includes foreign multinationals and other trading firms.

between t − 1 and t, we calculate the job creation and destruction rates as
P
Job Creation Rate:

JCS,t =

Job Destruction Rate:

JDS,t =

+
i∈St−1

∆Ei,t

(ES,t + ES,t−1 ) /2
P
i∈S − |∆Ei,t |
t−1

(ES,t + ES,t−1 ) /2

,

(1)

,

(2)

where ∆Ei,t = Ei,t − Ei,t−1 is the change in employment in establishment i. To obtain the intensive
and extensive margin rates, we further separate these groups into surviving establishments (existing
in both t − 1 and t) and establishment births/deaths for a given year.
Figure 2 reports the job creation/destruction rates of the intensive margin for the three groups
we study. The job creation rates in Panel A show both cyclicality and a secular decline for domestic and exporting establishments. Multinationals’ job creation rates exhibit less of a decline
and less cyclicality, but their level is significantly lower in almost every year. Panel B shows the
job destruction rates. These rates are higher for purely domestic firms and of comparable magnitude for exporters and multinationals. For all three groups of firms the job destruction rates are
countercyclical. Previous research such as Davis and Haltiwanger (1992) has highlighted that job
creation and destruction rates decrease with both firm size and firm age. Since multinationals are,

13

Figure 2: Job Creation and Destruction Rates by Group: Intensive Margin
A. Job Creation Rates

B. Job Destruction Rates

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. These figures show the job
creation and destruction rates at the intensive margin as defined in equations (1) and (2).

on average, approximately 3 times larger than exporting establishments in our data, it surprising
that multinationals’ job destruction rates are not much lower.
Figure 3 combines the job creation and destruction rates at the intensive and extensive margin
into net measures of employment gains by type of establishment. Panel A, which focuses on the
intensive margin of establishments, shows that multinational establishments have had lower net
growth rates in almost every year of our sample—and not just during recessions. These net growth
rates were negative in 15 of the 18 years of the panel for multinationals which contrasts to 7(9)

14

out of 18 for domestic (exporting) establishments. Panel B of Figure 3 shows that the relative
employment loss of multinational establishments is also apparent in the extensive margin. Until
2003 multinationals had the lowest net rate of these three groups of firms in every year with one
exception. From 2004 onwards the net rate of the extensive margin of multinationals was typically
lower than exporters but higher than domestic firms. In summary, the picture that emerges is one
where multinational firms shed more jobs than any other group of firms along both the intensive
and the extensive margin and for the large majority of years for which we have data.
The analysis this far shows that the unconditional growth rates of multinational establishments
differ systematically from both comparison groups. However, it is well-known that a variety of
observable characteristics are systematically related to establishment employment growth. If any of
these characteristics are correlated with multinational status, attributing the decline in employment
to offshoring operations of multinationals would be misleading. To control for these establishmentlevel characteristics, we construct a set of indicator variables from the interactions of firm age,
industry, establishment size, and year. More specifically, each indicator variable takes the value
one if an establishment belongs to a cell defined by the interaction of the approximately 250 4-digit
manufacturing industries, 10 establishment size categories, and 4 firm-age categories in a given year.
This setup implies around 16000 cells which we use as controls in the subsequent specifications,
pooling across years 1993-2011.17 We then fit the regression
eit = α + βMit + ΓXit + uit

(3)

where the dependent variable is the establishment employment growth rate, Mit is an indicator for
establishments owned by a U.S. multinational, and Xit is the vector of indicator variables identified
above. Note that the employment growth rate is calculated following Davis, Haltiwanger, and Schuh
(1996) (DHS), that is, ei,t =

Ei,t −Ei,t−1
0.5·(Ei,t +Ei,t−1 ) .

This definition allows us to estimate equation (3) on

a sample which includes the extensive margin (with records of zero for Ei,t in the year before
entry and after exit) and on a sample which isolates variation along the intensive margin (without
17
Our establishment size categories are 0-4,5-9,10-24,25-49,50-99,100-249,250-499,500-999,1000-1999 and 2000 and
above and the firm-age categories are 0-1,2-5,6-12 and greater than 12. We obtain firm-age from the LBD firm-age
panel. The age of a firm is defined as the age of its oldest establishment. If no multinational establishment exists in a
particular cell, we drop that cell from the analysis. We also drop cells that contain only multinational establishments.
This strategy strikes a balance between high detail for a narrow comparison and broad coverage for an accurate
characterization; the 4-digit NAICS is broad enough such that we do not eliminate many multinationals.

15

Figure 3: Net Job Creation Rates by Group
A. Intensive Margin

B. Extensive Margin

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. These figures show the job
creation rate net of the job destruction rate at the intensive margin and extensive margin. See equations
(1) and (2).

zeros).18
Table 4 presents the results from this specification. When pooling across years (1994-2011),
and focusing only on the intensive margin, we find that multinational establishments have a positive growth rate differential of 1.9 percentage points relative to non-multinational establishments.
Once the extensive margin is accounted for, however, this differential changes sign and becomes
18
While our preferred specification uses fully-interacted cells as flexible non-parametric controls, the results are
nearly identical when using an alternative specification with polynomials in age and size as well as industry-time
fixed effects as controls.

16

Table 4: Employment Growth Relative to a Control Group

Unweighted

Establishment Level
Intensive
Extensive and Intensive
Employment Weighted Unweighted Employment Weighted

β̂

0.019***
(0.001)

0.007***
(0.001)

-0.03***
(0.002)

-0.03***
(0.002)

Clusters
Observations

16,616
2784500

16,616
2784500

17,528
3204600

15,606
2765500

Firm Level

β̂

Clusters
Observations

Unweighted

Intensive
Employment Weighted

Extensive and Intensive
Unweighted Employment Weighted

-0.01***
(0.002)

-0.02***
(0.004)

-0.03***
(0.005)

-0.03***
(0.006)

8,028
529100

8,028
529100

9,118
777300

9,118
777300

Notes: The data are from the LBD, LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in the text. This table reports the
pooled regression results from estimating equation (3) at the establishment and firm level. Standard errors are
reported in parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level.

significantly negative. The importance of the extensive margin for net job destruction rates is
consistent with the results from Figure 3 (Panel B) above. Taken together, this evidence points to
establishment closure as important for understanding the employment decline in multinationals.
To assess the impact of this establishment-level result on overall employment within a firm,
we estimate the same pooled specification with the firm as the unit of analysis.19 Here, we find
coefficients that are significant and strongly negative: considering only the intensive margin, a multinational firm has a 1-2 percentage point lower employment growth rate than a non-multinational
firm. This is consistent with the establishment-level estimates, since the firm-level intensive margin
accounts for extensive margin changes at the establishment level (plant closings). The negative
differential increases to 3 percentage points once the extensive margin (firm entry and exit) is included. The effects of establishment closure within the multinational firm dominate any increases in
19

The firm here is defined as all manufacturing establishments of the same firm.

17

employment at existing establishments, leading to aggregate decline.20 Appendix Table B6 displays
results from this specification with different subsamples and additional controls for robustness.
Implications for Non-Manufacturing Employment

Although our focus is on manufac-

turing, we briefly explore the possibility that losses to manufacturing employment are offset by
employment gains in other sectors. In Appendix B.3 we examine employment growth patterns
in the non-manufacturing establishments of manufacturing firms. Appendix Table B4 documents
supportive evidence of non-manufacturing employment gains, though only in the latter period of
our sample. See Fort, Pierce, and Schott (2018) for a related analysis.
We conclude this set of stylized facts by examining the transition dynamics of the employment
and trade of establishments which become part of a multinational firm.
2.2.2

Evidence Using an Event-Study Framework

While previous sections established the role of multinationals in the U.S. manufacturing employment
decline, this section links this fact to their importing patterns. We analyze the change in outcomes
(employment and trade) of establishments that transition into multinational status relative to a
predefined control group. Using this event-study framework, we find that transitioning plants
experience significantly lower employment growth, while their parent firms increase imports of
intermediate inputs.21
We first divide establishments into four mutually exclusive groups: purely domestic and nonexporting, exporting, owned by a U.S. multinational or owned by a foreign multinational. An
establishment’s state is defined by the group it belongs to. We then explore whether changes in
establishment state are an important feature of our data. Table 5 reports the average annual
transition rates between states. As expected, most establishments maintain their status between
years—as shown by the large diagonal entries—and transitions between states are quite infrequent.
Only 0.03 percent of domestic establishments become part of a multinational every year. Es20

A simple aggregation exercise based on our employment weighted regression results illustrates the number of
jobs lost in U.S. multinational firms relative to the control group. To arrive at this number, we take the growth rates
implied by the employment weighted specification and apply that to multinational employment in the sample year
by year. Our estimates imply 2.02 million jobs were lost in these firms relative to a narrowly defined control group.
Further details are provided in Appendix B.2.
21
There have been several other recent papers that have analyzed such events for other countries, including Hijzen,
Jean, and Mayer (2011) [France] and Debaere, Lee, and Lee (2010) [South Korea].

18

tablishments of exporting firms have a somewhat higher transition probability with 0.84 percent.
We will next compare establishments which transition into multinational status to all remaining
establishments.
Establishment transitions into multinational status are endogenous outcomes and occur either
when an entire firm becomes a multinational by acquiring an establishment abroad or when a
multinational purchases an establishment from a non-multinational. Standard models of multinational production such as Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004) and Contessi (2015) suggest that
transitions occur after positive idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Greater productivity (and similarly demand) makes it worthwhile for firms to pay the fixed costs of multinational production.
This theoretical prediction is important for articulating a prior on how transitioning establishments
compare to non-transitioning establishments. In particular, if transitioning plants are those whose
parents experience positive productivity or demand shocks, one would expect that these plants
should grow faster than non-transitioning plants. We will show momentarily that this positive
growth differential turns negative surprisingly quickly after transitions.
Consider a set of establishments that transition into a multinational firm between y and y + 1,
and define a control group of similar establishments that do not transition into a multinational firm
in that year. For a transitioning establishment, this control group is defined as non-transitioning
establishments within the same narrowly defined cells of firm age, establishment size, and 4-digit
industry (all defined in period y − 1) we utilized above. We then compare the time path of
employment growth rates of the transitioning establishments to their control group.22 We highlight
that while the control variables include a rich set of observables, they will not capture idiosyncratic
shocks which drive these transitions in standard models. Hence, transition should not be interpreted
as an exogenous treatment. We will return to this discussion below.
As is clear from Table 5, we have relatively few multinational transitions in a given year. To
gain statistical power, we therefore pool the available transitions across years and stack the datasets
with “treatment” and control groups corresponding to each year of transition, which we refer to as
22

These cells are defined in the year prior to transition, and remain constant for a given transitioning establishment
across years. We drop any establishments in the control group that exit in year y, to match the implied conditioning
of the survival of the treated establishments in that year. In addition, we require the establishment to have existed
for at least one year prior to the potential transition, for a total minimum establishment age of 3 years.

19

Table 5: Establishment-Level Transition Probabilities

t\t+1
Dom
Exp
U.S. Mult
For Mult
Entry

Dom
84.59
13.07
0.27
0.45
84.35

(percent)
Exp
U.S. Mult
5.41
80.27
1.85
1.94
12.65

For Mult

Exit

0.04
0.52
0.87
90.36
1.85

9.93
5.29
6.06
5.70

0.03
0.84
90.95
1.60
1.16

Notes: The data are from the LBD, DCA, and UBP. The table reports
average probability of transition from state i in t to j in t + 1 where i, j ∈
{D, X, M H, M F, Entry, Exit}. The sample ranges from 1993 to 2011.

the “event” year. We then estimate the specification
eyik = Γyk Xyi +

10
X

y
δk Tik
+ uyik ,

(4)

k=−5,k6=0
y
where the variable Tik
is equal to one for transitioning establishment i in year k relative to the year

of transition y. We exclude the transition year k = 0. The vector Xyi contains the indicators we
utilized as controls above, and is fixed at time k = −1 for each event year, so that the comparison
groups remain the same over time. The coefficients Γyk on these indicators are allowed to differ
by event year y and period k relative to the year of transition. Note that the control groups are
defined separately for each event year (and thus differ across event years).
An establishment can appear multiple times in this specification. If the establishment exists for
several years as a non-multinational until it transitions into multinational status, the establishment
would show up in the sample as follows: First as part of a control group for other transitioning
establishment, and then, once, as part of a “treated” group of plants in the year of its own transition.
Standard errors are clustered by plant and cell using the two-way clustering method by Cameron,
Gelbach, and Miller (2011).23
To study the behavior of imports around multinational transitions, we replace eyik with imports
y
(IMik
) in equation (4). Such trade can be separately analyzed based on whether it is at arms-

length or between related parties. Note that we observe trade at the firm level, unlike employment
23

The standard errors change little when we alternatively cluster by firm or plant or plant and year.

20

which is measured at the plant level. Hence, this exercise compares the imports of the parent
firm of transitioning establishments to the imports of the parent firms of the control group. As
decisions to offshore or shut down plants are likely made at the firm level, this level of aggregation
is preferable to using plant-level imports (which are also difficult to measure).24
Panel A of Figure 4 shows the estimates of δk . Establishments that transition into multinational status experience a relative increase in their employment growth rates in the first two years.
This behavior is consistent with the notion that transitions are driven by positive idiosyncratic
productivity or demand shocks. Subsequent years, however, show a persistent negative effect on
employment growth, in the order of 3 to 6 percentage points relative to the control group. The
initial period of relative employment growth could reflect time spent by the firm replicating production processes abroad. Following a successful expansion, the firm may then choose to shut down or
downsize duplicated firm activities. Panel B of Figure 4 reports the implied cumulative effects. 10
years post transition, employment in transitioning plants falls approximately 20 percentage points
relative to the control group.
Our results point to the importance of studying a long horizon to understand the consequences
of offshoring. While a number of studies found weak positive or no effects on domestic employment,
our evidence points to large but delayed negative effects. This discrepancy could, in part, reflect
differences in the length of time under study. We also note that the exercise we conduct here does
not condition on survival and fully captures the extensive margins of plant and firm closings as we
use DHS growth rates on the left hand side of equation (4).
To examine the role of substitution towards imports in this decline, we estimate equation (4)
after replacing the left hand side with firm-level intermediate imports (split by related party and
arms-length).25 Panel C of Figure 4 shows estimates of δk pertaining to imports. The figure demonstrates that transitions are associated with sizable increases in both related-party and arms-length
intermediate imports. This suggests that firms may replace domestic production with intermediates imported from abroad. We find no evidence of pre-trends in any of the variables under
24

Since trade is only measured at the firm level, the level of trade of the parent generally changes discretely
when an establishment changes its parent firm. This poses a challenge for interpreting the results. To prevent this
complication, we restrict the sample in the analysis of trading outcomes to only those establishments that retain the
same firm identifier from years t − 1 to t + 1. Conducting the identical employment analysis using this reduced sample
yields very similar results to the ones we report in the text. See Appendix B.1 for details.
25
We use the level of imports as many firms either do not import or have consecutive periods of zero imports,
ruling out using growth rates.

21

Figure 4: Evidence from Multinational Transitions
A: Employment Growth Differential

B: Cumulative Employment (Index)

C: Importing Differentials of Multinational Transitions

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. Panel A plots the annual employment
growth rate differential of establishments that transition into a multinational firm in year (t = 0), relative to
a control group with similar firm age, establishment size, and industry (in year t = −1). Panel B reports the
cumulative coefficient estimates from Panel A, on an index scale. Panel C plots the related-party and arms-length
intermediate input imports of the parent firm a transitioning establishment, relative to a control group which
consists of establishments that are not part of a multinational firm in year t = 0. See equation (4) and text for
details. The shaded areas corresponds to a 95 percent confidence interval.

consideration.26
26

As most transitions into multinational status are by plants that belong to exporting/importing firms, and we

22

The results in Figure 4 are robust to various alternative specifications. For instance, we distinguish transitions depending on whether an existing multinational firm acquires a non-multinational
establishment (a merger/acquisition) or whether a non-multinational establishment’s parent newly
expands operations abroad.27 Although this split reduces samples significantly, we find that our
main results are robust to either form of transition (see Appendix B.1 for details.) We also report
alternative specifications for our results on firm-level trade following multinational transitions in
Appendix B. For instance, following research by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and
Schott (2016), Appendix B.1.3 studies intermediate input imports by multinationals from China.
Consistent with these papers, Appendix Figure B5 shows large increases in imports from China
post-transition.
2.2.3

Discussion

The evidence thus far established that U.S. multinationals contributed disproportionately to the
manufacturing employment decline and that their establishments had lower growth rates than
a narrow control group. We further documented that foreign sourcing of multinationals in the
aggregate increased dramatically between 1993 and 2011, and that establishment transitions into
multinational status were associated with employment loss as well as increases in imports of the
parent firm. We provide a number of additional facts in Appendix B. For instance, we show that
arms-length exports also rise after transitions into multinational status, which is consistent with
the view that transitions occur after idiosyncratic productivity or demand shocks, and that either
these shocks or the increase in imported intermediates reduce unit costs and increase the optimal
firm size—a prediction of the model below. We briefly discuss three related issues which help clarify
the role of these facts.
Why multinationals?

The evidence on lower employment growth after transitions into multi-

national status raises the question of the precise role of ownership of foreign affiliates. In particular,
it is possible that foreign sourcing alone, perhaps exclusively at arms-length, is responsible for such
do not condition on export status when creating a control group, the level difference in arms-length imports is
unsurprising. We have found no difference in the results using alternative control groups that explicitly condition on
the level of imports.
27
We can approximate this distinction in our data using information on firm identifier changes during the multinational transition. This also requires modifying the control group. For the merger/acquisition exercise, it would be
transitioning establishments that were transitioning to non-multinational firms.

23

employment declines. Since multinationals account for the vast majority of intermediate input imports (see Figure 1), these two channels are statistically difficult to distinguish. For the remainder
of the paper we treat intermediate input sourcing as a key characteristic of multinational firms.28
Alternative/additional explanations We presented a series of facts in this section in order to
provide guidance for theories which aim to explain the manufacturing employment decline. These
facts are consistent with the view that foreign sourcing by multinationals caused the decline, but
neither establish this causality nor do they rule out additional or alternative explanations. Besides
trade-related explanations for the manufacturing employment decline, other work has emphasized
the role of technology. It is possible, for instance, that multinationals substituted more than other
groups of firms towards labor-saving technology. While the facts we established above are not
directly informative about these hypotheses, explanations which argue that the manufacturing
employment decline is exclusively caused by technology have difficulties replicating the fact that
imports of intermediates increased substantially over the relevant time horizon.29 In Section 3 we
develop a model of foreign sourcing and confront this model with the observed increase in intermediate input imports. After estimating a key elasticity, the model implies that foreign sourcing
substitutes for U.S. employment.
IV-based strategies

An alternative approach to get at the underlying causal relationship is to

rely on IV-based strategies. In Appendix B we present the results from a firm-level IV specification
in the spirit of Acemoglu et al. (2016) and Hummels et al. (2014) where the instruments are
constructed from changes in tariffs and exchange rates, using firms’ imports as weights.30 While
the OLS estimates reflect a strong positive correlation between employment growth and import
growth, the coefficient becomes negative, albeit insignificantly so, when estimated using these
28

Bernard and Fort (2015) demonstrate that a nontrivial fraction of U.S. imports are imported by wholesale
importers that are not in our sample. We do not observe many firms with only direct arms-length imports of
intermediates, which could be because they purchase intermediates produced abroad that have been imported by
an intermediary. Our data would incorrectly identify these as domestic input purchases, and as a result we would
understate the economy-wide foreign sourcing of inputs. If this was true, however, these firms would appear in our
control group of the analysis in Section 2.2.2, and thus bias the estimates toward zero.
29
Fort, Pierce, and Schott (2018) discuss both trade and technology-related explanations and find that the data
broadly support both views.
30
We have considered various other instruments based on transport costs, foreign GDP growth and exports to
other countries (the “world export supply” instrument). Neither of these were relevant in our data. We also found
that this class of instruments tends to exhibit a trade-off between exogeneity and relevance. A reasonable first stage
typically requires firm-specific and time-varying weights which are lagged by only a few years—raising concerns about
the exclusion restriction.

24

instruments. Further, there is reason to believe that the instruments do not fully remove all
confounding variation. Our approach of addressing this identification problem using a structural
model is driven by the notorious difficulty in constructing convincing instruments with sufficient
power at the firm level.

3

A Framework of Offshoring

We next develop a model of foreign sourcing that can explain the observed changes in employment. Our model builds on Eaton and Kortum (2002), Halpern, Koren, and Szeidl (2015), Antràs,
Fort, and Tintelnot (2017), and Blaum, LeLarge, and Peters (Forthcoming), but relative to these
contributions we adapt the model to the precise features of our micro data with the objective of increasing its suitability for empirical analysis. In particular, we extend an otherwise standard model
of importing in three dimensions. First, firms can select a sourcing location for their intermediates,
as well as a sourcing mode: whether to produce intra-firm in a foreign location or to purchase goods
from a different firm in that location. Intra-firm production abroad is the defining characteristic of
a multinational in the model, reflecting the vertical supply chain structure of U.S. multinationals
in our data.
Second, we augment the model with a large number of structural shocks. Rather than being
characterized by a single productivity parameter, we increase the flexibility of the model by allowing
firms’ productivity to vary by production location and mode. For instance, a firm could be highly
productive at producing inside its own plants within the U.S., but its suppliers in an emerging
market country could be relatively unproductive. We also allow firms to differ along an unobserved
demand component and regarding their fixed costs of foreign sourcing.
Third, we impose minimal assumptions on firms’ information sets prior to choosing their sourcing strategy. Since it is unclear whether firms have perfect knowledge about their productivity in
a foreign location or about their demand prior to starting production, we prefer to be as agnostic
as possible on this dimension.
The model does not impose that an increase in imports following a reduction in the costs of
foreign sourcing leads to a contraction in domestic employment. Instead, we show that whether
imports of intermediates and domestic employment are complements or substitutes depends on a
single structural constant. A high value of this constant implies that input imports and domestic
25

employment are complementary, while a low value implies that they are substitutes. We develop
a method which allows us to estimate an upper bound on this structural constant under fairly
weak and conventional assumptions. Since our estimate of the upper bound is relatively small, we
conclude that foreign sourcing and domestic employment are substitutes. While the estimation is
based on the same microdata we used in the previous section, the unit of analysis in the model is best
interpreted as a firm, as the decision to source intermediate inputs from abroad is presumably made
at the firm-level. This contrasts to the previous section where we also analyzed the employment
growth rates of plants.31
The model in this section is in partial equilibrium in the sense that it only describes firms in
the manufacturing sector in the Home (U.S.) economy and takes sector-level aggregates as fixed.
In the next section, we develop a simple general equilibrium extension to illustrate how foreign
sourcing affects aggregate manufacturing employment.

3.1

Firms

There is a mass M of monopolistically competitive firms, each producing a unique variety. Firms
are indexed by i and sourcing locations/modes by j. We assume that firms are heterogeneous along
three dimensions: a set of location/mode-specific productivity shocks ζi,j , a demand shock δi , and
a vector of fixed costs fi . We discuss all sources of heterogeneity in greater detail below. For now
it is sufficient to note that a firm is fully described by the tuple ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) which we will refer
to as the firm’s type. Firms’ shocks may be arbitrarily correlated. For instance, it is possible that
a firm’s productivity shocks ζi,j are correlated across locations/modes j, or that firms’ demand
shocks δi are correlated with their productivity shocks.
Each firm uses a unit continuum of intermediates, indexed ν, in the production of their unique
variety. The production function is
Z
xi =

1

xi (ν)

ρ−1
ρ

ρ
 ρ−1

dν

.

(5)

0

Hence, the intermediates are imperfect substitutes with elasticity of substitution ρ. Letting pi (ν)
denote firm i’s price of variety ν, cost minimization in competitive factor markets implies that the
31
Neither the model nor the data we presented above are informative about the impact of foreign sourcing on
workers of different skill levels or the wage premium of workers in global firms. A recent literature has focused on
these questions using alternative models and data (see, e.g., Helpman, Itskhoki, and Redding (2010)).

26

unit cost of xi is
Z
ci =

1

1−ρ

pi (ν)

1
 1−ρ

dν

.

(6)

0

3.1.1

Supply chains

As we observe both significant arms-length and intra-firm intermediate input imports in the data,
we allow firms the choice of integrated or arms-length sourcing in each location. Sourcing inside
the firm is indicated by I and sourcing outside the firm by O. Firms can source from k = 1, ..., N
locations in addition to the home country H. The elements of the set J = {H, 1, ..., N } × {I, O}
represent all possible sourcing locations and modes for varieties.
We model the firm’s problem as follows. First, the firm chooses its sourcing strategy Ji =
J ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ), a subset of J . For each intermediate ν, the firm receives a price quote from each
element in this set. The benefit of a larger sourcing strategy is therefore a wider range of price
quotes resulting in lower input costs. On the other hand, each sourcing strategy requires an exante fixed cost payment. Given their type ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ), firms select the best option among these
combinations of production efficiencies and fixed cost payments. We will return to the choice of
firms’ sourcing strategy below. For now we assume that the set J ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) is given.
Intermediate goods production

Let j denote an element of firm i’s sourcing strategy Ji .

Intermediates in sourcing location/mode j are produced with production function
xi,j (ν) =

ζi,j
li,j (ν) .
ai,j (ν)

(7)

While a common assumption in the literature is that firms can fully transfer their inherent productivity to their suppliers (ζi,j = ζi for all j), our framework permits any form of technology transfer
across firms’ suppliers. For instance, it is conceivable that firms can transfer their technology to
suppliers, but that production in location/mode j is also subject to idiosyncratic shocks. In that
h i
case ζi,j = ζ̄i · ζ̃i,j where E ζ̃i,j = 1. We emphasize this generality since a sufficiently flexible model
is critical for taking the model to the data.
As in Eaton and Kortum (2002), the input efficiencies 1/ai,j (ν) are drawn from a Frechet
distribution with location parameter Tj and dispersion parameter θ. That is, Pr (ai,j (ν) < a) =
θ

1 − e−Tj a . While we do not explicitly model contracting frictions or other reasons that affect
27

whether firms integrate or source at arms-length, we allow the parameters Tj to vary across sourcing
modes.32 This assumption accommodates a number of real-world features, for instance, that armslength suppliers in a developing country may, on average, have lower productivity than those that
would commonly integrate with a U.S. multinational. In that case TkO < TkI for some k, implying,
on average, lower productivity draws 1/ai,kO (ν) than 1/ai,kI (ν). Unlike ζi,j , Tj is common across
firms.
Suppose the inverse productivity draws ai,j (ν) have materialized. Then, taking prices as given,
a potential supplier of variety ν in location/mode j maximizes
pi,j (ν)

xi,j (ν)
− li,j (ν) wj
τj

(8)

subject to the production function (7). Here, wj and τj denote wages and iceberg transport costs.
If the quantity demanded is positive and finite, optimality requires that the producer sets her price
equal to marginal cost
pi,j (ν) =

τj ai,j (ν) wj
.
ζi,j

(9)

As is clear from this expression, the firm-destination/mode specific productivity shock ζi,j can
equivalently represent idiosyncratic variation in transport costs or wages.
3.1.2

Basic model implications

Faced with price quotes from every location/mode in their sourcing strategy J ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ), firms
select the cheapest source for each intermediate ν. The distributional assumption together with
basic algebra implies that the share of intermediates sourced from j is the same as the cost share
of inputs from j, and equals

si,j = P

θ [τ w ]−θ
Tj ζi,j
j j

θ
k∈J ({ζi,l },δi ,fi ) Tk ζi,k

[τk wk ]−θ

.

(10)

Clearly, for fixed J ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ), locations/modes with greater Tj , greater ζi,j and lower τj wj have
larger cost shares. Further, since ζi,j varies across firms, the model can accommodate cost shares of
any size—which is critical for matching the data. Finally, the cost shares depend on the sourcing
32

See for instance Antràs (2005), Antràs and Helpman (2004) and Antràs and Chor (2013) among others for
theories of intra-firm production.

28

strategy J ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ). This implies that they also depend on the fixed cost draws fi that a firm
must pay to set up its supply chain, and the demand shock δi .
Optimal input sourcing implies that the unit cost function (6) becomes
1

1

c ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) = (γ) θ [Φ ({ζi,j } , δi , fi )]− θ

(11)

h 
i θ
1−ρ
, Γ is the gamma function, and
where γ = Γ θ+1−ρ
θ
Φ ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) =

X

θ
Tj ζi,j
[τj wj ]−θ .

(12)

j∈J ({ζi,l },δi ,fi )

Equation (12) summarizes the firm’s efficiency at producing its unique variety. We refer to this
term as the firm’s (overall) production efficiency. As is intuitive, firms with greater productivity in
location/mode j (greater ζi,j ) and firms with more sourcing locations/modes have greater values
of Φi and lower unit costs. Neither the cost shares (10) nor the unit costs depend on the quantity
the firm produces.
3.1.3

Optimal firm size and the scale elasticity

We next turn to the problem determining the firm’s optimal size. We assume that firm i faces an
iso-elastic demand curve of the form
xi = δi EPXσ−1 p−σ
i ,

(13)

where E is the household’s expenditure on the manufacturing bundle, PX =

1
 1−σ
1−σ
δ
p
di
is
i
i
i∈I

R

the manufacturing price index, δi the firm’s demand shock, and σ the demand elasticity. Given its
unit costs, the firm chooses the price for its product to maximize flow profits, pi xi − ci xi , subject
to the demand function (13). The firm optimally sets its price to a constant markup over marginal
cost, pi =

σ
σ−1 ci .

It is then possible to express revenues as
R ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) ∝ δi EPXσ−1 · Φ ({ζi,j } , δi , fi )

σ−1
θ

.

(14)

In our framework, the elasticity of firm revenues (a standard measure of firm size) with respect

29

to production efficiency Φ is
εR,Φ :=

∂ ln R
σ−1
=
.
∂ ln Φ
θ

(15)

As we will discuss momentarily, this scale elasticity is critical for the employment consequences of
foreign sourcing.
3.1.4

The choice of the firm’s sourcing strategy

In this partial equilibrium version of the model, we assume that domestic sourcing (HI and HO)
does not require a fixed cost payment. In contrast, selecting a sourcing strategy J 6= {HI,HO}
necessitates the payment of fixed cost fi,J . The vector fi is comprised of 22N fixed cost draws, one
for each J in the power set of {1, ..., N } × {I, O}.
Prior to selecting its sourcing strategy, the firm learns its vector of fixed cost draws fi . Since it
is not clear to what extent firms know about their productivity in all possible sourcing locations
{ζi,j } and its demand shock δi when they choose their sourcing strategy, we will be agnostic on
this point and simply assume that firms’ information set is ιi . This set contains the firms’ fixed
cost draws fi , but it may also contain signals on or actual values of the productivity draws {ζi,j }
and demand δi . We highlight that our estimation strategy below will not depend on any timing
assumptions regarding the revelation of shocks to the firm.
After learning ιi , the firm selects its sourcing strategy Ji ⊂ J to maximize expected profits
h
i
σ−1
E δi EPXσ−1 Σ [Φ ({ζi,j } , δi , fi )] θ |ιi − wH fi,J .

(16)

In this expression, Σ is a constant, wH is the wage in the Home country, and the fixed costs fi,J are
denominated in units of labor. E [·|ιi ] denotes the expectations operator conditional on information
set ιi . The solution to this problem is the firm’s optimal sourcing strategy Ji which depends on all
available information at the time of the choice.

3.2

Implications for Domestic Employment

We next turn to the model’s predictions for the relationship between firms’ domestic employment
and foreign sourcing. It is easily shown that the labor demanded by firm ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) with sourcing

30

strategy J ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) is

lHI ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) ∝

θ
[τH wH ]−θ
δi EPXσ−1 THI ζi,HI
·
· Φ ({ζi,j } , δi , fi )εR,Φ .
wH
Φ ({ζi,j } , δi , fi )
{z
}
|
{z
}
|
Scale effect

(17)

si,HI , Reallocation effect

Since the model is Ricardian in nature, intermediates that are produced at Home inside the firm
reflect the firm’s “comparative advantage” of intermediate production relative to other sourcing
options within its sourcing strategy. The term lHI ({ζi,j } , δi , fi ) is the labor required for this
production.
Consider a reduction in the costs of foreign sourcing, for instance, through greater values of
Tj or lower wages wj , j 6= HI, HO. In partial equilibrium, that is, for fixed expenditures E on
manufacturing goods, a constant Home wage wH , and a fixed manufacturing price index PX , lower
costs of foreign sourcing affect li,HI only through a change in Φi . Whether domestic employment
rises or falls depends on the relative strength of two channels.
First, lower costs of foreign sourcing lead firms to shift a greater fraction of intermediate production towards the location with lower costs—a reallocation effect. This decreases si,HI and thereby
reduces domestic labor demand. On the other hand, lower costs of sourcing from abroad reduce the
firm’s unit costs and increase production efficiency Φi . This effect increases the firm’s optimal size
and its domestic labor demand with elasticity εR,Φ —the scale elasticity we identified in equations
(14) and (15). The net effect on employment is determined by the sign of εR,Φ − 1. If negative, the
model implies that the reallocation effect dominates and employment declines after a reduction in
the costs of foreign sourcing. In this case we refer to foreign and domestic employment as substitutes. Conversely, if εR,Φ − 1 is positive, foreign and domestic employment are complements. This
notion of substitutability/complementarity is consistent with the terminology in Antràs, Fort, and
Tintelnot (2017) and independent of the elasticity of substitution between intermediates ρ.
The same condition characterizes the firm’s change in labor demand after a change in its sourcing
strategy, for instance due to lower fixed costs. If the firm adds an additional location/mode to its
set Ji (e.g., it engages in offshore activities), Φi rises and the firm’s labor demand falls if and only
if εR,Φ − 1 < 0.
Hence in partial equilibrium, the sign of εR,Φ − 1 completely characterizes the within-firm
domestic employment response. If εR,Φ − 1 > 0, one would expect recent productivity gains in
31

emerging markets to increase U.S. manufacturing employment in firms that source from abroad. In
contrast, if εR,Φ − 1 < 0, these same productivity gains should have led to job losses within these
firms. We next estimate the value of this key structural constant using microdata on firm sourcing
patterns.
3.2.1

Discussion

Absent general equilibrium effects, it is sufficient to know the scale elasticity εR,Φ :=

∂ ln R
∂ ln Φ

to

characterize the consequences of foreign sourcing. As noted above, in this simple model of importing
this scale elasticity is εR,Φ =

σ−1
θ .

Although this fact implies that knowledge of the scale elasticity

provides information on σ and θ, and vice-versa, we do not emphasize this connection as our
estimation method is more general than this particular mapping.
We illustrate in Appendix C.1 that an alternative framework with non-constant returns to scale
changes the structural parameters underlying the scale elasticity. In that alternative model the
estimation procedure we turn to momentarily will still correctly bound the scale elasticity εR,Φ and
this elasticity will still fully characterize the effect of foreign sourcing on domestic employment.
However, without knowledge of the degree of returns to scale, the estimated scale elasticity εR,Φ is
uninformative about σ and/or θ. Similarly, knowledge of σ and θ are only informative of the scale
elasticity if the degree of returns to scale is known. Introducing love of variety for intermediates as
in Benassy (1998) has similar implications as increasing returns to scale.

3.3
3.3.1

Structural Estimation
Estimating equation

Combining the cost share (equation 10) with the relationship for revenues (equation 14) or domestic
labor demand (equation 17) yields
ln yi = αj − εR,Φ ln si,j + (σ − 1) ln ζi,j + ln δi ,
where yi is either revenues Ri or scaled firm payroll

wi,HI li,HI
.
si,HI

j ∈ J,

(18)

In the model the two variables

are proportional to one another and both serve as measures of firm size. αj is a location/modespecific constant independent of firm characteristics. Equation (18) implies that holding the firm-

32

location/mode-specific supply shock ζi,j and the demand shock δi constant, a reduction in the log
cost share ln si,j by one infinitesimal unit raises the log firm size by εR,Φ , which is precisely the
elasticity which determines whether foreign sourcing and domestic employment are complements
or substitutes as defined above.
Equation (18) holds for all sourcing locations/modes j in a firm’s sourcing strategy Ji . For
instance, for a purely domestic firm, it holds for j = HI and j = HO. If the firm also sources at
arms-length from country k, then the equation also holds for j = kO, and so forth. Hence, and
letting ni denote the number of location/modes in firm i’s sourcing strategy, we have ni equations
per firm.
To obtain a single estimating equation per firm, we take the simple average of (18) over all
locations/modes j in firm i’s sourcing strategy. This gives
ln yi =

1 X
αj − εR,Φ ln si + ui ,
ni

(19)

j∈Ji

where ln si =

1
ni

P

j∈Ji

ln si,j . The error ui now contains averages of the firm’s shocks,
ui = (σ − 1) ln ζi + ln δi ,

where ln ζi =

1
ni

P

j∈Ji

(20)

ln ζi,j . The location/mode-specific constants αj are fixed effects scaled by

1/ni . It turns out that relative to equation (18), this averaging has additional benefits which we
discuss below. We use equation (19) as our estimating equation. If the error ui was uncorrelated
with the average share ln si , it would be possible to estimate the scale elasticity εR,Φ consistently
by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS).
3.3.2

Intuition

To understand the intuition connecting our estimating equation (19) to the scale effect, it is useful
to consider the following approximation.
Lemma 3.1. To a first order, ln si = α − ln ni , for some constant α.
Proof. See Appendix C.2.
Lemma 3.1 is a first order Taylor approximation and states that the average log cost share is
33

decreasing in the number of sourcing locations/modes. It follows that, up to a first order, estimating
equation (19) can be viewed as a regression of the log firm size on the log number of sourcing
locations. To a first order, the log number of sourcing locations captures the scale effect.
To see why, note that the ideal experiment to estimate elasticity εR,Φ is to take two otherwise
identical firms and to add one foreign location/mode to the sourcing strategy of the first of these
two firms. (This can be done by reducing the fixed costs of sourcing from that location/mode for
firm one.) After this addition, the first firm sources a positive fraction of intermediates from the
newly added location/mode. This has two implications. First, the average cost share falls as it is
decreasing in the number of sourcing locations/modes (Lemma 3.1). Second, because the firm only
purchases intermediates from the new location/mode which are cheaper there than in any other
location/mode of its sourcing strategy, its unit costs fall and its optimal scale increases. Thus,
ceteris paribus, a lower average log cost share is associated with greater size.33
In practice, the first order approximation of the average log cost share is surprisingly precise.
In Table 6 below, we show that the R-squared of a regression of the average log cost share on the
log number of sourcing locations/modes (and a set of fixed effects) is 92 percent.
3.3.3

An upper bound for the scale elasticity

Of course, the estimation of the scale elasticity εR,Φ on the basis of equation (19), is complicated by
the fact that ln ζi and δi are unobserved and thus enter the error term. We will next demonstrate
that under plausible assumptions we can sign this omitted variable bias, leading to an upper bound
of the scale elasticity εR,Φ .
Lemma 3.1 implies that conditional on the firm’s sourcing strategy Ji , which determines ni ,
ln si is uncorrelated with the structural shocks in the error term—again up to a first order. This
statement is obvious for the demand shock δi , since this shock affects the shares si,j only through
sourcing strategy Ji (see equation 10). However, it is also true for the productivity shocks ζi,j in
location/mode j. Conditional on Ji , an increase in ζi,j raises the cost share from location/mode j,
but decreases the cost shares from all other locations/modes k 6= j, because shares sum to one. Up
to a first order, these effects cancel, leaving the average log share ln si unchanged.
An implication of this fact is that the omitted variable bias that would arise if equation (19)
33

This intuition is closely related to Blaum, LeLarge, and Peters (Forthcoming), who show that changes in firm’s
domestic cost shares are informative about changes in unit costs.

34

was estimated by OLS, is solely determined by the correlation between the number of sourcing
locations/modes ni and the shocks ln ζi and δi . This feature is the critical advantage of estimating
the average specification (19) rather than specifications which are based on individual shares as
equation (18).34
The fact that the bias is solely determined by the covariance between ln ni and ui allows us to
succinctly state the assumption necessary for obtaining an upper bound for the scale elasticity.
Assumption 1. Firms choose their sourcing strategy Ji , and hence the number of sourcing locations/modes ni , such that


Cov [ln ni , ui ] = Cov ln ni , (σ − 1) ln ζi + ln δi ≥ 0.
Assumption 1 states that firms with greater demand shocks δi and greater average productivity
ln ζi are weakly more likely to source from more locations/modes. We view this assumption as
plausible and consistent with standard models in the literature. For instance, it can be verified in
the model of Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot (2017) when fixed costs are stochastic and independent
of the firms’ other structural shocks.
Under Assumption 1, Lemma 3.1 immediately implies that OLS estimation of the scale elasticity
εR,Φ from equation (19) delivers an estimate which is biased upwards. Since this result only holds
up to a first order due to the approximation in Lemma 3.1, we use an additional, two stage least
squares (2SLS) estimator using ln ni as an “instrument” for ln si . Under Assumption 1, the exclusion
restriction is violated because the “instrument” is positively correlated with the error term. The
resulting estimate is again upward biased, in this case without an approximation. We summarize
our bounding strategy in the following proposition.
Proposition 3.2. Under Assumption 1, the following statements hold.
1. Up to a first order, the OLS estimate of εR,Φ based on equation (19) is biased upwards.
34

For the average specification (19) the condition for an upward-biased scale elasticity is stated in Assumption 1.
An analogous assumption for the specification based on individual shares as in equation (18) is unlikely to hold. The
reason is that the error contains the location/mode-specific component ζi,j which can be positively correlated with the
share si,j , because greater productivity in destination/mode j lead to a greater cost share from that destination/mode.
Such a positive covariance would bias the scale elasticity downwards. Hence, specification (18) cannot easily be used
to bound the scale elasticity.

35

2. Without approximation, the 2SLS estimate of εR,Φ based on equation (19), using ln ni as an
“instrument” for ln si , is biased upwards.


Proof. Under Assumption 1, Cov ln si , ui ≤ 0 up to a first order. The assumption Cov [ln ni , ui ] ≥
0 immediately determines the asymptotic bias of the 2SLS estimator.

3.4
3.4.1

Results
Baseline estimates

Table 6 presents the baseline results from a sample pooled across the Census years 1997, 2002 and
2007, and using ln Ri (revenues) as the dependent variable. We begin by estimating (19) without
controls for productivity or demand. Under Assumption 1, the estimate for the scale elasticity εR,Φ
will be biased upwards. As specification (1) of Table 6 shows, the estimate of εR,Φ is 1.1. If the
bias is sufficiently large so that the true scale elasticity is below 1, the reallocation effect dominates
the scale effect in our sample and foreign sourcing is a substitute for domestic employment.
We confirm this intuition by showing that adding productivity controls reduces the estimate of
the scale elasticity. In specification (2) of Table 6 we add a third order polynomial in unit labor
productivity. The estimate drops from 1.1 to 0.97. Adding industry-year fixed effects to control
for common industry-specific demand and supply shocks further reduces the estimate of the scale
elasticity to 0.8 and significantly below one. This estimate should still be interpreted as an upper
bound on the elasticity, since the control variables imperfectly soak up the confounding variation.
For instance, idiosyncratic demand disturbances remain in the error term.
The final column of Table 6 uses the number of sourcing location/modes ni as an “instrument”
for the average log cost share in estimating equation (19). As discussed above, the 2SLS estimate
is biased upwards even without requiring the first order approximation. The estimate of approximately 0.5 suggests that the true scale elasticity is likely very small. Hence, all our estimates this
far indicate that foreign sourcing is a substitute for domestic employment.
3.4.2

Robustness and extensions

We next discuss a number of extensions and robustness checks for the estimation of εR,Φ .

36

Table 6: Baseline estimates: pooled sample
Dependent variable: ln Ri (Revenues)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Specification
Scale Elasticity εR,Φ

1.101***
(0.0506)

0.965***
(0.0457)

0.803***
(0.0175)

0.498***
(0.0213)

No
No
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No

726000
0.227
No

726000
0.286
No

726000
0.405
No

726000
0.403
Yes
6895
0.9208

Polynomial in Unit Labor Productivity
Industry-Year FE
Year FE
Observations
R-squared
2SLS (instrument ln ni )
First Stage F
First Stage R2

Notes: The data are from the LBD, the CMF, and the LFTTD. The estimates are based on equation
(19). As suggested by the model, we control for location/mode fixed effects interacted with 1/ni in
all specifications. In the pooled sample, the αj are allowed to vary by year. To comply with Census
disclosure requirements, the sample sizes are rounded. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are
reported in parentheses. *** indicates that the estimate is significantly different from zero at the 1
percent level.

Estimates by Census year

Table 7 presents the estimates of the scale elasticity separately for

each Census year in our data. As above, we estimate specification (19) first without productivity
controls (specification 1), and then sequentially add a third order polynomial in unit labor productivity (specification 2), and industry-year fixed effects (specification 3). Specification (4) reports
the 2SLS estimate when the number of sourcing locations/modes is used as an “instrument”. The
upper bound of the scale elasticity is significantly below one in every Census year and relatively
stable.
Alternative dependent variables
scaled payroll, ln

wi,HI li,HI
.
si,HI

We next replace the dependent variable with the log of

The model predicts that scaled payroll is proportional to firm revenues

and payroll may better capture the employment consequences of foreign sourcing. Table 8 reports
the OLS estimates of εR,Φ without controls (specification 1) and the 2SLS estimate with controls
(specification 2). Both estimates are almost unchanged. We also consider a measure of domestic

37

Table 7: Baseline estimates: by Census year

Year

Specification

1997

Scale Elasticity εR,Φ

Dependent variable: ln Ri (Revenues)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
1.293***
(0.0945)

1.039***
(0.0743)

0.842***
(0.0283)

0.346***
(0.0348)

270000
0.196

270000
0.307

270000
0.410

270000
0.406
1951
0.92

0.838***
(0.0992)

0.748***
(0.0847)

0.673***
(0.0302)

0.486***
(0.0348)

249000
0.196

249000
0.275

249000
0.392

249000
0.391
2454
0.92

1.176***
(0.0526)

1.054***
(0.0475)

0.848***
(0.0222)

0.639***
(0.0375)

207000
0.252

207000
0.296

207000
0.417

207000
0.416
2901
0.92

No
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations
R-Squared
First Stage F
First Stage R2
2002

Scale Elasticity εR,Φ

Observations
R-Squared
First Stage F
First Stage R2
2007

Scale Elasticity εR,Φ

Observations
R-Squared
First Stage F
First Stage R2
Polynomial in Labor Productivity
Industry FE
2SLS (Instrument ln ni )

Notes: The data are from the LBD, the CMF, and the LFTTD. The estimates are based on equation (19). As
suggested by the model, we control for location/mode fixed effects interacted with 1/ni in all specifications.
To comply with Census disclosure requirements, the sample sizes are rounded. Heteroscedasticity robust
standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** indicates that the estimate is significantly different from
zero at the 1 percent level.

revenues by removing exports from total revenues. Since many importing firms also export, one
may be concerned that a simultaneous choice of the extensive margins of importing and exporting
affects our results. The estimates, however, barely change when we consider domestic revenues
instead of total revenues (specifications (3) and (4) of Table 8).
38

Table 8: Robustness: alternative dependent variables
Dependent Variable
Specification
Scale Elasticity εR,Φ

Polynomial in Labor Productivity
Industry-Year FE
Year FE
2SLS (Instrument ln ni )
Observations
R-squared
First Stage F
First Stage R2

Scaled Payroll
(1)
(2)

Domestic Revenues
(3)
(4)

1.051***
(0.0480)

0.484***
(0.0208)

1.109***
(0.0506)

0.489***
(0.0221)

No
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

No
No
Yes
No

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

726000
0.224

726000
0.382
6895
0.921

726000
0.217

726000
0.394
6895
0.921

Notes: The data are from the LBD, the CMF, and the LFTTD. The estimates are based on equation
(19) and the sample is pooled across years 1997, 2002, and 2007. As suggested by the model, we control
for location/mode fixed effects interacted with 1/ni in all specifications. In the pooled sample, the αj are
allowed to vary by year. To comply with Census disclosure requirements, the sample sizes are rounded.
w
li,HI
The dependent variable scaled payroll is calculated as ln i,HI
. Domestic revenues refer to the log
si,HI
of total revenues minus exports. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** indicates that the estimate is significantly different from zero at the 1 percent level.

Measurement error

A further concern is that the estimates are small due to measurement error

in the average log cost share. This is almost certainly not the case. It is possible to show that
measurement error in individual cost shares leaves the average log cost share unaffected up to a first
order. If, for instance, one cost share is measured too high, then other cost shares are measured
too low because the shares sum to one. To a first order, this type of measurement error cancels out
and leaves the average log cost share unchanged. Of course, the 2SLS estimates, which are smaller
than the OLS estimates, also alleviate concerns about measurement error.
A related concern is that logarithms of small individual cost shares could become arbitrarily
negative because the logarithm is unbounded. Such small values could unduely affect the average
log cost share—our right hand side variable of interest. To rule out that this is the case, we reassign
cost shares from locations/modes below 1 basis point to the other cost shares of the same firm.35 As
35

More precisely, we reassign cost shares from locations/modes below 1 basis point to the other share from the
same country if available. For instance, if a firm sources from a particular country at arms length less than 1 basis

39

Table 9: Robustness: Removing small shares and inter/intra firm distinction
Dependent variable: ln Ri (Revenues)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

Specification
Scale Elasticity εR,Φ

1.051***
(0.0480)

0.484***
(0.0208)

0.729***
(0.0101)

0.394***
(0.0505)

No
No
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No

726000
0.396

726000
0.395
5757
0.922

726000
0.407

726000
0.403
6610
0.927

Polynomial in Labor Productivity
Industry-Year FE
2SLS (Instrument ln ni )
Remove small shares†
Distinction between AL and RP shares
Observations
R-squared
First Stage F
First Stage R2

Notes: The data are from the LBD, the CMF, and the LFTTD. The estimates are based on equation
(19) and the sample is pooled across years 1997, 2002, and 2007. As suggested by the model, we control
for location/mode fixed effects interacted with 1/ni in all specifications. In the pooled sample, the αj
are allowed to vary by year. AL abbreviates to arms-length and RP related-party. To comply with
Census disclosure requirements, the sample sizes are rounded. Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors
are reported in parentheses. *** indicates that the estimate is significantly different from zero at the 1
percent level.
†: The average log cost share is calculated after reassigning cost shares from locations/modes below
1 basis point to the other share from the same country if available, and otherwise to the domestic
arms-length (HO) share.

Table 9 shows in specifications (1) and (2), this correction has essentially no affect on the estimates.
Further robustness

To show that our results are not driven by the distinction between arms-

length and related-party sourcing we calculate cost shares exclusively by sourcing location (and not
mode) and estimate the scale elasticity. The point estimate for the upper bound, reported in Table
9 specifications (3) and (4), are even lower than before.
Finally, we show in Figure 5 that the scale elasticity does not vary substantially with the number
of sourcing locations/modes. The figure plots the log firm size as a function of the average log cost
share, estimated using a kernel-weighted local polynomial. Since the slope is relatively constant,
point of its total costs, then we reassign this value to the related-party cost share from the same country if the firm
also sources from an affiliate in the same country. If the firm does not source from the same country, we reassign the
value to the domestic arms-length (HO) share.

40

Figure 5: Elasticity of Size with Respect to Average Cost Shares

Notes: The data are from the CMF, the CMF, and the LFTTD as explained in the text.
The figure plots the log firm size as a function of the average log cost share, estimated
using a kernel-weighted local polynomial.

there is little evidence that the scale elasticity varies with firm size.36
Instrumental variables estimation An alternate approach to estimating equation (18) would
be to use an instrument which isolates variation in the cost shares orthogonal to the above confounders. In the model, the only source of such variation is heterogeneous fixed cost draws which
lead otherwise identical firms to choose different sourcing strategies. We do not have an instrument
that isolates such variation. One approach which has been taken in the literature is to difference the
estimating equation and to use the Hummels et al. (2014) World Export Supply (WEX) instrument
to estimate εR,Φ . Unfortunately, this instrument is weak in our sample. As discussed in Section 2,
alternative instruments based on exchange rate shocks or tariff/transport cost changes also have
little to no relevance for the imports of the full population of U.S. firms in our 19-year panel.
36

For small firms with average log cost shares between -1.5 and -0.5 the elasticity is slightly larger. However, this
fact is driven by the approximate discreteness of the average log cost share. Using Lemma 3.1, firms with two, three,
and four sourcing locations/modes have approximate average log costs shares of − ln 2 ≈ −0.69, − ln 3 ≈ −1.10, and
− ln 4 ≈ −1.39.

41

3.4.3

Relationship to other estimates

In contrast to our estimates, Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot (2017) find that εR,Φ is larger than one.
This difference could be explained by a number of factors. Most importantly, our data and approach
to creating a time-consistent manufacturing sample is very different from that used by Antràs, Fort,
and Tintelnot (2017) as we drop from our sample any establishments that are headquarter establishments, likely to be primarily headquarter establishments, or non-manufacturing establishments.
It is possible that non-manufacturing sectors and/or the non-manufacturing components of firms
have a stronger scale effect. This would lead to larger estimates of εR,Φ .37 An additional difference
is that we focus on imports of intermediates rather than all imports.
Kovak, Oldenski, and Sly (2018) find that foreign sourcing has a modestly positive effect for
continuing multinationals. Their estimate can be interpreted as the net scale and reallocation
effect for the firms in their data. In our model, this would imply a value of εR,Φ that is greater
than one. There are several possible reasons for this difference. First, their employment measure
explicitly includes U.S. headquarters (which likely include some non-manufacturing employment).
Second, since their data only covers existing multinationals, changes in employment (and foreign
sourcing) are not observable in the first year in which a firm becomes a multinational. Third, our
data includes detailed information on arms-length input sourcing by multinationals, in contrast
to Kovak, Oldenski, and Sly (2018). We therefore capture a broader range of activities of foreign
sourcing. Finally, the methodologies differ. We note that Kovak, Oldenski, and Sly (2018) also find
a negative net effect when they examine the extensive margin.

4

Aggregation

4.1

A naive policy counterfactual

We briefly explore the aggregate implications of our estimates using equation (18). To do so, we
consider the population of U.S. manufacturing firms in 1997 and predict the aggregate employment
37

Since the restricted-access microdata available for this paper do not include information on the cost structure
of non-manufacturing/headquarter establishments, we are unable to fully assess the reasons behind the discrepancy
between our results and Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot (2017). We perform one exercise that supports the interpretation
in the text. In Appendix B we replicate the transitions exercise from Section 2.2.2 on the non-manufacturing establishments of multinationals. We find no evidence of a relative drop in employment growth in the non-manufacturing
sector.

42

decline implied by the difference in their sourcing shares between 1997 and 2007 and our estimates
of εR,Φ . We use the upper bound estimate of 0.5, which likely understates the within-firm job loss
due to foreign sourcing. As a point of comparison, we also use an estimate of 0.2, which implies
an even smaller scale effect. In this exercise we predict employment changes within firms sourcing
from abroad (changes in sHI ), and first-order effects on their U.S. arms-length suppliers (changes
in sHO ).
This aggregation approach requires that we observe firms in both 1997 and 2007. It therefore
cannot account for the declines in employment due to offshoring in firms that exited before 2007.
Further, it underestimates the intensive margin effect in continuing firms, as some firm identifiers in
the data change even though these firms continue to exist. Hence, both these factors, coupled with
the fact that our estimate of 0.5 is an upper bound, suggest this procedure will underestimate the
job-loss due to foreign sourcing. We further highlight that the results of this exercise are relative
to the existing macroeconomic environment in 1997 and do not capture factors that might have
changed between 1997 and 2007, such as new policies in other countries or structural change, but
are not reflected in firms’ sourcing shares.
All else equal, this exercise suggests that for a scale elasticity of 0.5, 0.81 million lost jobs can
be attributed to foreign sourcing. Of this, 0.34 million jobs were lost within multinationals, and
the remainder of the losses are due to declines in multinational demand for arms-length sourcing
in the U.S. (0.36 million), as well as foreign sourcing by non-multinational firms (0.11 million).
This number increases substantially when considering lower but plausible elasticities within our
bound. Setting εR,Φ to 0.2 implies that 1.3 million jobs, or roughly one-third of the total decline
during this period, have been lost due to foreign sourcing.

4.2

General Equilibrium

We next consider a general equilibrium extension of the model in order to capture several equilibrium features that were absent in the above “naive” counterfactual. These features include firm
entry and exit, changes in the manufacturing price index, and substitution of manufacturing demand due to relative price changes. To conserve on space we only provide a rough outline in this
section and relegate the full exposition of the model to Appendix D.
The model is a simplified version of Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot (2017). We assume a three

43

country world, composed of Home (H), North (N) and South (S). All countries produce a freely
traded non-manufacturing good, but only Home and North produce differentiated manufacturing
goods. As in the previous section, intermediates in manufacturing can be sourced from other
countries, including the South. The households in all three countries consume manufacturing
goods from Home and the North, as well as the non-manufacturing good. Manufacturing firms are
heterogeneous and only the most productive firms will pay the fixed costs of offshoring to obtain
access to cheaper intermediates from abroad. We assume a scale elasticity of 0.2—a reasonable
value below our estimated upper bound.
In our main counterfactual, we adjust the fixed costs of offshoring to match the change in
trade flows over our sample period. All other parameters remain the same. Consistent with our
earlier results from Section 4.1, the increase in intermediate input imports explains approximately
one-third of the aggregate manufacturing employment decline. The general equilibrium forces
approximately offset one another and do not alter the conclusion substantially. We also highlight
that the increase in foreign sourcing leads to welfare gains in the Home country. For a full description
of the model, its calibration, and the counterfactual exercises, see Appendix D.
We note that all attempts to assess the role of foreign sourcing in general equilibrium require
strong assumptions and so should be interpreted with caution.

5

Conclusion

We present new facts showing that U.S. multinationals played a key role in the U.S. manufacturing
employment decline. These firms were responsible for 41% of the aggregate manufacturing employment decline between 1993-2011, and displayed low job creation rates and high job destruction
rates throughout this period. U.S. multinational firms also had lower employment growth rates
than a narrow control group of similar non-multinational firms. In our data, multinationals are
responsible for over 90% of all arms-length and related-party input imports and the fraction of U.S.
multinationals which source from developing countries nearly doubled between 1993-2011. Using
an event-study approach, we find that newly multinational establishments decrease employment
while their parent firms increase imports of intermediate inputs. In summary, these facts suggest
that U.S. multinationals reduced employment by offshoring the production of intermediate inputs
to developing countries.
44

We then study a model of foreign input sourcing in which a single key elasticity—of firm size with
respect to production efficiency—governs the employment impact of offshoring. Estimates of this
elasticity imply that foreign sourcing is a substitute for domestic employment. Finally, we present
two approaches to quantify the aggregate impact on manufacturing employment. These suggest
that the role of offshoring is sizable. An important caveat is that our paper exclusively studies the
manufacturing sector. It is possible (and indeed, likely) that foreign sourcing is complementary to
employment in the U.S. service sector.
As in many models, the model we present in this paper implies U.S. welfare gains, rather than
losses, from foreign sourcing. These welfare gains reflect consumers’ access to cheaper manufacturing goods and imply that globalization is generally beneficial. However, our results add to the
mounting evidence, that international trade differentially exposes manufacturing workers to competition from abroad. This suggests that policy interventions that assist displaced workers may be
desirable.

45

References
Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Brendan Price. 2016. “Import
Competition and the Great U.S. Employment Sag of the 2000s.” Journal of Labor Economics
34 (S1):S141–S198.
Alfaro, Laura and Andrew Charlton. 2009. “Intra-Industry Foreign Direct Investment.” American
Economic Review 99 (5):2096–2119.
Antràs, Pol. 2005. “Property Rights and the International Organization of Production.” American
Economic Review 95 (2):25–32.
Antràs, Pol and Davin Chor. 2013.
81 (6):2127–2204.

“Organizing the Global Value Chain.”

Econometrica

Antràs, Pol, Teresa C. Fort, and Felix Tintelnot. 2017. “The Margins of Global Sourcing: Theory
and Evidence from US Firms.” American Economic Review 107 (9):2514–64.
Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman. 2004.
112 (3):552–580.

“Global Sourcing.”

Journal of Political Economy

Arkolakis, Costas and Fabian Eckert. 2017. “Combinatorial Discrete Choice.” Working paper.
Artuç, Erhan, Shubham Chaudhuri, and John McLaren. 2010. “Trade Shocks and Labor Adjustment: A Structural Empirical Approach.” American Economic Review 100 (3):1008–45.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Jae Song. 2014. “Trade Adjustment: Worker-Level
Evidence.” American Economic Review 129 (4):1799–1860.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review
103 (6):2121–68.
Benassy, Jean-Pascal. 1998. “Is there always too little research in endogenous growth with expanding product variety?” European Economic Review 42 (1):61–69.
Bernard, Andrew, Teresa Fort, Valerie Smeets, and Frederic Warzynski. 2018. “Heterogeneous
Globalization: Offshoring and Reorganization.” Working paper.
Bernard, Andrew and J. Bradford Jensen. 2007. “Firm Structure, Multinationals, and Manufacturing Plant Deaths.” Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (2):193–204.
Bernard, Andrew, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2010. “Intrafirm
Trade and Product Contractibility.” American Economic Review 100 (2):444–48.
Bernard, Andrew B. and Teresa C. Fort. 2015. “Factoryless Goods Producing Firms.” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105 (5):518–523.
Blasnik, Michael. 2010. “RECLINK: A Stata Module to Probabilistically Match Records.” Working
paper.

46

Blaum, Joaquin, Claire LeLarge, and Michael Peters. Forthcoming. “The Gains from Input Trade
in Firm-Based Models of Importing.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics .
Boehm, Christoph, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar. Forthcoming. “Input Linkages and
the Transmission of Shocks: Firm Level Evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku Earthquake.” Review
of Economics and Statistics .
Braconier, Henrik and Karolina Ekholm. 2000. “Swedish Multinationals and Competition from
High and Low-Wage Locations.” Review of International Economics 8 (3):448–461.
Brainard, S. Lael and David A. Riker. 1997. “Are U.S. Multinationals Exporting U.S. Jobs?”
Working Paper 5958, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference with Multiway
Clustering.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 29 (2):238–249.
Contessi, Silvio. 2015. “Multinational firms entry and productivity: Some aggregate implications
of firm-level heterogeneity.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 61:61 – 80.
Cravino, Javier and Andrei Levchenko. 2014. “Multinational Firms and International Business
Cycle Transmission.” Working paper, University of Michigan.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger. 1992. “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction and
Employment Reallocation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (3):819–863.
———. 2001. “Sectoral job creation and destruction responses to oil price changes.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 48 (3):465–512.
Davis, Steven J, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. 1996. “ Small Business and Job Creation:
Dissecting the Myth and Reassessing the Facts.” Small Business Economics 8 (4):297–315.
Debaere, Peter, Hongshik Lee, and Joonhyung Lee. 2010. “It Matters Where You Go: Outward
Foreign Direct Investment and Multinational Employment Growth at Home.” Journal of Development Economics 91 (2):301–309.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines. 2009. “Domestic Effects of the Foreign
Activities of US Multinationals.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1 (1):181–203.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology, Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica
70 (5):1741–1779.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, and Margaret McMillan. 2015. “Why are American Workers
getting Poorer? China, Trade and Offshoring.” NBER Working Papers 21027, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Inc.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and Shannon Phillips. 2014. “Estimating
the Impact of Trade and Offshoring on American Workers using the Current Population Surveys.”
The Review of Economics and Statistics 96 (3):581–595.
Flaaen, Aaron. 2013a. “Constructing a Bridge Between the LexisNexis Directory of Corporate
Affiliations and the U.S. Business Register.” Working paper, University of Michigan.
47

———. 2013b. “Multinational Firms in Context.” Working paper, University of Michigan.
Fort, Teresa and Shawn Klimek. 2016. “The Effect of Industry Classification Changes on U.S.
Employment Composition.” Working paper, U.S. Census Bureau.
Fort, Teresa, Justin Pierce, and Peter Schott. 2018. “New Perspectives on the Decline of U.S.
Manufacturing Employment.” Working Paper 24490, NBER.
Halpern, László, Miklós Koren, and Adam Szeidl. 2015. “Imported Inputs and Productivity.”
American Economic Review 105 (12):3660–3703.
Harrison, Ann and Margaret McMillan. 2011. “Offshoring Jobs? Multinationals and U.S. Manufacturing Employment.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3):857–875.
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen Redding. 2010. “Inequality and Unemployment in
a Global Economy.” Econometrica 78 (4):1239–1283.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Stephen Yeaple. 2004. “Exports vs FDI with Heterogeneous
Firms.” American Economic Review 94:300–316.
Hijzen, Alexander, Sebastien Jean, and Thierry Mayer. 2011. “The Effects at Home of Initiating Production Abroad: Evidence from Matched French Firms.” Review of World Economics
147 (3):457–483.
Hummels, David, Rasmus Jørgensen, Jakob Munch, and Chong Xiang. 2014. “The Wage Effects
of Offshoring: Evidence from Danish Matched Worker-Firm Data.” American Economic Review
104 (6):1597–1629.
Konings, Jozef and Alan Patrick Murphy. 2006. “Do Multinational Enterprises Relocate Employment to Low-Wage Regions.” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv (Review of World Economics)
142 (2):267–286.
Kovak, Brian, Lindsey Oldenski, and Nicholas Sly. 2018. “The Labor Market Effects of Offshoring
by U.S. Multinational Firms: Evidence from Changes in Global Tax Policies.” Working paper.
Magyari, Ildiko. 2017. “Firm Reorganization, Chinese Imports, and US Manufacturing Employment.” Working paper.
Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding. 2015. “New Trade Models, New Welfare Implications.”
American Economic Review 105 (3):1105–1146.
Monarch, Ryan, Jooyoun Park, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. 2017. “Domestic gains from offshoring?
Evidence from TAA-linked U.S. microdata.” Journal of International Economics 105:150 – 173.
Muendler, Marc-Andreas and Sascha O. Becker. 2010. “Margins of Multinational Labor Substitution.” American Economic Review 100 (5):1999–2030.
Pierce, Justin and Peter Schott. 2012. “A Concordance Between U.S. Harmonized System Codes
and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries.” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement
37 (1-2):61–96.

48

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott. 2016. “The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing
Employment.” American Economic Review 106 (7):1632–62.
Ramondo, Natalia, Veronica Rappoport, and Kim J. Ruhl. 2016. “Intrafirm trade and vertical
fragmentation in U.S. multinational corporations.” Journal of International Economics 98:51 –
59.
Wasi, Nada and Aaron Flaaen. 2015. “Record Linkage Using Stata: Pre-Processing, Linking and
Reviewing Utilities.” The Stata Journal 15 (3):672–697.

49

A

Data Appendix

A.1

Identifying Plants Owned by Multinationals

The discussion that follows is an abbreviated form of the full technical note (see Flaaen (2013a))
documenting the bridge between the DCA and the Business Register.
A.1.1

External Sources of Information

Identification of foreign ownership and affiliate information comes from two external sources, the
LexisNexis Directory of Corporate Affiliations (DCA) and Uniworld Business Publications.
The LexisNexis DCA is the primary source of information on the ownership and locations of U.S.
and foreign affiliates. This directory describes the organization and hierarchy of public and private
firms, and consists of three separate databases: U.S. Public Companies, U.S. Private Companies,
and International – those parent companies with headquarters located outside the United States.
The U.S. Public database contains all firms traded on the major U.S. exchanges, as well as major
firms traded on smaller U.S. exchanges. To be included in the U.S. Private database, a firm must
demonstrate revenues in excess of $1 million, 300 or more employees, or substantial assets. Those
firms included in the International database, which include both public and private companies,
generally have revenues greater than $10 million. Each database contains information on all parent
company subsidiaries, regardless of the location of the subsidiary in relation to the parent.
Uniworld Business Publications (UBP) provides a secondary source used to identify multinational structure, and serves to increase the coverage and reliability of these measures. UBP has
produced periodic volumes documenting the locations and international scope of i) American firms
operating in foreign countries; and ii) foreign firms with operations in the United States. Although
only published biennially, these directories benefit from a focus on multinational firms, and from
no sales threshold for inclusion.
Because there exist no common identifiers between these directories and Census Bureau data
infrastructure, we rely on probabilistic name and address matching — so-called “fuzzy merging”
— to link the directories to the Census data infrastructure.
A.1.2

The Matching Procedure: An Overview

The matching procedure uses a set of record linking utilities described in Wasi and Flaaen (2015).
This program uses a bigram string comparator algorithm on multiple variables with differing userspecified weights.38 The primary variables for matching include the establishment name along with
geographic indicators of street, city, zip code, and state.
Recognizing the potential for false-positive matches, we use a relatively conservative criterion for
identifying matches between the directories and the Census Bureau data. In practice, the procedure
generally requires a match score exceeding 95 percent, except in those cases where ancillary evidence
provides increased confidence in the match.39 This matching proceeds in an iterative fashion, in
38

The term bigram refers to two consecutive characters within a string (the word bigram contains 5 possible
bigrams: “bi”, “ig”, “gr”, “ra”, and “am”). The program is a modified version of Blasnik (2010), and assigns a score
for each variable between the two datasets based on the percentage of matching bigrams. See Flaaen (2013a) or Wasi
and Flaaen (2015) for more information.
39
The primary sources of such ancillary evidence are clerical review of the matches, and additional parent identifier
matching evidence.

50

which a series of matching procedures are applied with decreasingly restrictive sets of matching
requirements. In other words, the initial matching attempt uses the most stringent standards
possible, after which the non-matching records proceed to a further matching iteration, often with
less stringent standards. In each iteration, the matching records are assigned a flag that indicates
the standard associated with the match.
A.1.3

Matching Procedures: Yearly Steps

The following list describes the specific steps in the routine used to match the DCA and Census
data (the UBP data matching used a similar routine).
1. Match DCA to Compustat (and then to Compustat-Bridge) for those DCA observations with
a Compustat Identifier.
(a) The DCA to Compustat bridge was accomplished external to the Census data architecture, using similar name and address matching procedures. The percentage of DCA
firms matched to Compustat firms was in line with our other match rates (≈ 70 percent).
2. Apply the standardization routines to the name and address variables of both DCA and the
Business Register (BR). Remove DCA observations
3. Tier 1 Matching
(a) Restrict BR to LBD observations (save non-matching observations for Tier 2)
(b) Apply reclink2 of Compustat-linked DCA observations to BR (using name, street address, zip code, and requiring city, state, and firmid to match exactly)
(c) Apply reclink2 of non Compustat-linked DCA observations to BR (using name, street
address, zip code, and requiring city and state to match exactly)
(d) Apply reclink2 of non-matching DCA to BR (using name, street address, zip code, and
city, but now only requiring state to match exactly)
(e) Evaluate matches
• if “match score” is above 0.95, classify as a match40 .
• if “match score” is between 0.80 and 0.95, evaluate manually
• if “match score” is below 0.80, classify as a non-match

41

(f) Append evaluated-as-match DCA observations to the other matched observations, and
send non-matching DCA observations to Tier 2 matching
4. Tier 2 Matching
40

We have looked at a several thousand of these potential matches and see that the false-positive rate for these is
very small (i.e. less than 0.5 percent)
41
The manual evaluation of matches is the one step in which we utilize some longitudinal information. (Without
this, the set of potential matches to evaluate was too large – in the range of 5-6 thousand per year.) Rather than
continue to manually review common matches (and non-matches) from year to year, we keep the pool of manually
evaluated matches from previous years and automatically accept as a match any potential match that exactly aligns
with a match evaluated in a previous year. The same is true for previously-evaluated non-matches.

51

(a) For the non-matching DCA observations, try to find an existing match with the same
(DCA) parent identifier. Take the corresponding BR firm identifier (alpha or ein) for
this match, and search for match over BR observations with identical alpha/ein
• apply reclink2 of DCA to BR (using name, street address, and city, and requiring
state and alpha/ein to match exactly)
• if “match score” is above 0.70 classify as as match – spot checks have shown no false
positives when requiring the alpha/ein to match
(b) Implement additional name standardization routines
(c) Apply reclink2 of DCA to non-LBD-matched BR observations (using name, street address, and city, and requiring state to match exactly)
• if “match score” is above 0.95, classify as a match
See Table A1 for a summary of the establishment-level match rate statistics by year and type of
firm. Table A2 lists the corresponding information for the Uniworld data. It is important to note
that we implement the matching at the establishment level, whereas the variables we are using
from these external directories are firm-level by their nature. Hence, the true degree of firm-level
matching is in practice much higher than the establishment match rates from Table A1.

52

Table A1: DCA Establishments and Match Rates, by Firm Type
Panel A: Total DCA

53

1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Panel B: U.S. Multinationals

Panel C: Foreign Multinationals

DCA
(Total)

Matched
to BR

Match
Rate

DCA
(Total)

Matched
to BR

Match
Rate

DCA
(Total)

Matched
to BR

Match
Rate

61,646
64,090
65,223
64,152
60,884
59,043
58,509
68,672
70,522
97,551
123,553
117,639
110,106
110,826
112,346
111,935
111,953
111,998
113,334

43,190
44,904
45,743
41,713
41,290
40,854
40,697
48,875
50,105
66,665
86,838
84,450
80,245
79,275
81,656
81,535
81,112
79,661
79,516

0.70
0.70
0.70
0.65
0.68
0.69
0.70
0.71
0.71
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.73
0.72
0.73
0.73
0.72
0.71
0.70

21,482
22,396
22,952
22,353
20,962
20,012
20,157
18,728
18,516
31,260
25,905
24,028
20,870
21,335
22,500
23,090
22,076
21,667
21,721

14,387
15,110
15,448
13,806
13,583
13,218
13,408
12,631
12,477
21,004
17,465
16,923
15,191
15,539
16,396
16,910
16,085
15,785
15,557

0.67
0.67
0.67
0.62
0.65
0.66
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.67
0.70
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.72

8,270
9,326
9,365
10,057
9,556
9,416
9,218
9,900
10,089
13,168
11,101
10,152
9,409
9,981
10,331
9,351
11,142
11,308
11,619

5,810
6,437
6,414
6,331
6,328
6,282
6,054
6,755
6,864
8,483
7,398
7,156
6,865
7,243
7,555
6,880
8,193
8,181
8,357

0.70
0.69
0.68
0.63
0.66
0.67
0.66
0.68
0.68
0.64
0.67
0.70
0.73
0.73
0.73
0.74
0.74
0.72
0.72

Notes: U.S. multinationals are defined as establishments whose parents are U.S. firms that have a foreign affiliate in the DCA.
Foreign multinationals are defined as establishments owned by firms whose headquarters are in a foreign location.

Table A2: Uniworld Match Statistics: 2006-2011

# of Uniworld
Establishments

Matched
to B.R.

Percent
Matched

Foreign Multinationals
1992
1995
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2011

1,597
1,625
2,020
2,371
2,780
3,220
3,495
3,683
6,188

1,223
1,213
1,555
1,862
2,154
2,347
2,590
2,818
4,017

0.77
0.75
0.77
0.79
0.77
0.73
0.74
0.76
0.65

U.S. Multinationals
1993
1996
1999
2001
2004
2005
2007
2009

2,553
2,502
2,438
2,586
3,001
2,951
4,043
4,293

1,746
1,819
1,942
2,046
2,403
2,489
3,236
3,422

0.68
0.73
0.80
0.79
0.80
0.84
0.80
0.80

Notes: U.S. multinationals include only the establishments identified as
the U.S. headquarters.

A.1.4

Within-Year Rules

To apply the matched establishment-level information to other, non-matched establishments within
a given year, we apply the following steps. First, we apply our multinational indicators to all
establishments within a firm provided there are no disagreements in the DCA/UBP information
among the establishments. As indicated above, this attractive feature of our methodology requires
that the researcher only successfully match one plant of a given firm to apply that information
throughout the firm. If there is any conflicting information within a year, we first attempt to
use corroborating evidence from the secondary source (typically Uniworld), and then turn to the
maximum employment share of a particular type of match. Finally, we conduct manual checks on
the data, particularly on those firms that demonstrate very large amounts of related-party trade
but have not been captured by our matching procedure.

54

A.2

Creating Panel of Multinational Plants

The external directories allow for relatively easy categorization of the multinational status of U.S.
plants. If the parent firm contains addresses outside of the United States, but is headquartered
within the U.S., we designate this establishment as part of a U.S. multinational firm. If the parent
firm is headquartered outside of the United States, we designate this establishment as part of a
Foreign multinational firm.
This paper seeks to understand how changes in multinational status affect labor market outcomes in the United States. To achieve this end, we must take the yearly multinational identifiers
and construct a panel across many years. The challenge with this exercise comes from the fact that
the directories are matched year-by-year, utilizing little longitudinal information.42 This implies
the possibility that a multinational plant may not be successfully matched every year, and our data
could have spurious entries and exits from multinational status throughout the panel.
To mitigate this concern, we develop a series of checks and rule-based procedures to correct
and smooth out any unlikely firm switching. These steps can be classified as those accounting for
changes within a year across plants of a given firm, and those correcting for multinational status
across years for a particular plant.
A.2.1

Checks and Rules for Across Years

Another important step in creating a panel of establishment information on the scope of international operations is to check and correct for any potentially spurious transitions of establishment
type over time. First, if there is only one missing year of a multinational indicator in the establishment’s history, we fill it in manually. Second, if there is a gap of two years in this indicator
that corresponds to gap years in the Uniworld coverage, we also fill it manually. Similarly, if an
establishment is identified as a multinational in only one year in it’s history, we remove the flag.
Finally, we fill in 2 year gaps provided that in the intervening period the share of related party
trade remains high.

A.3

Creating Consistent Manufacturing Sample

An important challenge for our analysis of U.S. manufacturing employment over such an extended
period of time is defining exactly what plant-level operations constitute manufacturing. This task is
complicated by the fact that our sample coincides with two distinct industry classification systems
(SIC and NAICS) as well as periodic revisions to these systems.
To construct a consistent manufacturing sample, we begin with the Longitudinal Business
Database (LBD), an assembly of the Standard Statistical Establishment List (SSEL) that has been
augmented with longitudinal identifiers and standardized across years. We drop establishments
listed as government, and establishments listed as “dead”. Next, we utilize a new concordance of
manufacturing classification systems outlined in Fort and Klimek (2016) for smoothing out discrepancies between industries defined as manufacturing between SIC and NAICS. There remain several
acknowledged data issues of the Fort and Klimek (2016) manufacturing definition, principally related to manufacturing establishments that are re-coded into a non-manufacturing industry in 2002,
specifically, NAICS 55 - “Management of Companies and Enterprises”. To deal with establishment
42

The only longitudinal information used is by applying prior clerical edits forward in time for a particular
establishment, provided that the name and address information remains unchanged.

55

Figure A1: Comparison of Consistent Manufacturing Employment Samples: 1993-2011

Notes: The data are from the BLS, Pierce and Schott (2016) and the LBD.

transitions between manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries, we set up the following two
rules. First, we drop establishments (in all years) that are re-classified out of manufacturing during our sample; and second, we retain establishments (in all years) that are ever reclassified into
manufacturing during our sample. This system prevents the possibility of spurious establishment
“births” or “deaths” being recorded as a consequence of a classification change.
Figure A1 illustrates how our consistent manufacturing sample compares to manufacturing
employment from two other sources: published totals from the Current Employment Survey and
Pierce and Schott (2016).
Finally, to evaluate whether there were offsetting gains to the non-manufacturing employment
component of a manufacturing firm, we create a non-manufacturing sample that is the complement set of establishments of these manufacturing firms to what we identify above (hence, nonmanufacturing establishments). This sample is used for results in Figure B6 and Table (B4).

A.4

Classification of Intermediate/Final Goods Trade

Firm-level data on imports available in the LFTTD do not contain information on the intended
use of the goods.43 Disentangling whether an imported product is used as an intermediate input
for further processing — rather than for final sale in the U.S. — has important implications for
the effect of offshoring on U.S. employment. Fortunately, the Census Bureau data contains other
information that can be used to distinguish intermediate input imports from final goods imports.
In brief, identifying the principal products produced by U.S. establishments in a given detailed
43

This is one advantage of the survey data on multinational firms available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
There are, however, a number of critical disadvantages of this data source, as outlined in Section 2.

56

industry should indicate the types of products that, when imported, should be classified as a
“final” good – that is, intended for final sale without further processing. The products imported
outside of this set, then, would be classified as intermediate goods.44 Such product-level production
data exists as part of the “Products” trailer file of the Census of Manufacturers. As detailed in
Pierce and Schott (2012) (see page 11), combining import, export, and production information at
a product-level is useful for just such a purpose.
It is important to acknowledge that the Census data on trade exists at the firm level, while the
other information used in this paper is, principally, at the plant level. Utilizing the establishment
industry information, however, will allow us to parse a firm’s trade based on the intermediate/final
distinction for a given establishment, thereby generating some heterogeneity in firm trade across
establishments.45
A.4.1

Creating a NAICS-Based set of Final/Intermediate Products

As part of the quinquennial Census of Manufacturers (CM), the Census Bureau surveys establishments on their total shipments broken down into a set of NAICS-based (6 digit) product categories.
Each establishment is given a form particular to its industry with a list of pre-specified products,
with additional space to record other product shipments not included in the form. The resulting
product trailer file to the CM allows the researcher to understand the principal products produced
at each manufacturing establishment during a census year.
There are several data issues that must be addressed before using the CM-Products file to infer
information about the relative value of product-level shipments by a particular firm. First, the
trailer file contains product-codes that are used to “balance” the aggregated product-level value of
shipments with the total value of shipments reported on the base CM survey form. We drop these
product codes from the dataset. Second, there are often codes that do not correspond to any official
7-digit product code identified by Census. (These are typically products that are self-identified by
the firm but do not match any of the pre-specified products identified for that industry by Census.)
Rather than ignoring the value of shipments corresponding to these codes, we attempt to match
at a more aggregated level. Specifically, we iteratively try to find a product code match at the 6,
5, and 4 digit product code level, and use the existing set of 7-digit matches as weights to allocate
the product value among the 7-digit product codes encompassing the more aggregated level.
We now discuss how this file can be used to assemble a set of NAICS product codes that are
the predominant output (final goods) for a given NAICS industry. Let xpij denote the shipments
of product p by establishment i in industry j during a census year. Then the total output (in U.S.
$) of product p in industry j can be written as:
Xpj =

Ij
X

xpij ,

i=1
44

To be more precise, this set will include a combination of intermediate and capital goods.
To be more precise, total trade at each establishment of a firm must be identical. The shares of intermediate/final
goods will vary.
45

57

where Ij is the number of firms in industry j. Total output of industry j is then:
Xj =

Pj
X

Xpj .

p=1

The share of industry output accounted for by a given product p is therefore:
Spj =

Xpj
.
Xj

One might argue that the set of final goods products for a given industry should be defined
as the set of products where Spj > 0. That is, a product is designated as a “final good” for that
industry if any establishment recorded positive shipments of the product. The obvious disadvantage
of employing such a zero threshold is that small degrees of within-industry heterogeneity will have
oversized effects on the classification.
Acknowledging this concern, we set a threshold level W such that any p in a given j with
Spj > W is classified as a final good product for that industry. The upper portion of Table
A3 documents the number of final goods products and the share of intermediate input imports
based on several candidate threshold levels. The issues of a zero threshold are quite clear in the
table; a small but positive threshold value (0.1) will have a large effect on the number of products
designated as final goods. This shows indirectly that there are a large number of products produced
by establishments in a given industry, but a much smaller number that comprise the bulk of total
value.
There are several advantages to using the CM-Products file rather than using an input-output
table.46 First, within a given CM year, the classification can be done at the firm or establishment
level rather than aggregating to a particular industry. This reflects the fact that the same imported
product may be used as an input by one firm and sold to consumers as a final product by another.
Second, the CM-Products file is one of the principal data inputs into making the input-output
tables, and thus represents more finely detailed information. Related to this point, the inputoutput tables are produced with a significant delay – the most recent available for the U.S. is for
year 2002. Third, the input-output tables for the U.S. are based on BEA industry classifications,
which imply an additional concordance (see below) to map into the NAICS-based industries present
in the Census data.
We now turn to the procedure to map firm-level trade into intermediate and final goods using
the industry-level product classifications calculated above.
A.4.2

Mapping HS Trade Transactions to the Product Classification

The LFTTD classifies products according to the U.S. Harmonized Codes (HS), which must be
concorded to the NAICS-based product system in order to utilize the classification scheme from
the CM-Products file. Thankfully, a recent concordance created by Pierce and Schott (2012) can
be used to map the firm-HS codes present in the LFTTD data with the firm-NAICS product codes
present in the CM-Products data.
46

Another option is to use the CM-Materials file, the flip side of the CM-Products file. Unfortunately, the CMMaterials file contains significantly more problematic product codes than the Products file, and so concording to the
trade data is considerably more difficult.

58

Table A3: Comparing the Results from Threshold Values W
Threshold Values
W = 0 W = 0.1 W = 0.2
Number of Final Good Products per Industry
Median
19
1
1
Mean
25
1.52
1.14
Min
1
1
0
Max
154
6
3
Implied Share of Intermediate Inputs
Imports
60.9
63.90
Exports
52.0
54.96

63.97
55.04

Notes: This table is applicable to the year 2007.

A challenge of this strategy is that the LFTTD exists at a firm-level, while the most natural
construction of the industry-level classification scheme is by establishment. More concretely, for
multi-unit, multi-industry firms, the LFTTD is unable to decompose an import shipment into the
precise establishment-industry of its U.S. destination. By using the industry of each establishment
to classify the firm’s imports, we generate heterogeneity in the intermediate/final goods trade across
the establishments of the firm.
Once the firm-level trade data is in the same product classification as the industry-level filter
created from the CM-Products file, all that is left is to match the trade data with the filter by
NAICS industry. Thus, letting Mij denote total imports from a firm i (firm i is classified as being
in industry j), we can then categorize the firm’s trade according to:

P
Mipj 
Mijint =


p∈P
/ j

where
Pj = {p | Spj ≥ W } .
(A1)
P

fin


Mij =
Mipj 
p∈Pj

The bottom section of Table A3 shows some summary statistics of the intermediate share of
trade according to this classification system, by several values of the product-threshold W . There
are at least two important takeaways from these numbers. First, the share of intermediates in
total imports is roughly what is reported in the literature using IO Tables. Second, the share of
total trade occupied by intermediate products is not particularly sensitive to the threshold level
W . While there is a small increase in the share when raising the threshold from 0 to 0.1 (about 3
percentage points), the number is essentially unchanged when raising it further to 0.2.

59

A.5

Creating the Firm-Level Sample

Much of our analysis is at the firm level, so we build a sample of U.S. multinational firms from
the panel of multinational plants (constructed as detailed in Section A.2). As the Corporate
Directories are matched at the establishment level, when aggregating up to the firm, there are
occasional conflicts in the definition of a firm between the Census and the Directories. We rely on
the Census definition of a firm. Conflicts are resolved as follows:
• We define a firm in the panel as a U.S. multinational in a particular year if our matches are
completely consistent in that year, and there are no conflicts.
• In the special case of a conflict where the Census classifies a firm as a set of establishments,
but our matches to the Directories indicate a subset of those establishments belongs to a
foreign multinational and a subset to a U.S. multinational, we classify the firm as a U.S.
multinational if the employment share of the firm in the matched U.S. multinational sample
is larger than that matched as a Foreign multinational.
Note, firm identifiers in the Census are sometimes problematic longitudinally. An example is that
the firm identifier changes when the firm goes from being a single unit to a multi-unit establishment.
Further, mergers and acquisitions can lead in some cases to the birth of a new firm identifier, and
in others to the continuation of one of the merged identifiers. As such, results pertaining to the
extensive margin that use the firm identifier as the basis of analysis will be overstated. This is
a problem faced by all longitudinal firm-level analysis using Census Bureau data. While we did
use longitudinal information in classifying establishments by multinational status, we do not this
information in aggregating up to the firm-level. However, some of our analysis in Section 2 uses
the growth rates of employment in the firm. In these cases, we use establishment level outcomes as
the baseline (as these identifiers are longitudinally consistent), and present the firm-level results for
robustness. The structural estimation relies on repeated cross-sections of the firm-level data and
does not suffer from this issue.

60

Table B1: Summary Statistics: Firm Counts by Type: 1993-2011
Year

Non U.S. Multinationals

U.S. Multinationals

Total

1993
2011

302,669
218,572

2,539
2,036

305,208
220,608

1993-2011
1993-2001
2002-2011

Average Annual Percent Change
-1.54
-1.10
-1.17
-0.17
-2.02
-2.06

-1.54
-1.16
-2.02

Notes: The data are from the LBD, LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text.
This table reports the firm counts pertaining to the “consistent” manufacturing sample used in section 2.

B

Additional Results

B.1
B.1.1

Other Results on Transitions
Alternative Control and Treatment Groups for Employment Results

The baseline results on the relative employment growth rates of plants that transition to become
part of a multinational firm shown in Figure 4 combines two cases: 1) where the non-multinational
plant is acquired by a multinational firm, and 2) where the non-multinational plant’s firm becomes
a multinational. These cases may offer distinct implications for employment growth for a number of
reasons. For example, plants involved in a merger/acquisition may experience employment declines
apart from whether or not the acquiring firm was also a multinational. We can identify these cases
based on whether the firm identifier of the plant changes in the pre and post periods of the setup
described in Section 2.2.2.
To evaluate these cases separately, we re-run specification (4) for a sample of establishments
that retain the same firm identifier in periods -1 and +1 (the “New Mult” sample) and separately
for a sample of establishments that change firm identifiers between periods -1 and +1 (the “M&A”
sample). Since these sample restrictions apply to both the control group and the treated group
(new multinational plants), we will not conflate standard M&A effects with those we attribute to
foreign sourcing. The results are shown in Figure B1. Although, as expected, there are differences
in the magnitudes of employment effects based on the type of plant transition into a firm with
foreign sourcing, the overall message of large and persistent employment declines remains.
B.1.2

Assumptions of Firm-Level trade Following an Establishment Death

There are at least two distinct approaches to account for the role of establishment death on the
import activity at the firm-level. The estimates in Panel C of Figure 4 fill in the post-death values for
a given establishment with the actual imports of the firm associated with that establishment.47 This
47

If the entire firm disappears, we then record zeros in that period and all future periods.

61

Figure B1: Employment Growth Differential of Multinational Transitions: Transition Types

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. This figure plots the annual
employment growth rate differential of establishments that transition into a multinational firm in year (t = 0),
relative to a control group with similar firm age, establishment size, and industry (in year t = −1). The
sample is split between those establishments that also experience switches in firm identifiers (M&A Sample)
and those that do not (new Mult Sample). This split also applies to the control group, where the control
group is not part of a multinational firm in year t = 0. See equation (4) and text for details. Standard errors
are suppressed, but the post-transition results are significant at traditional levels.

approach better captures the import substitution that may occur if a plant is closed in response to
offshore activities. If this was the case, we would see a larger import differential than otherwise. On
the other hand, if establishment deaths are associated with broad firm decline, then this differential
import measure would be smaller relative to the benchmark.
An alternative approach is to fill in a value of zero trade for all years following an establishment
death. If transitioning establishments are dying at a higher rate than non-transitioning establishments, this would reduce the differential importing patterns following the transition. A final
approach would be to ignore the extensive-margin effects and simply allow the observations to be
dropped upon an establishment death.
Below we demonstrate the effects of these assumptions on our estimates of import behavior
surrounding the event study. In our baseline sample underlying Panel C of Figure 4, we create a
balanced panel and fill the pre-birth or post-death observations with the value at the firm immediately following preceding its birth/death. To assess the alternative approach we fill the pre-birth
and post-death trade values with zero (which we call the “zeros-fill” results). Finally, the “no-ext
margin” results demonstrate our estimates when completely ignoring these extensive margin effects.
Figure B2 reports the coefficient estimates from the baseline, zero-fill, and no-ext margin samples
corresponding to related-party imports before and after the transition to multinational status. The
evidence points to transitioning plants with a higher death rate than the control group, an effect

62

Figure B2: Importing Differentials of Multinational Transitions, Balanced Panel

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. This figure reports the relatedparty intermediate input imports of the parent firm of the transitioning establishment relative to a control
group, see equation (4). Zero Fill refers to a balanced panel with zeros for trade after an establishment
death. No Ext. Margin refers to the sample with no extensive margin effects following the establishment
death.

which pulls the differential import behavior down relative to the baseline. On the other hand, filling
in the firm imports after death actually increases the importing differential. This evidence further
supports the hypothesis of employment substitution of these firms.
B.1.3

Other Trade Effects Following Multinational Transitions

We estimate equation (4) using various types of firm-level trade corresponding to establishments
that transition into part of a multinational firm. The results pertaining to related-party and
arms-length intermediate imports are shown in Figure 4. New U.S. multinationals may also begin
importing final goods from an arms-length or intra-firm supplier abroad. The results that show the
differential imports of final goods of new multinationals are shown in Figure B3. We also find strong
growth in export volumes in the years following a multinational transition, both to foreign affiliates
and unaffiliated parties. The increase in exports (shown in Figure B4), is consistent with the
interpretation that transitions occur after positive idiosyncratic shocks; alternatively these results
may indicate that the multinational reorganization allows the firm to focus on the highest value
products or transaction. A third interpretation involves greater interaction with other markets that
naturally leads to sales opportunities abroad (both internally and externally).
Finally, Figure B5 plots firm-level imports from China corresponding to establishments that
transitions into part of a multinational firm. As would be expected, the imports from China are a
large contributor to the overall increase in imports following a firm transition.

63

Figure B3: Final Goods Importing Differentials of Multinational Transitions

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. This figure reports the relatedparty and arms-length final goods imports of the parent firm of an establishment that transitions into a
multinational firm in year (t = 0), relative to a control group with similar firm age, establishment size, and
industry (in year t = −1). See equation (4), modified to have firm-level imports as the dependent variable.
The shaded area corresponds to a 95 percent confidence interval.

B.2
B.2.1

Quantifying Job Loss: Back-of-the-Envelope Calculations
Job Loss from Multinational Transitions

This section describes how we convert the estimates on relative employment growth rates of new
multinational plants into a measure of the aggregate net gains of employment. The coefficients from
Figure 4 represent relative employment effects, expressed in percentage points, of a transitioning
plant. These effects represent averages that span the entire period (1993-2011) for which plants
may be transitioning into a multinational firm. To translate these percentage points into jobs, one
challenge is to identify the appropriate base on which to apply the relative percentage differentials.
Unfortunately, the average size of transitioning plants is not currently available. However, using
the productivity/size ordering of firms implied by models such as Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple
(2004), we assign these transitioning plants an average size that is between that of exporters and
multinational plants.
Another challenge comes from what to assume when the time-path of a given transitioning
plant extends beyond our estimates (which currently end at t = 10 years post transition). While
we could extrapolate our estimates in the later years of the estimation in, we instead follow the
more conservative assumption and terminate the counterfactual time path once the estimates from
equation (4) run out. (Essentially, we assume that the growth rate differentials in all years t > 10
are zero.) Of course, extrapolating the estimates beyond year 10 would magnify the job losses

64

Figure B4: Exporting Differentials of Multinational Transitions

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. This figure reports the relatedparty and arms-length exports of the parent firm of an establishment that transitions into a multinational
firm in year (t = 0), relative to a control group with similar firm age, establishment size, and industry (in
year t = −1). See equation (4), modified to have firm-level imports as the dependent variable. The shaded
area corresponds to a 95 percent confidence interval.

resulting from multinational transitions.
Formally, we compute the job loss as
2010
X
t=1994

min{10,2010−t}

Tt Et

X
i=1

δi

i−1
Y

(1 + δj )

(B1)

j=1

where Tt is the number of transitioning plants in event year t, Et is the average size of transitioning
plants in event year t, and δ are the coefficient estimates from equation (4). Table B2 provides
further details. The result is an estimate of approximately 400,000 jobs lost due to these transitioning plants, roughly 7 percent of the total 5.65 million decline in manufacturing employment in
our sample.
B.2.2

Job Loss from all Multinational Activity: Total

A similar exercise can be done using the coefficient estimates from Table 4. This calculation is
somewhat easier in that we simply apply the employment growth rate differential to the average
establishment size of multinationals, and then multiply by the total number of multinational establishments in each year. Table B3 shows the results. The first set of calculations uses the weighted
regression coefficient pertaining to the intensive/extensive establishment growth rate, whereas the
second set of calculations uses the unweighted regression coefficient. The numbers are large: be-

65

Figure B5: Importing Differentials from China

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. This figure reports the relatedparty and arms-length imports from China of the parent firm of an establishment that transitions into a
multinational firm in year (t = 0), relative to a control group with similar firm age, establishment size,
and industry (in year t = −1). See equation (4), modified to have firm-level imports (from China) as the
dependent variable. The shaded area corresponds to a 95 percent confidence interval.

tween 2.02 and 2.45 million manufacturing jobs over our full sample.

B.3
B.3.1

Other Results
Relative Employment Growth of Non-Manufacturing in Multinational Establishments

One might wonder whether the complex supply chains managed by multinational firms require
large and increasing administrative and support services by non-manufacturing establishments and
workers. To evaluate whether these effects are present and offset the losses in manufacturing
employment seen in this data, we re-run specification (3) on the non-manufacturing establishments
of the manufacturing firms in our baseline dataset. The results are shown in Table B4. We
find some modest evidence of positive employment effects on non-manufacturing establishments of
multinational firms, but only in the latter period of our sample.
B.3.2

Impact of Multinational Transitions on Non-Manufacturing Plants

To assess whether the non-manufacturing establishments in new multinationals also experience
relatively negative employment growth rates, we re-estimate equation (4) for this group of establishments. We construct control groups from all non-manufacturing establishments in a manner

66

Table B2: Aggregate Job Loss from New Multinational Plants
Year

Average
Size

# of
Transitions

Cumul. Jobs
per Estab.

Total Job
Gains

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

203
204
205
202
205
208
197
195
193
181
178
175
174
174
169
164
152

344
498
915
762
851
994
962
699
1,060
623
723
539
535
837
679
352
465

-45
-45
-45
-45
-45
-46
-43
-43
-43
-36
-32
-29
-24
-16
-9
3
12

-15,424
-22,436
-41,344
-33,977
-38,590
-45,593
-41,774
-30,048
-45,062
-22,185
-23,204
-15,401
-12,799
-13,428
-6,255
964
5,759

Total
Share of 5.65 million lost

-400,796
0.07

Notes: Estimates based on Table 1, Table 2, and Figure 4.

similar to Section 2.2.2. Unlike in the manufacturing sector, however, the non-manufacturing establishments in our data encompass a very broad swathe of the economy and come from sectors
as diverse as wholesale or technology. Observing a common pattern after transition for this group,
relative to controls, is therefore very unlikely. The results from this exercise are in Figure B6. New
non-manufacturing multinational establishments do not experience job losses relative to the control
group. However, the results are noisy, and do not allow us to identify whether the scale effect for
this group of establishments as a whole outweighs the reallocation effect.
B.3.3

Location Complementarities

Why is direct foreign sourcing of intermediates concentrated in multinationals? Our data permit
a closer look at whether there is a relationship between inter and intra-firm imports which lead to
a greater degree of overall global production sharing in multinationals. While the share of relatedparty imports of multinationals is not significantly different to that of arms-length (roughly 53 vs
47 percent on average in our sample), perhaps there exist complementarities between intra- and
inter-firm imports. We explore this hypothesis by estimating the following regression for the sample
67

Table B3: Aggregate Job Loss from All Multinational Plants

1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Average
Size

# of Mult
Establishments

310
311
309
306
313
312
299
297
296
279
275
270
270
269
261
254
235
222

17,119
16,269
16,316
16,365
15,950
16,084
16,466
15,886
15,386
14,930
14,823
14,692
14,534
14,482
14,641
14,456
13,865
13,562

Extensive, Weighted
Avg. Differential
Employment per
Total
Establishment1
per year
-8.0
-8.0
-8.0
-7.9
-8.1
-8.0
-7.7
-7.7
-7.6
-7.2
-7.1
-7.0
-7.0
-6.9
-6.7
-6.5
-6.1
-5.7

Extensive, Unweighted
Avg. Differential
Employment per
Total
Establishment2
per year

137,112
130,612
129,956
129,359
128,823
129,307
127,067
121,800
117,568
107,524
105,186
102,480
101,095
100,475
98,763
94,562
83,888
77,721

Total
Share of 5.65 million lost

2,023,296
0.36

-9.7
-9.7
-9.7
-9.6
-9.8
-9.8
-9.4
-9.3
-9.3
-8.7
-8.6
-8.5
-8.4
-8.4
-8.2
-7.9
-7.3
-7.0

166,341
158,456
157,660
156,935
156,285
156,872
154,155
147,766
142,631
130,446
127,609
124,326
122,646
121,894
119,817
114,721
101,771
94,290
2,454,619
0.43

Notes: Estimates based on Table 1, Table 2, and Table 4.
1
This column applies the coefficient estimates from the intensive/extensive and weighted estimates from Table 4.
2
This column applies the coefficient estimates from the intensive/extensive and unweighted estimates from Table 4.

period 1993-2011:
RP
AL
+ ijkt .
log IMijkt
= αijt + γkt + β log IMijkt

(B2)

Here i is the firm, j is the partner country, k is the product code, and t is time. Hence, the αijt
are firm-country-time fixed effects and the γkt are product-time fixed effects. The β coefficient then
captures the extent to which a firm’s AL and RP imports scale together, after absorbing common
time-varying firm-by-country, or product shocks.
The results from this regression confirm that sourcing inputs within the firm in a particular
foreign location induces more arms-length sourcing as well — even in narrowly defined product
categories. This complementarity helps explain the concentration of imports within multinationals
in our sample (see Table B5), and is presumably the reason their supply chain restructuring is
large enough to show large employment effects. Underlying explanations for this finding could
include network effects that enable firm sourcing closely related products from suppliers in the
same countries both at arms-length or intra-firm, or lower fixed costs of joint arms-length/related68

Table B4: Non-Manufacturing Employment Growth Relative to a Control Group

Unweighted
β̂

Establishment Level
Intensive
Extensive and Intensive
Employment Weighted Unweighted Employment Weighted

Clusters

-0.017**
(0.007)
14500

-0.008*
(0.004)
14500

-0.06***
(0.017)
15500

0.001
(0.014)
13000

Observations

2,036,000

2,036,000

2,635,000

1,971,000

β̂
Clusters

-0.012**
(0.005)
14500

0.000
(0.003)
14500

0.032**
(0.015)
15500

0.035***
(0.006)
15000

Observations

2,158,000

2,158,000

2,766,000

2,408,000

1993 - 2000

2001 - 2011

Notes: The data are from the LBD, DCA, and UBP. The table reports pooled regression results, where the
sample is split into subsamples from 1993-2000 and 2001-2011. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*, **, and *** denotes significance at the 10, 5, and 1 percent level.

Table B5: Inter-Firm and Intra-Firm Sourcing
Country Level
RP Indicator Log RP Imports
Coef.

Fixed Effects
Firm × time
Country × Time
Industry × Time
Firm × Country × Time
R2
Observations

Industry & Country Level
RP Indicator Log RP Imports

1.84***
(0.006)

0.39***
(0.002)

1.765***
(0.004)

0.49***
(0.001)

Yes
Yes
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No

No
No
Yes
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes

0.51
1,776,800

0.61
380,400

0.52
5,012,000

0.64
1,033,000

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD. This table reports the results from equation (B2). The dependent variable
is the log of a firm’s inter-firm imports from a particular country and industry. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level.

party imports than of each approach separately. We incorporate the last dimension in our structural
model.

69

Figure B6: Transitions: Non-manufacturing

Notes: The data are from the LFTTD, DCA, and UBP as explained in text. This figure reports the
employment growth rates of non-manufacturing plants that transition into a multinational firm in year
(t = 0), relative to a control group with similar firm age, establishment size, and industry (in year t = −1).
The shaded area corresponds to a 95 percent confidence interval.

B.4

Regression Evidence: Robustness

Table B6 presents results from running the specification in equation (3) for various subsamples of
our data. The results are also robust to including lagged establishment or firm employment growth
rates as controls (available upon request).

B.5

IV

Table B7 presents results from a specification where we regress firm-level employment growth rates
on import growth, instrumenting for the import growth with changes in tariffsPand exchange rates.
Specifically,
we instrument for import growth ∆ ln IMi,t of firm i in year t with j,h wi,j,h,t−5 ∆τi,j,h,t
P
and j wi,j,t−5 ∆ ln Qj,t , where τi,j,h,t is the tariff paid by firm i to import product h from country
j, and Qj,t is the bilateral nominal exchange rate between the U.S. and country j. We use firmspecific weights constructed from the share of the firm’s imports
a product from a particular
P of
IMi,j,h,t−5
IMi,j,h,t−5
and
w
=
location in period t − 5, wi,j,h,t−5 = IM
i,j,t−5
h IMi,t−5 . Unfortunately, with
i,t−5
the exception of this specification, we are largely unable to construct instruments with predictive
power for firm-level imports. We have found that other commonly used instruments such as the
“World Export Supply” measure, which captures supply shocks in a partner country (see Acemoglu
et al. (2016) or Hummels et al. (2014)), transport costs and GDP growth rates are not relevant in
our data.

70

Table B6: Relative Employment Growth: Subsamples

Unweighted
β̂
1993 - 2000
Clusters
β̂
2001 - 2011
Clusters

0.02***
(0.001)
8179

0.01***
(0.001)
8179

-0.04***
(0.003)
8606

-0.03***
(0.002)
7081

0.02***
(0.001)
8437

0.004***
(0.001)
8437

-0.03***
(0.002)
8922

-0.03***
(0.002)
8922

Unweighted
β̂
1993 - 2000
Clusters
β̂
2001 - 2011
Clusters

Establishment Level
Intensive
Extensive and Intensive
Employment Weighted Unweighted Employment Weighted

Firm Level
Intensive
Extensive and Intensive
Employment Weighted Unweighted Employment Weighted

-0.01***
(0.004)
3481

-0.03***
(0.006)
3481

-0.06***
(0.01)
3931

-0.04***
(0.01)
3931

-0.01***
(0.003)
4547

-0.01***
(0.005)
4547

-0.01***
(0.006)
5187

-0.01***
(0.008)
5187

Notes: The data are from the LBD, DCA, and UBP. The table reports pooled regression results, where the
sample is split into subsamples from 1993-2000 and 2001-2011. Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
*** reports significance at the 1 percent level.

We include firm fixed effects in our IV estimation. The OLS specification demonstrates a strong
positive correlation between employment growth and import growth. With the instruments, the
correlation is negative and insignificant.

B.6

Patterns in Firm Sourcing

Table B8 illustrates the fraction of firms in each of the five most common broad sourcing categories
together with the fraction of input imports by firms in each sourcing category. We also include
a residual “Other” category that encompasses sourcing strategies not explicitly in the table. The
broad categories are combinations of the two home sourcing location/modes HI and HO as well
as sourcing from developed countries inter or intrafirm (N O and N I) or developing countries inter
or intrafirm (SO and SI). Multinationals are firms that have any N I or SI sourcing, which is the
sum of the third, fourth and fifth columns of the table.

71

Table B7: IV Specification for Firm-Level Employment Growth
∆ ln Emp
OLS
IV
∆ ln IM

0.040***
(0.0048)

-0.021
(0.1519)

Fixed Effects
Firm
Year

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

First stage F
R2
Observations

0.348
41,800

155.73
41,800

Notes: The data are from the LBD and the LFTTD. This table reports the
results from an OLS regression relating changes in firm employment growth to
changes in firm import growth, and the same regression using changes in lagged
tariff and nominal exchange rate movements, with country-weights lagged by
five years, as instruments in a first stage. Standard errors are reported in
parentheses. *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level.

Table B8: Firm Sourcing Patterns

Year

{HO,HI}

1997
2002
2007

74.5%
66.8%
61.6%

{HO,HI, {HO,HI, {HO,HI,NO, {HO,HI,NO,
NO}
NO,NI}
NI,SO}
NI,SO,SI}
Fraction of firms with sourcing strategy
9.9%
11%
9.6%

2.6%
2.9%
2.1%

2.6%
3.4%
3.5%

3.1%
4.6%
6.3%

Other

7.4%
11.3%
16.9%

Fraction of imports in sourcing strategy
1997
2002
2007

0%
0%
0%

0.6%
0.5%
0.2%

1.4%
1.6%
0.8%

4.2%
3.3%
3.4%

89.1%
91.0%
92.0%

4.7%
3.7%
3.5%

Notes: The data are from the LBD, LFTTD and CMF. This table reports the fraction of firms
sourcing from five of the most prominent sourcing strategies, as well as the fraction of imports
accounted for by firms in each of these sourcing strategies. “Other” includes all other possible
sourcing strategies.

72

C

Appendix: Model Extensions and Proofs

C.1

Model with non-constant returns to scale

In this Appendix we suppose instead that firms produce with the production function
Z

1

xi =

xi (v)

ρ−1
ρ

ρ
 ρ−1
(1−λ)

dv

.

0

Here, the parameter λ > −1 captures the degree of decreasing returns to scale. For λ = 0 returns
to scale are constant, and we return to the model in the paper. For λ > 0 returns to scale are
decreasing and for λ < 0 returns to scale are increasing. With this production function, but leaving
the remainder of the model unchanged, firm revenues are

 1
σ−1
· 1−λ
1+(σ−1)λ
Ri ∝ δi E (PX )σ−1
Φi θ 1+(σ−1)λ ,
where Φi is defined as in the paper. The scale elasticity therefore is
σ−1
1−λ
∂ ln R
=
·
.
∂ ln Φ
θ
1 + (σ − 1) λ
As noted in the text, decreasing returns to scale implies that the scale elasticity is smaller than
σ−1
σ−1
θ . Conversely, for increasing returns to scale that the scale elasticity is greater than θ .
The domestic employment response in partial equilibrium continues to be determined by the
scale and reallocation effect,

lj ∝

δi E (PX )

σ−1



1
1+(σ−1)λ
σ−1
1−λ
· 1+(σ−1)λ
θ

· si,j · Φi

wj

.

That is, the scale elasticity fully characterizes the domestic employment response in partial equilibrium.
The estimating equation in the model takes the form
ln Ri = α +

1 X
σ−1
1−λ
1 X
αj −
ln si,j + ui ,
ni
θ 1 + (σ − 1) λ ni
j∈Ji

where
ui = (σ − 1)

j∈Ji

1−λ
1 X
1
ln ζi,j +
ln (δi ) .
1 + (σ − 1) λ ni
1 + (σ − 1) λ
j∈Ji

It is easy to see that our bounding strategy also applies to this modified model with non-constant
returns to scale.
We finally note that introducing love of variety for intermediate inputs, as in Benassy (1998),
generates predictions comparable to increasing returns to scale. Again, the scale elasticity differs
from σ−1
θ .

73

C.2

Proof of Lemma 3.1

Lemma. To a first order, ln si = α − ln ni , for some constant α.
Proof. We begin with the linear approximation of
X
θ
ln Φi = ln
Tk ζi,k
(τk wk )−θ
k∈Ji

in Tj (τj wj )−θ around T̄ (τ̄ w̄)−θ =
ln Φi = ln Φ̄i +

j∈Ji

P

P

k

Tk (τk wk )−θ and ln ζi,j around ln ζ̄. This yields

θ

n 


o
  
(τ̄ w̄)−θ
−θ
−θ
θ
ln
ζ
−
ln
ζ̄
+
ln
T
(τ
w
)
−
ln
T̄
(τ̄
w̄)
.
θ
i,j
j
j
j
(τ̄ w̄)−θ
k∈Ji T̄ ζ̄
T̄ ζ̄

X

1
n

Note that

1
T̄ ζ̄ θ (τ̄ w̄)−θ
=
θ
P
−θ
n
i
(τ̄ w̄)
k∈Ji T̄ ζ̄

so that
ln Φi = ln Φ̄i +



o
X 1 n 
  
θ ln ζi,j − ln ζ̄ + ln Tj (τj wj )−θ − ln T̄ (τ̄ w̄)−θ
.
ni

j∈Ji

Further
X

ln Φ̄i = ln

T̄ ζ̄

θ

(τ̄ w̄)−θ = ln ni + ln T̄ ζ̄ θ (τ̄ w̄)−θ

k∈Ji

and hence
ln Φi = ln ni + ln T̄ ζ̄ θ (τ̄ w̄)−θ +



o
X 1 n 
  
θ ln ζi,j − ln ζ̄ + ln Tj (τj wj )−θ − ln T̄ (τ̄ w̄)−θ
.
ni

j∈Ji

Next write the log share as
ln si,j

= ln P

θ (τ w )−θ
Tj ζi,j
j j

k∈Ji

θ (τ w )−θ
Tk ζi,k
k k

= θ ln ζi,j + ln Tj (τj wj )−θ − ln Φi
Plugging in the first order approximation of ln Φi and again summarizing constants in α implies
ln si,j = α + θ ln ζi,j + ln Tj (τj wj )−θ − ln ni − θ


1 X
1 X 
ln ζi,k −
ln Tk (τk wk )−θ
ni
ni
k∈Ji

74

k∈Ji

Finally, take the simple average over the firm’s sourcing strategy to obtain
1 X
ln si,j
ni
j∈Ji

= α+θ

1 X
1 X
ln ζi,j +
ln Tj (τj wj )−θ − ln ni
ni
ni
j∈Ji

j∈Ji

1 X
1 X
−θ
ln ζi,k −
ln Tk (τk wk )−θ
ni
ni
k∈Ji

k∈Ji

= α − ln ni .

75

D
D.1

Appendix: General Equilibrium
A general equilibrium extension

For this exercise, we assume a three country world, with the countries labeled Home (H), North
(N ) and South (S). For simplicity, we drop the distinction between intra and inter-firm sourcing.
We further assume that 1) ζi,j = ζi , that is, firms’ productivity does not vary by location/mode,
and 2) fixed costs of foreign sourcing are constant across firms. In our baseline version of the model,
the Home and North countries are symmetric and produce final manufactured goods that are freely
traded between all three countries. The South does not produce and export final manufacturing
goods. To conserve space we only present the problems of the Home and South country. In addition
to the manufacturing sector X in H and N , there is a large absorbing sector which produces a
freely traded non-manufacturing good Z in each country. We normalize its price to unity.
Notation In this section, a double subscript indicates first the destination and second the source.
For instance, XHN will denote Home’s consumption of the North manufactured bundle.
Home country
Households The representative household in the Home country derives utility from the consumption of Y and Z. It supplies LH units of labor inelastically. The household maximizes utility
β 1−β
subject to its budget constraint wH LH = PHY YH + ZH . Here, ZH is Home consumpYH
ZH
tion of the numeraire good. As a result, the Home consumer spends EH = (1 − β) wH LH on the
manufacturing good YH and the remainder on Z.
The composite manufacturing good YH is an aggregate of the Home and the North manufac 1
 
−1
−1
1
−1




turing good (XHH and XHN ), YH = aHH XHH + aHN XHN
. The demand functions for
 X −
P
manufacturing goods from Home and the North are given by XHj = aHj PHj
YH , j = H, N ,
Y
H
1

(1−)
(1−)  1−
. For simplicity
and the manufacturing price index is PHY = aHH PHX
+ aHN PNX
X = P X = P X.
we assume the final manufactured goods are freely traded, so PHN
N
NN
Z
Firms in the Z sector Firms in the Z-sector produce with linear technology QZ
H = AH LH .
Profit maximization in competitive markets implies that wH = AH as long as QZ
H is strictly
positive and finite.

Assembling Firms A Home aggregating firm which sells to Home, North, and South now replaces the consumer as described in Section 3. The firm produces the C.E.S aggregate QX
H =
R
 σ
 X −σ
1
σ−1
σ−1
PH
X
σ
σ dω
. The demand for a variety ω is x (ω) = δ (ω) p(ω)
QH and the
ω∈Ω [δ (ω)] [x (ω)]
1
R

1−σ
price index is PHX = ω∈Ω δ (ω) p (ω)1−σ dω
Firms in the X sector Home firms in the X sector set up supply chains and produce as
described in Section 3. In this general equilibrium extension we assume that the number of firms
is endogenous and determined by the following entry problem which has three stages.
76

In the first stage, there is an unbounded mass of potential entrants who can pay fixed costs fE
to learn their productivity ζ. In equilibrium, the number of entrants MH is determined by a zero
expected profit condition:
Eζ [max {V (ζ, δ, f ) − wH fH , 0}] − wH fE = 0
where fH is the fixed cost of entering into production at Home and
1
V (ζ) =
σ



σ−1
σ

σ−1

2N

σ
PHX

E [δ] QX
H

γ

1−σ
θ

[Φ (ζ)]

σ−1
θ

− wH

2
X

1{J(ζ)=Jk } fk .

k=1

In this simple model we will set N = 3.
Second, after learning their types, entrants must pay the additional fixed cost fH to set up
production in the Home country. Only firms with sufficiently high types ζ find it profitable to do
LB . The equation determining entry into Home production is:
so. The lowest type that enters is ζH

LB
V ζH
− wH fH = 0
LB will not source inputs from abroad.
where we will assume that the marginal firm with type ζH
Finally, those firms that produce in the Home country set up their supply chain as discussed in
Section 3. As before, all fixed costs are measured in units of labor. Note that firms learn their
demand shock δ only after having chosen their sourcing strategy.

Labor market clearing Labor market clearing in the Home country requires that
"Z Z
∞

LH = LZ
H

+ MH
0

Z

∞

+
LB
ζH

∞

LB
ζH

LB
lHH (ζ, δ) dGζ (ζ) dGδ (δ) + fE + fH 1 − Gζ ζH

#

"Z

fJ(ζ) dGζ (ζ) + MN
0

#

∞Z ∞
LB
ζN



lHN (ζ, δ) dGζ (ζ) dGδ (δ) .

(D1)

Labor demand on the right hand side consists of demand from the Z sector, demand from Home
firms in the X sector (the first integral), the labor demand stemming from the various fixed costs
and the demand from North firms in the X sector sourcing intermediates from H (the last integral).
South
The representative household in the South has preferences analogous to Home and North. The
production of the non-manufacturing good is also analogous to the Home and North. However,
there is no manufacturing sector in the South, or only to the extent that Home and North produce
intermediates in the South. As a result, the labor market clearing condition requires that
Z ∞Z ∞
Z
LS = LS + MH
lHS (ζ, δ) dGζ (ζ) dGδ (δ)
0

Z
+ MN
0

LB
ζH
∞Z ∞

LB
ζN

77

lN S (ζ, δ) dGζ (ζ) dGδ (δ) .

(D2)

Goods market clearing
We close the model with the market clearing conditions for the goods. For the Z-sector,
Z
Z
ZH + ZN + ZS = QZ
H + QN + QS .

For the Home manufacturing good,
QX
H = XHH + XN H + XSH .
An analogous condition exists for the North’s manufacturing good XN .48

D.2

Calibration

While the model does not restrict firms’ sourcing patterns from Home, North, and South, we find
that only three of these are prevalent in the data.49 We therefore restrict the model to these three
equilibrium sourcing strategies, so that J˜H = {(H) , (H,N) , (H,N,S)}. This restriction together
with nonstochastic fixed costs conveniently implies a complete ordering of sourcing strategies which
simplifies the numerical solution: Most manufacturing firms do not source from abroad. They only
pay fixed costs fE to learn their type and fH to enter into domestic production. The somewhat
more productive firms additionally pay a fixed cost to also source from the North. Finally, only
the most productive firms source from the North and the South in addition to their production in
the Home country. To do so, they pay an additional fixed cost.50
Our calibration procedure proceeds in two steps. We first set a number of parameters equal to
their direct analogues in the data or to conventional values in the literature. Second, we choose
the remaining parameters to match key features of employment and imports in the manufacturing
sector in a baseline year. For the baseline calibration, we choose parameters for both the Home
and the North to match the U.S.
The productivity parameters AH and AS are chosen to match skill-adjusted wages for the U.S.
and the average country in the South. Wage data are obtained from the ILO and skill adjusted
using the method in Eaton and Kortum (2002). We define the South as countries with GDP per
capita of less than 10 percent of the U.S. in 2000. This threshold implies that China, India, and
Brazil belong to the South. The labor endowment in all three countries are set to match the
skill-adjusted labor force, taken from the same source.
We next assume that firm types have a Pareto distribution with a lower bound of unity and
curvature parameter αζ = 4.25 as in Melitz and Redding (2015). The demand elasticity σ is set
to 2.3 and the dispersion parameter θ to 6. These values imply that (σ − 1) /θ is 0.217, roughly
consistent with the upper end of our point estimates. In line with the literature, we choose  is be
4. We also set τjj = 1 and τjk = 1.15, j, k ∈ {H, N, S}, j 6= k. Although these parameters are not
48

A full list of conditions for all three countries that characterize the equilibrium of the model is available upon
request.
49
In fact, similar to Antràs, Fort, and Tintelnot (2017), there are regularities in sourcing locations/modes of the
following form. First, very few firms source from abroad. Of the ones that do, most firms only import from the
North. Second, if a firm sources from the South, it almost always also sources from the North. Appendix Table B8
shows the fraction of firms in the data that source according to each of these strategies.
50
Adding further sourcing strategies, e.g. (H,S) would destroy the complete ordering and complicate the solution
somewhat. Empirically, this sourcing strategy is unimportant. However, Arkolakis and Eckert (2017) demonstrate
how to solve such models.

78

Table D1: Calibration Stage 1
Parameter
σ
θ
bφ
αφ
AH , AN
AS
LH , LN
LS
τjk
ρ
E [δ]

aHN , aN H

Value
2.3
6
1
4.25
14.32
1.02
0.301
2.35
1.15
1.5
1.0025
4
0.0331

aHH , aN N
aSH , aSN

1
1

Note
Demand elasticity
Frechet shape parameter
Lower bound of the Pareto distribution
Pareto shape parameter
Skill-adjusted wages in Home, from the ILO
Average skill-adjusted wages in South from the ILO
Skill-adjusted labor force in Home, from the ILO
Total skill-adjusted labor force in South from the ILO
Domestic transport costs
Elasticity of substitution of tasks
Expected value of demand shifter
Elasticity of substitution of manufactured bundles from H and N
Taste parameters for foreign good in aggregate manufactured bundle
(Calibrated to match share of final goods imports/total manufacturing output)
Taste parameters for own good in aggregate manufactured bundle (normalization)
South preference for Home and North good

important for any of the model’s predictions, we note that ρ is set to 1.5 and E [δ] to 1.0025 (we
assume δ is independent of ζ). Table D1 summarizes the values of the preset parameters.
The remaining parameters of the model are chosen to match key features of our data in 1997.51
These parameters are Tj , j ∈ {H, N, S}, the fixed cost parameters fJ , J ⊂ {(H,N) , (H,N,S)}, fE ,
and fH , as well as the expenditure share β. The targets and the fit of the model in equilibrium are
summarized in Table D2.

D.3

Quantitative exercises

We consider two counterfactuals relative to our baseline model. In the first exercise, we compute the
employment and welfare changes relative to 1997 when we allow only the fixed cost parameters fJ ,
J ⊂ {(H,N) , (H,N,S)} to change to match 2007 trade flows. We stress that our framework cannot
identify which shocks (technology, fixed costs, variable costs) occurred between 1997 and 2007 to
generate observed changes in foreign sourcing – all these shocks have the same implications for firm
sourcing shares in our model.52 The purpose of this exercise is to illustrate the role the observed
changes in the foreign sourcing of U.S. multinationals played in the aggregate manufacturing decline,
when general equilibrium effects are present. We simply choose fixed cost declines as one method
of generating the observed aggregate changes in foreign sourcing. The benefit of this approach is
that we do not need to recalibrate the entire model to match the data in 2007; rather we can be
explicit about relating the changes in fixed costs to changes in employment and welfare.
Table D2 illustrates the fit of our model to our calibration targets for 1997 and 2007, and
51
We choose 1997 as the baseline year in much of the paper as all of the data required for calibration and estimation
is available in this year.
52
In fact in this model an increase in Tj is not separable from a decrease in τjk or wj . Therefore, any calibrated
technology increases would reflect a composite change in foreign wages and the variable costs of offshoring.

79

Table D2: Quantitative Exercises: Model Fit and Parameter Changes

Moments
N imports/Manufacturing sector sales
S imports/Manufacturing sector sales
Fraction of firms with J = {H, N }
Fraction of firms with J = {H, N, S}
Manufacturing employment share
Not targeted:
Fraction of firms with J = {H}
Fraction of manufacturing employment
in offshoring firms

1997
Targets Model

Targets

2007
CF 1 (only fj changes)

0.055
0.032
0.125
0.057
0.168

0.047
0.031
0.158
0.001
0.169

0.076
0.074
-

0.076
0.074
0.367
0.002
0.155

0.818
0.307

0.841
0.291

-

0.631
0.513

Parameters
β
% change in fHN
% change in fN H
% change in fHN S

0.6508

0.6508
-22.71 %
-22.71 %
-34.27%

Notes: This table summarizes the fit of the model to calibration targets in 1997 and 2007. The second panel
displays the changes in parameters in the counterfactual.

summarizes the changes in fixed costs necessary to match aggregate input imports in both periods.
To match the observed trade patterns in 2007 the fixed cost parameters fj , j ∈ J uniformly
decrease. fHN S decreases the most, reflecting the fact that imports from the South grew rapidly
over the period 1997-2007.
The results of this exercise are in Table D3. Targeting 2007 trade patterns results in Home
manufacturing employment falling by 8% which accounts for around one third of the observed
decline between 1997 and 2007.53 In this exercise the employment declines within offshoring firms
increase due to firm entry into foreign sourcing. However, as firms sourcing inputs from abroad
face lower unit costs, the Home and North manufacturing price indexes fall and demand for the
manufactured goods increase. This raises manufacturing employment. On net the effect is similar
to the previous “naive” counterfactual in Section 4.1. Home welfare increases.
Our second counterfactual exercise implements an asymmetric policy where Home firms are not
permitted to offshore production, while North firms continue to do so. In practice, we maintain all
parameters at their 1997 levels and assume that fixed costs faced by Home firms increase to prevent
Home offshoring as an equilibrium outcome. The results of this exercise are in Table D3. Home
firms face higher unit costs relative to the baseline model. This reduces their scale and increases
53

We present the declines in the data both for our full sample and for the period 1997-2007. As some of the
parameters in our model are calibrated using data available only in census years (years ending in 2 or 7), we present
the 1997-2007 decline and the 1993-2011 decline as an additional point of comparison.

80

the price of the Home manufactured bundle relative to the North bundle. Despite higher prices
consumers in all countries demand the Home manufactured good, and the existing manufacturing
firms now reallocate all their intermediate good production to the Home country. The net effect is
an increase in Home manufacturing employment. Due to the increase in the manufacturing price
index, Home welfare falls. Fewer firms enter manufacturing in Home.
The final row of Table D3 considers the same policy change when the elasticity of substitution
between the Home and North good equals 6. This results in a smaller increase in the Home
manufacturing price index, as the consumer substitutes towards the relatively cheaper North good.
The increased substitutability also leads to a smaller welfare loss. Manufacturing employment faces
several offsetting effects – Home firms are less productive and have less demand worldwide, but
these firms reallocate all input production to Home. Further, North multinationals that source
inputs from Home face increased demand and increase their employment worldwide. The net effect
is a somewhat larger increase in Home manufacturing employment.
We advice some caution should be taken in the application of these general equilibrium results.
This exercise quantifies the decline in manufacturing employment due to increased foreign sourcing
alone, and does not account for other factors – such as structural change or frictions in labor
mobility between sectors – that could serve to mitigate the overall negative employment results.
Further, our analysis has focused on the effects on manufacturing, and it is important to note
that one might suspect U.S. multinationals have increased their non-manufacturing employment.
Addressing such questions in future research would require more data than currently available to
properly calibrate a large multi-country model of multinational sourcing patterns.
Table D3: Quantitative Exercises: Manufacturing Decline

Data (1993- 2011)
Data (1997- 2007)
Counterfactual 1: Only fixed costs change
Counterfactual 2: No Home offshoring
Counterfactual 3: No Home offshoring,  = 6

LX
H

MH

PYX

H Welfare

-36 %
-25 %
-8 %
8.2 %
8.9 %

0.0 %
-1.0 %
1.5%

-2.1%
1.3 %
1.3 %

0.5%
-0.3 %
-0.7 %

Notes: This table summarizes the changes in aggregate manufacturing employment and other aggregate
variables within the counterfactuals. All changes are reported as percent changes relative to the baseline.
X
LX
H is the Home manufacturing employment share, MH is the mass of firms in Home and PY is the Home
manufacturing price index. We show the declines in the data over two periods – the full sample and
a shorter period between the census years 1997 and 2007, as some of our calibration targets are only
available in census years and have been chosen to match data in 1997 and 2007.

81

