                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 HURRICANES, CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES AND ELECTORAL ACCOUNTABILITY

                                      Stefano Gagliarducci
                                      M. Daniele Paserman
                                      Eleonora Patacchini

                                      Working Paper 25835
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25835


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We thank Alberto Alesina, Laurent Bouton, Luigi Guiso, Shanker Satyanath, James Snyder,
participants at the Warwick/Princeton/Utah Political Economy Conference in Venice 2017, the
NBER Political Economy Program Fall 2018 Meeting, the Barcelona GSE Summer Forum 2018,
the Bocconi Workshop on Causes and Consequences of Populism 2019, and seminar participants
at Ben-Gurion University, EIEF, Lund University, Kellogg School of Management, Tel Aviv
University, Tor Vergata and Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona for helpful comments. Chiara
Lacava and Gabriele Rovigatti provided excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The
authors did not receive any sources of external funding, and declare that they have no relevant or
material financial relationships that bear on their research. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Stefano Gagliarducci, M. Daniele Paserman, and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hurricanes, Climate Change Policies and Electoral Accountability
Stefano Gagliarducci, M. Daniele Paserman, and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 25835
May 2019
JEL No. D70,D72,H50,Q54

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies how politicians and voters respond to new information on the threats of
climate change. Using data on the universe of federal disaster declarations between 1989 and
2014, we document that congress members from districts hit by a hurricane are more likely to
support bills promoting more environmental regulation and control in the year after the disaster.
The response to hurricanes does not seem to be driven by logrolling behavior or lobbysts'
pressure. The change in legislative agenda is persistent over time, and it is associated with an
electoral penalty in the following elections. The response is mainly promoted by representatives
in safe districts, those with more experience, and those with strong pro-environment records. Our
evidence thus reveals that natural disasters may trigger a permanent change in politicians' beliefs,
but only those with a sufficient electoral strength or with strong ideologies are willing to engage
in promoting policies with short-run costs and long-run benefits.

Stefano Gagliarducci                             Eleonora Patacchini
University of Rome Tor Vergata                   Cornell University
Via Columbia 2                                   Uris Hall
00133 Rome                                       Cornell University
Italy                                            Ithaca, NY 14850
stefano.gagliarducci@uniroma2.it                 ep454@cornell.edu

M. Daniele Paserman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
paserman@bu.edu
1         Introduction

Legislators are goal-oriented actors seeking to achieve three main objectives: reelection,

institutional prestige and good public policy (Fenno, 1973). But what if some of those

goals are in contrast to each other? Will legislators support desirable policies even if it

proves costly in the voting booth?

        In this paper, we consider the case of climate change policies. There is almost unani-

mous consensus among scientists that climate change is occurring, and it is caused largely

by human activity (IPCC, 2013). However, failure to internalize the long-run – and pos-

sibly irreversible – costs of climate change is keeping policies below the suggested optimal

level (Nordhaus, 2016). It is notoriously difficult for politicians to translate a scientific con-

sensus about global warming into public policies. Voters tend to rank climate low among

their priorities,1 and business interests have been historically organized against climate

change action.2 Natural disasters and their associated costs, however, may lead to a more

vigorous debate about environmental policy, and may act as catalysts for change. Envi-

ronmental catastrophes capture wide public attention, voters process information coming

from flooded islands and submerged cities, and firms suffer from the negative reputation

externality of being associated with global warming. Under these circumstances, firms

may be more likely to accept new regulation, and voters may reward politicians that

address salient concerns.

        In this paper, we study how elected representatives and voters react to new informa-

tion regarding the risks of climate change. In theory, several reactions are possible. If

voters and politicians are already aware of the risks of climate change, the occurrence of
    1
     Gallup, “Most Important Problem”, http://news.gallup.com/poll/1675/most-important-
problem.aspx, accessed on April 30, 2019.
   2
     Yale Environment 360, “Why Won’t American Business Push for Action on Climate?”, http:
//e360.yale.edu/features/why-wont-american-business-push-for-action-on-climate, accessed
on April 30, 2019.


                                                1
hurricanes should not meaningfully affect their views about the optimal policy response,

and we would not expect to see any response in terms of either legislation or electoral

outcomes. On the other hand, if hurricanes shift views on what the optimal policy is, we

would expect an increase in environmental legislation and larger vote shares for politicians

endorsing “green” bills. It is also possible, however, that the effects are different for voters

and politicians, if they are exposed to different information, or if they process the same

information differently. Politicians are more likely to be exposed to environmental lobby-

ing groups, and are more likely to engage with supporters of more stringent environmental

regulation both inside and outside of Congress. On the other hand, the general public

may fail to adequately assess the relative costs and benefits of policies aimed at mitigating

the effects of global climate change; it may myopically believe that intervention at a later

date would still be effective; or, even if it correctly assesses the inter-temporal decision

problem, it may choose not to reward action today because it does not value sufficiently

the welfare of future generations. In this scenario, we expect to see a response in terms of

legislation but no response in electoral outcomes. The vote share for politicians endorsing

green bills may even decrease if this is perceived as a shift of their agenda from other

topics, such as jobs or health. And, because apocalyptic global-warming messages may

trigger fear and backfire, politicians may also choose to decrease support for green policies

(O’Neill and Nicholson-Cole, 2009; see also Moser and Dilling, 2011, and the references

therein).

      This paper attempts to disentangle between these competing hypotheses. We analyze

United States House members’ support for legislation aimed at contrasting global warming

in the aftermath of hurricanes that directly impact their congressional district. Even

though the scientific community is somewhat cautious in assessing a causal link from

anthropogenic climate change to the frequency and intensity of hurricanes,3 there is ample
  3
      For example, the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric


                                                  2
evidence that extreme weather events are associated with an increase in the perceived

threats of global climate change. For example, Leiserowtiz (2006) and Myers et al. (2012)

find that personal experience with extreme weather is associated with stronger beliefs

about the reality of climate change; Sisco et al. (2016) find that extreme weather increase

the frequency of tweets about climate change in the local area; and Egan and Mullin

(2012) find that higher-than-average temperatures are associated with stronger short-

term beliefs in global warming.4 In some cases, extreme weather events have led political

personalities to explicitly call for more action to fight climate change. For example, in

November 2012 New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg surprisingly endorsed Barack

Obama just days before the Presidential election, citing the fallout from Hurricane Sandy

as the main reason for his decision, and arguing that the risk that extreme weather events

may be the result of climate change “should be enough to compel all elected leaders to

take immediate action.”5

    Going further back in time, we can also find other examples of links between environ-

mental disasters and environmental action. The 1969 Cuyahoga River fire in Cleveland

is widely believed to have contributed to the creation of the federal Environmental Pro-

tection Agency in 1970 and the Clean Water Act of 1972. The Exxon Valdez oil spill

of 1989 eventually led to the Oil Pollution Act of 1990. However, the relationship be-

tween environmental disasters and subsequent legislation is not always automatic. The

BP Deepwater Horizon oil spill of 2010, which was almost twenty times worse than the

Exxon Valdez oil spill in terms of oil released, did not lead to the introduction of any
Administration (NOAA) states that “[i]t is premature to conclude that human activities – and partic-
ularly greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming, have already had a detectable impact on
Atlantic hurricane or global tropical cyclone activity”, https://www.gfdl.noaa.gov/global-warming-
and-hurricanes, accessed on May 17, 2017.
   4
     Others find similar results outside of the U.S. (Dai et al., 2015; Blennow et al., 2012; Frondel et al.,
2017).
   5
     Quoted from http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/02/nyregion/bloomberg-endorses-obama-
saying-hurricane-sandy-affected-decision.html, accessed on April 30, 2019.)



                                                     3
significant environmental legislation.

       We use data on the universe of federal disaster declarations collected from the Federal

Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The data contain detailed information on the

counties assisted by FEMA after each event. We match counties to congressional districts

and ask whether representatives of congressional districts directly affected by a hurricane

are more likely to initiate environmental legislation by either sponsoring or co-sponsoring

“green” bills aimed at fighting climate change. We define green bills as those that are

classified by the Congressional Bills Project (CBP) as dealing with air pollution, global

warming, and alternative and renewable energy, and use text analysis to exclude relief bills

or bills that are actually anti-environmental.6 By doing so, we are mostly focusing on bills

introducing stricter regulation, i.e., on what we interpret as long-run policy. The main

empirical strategy consists of regressing the number of green bills supported on a measure

of hurricane incidence, controlling for a vast range of district and individual congress

member characteristics, as well as district and year fixed effects. The long nature of our

panel (we have data on Congressional bills going from the 101st to the 113th Congress,

i.e., from 1990 to 2014) means that we are exploiting for identification the variation in

hurricane occurrence within districts over time. The quasi-random trajectory of hurricanes

implies that the occurrence of a hurricane in a particular district and year can be taken

as exogenous.

       We find that congress members are significantly more likely to support green legislation

in the year after their district has been hit by a hurricane.7 This result is robust to
   6
     The results are robust to using an alternative definition of “green” bills, based on the classification
of bills related to climate change by the Center for Climate and Energy Solutions.
   7
     A concrete example of this is the MARKET CHOICE Act (H.R. 6463 in the 115th Congress), a bill
that proposes to impose a tax on greenhouse gas emissions. The bill was introduced in June 2018 by
Representative Carlos Curbelo of Florida’s 26th Congressional District, and co-sponsored by Represen-
tative Francis Rooney of Florida’s 19th congressional district and Representative Brian Fitzpatrick of
Pennsylvania’s 8th congressional district. Florida’s 26th congressional district contains all of the Florida
Keys and a portion of south-west Miami-Dade county; Florida’s 19th congressional district covers an
area on the West coast of Florida that includes Fort Myers and Naples. These areas suffered extensive


                                                     4
controlling for district and congressperson fixed effects, and for state-specific time trends.

It is essentially unchanged regardless of how we measure exposure to hurricanes, and also if

we restrict attention only to those hurricanes after which a major disaster declaration was

issued. The effect is large in districts that are directly affected, diminishes with distance

from the hurricane’s centroid, and congress members representing states adjacent to a

hurricane’s trajectory do not exhibit any significant change in behavior.

   We then look at channels mediating this effect. Our evidence reveals little support

for the hypothesis that politicians use hurricanes as a mechanism to engage in logrolling

(as measured by the exchange of favors between alumni from the same alma mater), and

for the conjecture that their reaction is simply driven by lobbysts’ pressure (as measured

by the amount of campaign contributions received by political action committees (PACs)

with environment-related interests).

   We next look at the effect of a politician’s support for green legislation in the after-

math of a hurricane on the vote share in the following election. We find that supporting

green legislation in response to a hurricane carries an electoral penalty. This suggests that

politicians’ response cannot be explained by a simple model in which they are catering to

an increase in the preference for environmental regulation by the median voter. We also

find little support for the hypothesis that congress members temporarily overestimate

preferences for regulation, because the increase in support for green bills persists over

time, despite additional survey evidence showing that voters seem to forget about the

disaster relatively soon. The only hypothesis that remains consistent with the evidence is

that hurricane occurrence and hurricane damages in one’s own district trigger a perma-

nent change in beliefs. Politicians, however, do not act in a completely selfless manner,

regardless of political constraints. Climate change legislation in response to a hurricane

is more likely to be supported by politicians in safe districts, those with more experience,
damages from Hurricane Irma in September 2017.


                                                 5
and those with stronger pro-environmental records. We interpret these results as evidence

that only politicians with sufficient electoral credit or with strong ideologies can engage

in promoting policies with short-run costs and long-run benefits.

       The existing literature has focused on the responsiveness of voters to politicians’ ability

to obtain short-run assistance in the form of relief funds in the aftermath of severe weather

events. The traditional theoretical view is that, with rational voters, these events should

not affect incumbents’ electoral fortunes. However, others (Ashworth et al., 2018) have

argued that exogenous shocks can still affect incumbents’ electoral fortunes as voters can

observe the way they prepared for or responded to a natural disaster, thus providing the

opportunity to learn about the quality of the incumbent. The empirical evidence on this

issue is mixed. Gasper and Reeves (2011), Healy and Malhotra (2010), and Cole (2012)

find that incumbents suffer if weather events produce severe damage, but are rewarded by

requesting or granting recovery funds. Similarly, Healy and Malhotra (2009), Bechtel and

Hainmueller (2011), and Chen (2013) also find that incumbents are rewarded for disaster

recovery spending.8 The contribution of this paper is in looking explicitly at politicians’

response in terms of long-run environmental legislation, and at voters’ support for this

intervention.

       More broadly, our paper complements the recent literature on populism. Guiso et

al. (2017), and references therein, argue that one of the key features of populism is the

support of policies that pander to voters by offering short-run protection, but have no

regard to long-run consequences. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first

to look at the flip side of the coin, that is, investigating a forward-looking behavior of

politicians who decide to take action despite the opposition of (possibly more myopic)
   8
    Other papers have focused on the economic impact of weather disasters. For example, Hsiang and
Jina (2014) use cross-country data to show that extreme weather is harmful for economic growth, although
the effect is smaller for rich countries (Dell et al., 2012). For the U.S., Boustan et al. (2017) find that
most severe disasters increase migration rates and lower housing prices, although these effects can be
mitigated by adaptation (Burke and Emerick, 2016) and aid policies (Deryugina et al., 2018).


                                                    6
voters.

        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section

3 discusses the empirical approach. In Section 4 we present the main empirical results

on green legislation, while in Section 5 we explore the mechanisms behind our results.

Section 6 concludes.



2         Data

2.1        Bills

We use data from the U.S. House of Representatives for the 101st to the 113th Congress

(1989-2014). We obtained data on bill characteristics, sponsorship and co-sponsorship,

plus demographic and electoral characteristics for congressmen and their district of elec-

tion, from the Library of Congress (www.congress.gov).

        We identified bills aimed at fighting climate change (in short “green bills”) as those

classified with one of the following two minor topics, based on the Congressional Bills

Project 9 : “Air pollution, Global Warming, and Noise Pollution”, and “Alternative and

Renewable Energy”. The advantage of this classification is that it does not contain other

categories typically included under the umbrella of environmental issues, like waste man-

agement, clean water, etc. Using text analysis (see Section A.1 for more details), we then

excluded relief bills, bills on noise pollution, or bills that are actually anti-environmental.

After this cleaning, we are left with a total of 868 “green bills,” mostly proposing more

stringent regulation on environmental standards related to greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-

sions and global warming. The disadvantage of this classification is, however, that it

may miss important climate change legislation that falls into other categories (e.g., the
    9
        Adler and Wilkerson (2015), http://www.congressionalbills.org



                                                 7
ratification of international agreements).10

       As an alternative measure, we use the list of climate change federal legislation provided

by the Center for Climate and Energy Solutions (www.c2es.org), which is an environ-

mental think tank that replaced the former Pew Center on Global Climate Change. The

list is only available from the 106th Congress onwards, but it has the advantage of iden-

tifying major bills that are clearly addressing climate change, and whether the bills were

aimed at reducing (i.e., imposing additional taxes on greenhouse gas emissions) or in-

creasing (i.e., spurring fossil fuel development, or curtailing environmental regulations)

global warming.11 Again, we used text analysis to exclude relief bills, leaving us with a

total of 365 “green bills” under this alternative definition.

       Our main measure of congress members’ activity is the number of bills sponsored or

co-sponsored. Each bill in Congress has one primary sponsor, and can be signed by any

number of co-sponsors. The sponsor is not necessarily the sole or the most important

author of the bill, but he/she is identified with the bill content. The sponsor’s activities

include, but are not restricted to, gathering and communicating information about the bill,

building coalitions, administering public relations around the bill, and shepherding the

legislation through the House. co-sponsors typically help the sponsor in promoting the bill,

and in attracting support within Congress. While there is some debate in the literature on

the exact motives for co-sponsoring bills (Krehbiel, 1995, and Kessler and Krehbiel, 1996),

we take the view that co-sponsoring is an indicator that the Congressperson wishes to be

associated with a piece of legislation. Moreover, bills with a large number of co-sponsors
  10
     We also checked if there were bills falling under different CBP minor topics and whose title included
the words “global warming” or “climate change” (with and without the first letter capitalized). We only
found 20 such bills, of which some were actually anti-environmental. Inclusion of these additional bills in
the analysis does not affect any of the results in the paper.
  11
     The majority of bills in the list favors climate action, with nearly half of those bills dealing with climate
change adaptation and climate science. Many more bills touch on energy, environment, transportation,
agriculture and other areas that could have an impact on or be affected by climate change. The list
contains for the most part only those bills whose authors explicitly reference climate change or related
terms, such as greenhouse gases or carbon dioxide.


                                                        8
have a higher probability of passing the House and becoming p ublic law (Gagliarducci

and Paserman, 2016), suggesting that co-sponsorship has real effects and is not just plain
                    12
position taking.

       Finally, we gathered detailed information on electoral results for each candidate through

the Congressional Quarterly (library.cqpress.com); information on fossil production

(gas, oil and coal) at the state level through the Energy Information Administration (EIA,

www.eia.gov); information on contributions from Political Action Committees (PACs)

from OpenSecrets.org (www.opensecrets.org); and information on congress members’

voting history on environmental matters from the League of Conservation Voters (LCV,

www.lcv.org).


2.2       Hurricanes

We collected federal disaster declarations for the period 1989-2014 from the Federal Emer-

gency Management Agency (FEMA, www.fema.gov), which provides county-level detailed

information on assisted population after each event. We focus on disasters caused by hur-

ricanes only (no severe storms, nor typhoons), i.e., tropical storms in the Atlantic Ocean

and the northeastern Pacific Ocean, and consider both Major Disaster Declarations (DR)

and Emergency Declarations (EM).13

       Since disaster declarations, and especially the intensity of assistance, could be poten-

tially influenced by the political momentum (Garret and Sobel, 2003), we additionally
  12
     By looking at sponsorship and co-sponsorship, rather than just sponsorship, we are also able to
mitigate the possibility that, since a hurricane typically hits several districts, congress members elected
in those districts might combine their effort around just one bill. If so, this might produce negative
spatial auto-correlation, with one representative (e.g., the one from district with the most damage or
higher number of deaths) sponsoring a bill, and the others none.
  13
     The President can declare a major disaster for any natural event that has caused damage of such
severity that it is beyond the combined capabilities of state and local governments to respond. A Ma-
jor Disaster Declaration provides a wide range of federal assistance programs for individuals and public
infrastructure, including funds for both emergency and permanent work. Emergency Declarations sup-
plement state and local or Indian tribal government efforts in providing emergency services, such as the
protection of lives, property, public health, and safety, or to lessen or avert the threat of a catastrophe.


                                                     9
collected more objective measures of hurricanes’ intensity, like wind speed and trajectory,

from Weather Underground (www.wunderground.com). For each county, we consider the

wind speed recorded on the five points on the actual hurricane trajectory which are closest

to the county centroid, and weight those values by the inverse of the distance from the

county centroid. We assign the maximum of these five recorded speeds as the county’s

experienced wind speed.14

       As a baseline, we classify as hit by a hurricane any county listed in a FEMA disaster

declaration, conditional on the wind speed being above 19 mph, which corresponds to half

of the lower threshold for a Tropical Storm (as defined by the Saffir-Simpson hurricane

wind scale).15,16 The wind cut-off helps mitigating measurement errors in the identification

of the treated counties, as some counties may be included in a FEMA declaration only

because they belong to a state hit by a hurricane. This is because “all requests for a

declaration by the President that a major disaster exists shall be made by the Governor

of the affected state” (Stafford Act, 1988). Also, we do not consider as hit by a hurricane

those counties that were only indirectly affected by a hurricane (e.g., counties that took

in evacuees after Hurricane Katrina, and therefore received FEMA assistance).17


2.3       Final sample

We collapsed the above data on green bills and hurricanes at the year/district level.

The mapping of counties into districts was performed using the congressional districts
  14
     This measure is somewhat less precise, because some districts are quite distant from the meteorological
station with information on wind speed, and therefore the measure relies heavily on interpolation. Because
of this, we prefer to use the FEMA-based measure as our baseline.
  15
     All our results remain qualitatively unchanged when using different thresholds. In Section 4.1 we will
also show results when using the actual wind speed as a proxy for hurricanes’ incidence.
  16
     Over the period 1989-2014 we observed a total of 37 hurricanes, namely: Alex, Andrew, Bertha,
Bob, Bonnie, Bret, Charley, Claudette, Dean, Dennis, Dolly, Earl, Emily, Erin, Floyd, Fran, Frances,
Georges, Gustav, Henri, Hugo, Ida, Ike, Iniki, Irene, Isaac, Isabel, Isidore, Ivan, Jeanne, Katrina, Lili,
Opal, Ophelia, Rita, Sandy, and Wilma.
  17
     We also collected data for FEMA assistance grants. However, county assistance grants are only
available from 2002, while individual assistance grants (renters and owners) are only available from 2008.


                                                    10
relationship files available at the Census Bureau (www.census.gov).18 When collapsing,

we computed the total number of green bills sponsored or co-sponsored in a year. In

the case of more than one hurricane over the same district in one year, we identified the

number of counties ever hit, and highest wind intensity ever recorded.

       Table 1 describes our final data set. The sample is made of 11,195 year/district

observations, corresponding to 1,338 congress members and to 1,735 district combinations

over the period 1989-2014. Almost 5% of the districts had at least one county that was

hit by a hurricane in a certain year, with most of the disaster declarations being classified

by FEMA as major (4.6%). Not surprisingly, all of the occurrences are located in the

South-East (2.8%) and the North-East (2.2%) of the country, as these are the areas most

exposed to the proliferous hurricane activity in the Atlantic Ocean. Similar figures can

be observed when looking at the share of counties hit by a hurricane, or at the share of

population.

       On average, members of Congress sponsor 6.3 and co-sponsor 107.8 bills, of which only

1.3 (1.2%) can be classified as green according to our baseline classification. Figure 1 shows

that climate change has received increased attention by congress members, especially

after the release of the 4th Assessment Report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate

Change (IPCC) in 2007, which was the first to assess that “impacts [of climate change] will

very likely increase due to increased frequencies and intensities of some extreme weather

events.”
  18
    Because of the reapportioning of congressional districts following the Decennial Census, a “district”
should be interpreted throughout as a congressional district-decade pair. This means, for example, that
Florida’s 18th Congressional district in Congresses 108-112, which includes parts of Miami, is treated as
a different district from Florida’s 18th district in Congresses 113rd -114th , which does not include Miami.




                                                    11
3     Empirical model and identification strategy

We ask whether the raw correlation presented in Figure 1 is affected once we control for

differences between districts and congress members hit by a hurricane or not. The basic

estimating equation is the following:



                     GBsdi,t = α + βHsdi,τ + γ 0 Xsdi,t + δt + µz + sdi,t              (1)

where GBsdi,t is the number of green bills sponsored or co-sponsored at year t by con-

gressman i, representing district d in state s; Hsdi,τ is a dummy for whether at least a

county in district d of state s was ever hit by a hurricane at year τ , where τ is equal to

either t or t − 1; Xsdi,t is a vector of district and individual congress member character-

istics. The district characteristics include: the share of the Green and the Republican

party in the previous Congressional elections; the log of population, area, and per capita

income, the share of the population over 65, black, foreign born, and urban (from the

Decennial Census); the ratio between the national share of coal/oil production and the

national share of the population, at the state level; and a dummy for the district having

received any evacuee from other districts hit by a hurricane. Individual congress member

characteristics include: the number of other non-green bills sponsored or co-sponsored; 23

committee membership dummies; a dummy for belonging to the House minority party, for

being House leader (speaker, minority/majority leader/whip, standing committee chair),

Republican, and female; the relative margin of victory with respect to the second candi-

date in the previous elections; tenure (number of terms served in congress) and age (in

years). Finally, δt are year fixed effects, while µz are geographic (state or district) or

congress member fixed effects, depending on the specification.

    Our identification strategy rests on the assumption that, within geographic units (like


                                              12
states, but possibly also within regions), the timing and the trajectory of a hurricane is

as good as random, since it is based on aggregate natural and meteorological factors that

are orthogonal to any local anthropogenic activity. This randomness is well represented in

Figure 2, which reports the observed trajectory of four representative hurricanes in the last

twenty years. There is no evident sign of any time or geographical pattern, besides the fact

that al these hurricanes hit either the Eastern seaboard of the United States or the Gulf

of Mexico. But the actual trajectory of the hurricanes is hard to predict. For example,

Hurricane Sandy in 2012, after making landfall in Jamaica and Cuba, stayed largely

away from the U.S. coast, only to veer sharply westward and move ashore again in New

Jersey. In 2004, Hurricane Ivan made initial landfall in the United States in Alabama and

continued inland before losing tropical characteristics while crossing Virginia. However,

remnants of the storm completed an anticyclonic loop and moved over Florida, regaining

strength as it crossed the Gulf of Mexico, and it made a second landfall in Louisiana. It is

also interesting to notice that the mapping of actual hurricane trajectories into counties

included in FEMA declarations is quite accurate (see Figure 3), which is reassuring against

the possibility that FEMA declarations might be subject to political influence (Garret and

Sobel, 2003).

   Following the above discussion, we could include in our baseline specification state×year

fixed effects, thus directly exploiting the random path of a hurricane within a given state

and year. However, given that hurricane trajectories are quite broad (see again Figure 3),

we would be left with quite a small variability in the incidence of hurricanes within state

and year. This problem is further exacerbated by the presence of spillover effects across

neighboring districts (see results in Section 4.2). For these reasons, our preferred specifi-

cation includes year fixed effects and geographic fixed effects (either state or congressional

district fixed effects) separately. That is, we exploit the variation in the incidence of hur-



                                             13
ricanes over time within a geographic area, where the randomness of a hurricane across

geographical areas and over time guarantees that the timing of a disaster is orthogonal

to any time-specific district characteristics.

       Table 2 tests the validity of this assumption by looking at whether pre-determined

congress member and district characteristics are balanced between districts hit by a hur-

ricane or not, after controlling for state and year fixed effects.19 Of the 14 balancing tests

reported in the table, only two are statistically significant at the 10% level. It is reassur-

ing that, even with a relatively coarse geographic fixed effect, most of the covariates are

balanced. None of the individual characteristics is unbalanced. The two remaining imbal-

ances at the district level might simply reflect the fact that the incidence of hurricanes is

higher in districts close to the coast. Specifications that include district fixed effects are

likely to address this potential confounder.



4        Main results

The main results are presented in Table 3. The top panel of the table shows results from

a regression of the number of green bills on contemporaneous hurricane incidence, while

in the bottom panel the key right hand side variable is lagged one period.

       Since hurricanes tend to hit in the second part of the year, it is unlikely that congress

members have sufficient time to introduce new legislation in the same year as the hur-

ricane. And in fact, while the coefficients in both panels have the same sign, the ones

in the top panel tend to be attenuated relative to the ones in the bottom panel, where

we measure hurricane incidence lagged one year. We therefore concentrate our comments

on the results from the bottom panel, even though they are based on slightly smaller

samples, as observations from the first year of the sample and the first year after the
  19
   We do not control here for district fixed effects, as district characteristics come from the Decennial
Census and are therefore constant within a congressional district-decade.

                                                   14
reapportionment of congressional districts are dropped.

   Column (1) shows the simple correlation between hurricane incidence and sponsorship

of green bills, controlling only for year effects. The correlation is negative and statistically

significant, probably reflecting the fact that most hurricanes hit the Southeastern United

States, which in recent years have become solidly Republican and generally opposed to

environmental regulation.

   The picture changes immediately in column (2), with the inclusion of state fixed

effects and the full set of control variables. Now the coefficient on lagged hurricane

incidence becomes positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. This implies that

congress members representing a district hit by a hurricane are significantly more likely to

sponsor green legislation in years following a hurricane than in other years, even relative

to members of their own state’s delegation representing districts not hit by a hurricane.

The results are similar even when we include district fixed effects (column 3), with the

point estimate becoming even larger. When at least one county in the district is hit by

a hurricane the average number of sponsored or co-sponsored bills rises by about 0.2, an

almost 15% increase relative to the sample mean of about 1.3.

   The results are qualitatively and quantitatively unchanged if instead of controlling for

district fixed effects we control for individual congress member fixed effects (column 4), or

if we control for state-specific linear trends in addition to district fixed effects (column 5)

to rule out the presence of other underlying unobservable trends. We conclude that there

is strong evidence that the occurrence of hurricanes causally affects the behavior of elected

politicians, and induces them to initiate and support more environmental legislation.




                                              15
4.1    Robustness checks

In Table 4 we assess the robustness of our results to alternative definitions of hurricane

incidence and climate change legislative activity. We follow our preferred specification,

which controls for all individual and district characteristics and district fixed effects (i.e.,

specification (3) in Table 3).

   In column (1) we use as the key right hand side variable the share of counties affected

by the hurricane (instead of a binary variable indicating whether any county in the district

was affected by a hurricane). In column (2), instead, we use the share of the population

affected by the hurricane. Both specifications show that moving from zero to one-hundred

percent of the district being hit by a hurricane increases the number of green bills by about

0.3. Considering that the average share of a district which is hit by a hurricane is around

0.7, the results of these specifications are essentially indistinguishable from those of the

previous table (an estimated effect of 0.2).

   One concern with all these measures of hurricane incidence is that they are based

on FEMA disaster declarations. These declarations, as well as the intensity of FEMA

assistance, may be themselves affected by the political environment, and therefore not

completely exogenous. Therefore, in column (3) we replace the key right hand side variable

with the highest wind speed recorded across all counties affected by the hurricane. As

discussed previously, this is a potentially more “objective” measure of hurricane incidence,

even though it may suffer from some measurement error because of the way wind speed is

measured (see footnote 14). Reassuringly, the coefficient is still positive and statistically

significant. The magnitude of the coefficient is in line with previous ones: the average

hurricane has a maximum wind speed of about 45 miles per hour, meaning that going from

no hurricane to an average hurricane raises the number of bills by about 0.2. In column

(4), we restrict attention only to hurricanes that were declared Major Disasters. The


                                               16
point estimate is essentially indistinguishable from the one in the baseline specification.

      We next experiment with alternative measures of green bills. In column (5) we use

the C2ES classification of green bills. The sample becomes noticeably smaller (we lose

about 15% of observations), because we only have data from the 106th Congress onwards.

Nevertheless, even with this quite different definition, we find an almost 25% increase

(relative to the sample mean of about 0.7) in the number of green bills sponsored or

co-sponsored.

      Another concern is that co-sponsorship may not necessarily indicate active engagement

with the bill, and instead may be simply a way to signal to constituents and other congress

members support for a specific legislation. We note, however, that expressing support for

a bill through co-sponsorship is actually part of the effect that we intend to measure.

In any case, to assuage some of these concerns, in column (6) we count only the co-

sponsorships that were listed at the time of the bill’s introduction, for which one could

presumably assume some active participation in the drafting of the bill. Compared to the

sample average, the estimated effect using only original co-sponsorships is very similar to

the baseline results (about 20%).

      Next, in Table 5 we look at whether congress members’ legislative activity is also tied

to other types of extreme weather events. Snowfalls, storms and tornadoes are typically

not associated with global climate change, in contrast to hurricanes.20 Climate change

legislation is not affected by these other types of events. Columns (1) to (3) of Table 5

show no association between these other extreme weather events and the number of green

bills, suggesting that the response in climate change legislation is specific to hurricanes.

      As a final robustness test, we test whether hurricane incidence is associated with a

higher level of legislative activity, not specifically linked to climate change regulation,

perhaps because of the higher visibility of congress members representing districts hit by
 20
      See also the bottom three panels of Table 10.


                                                      17
hurricanes. This does not seem to be the case: Table 6 shows that the occurrence of a

hurricane, while boosting legislative activism on climate change issues, seems to have, if

anything, some displacement effect on other policies. While it does not reduce effort on

non-environmental legislation (column 1), it reduces by about 6% the number of other

environmental bills (column 2). Not surprisingly, we find a positive effect of hurricanes

on relief bills (bills providing short-run economic and logistic assistance in the aftermath

of a hurricane, column 3), although this effect is not statistically significant.21


4.2       Spillovers

So far, we have focused on the response by representatives from districts hit by a hur-

ricane. However, if information about the disaster spreads through media outlets, or

because of evacuation operations over a larger area, one might also expect a response

by representatives in nearby districts. In Table 7 we test this hypothesis by looking at

whether there is an increases in the number of green bills in districts close to those hit by

a hurricane.

       Column (1) shows that there is a significant response to hurricanes also in neighboring

districts. This effect looks smaller than the one observed in the district which is actually

hit by the hurricane, although we cannot reject that the two coefficients are statistically

the same. Similar results can be found in column (2) when we look at districts in a state

where at least one other district was hit by a hurricane, with the effect in this case being

statistically significant at the 10% level only. Importantly, the effect disappears when we

look at the effect of an adjacent state being hit by a hurricane, as we do in column (3).

       Taken together, these results reveal that the largest effect of a natural disaster arises

when the damages of an extreme event are experienced directly. There is some effect
  21
    Relief bills are identified from the Library of Congress as any bill whose title contains the name of a
specific hurricane.



                                                    18
from being close to the disaster area, as neighbouring districts might still acquire infor-

mation about its potential effects. However, the effect diminishes with distance from the

hurricane’s centroid, and congress members representing states adjacent to a hurricane’s

trajectory do not exhibit any significant change in behavior.



5      Exploring the pathways

In this section we explore the possible channels underlying our finding of an important

increase of politicians’ environmental legislation in the aftermath of a hurricane. We con-

sider three main channels: a) “logrolling” (i.e., the exchange of favors between politicians);

b) the influence of lobbying groups; and c) the role of voter preferences as expressed in

electoral results.


5.1     Logrolling

One possibility is that politicians in districts hit by a hurricane may be in a position

to leverage the increased visibility of their district to extract policy concessions from

their peers, in a quid pro quo bargain. We hypothesize that these exchanges of favors

may be more prevalent among representatives that share a tight connection with other

congress members with strong environmental preferences. If this hypothesis is correct,

we would expect to see that the response to hurricanes is stronger for representatives

who have stronger social ties to a large number of other “green” legislators. Following

Battaglini and Patacchini (2018), we measure social ties using the network of alumni

connections, i.e., those who graduated from the same institution within four years of one

another.22 The advantage of this approach is that it measures social ties that are likely
  22
    While Patacchini and Battaglini (2018) construct networks for the 109th -113rd Congresses, we have
extracted new information on the educational institutions attended by all congress members from the
101st to the 113th Congress. The data source is the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress


                                                  19
predetermined, and not influenced by shared geography, expertise (as, for example, if

we had used networks based on committee membership), or political preferences. We

then identify as “green friends” the alumni whose League of Conservation Voters (LCV)

lifetime environmental score at time t − 2 was above the median of the Congress.23 Based

on this measure, more than 40% of the representatives have at least 1 “green friend” and

a maximum of 16. Table 8 reveals that the estimated coefficient on the interaction with

the number of “green friends” (column 1) is small and not statistically significant.

   In column (2), we repeat the analysis, but look at ties between congress members

representing the same state (e.g., see Cohen and Malloy, 2014). This network definition

is slightly less preferred, as other districts in the state may also have been hit by the

hurricane, so a positive interaction coefficient may simply represent a coordinated effort

to promote more green legislation, rather then an exchange of favors. Indeed, there is

some evidence here that a larger number of green same-state congress members is asso-

ciated with a stronger response to hurricanes (the coefficient on the interaction between

hurricane incidence and the number of same-state green congress members is positive and

significant), but the coefficient on the main effect remains essentially unchanged. Overall,

therefore there appears to be little support for the “exchange of favors” hypothesis.


5.2     Lobbying influence

We next explore whether politicians’ response to hurricanes is merely driven by capture

from lobbying groups with a direct stake in environmental legislation. For this purpose,

we collected data from OpenSecrets.org on the yearly sum of campaign contributions to

individual representatives received from environmental PACs, and PACs related to the
(bioguide.congress.gov).
  23
     The LCV lifetime score assigns to each congress member a score between 0 and 1, equal to the share
of pro-environment votes cast out of the total number of votes scored.




                                                  20
automotive and energy industry.24 We identified as environmental all PACs classified by

the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP) as “Environmental”; as automotive those clas-

sified as “Transport”; and as energy those classified as “Oil & Gas”, “Electric utilities”

and “Coal mining”.25 In columns (3) and (4) of Table 8 we use campaign contributions

as the dependent variable and show that representatives of districts hit by a hurricane

do receive more “green” contributions. Perhaps surprisingly, we do not find a similarly

strong reaction for contributions from energy and automotive PACs. In columns (5),

we use the number of green bills sponsored and co-sponsored as dependent variable and

we include in the regression an interaction between the “hit by hurricane” dummy and

log(1+contributions) from each of the three sources (environmental, energy and automo-

tive, and others).26 According to the capture theory, we should observe a stronger response

to hurricanes in terms of green bills for representatives who received large amounts of cam-

paign contributions by environmental PACs. While we do find a positive point estimate,

the effect is modest and statistically insignificant. Contributions from the energy and

automotive industries do instead reduce the support from green legislation, but this effect

reflects in large part the fact that representatives who receive large contributions from

the energy and automotive industry are also less likely to have supported environmen-

tal causes in the past. In fact, when controlling for the politician’s pro-environmental

score (as measured by the LCV score) in column (6) and its interaction with the “hit by

hurricane” dummy, the coefficient on the interaction term becomes insignificant. On the

whole, we conclude that there is only limited support for the hypothesis that politicians’
  24
      We only consider contributions in favor of a candidate, i.e.: coordinated expenditures, independent
expenditures for the candidate, communication costs for the candidate, and direct contributions.
   25
      This definition excludes other subcategories of the energy and natural resources sector, such as
the “Miscellaneous Energy” sector, which includes many PACs associated with wind, solar and other
renewable energy sources.
   26
      We use the log transformation because contributions from PACs sum to zero for many representatives
(from 80% for the environmental contributions, to 10% for the energy and automotive contributions) but
they are often very large for some others (up to about 1 million dollars per year for environmental
contributions, and to about half million dollars per year for the energy and automotive contributions).


                                                   21
response to hurricanes is driven by lobbying capture.


5.3    Electoral results

Our next line of investigation is whether politicians’ responses to climate change threats

are aligned to voters’ interest or not. To this purpose, we analyze whether voters reward

or penalize politicians for engaging in green legislation, by looking at the electoral vote

share in elections following a hurricane.

   We consider in particular three main hypotheses: (i) environmental catastrophes cap-

ture voters’ attention over salient issues, and politicians respond to voters’ desire for

environmental regulation (ii) the general public fails to understand the importance of

the global warming signals, but politicians miscalculate voters’ interests (iii) the general

public fails to understand the importance of the global warming signals, but politicians

perceive the increasing risks of climate change and endorse green bills irrespective of the

voters’ views.

   For this analysis, we collapse the original data at the Congress level, and separate

green bills sponsored or co-sponsored before (or in the absence of) a hurricane, from

those sponsored or co-sponsored after a hurricane. We then run the following regression:


          V oteSharesd,t+1 =α + β1 Hsd,t + β2 GBBef oresd,t + β3 GBAf tersd,t +

                             γ 0 Xsd,t + δt + µi + sd,t                                (2)


   Each observation represents a congress member-Congress pair (e.g., the representative

of Massachusetts’ 1st congressional district in the 109th Congress). We exclude uncontested

races and races where the incumbent is not running for re-election. We also exclude

Congresses in which it was not possible to compute the vote share for the incumbent in

the following election (i.e., the 102nd , 107th , and 112th Congresses, which preceded the

                                              22
reapportionment of districts; and the 114th Congress, the last one in our data). We also

control for the time from the hurricane to the end of the Congress, which is set to two

years in the absence of a hurricane. Finally, we include individual congress member fixed

effects (µi ), as in column (4) of Table 3, to control for unobservable systematic differences

among those who support more or less climate change legislation.

       The key parameter of interest is β3 , which tells us the the effect of supporting an

additional green bill after the occurrence of a hurricane on the vote share in the subsequent

election, holding constant the number of green bills supported prior to the hurricane.

The inclusion of individual effects implies that identification is obtained from variation

within congress member over time in electoral support and green legislation in response to

hurricanes. This at least in part assuages concerns that we are picking up a spurious effect,

whereby representatives who are consistently more or less popular also systematically

sponsor more green legislation.

       Table 9 presents the main results from regressing the number of green bills sponsored

or co-sponsored before and after a hurricane on the vote share in the following election.

Column (1) shows that each green bill sponsored or co-sponsored after a hurricane reduces

the vote share by almost 1.7 percentage points.27 This effect represents only a 2.5%

reduction in the average vote share of an incumbent politician (68 percentage points),

but almost a 10% reduction in the average vote margin necessary to secure reelection (17

percentage points). At first glance, it appears that supporting environmental legislation

is not popular with voters.

       Following the rest of the literature (e.g., Cole et al., 2012) in column (2) we also control

for the number of relief bills sponsored or co-sponsored in the aftermath of a hurricane.

We view these as measures of short-run response to a natural disaster (see the discussion
  27
     There is no significant effect of hurricanes on the probability of running for re-election. There is
also no effect of the number of green bills supported after a hurricane on the probability of running for
re-election. Results available upon request.


                                                   23
in Section 4.1). Not surprisingly, we find that these variables are positively associated

with subsequent vote share, even though the point estimate for the number of relief

bills supported after a hurricane fails to hit conventional level for statistical significance.

Importantly, the inclusion of these additional controls does not change the main result on

the number of green bills, which remain negative and statistically significant at the 1%

level.

    We may be concerned, however, that the relationship in columns (1) and (2) is biased, if

politicians’ response to hurricanes is itself affected by the expected re-election probability,

which is unobservable. The bias could go in either direction: politicians who are aware

of their declining popularity may engage in more environmental regulation, leading to a

negatively biased estimate; but it is also possible that only popular politicians can afford

to support green bills, in which case the bias would be positive. The inclusion of congress

member fixed effects is ineffective in addressing this potential source of bias.

    We address this issue here by using an original instrumental variable approach. In

columns (3) and (4) we instrument the number of green bills sponsored or co-sponsored

after a hurricane with the number of green bills already introduced by other congress

members of one’s same party at the time a district is hit. The exclusion restriction is

likely to be satisfied, because the number of other green bills introduced to Congress prior

to the occurrence of a hurricane is orthogonal to the timing of a hurricane hitting a certain

district. The relevance condition is also likely to be satisfied, because a representative

willing to engage in environmental legislation after a hurricane is more likely to co-sponsor

a bill that had already been introduced, rather than drafting a new one from scratch.

Column (3) indeed shows that the number of green bills sponsored or co-sponsored after

the hurricane is positively correlated with the total number of green bills that had been

introduced before a hurricane. The first stage is moderately strong, with a first-stage



                                              24
F-statistic of 15.8. The 2SLS estimates in column (4) show that, once we account for

the potential endogeneity of legislative activity, the effect of supporting green bills on

the subsequent vote share remains negative and of similar magnitude, but is estimated
                28
imprecisely.

       On the whole, there is little evidence that voters reward politicians for engaging in

green legislation. If anything, politicians appear to be penalized for supporting more

green bills, even though the evidence from the 2SLS analysis is somewhat inconclusive.

However, one would need a large correlation between unobserved politician popularity

and the propensity to support green bills to overturn the conclusion that environmental

legislative activity carries an electoral penalty. Specifically, we would need weak and

unpopular politicians to be the ones most likely to engage in climate legislation as a last-

ditch move to prevent a decline in electoral support. We document in Section 5.5 that

this is actually not the case.

       The results run counter to the notion that politicians act in response to voters’ desire

for more environmental regulation in the aftermath of a hurricane (hypothesis (i) above).

The remaining possibilities are that politicians either overestimate the public’s desire for

environmental regulation (hypothesis (ii)) , or that they decide to go ahead and promote

green legislation in spite of their constituents’ preferences (hypothesis (iii)). We attempt

to disentangle these alternative possibilities in the following section.


5.4       Short-run vs. long-run response

To assess whether politicians overestimate voters’ willingness to support environmental

regulation, we look at whether the response is temporary or permanent. A temporary

effect would be aligned with hypothesis (ii): politicians are originally misled by interest
  28
    Weak-instrument robust inference also indicates that one cannot reject the null hypothesis that
β3 = 0.



                                                25
groups’ activities or media coverage regarding the true interest of voters, but soon realign

their legislative activity. A more persistent effect instead signals a change of view that

cannot be easily explained, given voters’ apparent hostility towards climate environmental

regulation.

   We investigate this issue by implementing an event-study analysis. In doing so, we

restrict attention to districts ever hit by a hurricane. As districts can experience multiple

hurricanes over time, we focus on “clean” episodes without any other occurrence within a

-4/+4 year symmetric window (for a total of nine years) around the event, dropping any

other observation outside this window.

   In practice we use the same model as in Equation (1), augmented with lags and leads

of the event. Denoting by t0 the year in which a hurricane hits district d, we estimate the

following equation:

                                 tX
                                  0 +4

                GBsdi,t = α +             βt−t0 Hsdi,t0 + γ 0 Xsdi,t + δt + µz + sdi,t .    (3)
                                t=t0 −4

As we can only identify eight coefficients out of nine, we restrict the coefficient in the year

before the hurricane (t0 − 1) to zero.

   Absent anticipation effects, we should expect the effects at all leads (t = t0 −4, ..., t0 −1)

to be equal to zero. Instead, there should be a positive effect in years t0 and t0 + 1, as we

have already seen in Section (4). Our main interest is in the coefficients on the subsequent

lags, which are informative about the persistence of the effect.

   Estimated coefficients, together with 95 percent confidence intervals, are reported in

Figure 4. A vertical line refers to the year of the hurricane (time t0 ). One can verify

that, prior to entry, there is no trend in green legislation. This evidence rules out that

anticipation effects are driving our results. One can also see that the estimated coefficients

become positive exactly at the time of a hurricane, they increase after one year and then


                                                   26
remain steadily positive throughout the following years, even though confidence intervals

become wider.29

       We interpret the persistence of the effect as evidence that climate change permanently

shapes congress members’ beliefs about the optimal policy, irrespective of the voters’

views (hypothesis (iii)). This is indeed a surprising result, which is difficult to reconcile

with standard models of electoral accountability (Barro, 1973; Ferejohn, 1986) in which

politicians choose an action not because it is right for society, but because it is popular

(Maskin and Tirole, 2004). It is instead reminiscent of a framework where politicians

are also motivated by the desire to implement good public policy. Moreover, they are

more likely than the average citizen to have the experience, judgment, and information to

evaluate the costs and benefits of alternative policies, and they are willing to lose electoral

support in order to implement policies that are unpopular in the short-run, but may have

long-run benefits.

       This interpretation is further corroborated by the evidence we present in Table 10.

Here we use data from the 2014 and 2016 waves of Yale University’s survey Climate Change

in the American Mind. The survey specifically tracks public understanding of climate

change and support for climate policies. We aggregate county level data into population-

weighted district averages of the principal component estimate for three groups of related

answers on global warming: “Support regulation” (which groups support to limit to coal-

fire, support for CO2 regulation, and support for renewable sources), “Believe climate

change is happening” (which groups belief in global warming, belief that it is caused by

humans, belief in science, and expression of worry about climate change), and “Climate

change will harm us” (which groups belief that climate change will harm you, will harm

the U.S., will harm poor countries, will harm future generations, and will harm in 10
  29
    We have fewer observations for higher-order lags and leads when hurricanes occur at the end or at
the beginning of the census decade.



                                                 27
years). We then merged these data with the disaster declarations’ data from FEMA.

       In line with other studies we described in Section 1, the main results in columns (1),

(3) and (5) show that voters living in districts hit by a hurricane are somewhat more likely

to believe that climate change is happening (a 4% increase compared to the average), and

are especially more likely to support climate change regulation (a 17% increase). This is

not the case for voters living in districts hit by snowfalls, storms or tornadoes, events that
                                                                                                      30
are typically not associated with global climate change, in contrast to hurricanes.

       This result might seem at odds with the hypothesis that voters penalize politicians

for promoting climate change policies in the aftermath of a hurricane. However, further

evidence presented in columns (2), (4) and (6) shows that this effect is only temporary.

Actually, there is some evidence of a rebound effect, with voters in districts hit by a

hurricane who become less supportive of climate change intervention in less than two

years.31 This short-sighted behavior is in contrast with what we observed for politicians

in Figure 4, and might help explain the electoral penalty we document in Table 9.32


5.5       Heterogeneous responses

To learn more about the underlying motives behind the patterns uncovered above, we

now look at whether the politicians’ response to hurricanes and the electoral penalty

associated with environmental regulation differs by congress member characteristics or

political circumstances.

       In Table 11 we investigate heterogeneity in the politicians’ response to hurricanes by

interacting our measure of hurricane incidence with district and individual characteristics.

We first look at whether the response to hurricanes has changed over time. Column
  30
     Results using the original county level data are qualitatively identical, and are available upon request.
  31
     We could only estimate the effect of a hurricane hitting a district at time t − 2, but not at time t − 1,
as there were no recorded hurricanes between 2012 and 2015.
  32
     Additionally, it is also possible that survey respondents support more regulation in the abstract, but
voters, who face the full set of tradeoffs implied by regulation, are more lukewarm.


                                                     28
(1) shows that the response to hurricanes has become substantially stronger after the

publication of the 4th IPCC Assessment Report in 2007. This is the first IPCC report

that stated in unequivocal terms that Earth’s climate is warming, and that the increase

in global temperatures is very likely caused by human activity. The report also noted an

increase in hurricane intensity that correlates with increases in sea surface temperatures,

and predicted that there will be an increase in hurricane intensity during the 21st Century.

The finding of a stronger response after the publication of the report lends support to the

hypothesis that awareness of the risks of global climate change is one of the main drivers

behind the relationship between hurricanes and green legislation.

   We next look at heterogeneity by party and by previous support for environmental

causes. The response to hurricanes is weaker for Republican congress members (column

2). This is not surprising, as the Republican party has traditionally been less likely to em-

brace environmental regulation, because of its pro-business orientation. In recent years,

contributions to Republican candidates from the energy and automotive sectors, two in-

dustries likely to be particularly affected by environmental regulation, have outstripped

those to Democrats by a factor of about 3 to 1. Nevertheless, the sum of the coeffi-

cients in column (2) is positive and significant at the 10% level, implying that, ceteris

paribus, Republican congress members do respond to hurricanes with more support for

environmental legislation, albeit in a more limited manner.

   Column (3) looks instead at whether the response to hurricanes depends on congress

members’ own lifetime environmental record. We collected the League of Conservation

Voters (LCV) lifetime score for each member of Congress. The LCV assigns to each

congress member a score between 0 and 1, equal to the share of pro-environment votes

cast out of the total number of votes scored since their first election. To obtain an ex-ante

measure not influenced by hurricanes per se, we focus on the lifetime score measured



                                             29
at t − 2.33 The results are again consistent with those of column (2): the response to

hurricanes is more pronounced among congress members who were already inclined to

support environmental causes. This suggests that hurricanes do not necessarily cause

climate skeptics to suddenly overturn their long-held position. Rather, politicians who

were already inclined to support environmental causes become more forceful in their

support for environmental regulation.

    In column (4) we investigate whether there might be different behaviors depending

on congress members’ experience, as proxied by tenure in office.34 There is a positive

interaction term, i.e., the response to a hurricane increases with time served in Congress.

This result may be telling us that supporting unpopular policies is more viable for more

experienced politicians, who possibly also enjoy more electoral credit. Following this

argument, in column (5) we look specifically at whether support for green legislation

following a hurricane depends on whether the representative is facing a competitive re-

election or not. In the spirit of Dal Bó et al. (2009), to minimize reverse causality issues

we define a district as safe if the average margin of victory of the incumbent party at the

state level in the following election is larger than 15 percentage points. This variable is

not defined for inter-census races (Congress 102nd , 107th , and 112th ) and Congress 114th ,

which explains why we end up with fewer observations.35 In this case, the whole effect

seems to be driven by representatives holding a safe seat. This evidence is evocative

of the fact that voters might dislike more environmental regulation, and representatives

only engage on it when their seat is not at risk. Accordingly, while we find a negative

effect of the number of green bills sponsored or co-sponsored after a hurricane on the vote
   33
      This variable is by construction not available for congress members in their first term, which explains
why we have a fewer observations than in the rest of the table.
   34
      Results are essentially identical if we use age rather than tenure as the proxy for experience.
   35
      We also experimented with other thresholds (10 or 30 percentage points), and other definitions
(incumbent’s own margin of victory in the following election), but results were qualitatively very similar.
These results available upon request.



                                                     30
share in the following election (see Section 5.3), there is no significant impact on the re-

election probability: in a regression where the dependent variable is a dummy for whether

a congress member is reelected (similar to that of Table 9, column 1), the coefficient on

the interaction between hurricane incidence and the number of green bills supported after

a hurricane is 0.0059, with a standard error 0.0089.

    We conclude from the evidence in Table 11 that the legislative response to hurricanes

is driven by awareness of the risks of global climate change, and it is stronger among

congress members who were already inclined to support environmental regulation. How-

ever, political constraints matter – only politicians with sufficient experience and electoral

credit may engage in forward-looking policies.36

    In Table 12 we look at whether there is heterogeneity in the electoral penalty suffered

by politicians that support green policies in the aftermath of a hurricane. For each dimen-

sion of heterogeneity considered in Table 11, we compare the effect of the number of green

bills sponsored or co-sponsored on politicians’ vote shares before and after the hurricane.

Given the lack of precision of the 2SLS estimates in Table 9, we focus exclusively on the

OLS specification, keeping in mind the potential concerns about endogeneity discussed

previously. Columns (1) and (2) show that there is a sizeable electoral penalty both before

and after the publication of the 4th IPCC Assessment Report, even though the coefficient

is larger and more precisely estimated in the latter period. This suggests that as the

risks of climate change become more salient, the issue itself becomes more polarizing, and

politicians who actively engage in this subject may suffer a larger electoral penalty.

    The next two columns look at heterogeneity by party and by previous environmen-
   36
      In Section A.2 we show that more green legislative activity results in more green bills that are
ultimately enacted into public law, although there is a considerable amount of heterogeneity. This
allows us to rule out that the increase in support for green bills after a hurricane is pure signaling, with
representatives having no real intent to push through new legislation. There is no evidence, however,
that bills supported in the aftermath of a hurricane are more effective, or that affected representatives
devote more effort to ensure passage of their bills.



                                                    31
tal record. Perhaps surprisingly, Republicans and Democrats suffer a similar electoral

penalty (columns 3 and 4), but the effect for the former is more precisely estimated. On

the other hand, there are large differences in the size of the electoral penalty by pre-

vious environmental record. Congress members with an environmental score above the

median (“green”) do not suffer an electoral penalty, and may in fact even benefit from

engaging in more climate change legislation in the aftermath of a hurricane. On the

other hand, congress members with an environmental score below the median do suffer a

statistically significant (at the 10% level) electoral penalty, similar in size to that of the

average congress member. It therefore appears that the electoral penalty is mostly concen-

trated among politicians who deviated from previously held views. Columns (7) and (8)

show that the electoral penalty is of similar magnitude for experienced and inexperienced

congress members, but it is estimated more precisely for the former.

    Finally, the last two columns of the table look separately at safe and unsafe districts.

the effect of supporting green bills in the aftermath of a hurricane appears to be more

pronounced in unsafe districts, consistent with the previous finding that representatives

in unsafe districts are less likely to support green legislation. However, the estimates are

quite noisy because of the small sample size.



6     Concluding remarks

Climate change legislation represents an ideal context to understand the making of long-

run oriented but unpopular policies. While the recent and unprecedented wave of pop-

ulism in some countries portrays politicians as short-sighted policy makers who neglect

the future cost of policies to please voters, our work reveals that there are circumstances

under which politicians may adopt a forward-looking behavior and decide to take action

despite the electoral penalty that comes with it.


                                             32
   Using data on the universe of federal disaster declarations between 1989 and 2014,

we document that congress members from districts hit by a hurricane are more likely to

support bills promoting more environmental regulation and control in the year after the

disaster. This response to hurricanes does not seem to be driven by logrolling behavior or

lobbysts’ pressure, and it is associated with an electoral penalty in the following elections.

The change in legislative agenda is persistent over time, unlike voters’ support which is

only temporary, and it is prompted by the direct experience of the hurricane’s damages,

and mainly promoted by representatives in safe districts, those with more experience, and

those with strong pro-environment records.

   Our evidence reveals that extreme events can trigger a permanent change in politicians’

beliefs. However, when the appropriate political response to the disaster is unpopular, not

all politicians are willing to bear the electoral costs: only those with a sufficient electoral

strength or with strong ideologies are willing to promote policies with short-run costs

and long-run benefits. More broadly, our findings suggest that electoral accountability

may be counter-productive when policy making needs to be forward-looking. This raises

the question of whether some institutions, such as two-year legislatures, are appropriate

under circumstances that require instead a less short-sighted approach.




                                              33
References

[1] Adler, E. S. and J. Wilkerson. 2015. Congressional Bills Project: 1989-2014, NSF

   00880066 and NSF 00880061.

[2] Ashworth, S., Bueno de Mesquita, E. and A. Friedenberg. 2018. “Learning about

   Voter Rationality,” American Journal of Political Science, 62, 37-54.

[3] Barro, R. J.. 1973. “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice,

   14, 19-42.

[4] Battaglini, M., and E. Patacchini. 2018. “Influencing Connected Legislators.” Journal

   of Political Economy, 126, 2277-2322.

[5] Bechtel, M. M., and J. Hainmueller. 2011. “How Lasting Is Voter Gratitude? An

   Analysis of the Short- and Long-Term Electoral Returns to Beneficial Policy.” Amer-

   ican Journal of Political Science, 55, 852-868.

[6] Blennow, K., Persson, J., Tome, M., and M. Hanewinkel. 2012. “Climate Change:

   Believing and Seeing Implies Adapting.” PloS One, 7, e50182.

[7] Boustan, L. P., Kahn, M. E., Rhode, P. W., and M. L. Yanguas. 2017. “The Effect

   of Natural Disasters on Economic Activity in U.S. Counties: A Century of Data.”

   NBER WP n. 23410.

[8] Burke, M., and K. Emerick. 2016. “Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence from

   U.S. Agriculture.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8, 106-40.

[9] Chen, J.. 2013. “Voter Partisanship and the Effect of Distributive Spending on Po-

   litical Participation.” American Journal of Political Science, 57, 200-217.



                                           34
[10] Cohen, L., and C. J. Malloy. 2014. “Friends in High Places.” American Economic

    Journal: Economic Policy, 6, 63-91.

[11] Cole, S., Healy, A., and E. Werker. 2012. “Do Voters Demand Responsive Govern-

    ments? Evidence from Indian Disaster Relief.” Journal of Development Economics,

    97, 167-181.

[12] Dai, J., Kesternich, M., Loschel, A., and A. Ziegler. 2015. “Extreme Weather Expe-

    riences and Climate Change Beliefs in China: An Econometric Analysis.” Ecological

    Economics, 116, 310-321.

[13] Dal Bó, E., Dal Bó, P., and J. Snyder, 2009. “Political Dynasties.” Review of Eco-

    nomic Studies, 76, 115-142.

[14] Dell, M., Jones, B. F., and B. A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature Shocks and Eco-

    nomic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal:

    Macroeconomics, 4, 66-95.

[15] Deryugina, T., Kawano, L., and S. Levitt. 2018. “The Economic Impact of Hurricane

    Katrina on Its Victims: Evidence from Individual Tax Returns.” American Economic

    Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 202-233.

[16] Egan, P. J., and M. Mullin. 2012. “Turning Personal Experience into Political Atti-

    tudes: The Effect of Local Weather on Americans’ Perceptions About Global Warm-

    ing.” Journal of Politics, 74, 796-809.

[17] Fenno, R. F.. 1973. Congressmen in Committees. Boston: Little, Brown & Co..

[18] Ferejohn, J.. 1986. “Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control.” Public Choice,

    50, 5-25.



                                              35
[19] Frondel, M., Simora, M., and S. Sommer. 2017. “Risk Perception of Climate Change:

    Empirical Evidence for Germany.” Ecological Economics, 137, 173-183.

[20] Gagliarducci, S., and M. D. Paserman. 2016. “Gender Differences in Cooperative

    Environments? Evidence from the U.S. Congress.” NBER WP n. 22488.

[21] Garret, T. A., and R. S. Sobel. 2003. “The Political Economy of FEMA Disaster

    Payments.” Economic Inquiry, 41, 496-509.

[22] Gasper, J. T., and A. Reeves. 2011. “Make it Rain? Retrospection and the Atten-

    tive Electorate in the Context of Natural Disasters”. American Journal of Political

    Science, 55, 340-355.

[23] Guiso, L., Herrera, H., Morelli, M., and T. Sonno. 2017 “Demand and Supply of

    Populism.” CEPR DP n. 11871.

[24] Healy, A., and N. Malhotra. 2009. “Myopic Voters and Natural Disaster Policy.”

    American Political Science Review, 3, 387-406.

[25] Healy, A., and N. Malhotra. 2010. “Random Events, Economic Losses, and Retro-

    spective Voting: Implications for Democratic Competence.” Quarterly Journal of

    Political Science, 5, 193-208.

[26] Hsiang, S. M., and A. S. Jina. 2014. “The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe

    on Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence From 6,700 Cyclones.” NBER WP n.

    20352.

[27] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2013. Climate Change 2013:

    The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment

    Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University

    Press.

                                           36
[28] Kahn, M. E.. 2007. “Environmental Disasters as Risk Regulation Catalysts? The

    Role of Bhopal, Chernobyl, Exxon Valdez, Love Canal, and Three Mile Island in

    Shaping U.S. Environmental Law.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 35, 17-43.

[29] Leiserowitz, A.. 2006. “Climate Change Risk Perception and Policy Preferences: The

    Role of Affect, Imagery, and Values.” Climatic Change, 77, 45-72.

[30] Maskin, E., and J. Tirole. 2004. “The Politician and the Judge: Accountability in

    Government.” American Economic Review, 94, 1034-1054.

[31] Moser, S. C., and L. Dilling. 2011. “Communicating Climate Change: Closing the

    Science-Action Gap,” in The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society,

    Dryzek, J.S., Norgaard, Richard B., and Schlosberg, D. (eds.), Oxford University

    Press.

[32] Nordhaus, W.. 2016. “Projections and Uncertainties about Climate Change in an

    Era of Minimal Climate Policies.” Mimeo.

[33] Myers, T. A., Maibach, E. W., Roser-Renouf, C., Akerlof, K., and A. A. Leiserowitz.

    2013. “The Relationship between Personal Experience and Belief in the Reality of

    Global Warming.” Nature Climate Change, 3, 343-347.

[34] O’Neill, S. , and S. Nicholson-Cole. 2009. “Fear Won’t Do it: Promoting Positive En-

    gagement with Climate Change through Visual and Iconic Representations.” Science

    Communication, 30, 355-379.

[35] Sisco, M. R., Bosetti, V. and E. U. Weber. 2016. “When Do Extreme Weather Events

    Generate Attention to Climate Change?.” Climate Change, 143, 227-241.




                                           37
Figures and Tables


                                 Table 1: Descriptive statistics
                                               Mean         S.d.      Min      Median        Max

    Hurricanes:
    Hit by hurricane                           0.050       0.219        0          0          1
    Hit by hurricane - SE                      0.028       0.165        0          0          1
    Hit by hurricane - NE                      0.022       0.146        0          0          1
    Major disaster                             0.046       0.209        0          0          1
    Share counties                             0.036       0.175        0          0          1
    Share population                           0.037       0.178        0          0          1
    Wind intensity                             0.025       0.110        0          0        1.344

    Legislative activity:
    N. bills sponsored                        6.328        6.420        0         5          106
    N. bills co-sponsored                    107.778       70.999       0         92         643
    N. green bills sponsored                  0.075        0.334        0         0           7
    N. green bills co-sponsored               1.248         1.726       0          1          22
    N. of green bills                         1.323        1.817        0         1           22

    N. year/districts                                               11,195
    N. decade/districts                                              1,735
    N. individual congress members                                   1,338
     Notes. N. of green bills is the number of green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by
     the CBP. Hit by hurricane is a dummy equal to 1 if at least one county in the district was hit by
     a hurricane, conditional on wind intensity being at least 18 mph. SE includes Alabama, Florida,
     Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina,
     South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, while NE includes Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland,
     Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont,
     Virginia, and West Virginia. Major disaster only includes FEMA major disaster declarations (not
     emergency declarations). Wind intensity in 100 mph.




                                                   38
                                       Table 2: Balancing tests
                         (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)

District                Pop.        Income         Land area      Over 65       Black      Foreign     Urban
characteristics:        (log)        (log)           (log)        (share)      (share)     (share)     (share)

Hit by hurricane       0.001          0.015           -0.042        -0.171     1.024*      1.215*       0.976
                      (0.003)        (0.015)         (0.077)       (0.115)     (0.556)     (0.618)     (1.150)

Avg. outcome           13.30          10.19           14.26         13.32       11.78       9.128       72.16

Individual             House                                       Margin                  Tenure        Age
characteristics:       leader     Republican        Majority       victory     Female      (terms)     (years)

Hit by hurricane       0.005          -0.023          0.017         -2.908      -0.016      0.091       0.195
                      (0.004)        (0.021)         (0.032)       (1.987)     (0.012)     (0.212)     (0.518)

Avg. outcome           0.0110         0.486           0.446        37.85        0.133       4.481       55.06
N. year/districts                                              11,195
State FE                Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Year FE                 Yes            Yes             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Notes. Hit by hurricane is a dummy equal to 1 if at least one county in the district was hit by a hurricane.
House leader is a dummy for being speaker, minority/majority leader/whip, or standing committee chair.
Margin victory is the relative margin of victory w.r.t. the second candidate. Tenure is the number of terms
served in Congress. Standard errors clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10
percent level respectively.




                                                      39
        Table 3: Hurricanes and support for green bills - Baseline estimates
                                   (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)

                                                              N. green bills

Hit by hurricane                -0.257***         0.067          0.111*          0.119**          0.134*
                                 (0.062)         (0.050)         (0.066)         (0.056)          (0.072)

Avg. outcome                     1.323            1.323          1.323             1.322           1.323
N. year/districts                11,195           11,195         11,193           11,180           11,193

Hit by hurricane (t-1)           -0.151*         0.171**        0.236***         0.247***        0.231***
                                 (0.082)         (0.081)         (0.076)          (0.083)         (0.076)

Avg. outcome                      1.262           1.262           1.280            1.270           1.280
N. year/districts                 9,472           9,472           9,039            9,313           9,039
Year FE                            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Controls                                           Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
State FE                                           Yes
District FE                                                        Yes                              Yes
Individual FE                                                                       Yes
State trends                                                                                        Yes
Notes. Hit by hurricane is a dummy equal to 1 if at least one county in the district was hit by a hurricane. N.
of green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. Controls include the n. of relief bills and the
n. of other non-green bills sponsored/co-sponsored; 23 dummies for the committee membership; the share of
the Green and the Republican party in the previous election; the log of population, area, and per capita income;
the share of population over 65, black, foreign born, and urban; the ratio between national share of coal/oil
production and the national share population, at State level; a dummy for belonging to the House minority
party; being House leader (speaker, minority/majority leader/whip, standing committee chair), republican, in
the first session, female, and the relative margin of victory w.r.t. the second candidate; tenure (terms) and age
(years). State linear trends in column (5). Standard errors clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote
significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                      40
                                         Table 4: Robustness analysis
                                  (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)               (6)

                                                                                        N. green bills     N. original
                                                 N. green bills                            (C2ES)          green bills

Hit by hurricane (t-1)                                                                    0.167***           0.112***
                                                                                           (0.043)            (0.037)
Share counties (t-1)          0.315***
                               (0.112)
Share population (t-1)                       0.307***
                                              (0.107)
Wind intensity (t-1)                                       0.455***
                                                            (0.148)
Major disaster (t-1)                                                     0.235***
                                                                          (0.073)

Avg. outcome                    1.280          1.280         1.280         1.280            0.668              0.508
N. year/districts               9,039          9,039         9,039         9,039            7,745              9,039
Year FE                          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes                Yes
District FE                      Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes                Yes
Controls                         Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes                Yes
Notes. N. of green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP (or C2ES). N. of original green bills includes
sponsored and originally co-sponsored bills only. Wind intensity in 100 mph. Major disaster only includes FEMA major
disaster declarations (not emergency declarations). For a description of Controls see Table 3. Standard errors clustered by
state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                           41
                            Table 5: Other disasters
                                      (1)                (2)                (3)

                                                        N.
                                                    green bills

Hit by snow (t-1)                   0.065
                                   (0.068)
Hit by storm (t-1)                                     -0.052
                                                      (0.056)
Hit by tornado (t-1)                                                       -0.004
                                                                          (0.121)

Avg. outcome                        1.280              1.280               1.280
N. year/districts                   9,039              9,039               9,039
Year FE                              Yes                Yes                 Yes
District FE                          Yes                Yes                 Yes
Controls                             Yes                Yes                 Yes
Notes. N. green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. Snow in-
cludes snowfalls, freezings and severe ice storms. Storm includes severe storms and
coastal storms. For a description of Controls see Table 3. Standard errors clustered by
state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                               Table 6: Other bills
                                        (1)                 (2)               (3)

                                   N. other             N. other               N.
                                 non-env. bills         env. bills        relief bills

Hit by hurricane (t-1)                0.834              -0.470**            0.131
                                     (1.466)              (0.204)           (0.150)

Avg. outcome                          101.7                7.511             1.047
N. year/districts                     9,039                9,039             9,039
Year FE                                Yes                  Yes               Yes
District FE                            Yes                  Yes               Yes
Controls                               Yes                  Yes               Yes
Notes. N. green bills, N. other non-env. bills and N. other env. bills sponsored
and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. N. relief bills sponsored or co-sponsored,
according to the bill’s title. For a description of Controls see Table 3. Standard errors
clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent
level respectively.




                                              42
                                 Table 7: Spillover effects
                                                         (1)              (2)              (3)

                                                                    N. green bills

Hit by hurricane (t-1)                                 0.256***        0.270***         0.264***
                                                        (0.075)         (0.075)          (0.078)
Adjacent district hit by hurricane (t-1)               0.142**
                                                        (0.061)
District in state hit by hurricane (t-1)                                0.200*
                                                                        (0.108)
Adjacent state hit by hurricane (t-1)                                                     0.128
                                                                                         (0.081)

Avg. outcome                                            1.280            1.280            1.280
N. year/districts                                       9,039            9,039            9,039
Year FE                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes
District FE                                              Yes              Yes              Yes
Controls                                                 Yes              Yes              Yes
Notes. N. green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. Adjacent district, District
in state and Adjacent state are dummies equal to 1 if at least one adjacent district, or one non-
adjacent district in the state, or one district in an adjacent state was hit by a hurricane (but not the
district itself), respectively. For a description of Controls see Table 3. Standard errors clustered
by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                  43
                                Table 8: Logrolling and lobbyists’ pressure
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)

                                                                   Contributions (log)
                                         N. green bills            Green         Oil                N. green bills

Hit by hurricane (t-1)              0.236***       0.297***       0.444***         -0.168       0.220***       0.243***
                                     (0.076)        (0.078)        (0.138)        (0.166)        (0.068)        (0.075)

Hit by hurricane (t-1) ×:

N. green friends                      -0.021
                                     (0.028)
N. green same-state                                0.021***
                                                    (0.007)
Green contributions (log)                                                                        0.024           -0.002
                                                                                                (0.023)         (0.020)
Energy contributions (log)                                                                     -0.060***         -0.036
                                                                                                (0.022)         (0.024)
Other contributions (log)                                                                        0.021           0.021
                                                                                                (0.029)         (0.033)

Avg. outcome                          1.280          1.280          1.363          8.934          1.280          1.292
N. year/districts                     9,039          9,039          9,039          9,039          9,039          7,607
Year FE                                Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
District FE                            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Controls                               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Green score (t-2)                      No             No             No             No             No             Yes
Notes. N. green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. N. green friends is the number of representatives
who graduated from the same university and whose LCV lifetime environmental score, as observed at t − 2, was above the
median of the corresponding year. N. green same-state is the number of representatives from the same state whose LCV
lifetime environmental score, as observed at t − 2, was above the median of the corresponding year. Green contributions
(log) and Energy contributions (log) are the log of the yearly amount of campaign funds, in thousand dollars, received
from PACS classified as environmental or as energy and automotive industry by the CRP, respectively. Other campaign
funds (log) is the residual of the campaign funds not classified as either green or oil. All continuous interaction variables
are demeaned. Green score (t-2), Green score (t-2) is the LCV lifetime environmental score as observed at t − 2, and it
not available for rookies. Column (5) also controls for the interaction of Green score (t-2) with Hit by hurricane (t-1). In
all columns Controls include the level of the corresponding interacted variable. For a description of Controls see Table 3.
Standard errors clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                             44
                                           Table 9: Electoral outcomes
                                                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)

                                                                                                IV estimates
                                                                                       First Stage         2SLS
                                         Vote share next        Vote share next       N. green bills Vote share next

Hit by Hurricane                                -0.588                -0.463                                    -0.512
                                               (1.006)               (1.102)                                   (2.521)
N. cumulative green bills before                                                         0.005***
                                                                                          (0.001)

Hit by hurricane ×:

N. green bills before                          0.007                 0.010                                       0.002
                                              (0.083)               (0.084)                                    (0.085)
N. green bills after                         -1.690***             -1.718***                                    -1.901
                                              (0.527)               (0.535)                                    (7.425)
N. relief bills before                                              0.238**
                                                                    (0.097)
N. relief bills after                                                0.148
                                                                    (0.269)

F-test                                                                                    15.761
Avg. outcome                                    68.19                 67.78               0.027                 68.19
N. congress/districts                           3,023                 3,369                3,018                3,018
Congress FE                                      Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Individual FE                                    Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Controls                                         Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Notes. Vote share next is the vote share of the incumbent ion the subsequent election. Uncontested races, inter-census
races (Congress 102nd , 107th , and 112th ), and Congress 114th excluded. N. cumulative green bills before is the the number
of green bills already introduced by other congress members of one’s same party at the time a district is hit. N. green bills
before and N. relief bills before is the number of green and relief bills sponsored and co-sponsored before (or in the absence
of) a hurricane. N. green bills after and N. relief bills after equal to zero if no hurricane. Vote share next only defined
if the incumbent is running for re-election. All continuous interaction variables are demeaned. In all columns Controls
include the time (in days) to the end of the Congress (two years if no hurricane). For a description of Controls see Table
3. Standard errors clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                             45
                                  Table 10: Attitudes on climate change
                                  (1)               (2)            (3)               (4)          (5)             (6)

                                 Support regulation               Believe is happening              Will harm us

Hit by hurricane               0.091***        0.092***          0.016**       0.017**           0.015          0.016
                                (0.019)         (0.019)          (0.008)       (0.008)          (0.010)        (0.010)
Hit by hurricane (t-2)                          -0.035*                        -0.016*                         -0.013*
                                                (0.018)                        (0.008)                         (0.008)


Hit by snow                      -0.036            -0.006         -0.007            0.007        -0.004         -0.004
                                (0.022)           (0.026)        (0.006)           (0.009)      (0.011)        (0.012)
Hit by snow (t-2)                                  0.053                           0.024*                       0.000
                                                  (0.034)                          (0.015)                     (0.017)


Hit by storm                     -0.001            -0.004         -0.003            -0.003       0.010          0.014
                                (0.019)           (0.022)        (0.010)           (0.013)      (0.010)        (0.012)
Hit by storm (t-2)                                 -0.006                           -0.001                      0.009
                                                  (0.014)                          (0.009)                     (0.008)


Hit by tornado                   0.012             -0.013         0.012             -0.001       0.015        0.029***
                                (0.011)           (0.013)        (0.018)           (0.005)      (0.021)        (0.003)
Hit by tornado (t-2)                               -0.033                           -0.017                      0.019
                                                  (0.028)                          (0.027)                     (0.027)

Avg. outcome                              0.535                            0.416                          0.433
N. year/districts                                                          870
Year FE                           Yes              Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes             Yes
District FE                       Yes              Yes            Yes               Yes           Yes             Yes
Notes. Each outcome represents the (county) population-weighted district average of the principal component estimate for
three groups of related answers, standardized between 0 and 1, to the Climate Change in the American Mind survey (waves
2014 and 2016). Snow includes snowfalls, freezings and severe ice storms. Storm includes severe storms and coastal storms.
Standard errors clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                            46
                       Table 11: Heterogeneous responses - Congress members
                                         (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)

                                                                       N. green bills

Hit by hurricane (t-1)                  0.083           0.345***           0.261***          0.244***            -0.079
                                       (0.091)           (0.104)            (0.067)           (0.073)           (0.121)

Hit by hurricane (t-1) ×:

Post-2007                             0.538***
                                       (0.188)
Republican                                               -0.208*
                                                         (0.109)
Green score (t-2)                                                           0.405*
                                                                            (0.202)
Tenure                                                                                        0.040**
                                                                                              (0.017)
Safe district                                                                                                  0.317**
                                                                                                               (0.120)

Avg. outcome                            1.280             1.280              1.292             1.280             1.383
N. year/districts                       9,039             9,039              7,607             9,039             6,019
Year FE                                  Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
District FE                              Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
Controls                                 Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes
Notes. N. green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. Post-2007 is a dummy equal to one for all
Congresses after the release of the 4th IPCC Assessment Report in 2007. Green score (t-2) is the LCV lifetime environmental
score as observed at t − 2, and it is not available for rookies. Tenure is the number of terms served in Congress. Safe
district is dummy equal to one if the average margin of victory of the incumbent party at state level in the following election
is larger than 15 percentage points, and it is not defined for inter-census races (Congress 102nd , 107th , and 112th ) and
Congress 114th . All continuous interaction variables are demeaned. In column (3), Controls also include the Green score
(t-2). For a description of all other interaction variables and Controls see Table 3. Standard errors clustered by state in
brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                             47
                                                              Table 12: Heterogeneous responses - Voters
                                   (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)            (8)          (9)          (10)

                                                                                                Vote share next
                                                                                                                                                             Safe       Unsafe
                                Post-2007       Pre-2007       Republican        Democrat         Green       Not-green         Exp.         Unexp.        district     district
     Hurricane                    2.513           -1.405         -0.840            0.681          -1.153        0.816           0.761         -1.905        -1.370      9.649**
                                 (1.581)         (1.190)        (1.494)           (1.689)        (1.681)       (2.097)         (2.533)       (1.427)       (1.659)      (4.128)

     Hit by hurricane ×:

     N. green bills before        0.002            0.140          -0.033            0.025         0.016          -0.188          -0.066       -0.066         0.116        -0.068
                                 (0.124)         (0.127)         (0.108)          (0.089)        (0.094)        (0.143)         (0.141)      (0.137)       (0.099)       (0.201)
     N. green bills after       -2.204***         -1.439         -1.394*           -1.522         0.532         -1.454*        -1.606**       -1.412        -1.292        -2.679
                                 (0.773)         (0.966)         (0.724)          (1.136)        (0.814)        (0.809)         (0.793)      (0.989)       (1.117)       (4.002)

     Avg. outcome                 66.79           68.15           65.86            69.56          70.04           66.86         69.42         66.58         69.58        59.01
     N. congress/districts         923            2,446           1,622            1,747          1,482           1,385         1,426         1,943         2,659         467
     Congress FE                   Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
     Individual FE                 Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
     Controls                      Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes
48




     Notes. Vote share next is the vote share of the incumbent ion the subsequent election. Uncontested races, inter-census races (Congress 102nd , 107th , and 112th ), and
     Congress 114th excluded. N. green bills before is the number of all green bills sponsored and co-sponsored before (or in the absence of) a hurricane. N. green bills after equal
     to zero if no hurricane. Vote share next only defined if the incumbent is running for re-election. Post-2007 is a dummy equal to one for all Congresses after the release of the
     4th IPCC Assessment Report in 2007. Green is dummy equal to one if the LCV lifetime environmental score as observed at t − 2 was above the median of the corresponding
     Congress. Exp. is a dummy equal to one for congress members with more than the median tenure (4 terms). Safe district is dummy equal to one if the average margin
     of victory of the incumbent party at state level in the following election is larger than 15 percentage points, and it is not defined for inter-census races (Congress 102nd ,
     107th , and 112th ) and Congress 114th . All continuous interaction variables are demeaned. Controls additionally include the time to the end of the Congress (two years if no
     hurricane). For a description of Controls see Table 3. Standard errors clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.
                          Figure 1: Hurricanes and green bills over time

        100




                                                                                                   100
        80




                                                                                                                              80
                                                                                                   N. districts hit by hurricane
  N. green bills
           60




                                                                                                                      60
   40




                                                                                                            40
        20




                                                                                                   20
        0




                                                                                                   0
                   1990       1995           2000            2005            2010            2015
                                                    Year

                          N. green bills                                Fitted values
                          N. districts hit by hurricane                 Fitted values

Notes. N. green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. The vertical line corresponds to the
release of the 4th IPCC Assessment Report in 2007.




                                                    49
                                           Figure 2: Hurricane trajectories
50




     Notes. Source: Weather Underground.
                                                    Figure 3: Hurricane FEMA declarations


                                     Katrina                                                               Sandy
51




                                       Ivan                                                                Charley




     Notes. Source: FEMA. Counties hit by a hurricane in dark green. Blue lines denote state boundaries.
                                                    Figure 4: Event-study analysis


                      4
   Coefficient on the N. of green bills
          0           -2  2




                                          -4   -3   -2      -1         0        1    2          3           4
                                                           Years to/from hurricane

Notes. The figure displays the estimated coefficient on the N. green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined
by the CBP, at different lags and leads since a hurricane hit the district (denoted by a vertical line). Estimates
include all the controls as in column (3) of Table 3. Sample: districts experiencing one hurricane within a
decade (1,205 year/district observations). 95 percent confidence intervals reported in dash lines (standard
errors clustered by state).




                                                                  52
A         Appendix

A.1        Bills’ text analysis

The bills’ text analysis was conducted as follows. A research assistant read the content of

all bills identified either by the CBP or by the C2ES (see Section 2) as aimed at contrasting

climate change, and classified each of them according to the following (non mutually

exclusive) flags: “against the environment”, related to “noise pollution”, providing “relief

funds”.

       Specifically, a bill was considered as “against the environment” if:

    • it prohibits, limits or delays the authority of Federal agencies or other U.S. author-

         ities to issue regulations, decrees or orders to implement international protocols or

         agreements;

    • it prohibits or limits U.S. contributions to international programs aimed protecting

         the environment;37

    • it prohibits, limits or delays the use of Federal funds to implement environmental

         friendly regulation (e.g. limitation of carbon dioxide emissions, greenhouse gas

         emission reductions) or finance grant programs;38

    • it prohibits, limits or delays subsidies or credit to household or firms for using

         renewable energy or environmentally friendly goods;
  37
      Examples of international programs are: the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change, and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
   38
      Examples of environmentally friendly regulation are: limitation of carbon dioxide emissions, green-
house gas emission reductions, ozone standards, greenhouse gas emissions from mobile sources, emissions
from fossil fuel-fired electric utility generating units. Examples of grant programs are: EPA National
Clean Diesel Campaign, EPA Environmental Justice Program, Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program, Global
Methane Initiative, Climate Resilience Fund, Climate Resilience Evaluation Awareness Tool, Green In-
frastructure Program, Climate Ready Water Utilities Initiative.



                                                   53
   • it prohibits, limits or delays the introduction of programs to reduce the effects of

     emissions;

   • it prohibits, limits or delays the introduction of taxes or fees on emissions (e.g.

     carbon dioxide emissions);

   • it waives the requirements introduced by previous regulation;

   • it waives temporarily taxes on traditional energy sources to decrease the price of

     energy;

   • it simplifies the implementation of the Keystone pipeline, against which there was

     a strong campaign by environmentalist associations;

   • it expresses the sense of Congress against taxes or tax increases on traditional energy

     source;

   • it expresses skepticism on research documenting global warming or climate change.

   Finally, a bill was considered as providing “relief funds” if it introduces additional

relief funds to the victims of a natural disaster, and related to “noise pollution” if it

introduces special regulations or taxes against noise pollution, mainly related to aviation

and aeronautic regulations.

   Of the initial 968 bills identified by the CBP as aimed at contrasting climate change,

94 turned out to be “against the environment”, 2 providing “relief funds”, and 6 related to

“noise pollution”. Of the initial 449 bills identified by the C2ES as aimed at contrasting

climate change, none turned out to be either “against the environment”, providing “relief

funds”, or related to “noise pollution”.




                                            54
A.2     Bill outcomes

In Table A.1 we investigate whether the increase in politicians’ activity in support of

green bills translates into more laws that are actually enacted. In the top panel of the

table, we estimate models analogous to Equation (1), but the dependent is the number

of bills that become public law. Column (1) shows that on average representatives of

districts hits by hurricanes are not successful in promoting more legislation that becomes

public law. This negative result, however, masks a considerable amount of heterogeneity:

there is an effect after 2007 (column 2), for bills sponsored by Democrats and by green

representatives (columns 3 and 4). Note that the characteristics also predict increased

sponsorship and co-sponsorship of bills (from Table 11). As a result, this evidence is not

very surprising: more legislative activity results in more bills that are ultimately enacted

into public law. However, this allows us to rule out that the increase in support for green

bills after a hurricane is pure signaling, with representatives having no real intent to push

through new legislation.

   There is no evidence, however, that bills supported in the aftermath of a hurricane are

more effective, or that affected representatives devote more effort to ensure passage of their

bills. The bottom panel of the table shows that the fraction of green bills that are enacted

into law is not correlated with whether a district was hit by a hurricane, nor with any of the

other characteristics. The combined evidence indicates that hurricanes lead to an increase

in the volume of support for green legislation, but with no effect on the probability that

those bills become laws. One possible explanation for this evidence is provided by Kahn

(2007) who studies politicians’ pro-environment voting after environmental disasters (such

as oil spills). He shows that representatives are less likely to vote the pro-environment

position on legislation tied to catalytic events, possibly because green bills proposed after

a natural disasters are more ambitious.


                                             55
                                               Table A.1: Bill outcomes
                                         (1)             (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)

                                                            N. green bills that became law

Hit by hurricane (t-1)                 0.002            -0.000          0.020***              0.003            0.002
                                      (0.003)          (0.003)           (0.005)             (0.003)          (0.016)

Hit by hurricane (t-1) ×:

Post-2007                                              0.007*
                                                       (0.004)
Republican                                                              -0.035***
                                                                         (0.006)
Green score (t-2)                                                                           0.043***
                                                                                             (0.009)
Safe district                                                                                                  -0.000
                                                                                                              (0.017)

Avg. outcome                           0.0238          0.0238             0.0238             0.0209            0.0317
N. year/districts                       9,039           9,039              9,039              7,607             6,019

                                                 Fraction of supported green bills that became law

Hit by hurricane (t-1)                 -0.001           -0.003            0.006               -0.003           0.041
                                      (0.003)          (0.005)           (0.006)             (0.003)          (0.028)

Hit by hurricane (t-1) ×:

Post-2007                                               0.006
                                                       (0.006)
Republican                                                                -0.015
                                                                         (0.011)
Green score (t-2)                                                                             0.012
                                                                                             (0.012)
Safe district                                                                                                  -0.048
                                                                                                              (0.029)

Avg. outcome                           0.0263          0.0263             0.0263             0.0216            0.0354
N. year/districts                       4,944           4,944              4,944              4,117             3,409
Year FE                                  Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
District FE                              Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
Controls                                 Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes
Notes. N. green bills sponsored and co-sponsored, as defined by the CBP. Post-2007 is a dummy equal to one for all
Congresses after the release of the 4th IPCC Assessment Report in 2007. Green score (t-2) is the LCV lifetime environmental
score as observed at t − 2, and it not available for rookies. Safe district is dummy equal to one if the average margin of
victory of the incumbent party at state level in the following election is larger than 15 percentage points, and it is not
defined for inter-census races (Congress 102nd , 107th , and 112th ) and Congress 114th . All continuous interaction variables
are demeaned. In column (4), Controls also include the Green score (t-2). For a description of Controls see Table 3.
Standard errors clustered by state in brackets. ***, **, *: denote significant at 1, 5 and 10 percent level respectively.




                                                             56
