                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       IMMIGRATION AND ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                      George J. Borjas

                                     Working Paper 25836
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25836


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2019




This paper was first presented at the “Prospects for Economic Growth Conference” held at Rice
University’s Baker Institute in December 2018 and will be published in Prospects for Economic
Growth in the United States, edited by John W. Diamond and George R. Zodrow (Oxford
University Press). The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Immigration and Economic Growth
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 25836
May 2019
JEL No. J6,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

Immigration is sometimes claimed to be a key contributor to economic growth. Few academic
studies, however, examine the direct link between immigration and growth. And the evidence on
the outcomes that the literature does examine (such as the impact on wages or government
receipts and expenditures) is far too mixed to allow unequivocal inferences. This paper surveys
what we know about the relationship between immigration and growth. The canonical Solow
model implies that a one-time supply shock will not have any impact on steady-state per-capita
income, while a continuous supply shock will permanently reduce per-capita income. The
observed relationship between immigration and growth obviously depends on many variables,
including the skill composition of immigrants, the rate of assimilation, the distributional labor
market consequences, the size of the immigration surplus, the potential human capital
externalities, and the long-term fiscal impact. Despite the methodological disagreements about
how to measure all of these effects, there is a consensus on one important point: Immigration has
a more beneficial impact on growth when the immigrant flow is composed of high-skill workers.


George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
                                                     3


                               Immigration and Economic Growth

                                           George J. Borjas*

        From 1990 to 2014, U.S. economic growth would have been 15 percentage
        points lower without the benefit of migration.
                                                       --Citi Research (2018)

        There’s a way for President Trump to boost the economy by four percent, but
        he probably won’t like it…For every 1 percent increase in U.S. population
        made of immigrants, GDP rises 1.15 percent. So a simple way to get to
        Trump’s 4 percent GDP bump? Take in about 8 million net immigrants per
        year.
                                                         --ProPublica (2017)

1. Introduction

        There has been a worldwide surge in international migration in recent decades. In

the U.S. context, the immigrant share of the population almost tripled from a historic low of

4.7 percent in 1970 to 13.7 percent by 2017.

        It is sometimes claimed that the immigration surge has been a key contributor to

economic growth, and that an even larger number of immigrants would increase our

national wealth even more—although these claims tend to appear in reports produced by

think tanks, policy advocates, and business associations. In fact, few academic studies

document the direct link between immigration and growth. And the evidence on the

outcomes that the studies do examine (such as the impact on wages, employment, and

government receipts and expenditures) is far too mixed and unsettled to justify blanket




        * Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy, Harvard Kennedy School; and
Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was first presented at the “Prospects
for Economic Growth Conference” held at Rice University’s Baker Institute in December 2018 and will be
published in Prospects for Economic Growth in the United States, edited by John W. Diamond and George R.
Zodrow (Oxford University Press).
                                              4


statements that immigration accounts for a substantial part of economic growth (or,

conversely, that it does not contribute to economic growth at all).

       Despite the relative scarcity of credible research on the link between immigration

and growth, there is no doubt that immigrants contribute significantly to aggregate output.

In 2016, 16.6 percent of workers in the U.S. labor market were foreign-born. The large

immigrant presence in the workforce inevitably implies that foreign-born labor was

directly responsible for a sizable fraction of GDP. And, by definition, the immigration surge

must have led to a correspondingly large increase in GDP. It is far less clear, however, that

the immigrant supply shock necessarily increased per-capita income.

       This paper presents a theoretical and empirical survey of what it is that we know

about the link between immigration and economic growth. The canonical Solow growth

model has striking implications about what happens as the economy adjusts to supply

shocks. A one-time supply shock increases output and decreases per-capita income in the

short run. As the economy adjusts, there will be relatively rapid “catch-up” growth. In the

end, however, per-capita income ends up in exactly the same steady state that would have

been observed had there been no immigration. In contrast, a permanent increase in the

rate of growth of the workforce due to a persistent immigrant flow will lead to increased

output but at a permanently lower per-capita income.

       I use these insights to frame the discussion of what economics has to say about

immigration and growth. The link obviously depends on many variables, including the

skills that immigrants bring to the country; the rate at which immigrants become more

productive (which is typically thought of as “economic assimilation”); the impact of

immigration on the employment opportunities of native workers; the impact immigrants
                                                5


have on the total income accruing to the pre-existing population (i.e., the “immigration

surplus”); and the fiscal impact of immigration, as measured by a comparison of the taxes

immigrants pay with the cost of the services they receive. The net impact of immigration on

economic growth will depend on the direction and magnitude of all of these effects.

       Despite the uncertainty about the measurement of each of these effects, there is a

consensus on one important point: Immigration has a more beneficial impact when the

immigrant influx is composed of high-skill workers. In the end, there is little doubt about

the type of immigration policy a country should pursue if it wished to use immigration as a

tool to spur growth: Admit high-skill immigrants. (Although the literature is totally silent

on just how many high-skill immigrants should be admitted). There is, however, an

important normative question that economics—and economists—cannot answer: Should

spurring economic growth be the sole objective of immigration policy?



2. Immigration in the Solow Model

       It is useful to fix ideas by illustrating the link between immigration and growth in

the canonical Solow model (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1999). The model is summarized by:

                                     𝑌" = (𝐾" )' (𝐴" 𝐿" )*+' ,                                (1)
                                        𝐾"̇ = 𝑠𝑌" − 𝛿𝐾" ,                                     (2)
                                          𝐿" = 𝐿4 𝑒 6" ,                                      (3)
                                          𝐴" = 𝐴4 𝑒 8" .                                      (4)

Equation (1) gives the linear homogeneous Cobb-Douglas production function where

Yt denotes output at time t; Kt the capital stock; and (At Lt) the number of efficiency units in

the labor market, with At being the efficiency parameter and Lt the number of workers.

Equation (2) gives the equation of motion for the capital stock, with constant savings rate s
                                                     6


and depreciation rate d. Finally, equations (3) and (4) specify that the number of workers

grows at rate g and the efficiency of a worker grows at rate h.

       Let kt denote the “effective” capital-labor ratio, Kt/At Lt. Income per efficiency unit

(which is not observed) can be written as:

                                                    𝑌"
                                           𝑦" =          = 𝑘"' ,                               (5)
                                                   𝐴" 𝐿"

while the observed per-capita income 𝑦>" is:

                                                   𝑌"
                                           𝑦>" =      = 𝐴" 𝑘"'                                 (6)
                                                   𝐿"

       Finally, the wage (w) and the rental rate of capital (r) at time t are given by the

marginal productivity conditions:

                                       𝑤" = (1 − 𝛼)𝐴" 𝑘"' ,                                    (7)

                                            𝑟" = 𝛼𝑘"'+* .                                      (8)

       Equation (2) can be rewritten in terms of the effective capital-labor ratio as 𝑘̇ =

𝑠𝑦" − (𝛿 + 𝜂 + 𝑔)𝑘" . This implies that the steady-state effective capital-labor ratio is:
                                                                   K
                                       ∗
                                            𝑠    KLM
                                     𝑘 = I      J .                                            (9)
                                          𝛿+𝜂+𝑔

Note that the rental rate of capital is constant in the steady state. If labor efficiency is

increasing at rate h > 0, however, both the wage and per-capita income will also increase at

rate h in the steady state.

       Suppose the economy is in steady state, and immigration produces a one-time

increase in the size of the workforce. Consider the special case where the size of the

workforce was constant prior to the supply shock (g = 0). A one-time influx of immigrants

who are perfect substitutes with pre-existing workers can then be modeled as a simple
                                                      7


shift in L. The one-time supply shock produces an immediate drop in the effective capital-

labor ratio (which in turn, increases the rental rate of capital and reduces the wage). It

follows that the immediate impact on output and per-capita income are given by:

                                          𝜕𝑌"
                                              = (1 − 𝛼)𝑦>" > 0,                                          (10)
                                          𝜕𝐿
                                        𝜕𝑦>"             𝜕𝑘"
                                             = 𝛼𝐴" 𝑘"'+*     < 0,                                        (11)
                                        𝜕𝐿               𝜕𝐿

The one-time supply shock trivially increases GDP (more workers produce more output).

But the supply shock reduces per-capita income in the short run.

        This short-run drop is attenuated as the economy adjusts to the larger workforce.

The decline in the capital-labor ratio increases the rate of return to capital, inducing an

increase in the capital stock. As equation (9) shows, however, the steady state effective

capital-labor ratio does not depend on the size of the workforce. As a result, the one-time

supply shock does not change the steady state level of per-capita income:

                                                  𝜕𝑦> ∗
                                                        = 0.                                             (12)
                                                  𝜕𝐿

Once the steady-state equilibrium is reestablished, the economy has a larger GDP, and per-

capita income continues to grow at the same rate h.1

        The model can also be used to analyze the impact of a continuous supply shock,

which can be modeled as an increase in g, the rate of growth in the size of the workforce.

This persistent shock has long-term consequences. Equation (9) implies that it reduces the

steady state level of the effective capital-labor ratio (¶k*/¶g < 0). It then follows that:


         1 The transitional dynamics after the one-time shock are interesting. Per-capita income was growing
at a constant rate of h prior to the shock. After the shock (and before the economy is re-equilibrated), the
growth rate increases to (η + 𝛼𝑘̇/𝑘), where 𝑘̇ > 0. The growth spurt is short-lived. It only reflects that the
shock immediately reduced per-capita income and the economy is reverting to the original steady state.
                                                8

                                  𝜕𝑦> ∗             𝜕𝑘 ∗
                                        = 𝛼𝐴" 𝑘"'+*      < 0,                                (13)
                                  𝜕𝑔                𝜕𝑔

In short, a persistent immigrant flow permanently reduces per-capita income.

       An augmented version of the Solow model (Mankiw, Romer, and Weil, 1992; Dolado,

Goria, and Ichino, 1994) can be used to derive the implications if immigrants also increase

the country’s human capital stock (H). The linear homogeneous production function in the

augmented model is typically written as:

                                𝑌" = (𝐾" )' (𝐻" )V (𝐴" 𝐿" )*+'+V ,                           (14)

and the equations of motion for the physical and human capital stocks are:

                                      𝐾"̇ = 𝑠W 𝑌" − 𝛿𝐾" ,                                    (15)
                                                             𝐻"
                                𝐻"̇ = 𝑠X 𝑌" − 𝛿𝐻" + 𝑀" 𝜋 I      J,                           (16)
                                                             𝐿"

where sK and sH are the (constant) investment rates for physical and human capital,

respectively; the depreciation rate d is assumed to be the same for both types of capital; Mt

is the net number of immigrants; and p measures the relative contribution of an immigrant

to the human capital stock. The immigrant is as skilled as a pre-existing worker if p = 1.

       The change in the number of workers is 𝐿"̇ = 𝑔𝐿" + 𝑀" . Suppose that the number of

immigrants increases at the same rate as the native population, so that the net migration

rate m = Mt/Lt is constant. The workforce then grows at constant rate (g + m), and the

equations of motion for the effective capital-labor ratios are given by:

                               𝑘̇ = 𝑠W 𝑦" − [𝛿 + 𝜂 + 𝑔 + 𝑚]𝑘" ,                              (17)
                           ℎ̇ = 𝑠X 𝑦" − [𝛿 + 𝜂 + 𝑔 + (1 − 𝜋)𝑚]ℎ" .                           (18)

       The steady state is defined by 𝑘̇ = 0 and ℎ̇ = 0. The effective capital/labor ratios in

the steady state are:
                                                 9

                                           KL_                             _
                            𝑠W    KLML_            𝑠X           KLML_
                  𝑘∗ = I         J      I                      J      ,                      (19)
                         𝛿+𝜂+𝑔+𝑚          𝛿 + 𝜂 + 𝑔 + (1 − 𝜋)𝑚
                                                                          KLM
                                            M                    KLML_
                           𝑠W    KLML_            𝑠X
                  ℎ∗ = I        J      I                       J       .                     (20)
                        𝛿+𝜂+𝑔+𝑚          𝛿 + 𝜂 + 𝑔 + (1 − 𝜋 )𝑚

       The steady state capital-labor ratios in equations (19) and (20) are constant. As a

result, effective per-capita income (given by 𝑦 = 𝑘 ' ℎV ) will also be constant. In contrast,

actual per-capita income (𝑦> = 𝐴𝑘 ' ℎV ) will still grow at a rate of h (as was the case in the

simpler version of the Solow model).

       Equations (19)-(20) imply that immigration alters steady-state per-capita income:

                      𝜕 log 𝑦> ∗          𝛼             𝛽
                                 =−              −             [1 − 𝜋],                      (21)
                         𝜕𝑚         (1 − 𝛼 − 𝛽 )𝐶 (1 − 𝛼 − 𝛽)𝐷

where 𝐶 = [𝛿 + 𝜂 + 𝑔 + 𝑚]; and 𝐷 = [𝛿 + 𝜂 + 𝑔 + (1 − 𝜋)𝑚] > 0. Per-capita income will

certainly decline if p £ 1 (a case relevant for the recent U.S. context with high numbers of

low-skill immigrants). In fact, the diminishing marginal productivity of labor implies that

per-capita income might fall even if immigrants are relatively more skilled (with p being

slightly above 1). Equation (21) shows that immigration can spur long-term growth only if

the influx is very skilled, with sufficiently high values of p.

       An important lesson from this brief overview of the Solow model is that persistent

immigration will often reduce per-capita income in the steady state, particularly when the

immigrants are perfect substitutes or less skilled than the natives. Immigration may spur

long-term growth only if the supply shock is composed of very highly skilled workers. In

fact, such a supply shock could increase per-capita incomes by far more than the model

suggests if the immigrants also produce human capital externalities that permanently

increase the productivity of native workers.
                                                     10



3. Immigration and GDP: Evidence

          Despite the contentious policy debate over immigration, only a handful of studies

study the empirical link between immigration and long-term growth.2 Hence, it is useful to

begin by illustrating the relationship between GDP and immigration trends in the United

States.

          Each decennial census since 1850 reports the number of foreign-born persons,

allowing the calculation of net immigration in each decade. Define the net migration rate in

the decade between years t and t+10 as the net number of immigrants arriving in that

decade divided by the population at time t. For expositional convenience, I multiply the net

migration rate by 100 so that it gives the number of new immigrants per 100 persons. As

Figure 1 shows, there have been periods of very high and of very low immigration. Between

1900 and 1910 and between 1990 and 2000, the net migration rate was about 4 persons

per decade. In contrast, the net migration rate was negative between 1930 and 1970.

          The two panels of the figure also show the decadal rate of change in (real) GDP and

in per-capita GDP. It is visually obvious that the simple correlation implied by the historical

record does not suggest that there was more rapid economic growth during those periods

of high immigration. In fact, the slope of a regression that relates the rate of change in GDP




          2 See Boubtane, Dumont, and Rault (2016), Dolado, Goria, and Ichino (1994) and Kane and Rutledge
(2018). Related work by Peri (2012) correlates immigration with total factor productivity (TFP), where TFP
is a residual from a regression that links state-level GDP to the size of the workforce and measures of the
capital stock. It is particularly difficult to interpret the correlation between TFP and immigration as much
depends on the regression specification, and on what exactly is included and left out of the first-stage
regression.
                                                      11


to the net migration rate is 0.008 (with a standard error of 0.014), while the respective

coefficient in the per-capita growth regression is -0.010 (0.012).

        Obviously, these weak correlations do not prove the absence of a causal link

between immigration and growth. There are far too many other factors that influence the

evolution of economic output and Figure 1 does not control for any of these factors. It is

possible, however, to examine the causal relationship by linking trends in state-level

economic growth and immigration during the 1960-2017 period.

        Specifically, I use the decadal census data to calculate the immigrant share in the

workforce of each state r at time t and estimate the regression model:3

                                  log 𝑦f" = 𝜃f + 𝜃" + 𝛽𝑝f" + 𝛾ℎf" + 𝜖,                                     (22)

where yrt is a measure of the Gross State Product (GSP) in state r at time t; qr and qt

represent vectors of state and year fixed effects, respectively; prt gives the ratio of the

number of working immigrants to the size of the workforce in the state (´ 100); and hrt

measures the human capital of the state’s workforce (which I proxy by the log mean years

of education and by the fraction of workers aged 25 and 54).

        The top panel of Table 1 reports the coefficients estimated by ordinary least

squares. There is a positive (and significant) correlation between immigration and GSP

across states and over time. An increase in the immigrant share of 1 percent is associated

with a 3.2 percent increase in GSP. Note, however, that the coefficient becomes insignificant

when the regression uses per-capita GSP as the dependent variable.



        3 Kane and Rutledge (2018) conduct a similar analysis for the 1980-2015 period. The panel used in
Table 1 consists of seven cross-sections (1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010, and 2017) and 50 states (the
District of Columbia is excluded from the regressions). I also estimated the regressions using a first-difference
specification. The results are qualitatively similar to those reported below.
                                              12


       The regression model in equation (22), which is exactly analogous to the panel

regression typically estimated to measure the wage impact of immigration (Borjas, 2014),

suffers from potential endogeneity bias. Income-maximizing immigrants will likely settle in

states that offer vibrant economic conditions, building in a positive correlation between yrt

and prt. The bottom panel of Table 1 reports the coefficients estimated from IV regressions

that use the generic “shift-share” instrument to control for the endogeneity (Card, 2001).

       In particular, I used the 1960 census to observe the geographic settlement of

immigrants who originated in a particular country. The key assumption of the shift-share

instrument is that this initial geographic distribution influences the settlement of later

waves of immigrants from that same country. Future immigrants will find it cheaper to

settle in those parts of the country where ethnic networks facilitate the move. The shift-

share instrument uses the 1960 geographic distribution to geographically allocate the

immigrants from that country observed in a subsequent cross-section t. The predicted

number of immigrants living in state r at time t is then obtained by adding up across

countries of origin, and this prediction is used to calculate the predicted fraction of

immigrants in the workforce. Note, however, that if the economic conditions that induced

the 1960 immigrants to settle in particular states persist over time, the shift-share

instrument does not solve the endogeneity problem (Jaeger, Ruist, and Stuhler, 2018).

       The IV estimates of the “causal” link between immigration and GDP reported in

Table 1 are again positive for the level of GSP but turn negative (and insignificant) when

looking at per-capita GSP. A one-point increase in the immigrant share is associated with a

1.9 percent increase in GSP, and with a 0.7 percent decrease in per-capita GDP.
                                               13


       The prudent inference from the exercises reported in this section seems to be that

the correlation between immigration and per-capita income is, at best, zero. The data do

not provide any support for the hypothesis that the two variables are strongly and

positively correlated, either historically or across regions. It seems that a finding of strong

positive effects will require much more data manipulation (and many more assumptions).



4. The Immigration Surplus

       The negative short-run impact of immigration on wages and the positive impact on

the return to capital imply that immigration has distributional consequences. They also

raise the possibility that the gains to firms exceed the losses to workers, and there might be

an immigration surplus, a net increase in the wealth of the “native” population.

       The simplest model of the immigration surplus assumes that immigrants and

natives are perfect substitutes (Borjas, 1995). The workforce has N native and M immigrant

workers, with L = N + M. The aggregate production function Y = f(K, L) is linear

homogeneous. Suppose further that natives own the capital stock and that the supplies of

both natives and immigrants are perfectly inelastic.

       Each factor price equals the respective value of marginal product in a competitive

labor market. The rental rate of capital in the pre-immigration equilibrium is r0 = fK(K, N)

and the price of labor is w0 = fL(K, N), where output price is the numeraire. Linear

homogeneity implies that the entire output is distributed to the owners of capital and to

workers. In the pre-immigration regime, the national income accruing to natives, YN, is

given by YN = r0 K + w0 N.
                                               14


       Figure 2 illustrates this initial equilibrium. The value of YN is given by the area under

the marginal product of labor curve fL, or trapezoid ABN0. In the short run, the capital stock

is fixed. The entry of M immigrants shifts the supply curve and lowers the wage to w1. The

area in the trapezoid ACL0 gives national income in the post-immigration economy. Part of

the increase in national income goes to immigrants (who earn w1M dollar). The area in the

triangle BCD gives the immigration surplus, the increase in income that accrues to natives.

       The immigration surplus, as a fraction of national income, approximately equals:

                                      Δ𝑌l    1
                                          = − 𝑠m 𝜀 𝑝o ,                                     (23)
                                       𝑌     2

where sL is labor’s share of income (sL = wL/Y); e is the wage elasticity (e = d log w/d log L);

and p is the immigrant share of the workforce (p = M/L).

       Equation (23) gives a simple formula for doing a “back-of-the-envelope” calculation

(summarized in Table 2). The share of labor income has hovered around 70 percent for

some time, and the fraction of immigrants in the workforce is 16.6 percent. Suppose further

that the linear homogeneous production function is Cobb-Douglas. It is then easy to show

that the absolute value of the wage elasticity e equals capital’s share of income, or about

0.3. The immigration surplus is then 0.29 percent of GDP. In 2017, GDP was $19.5 trillion,

so that the short-run immigration surplus is about $56 billion a year, a relatively small

number in the context of a very large economy.

       Figure 2 shows that immigration redistributes income from labor to capital. Native

workers lose the area in the rectangle w0BDw1, and this quantity plus the surplus accrues

to employers. Table 2 also reports the implied dollar value of these losses and gains (see

Borjas, 1995, for algebraic details). Native-born workers lose about 2.9 percent of GDP,
                                              15


while native-owned capital gains about 3.2 percent of GDP. The $19.5 trillion GDP implies

that workers lose $567 billion while employers gain $623 billion. The small surplus of $56

billion masks a sizable redistribution from workers to the users of immigrant labor.

       Note that the immigration surplus, which measures the dollar gains accruing to

“natives,” is conceptually different from the total increase in GDP. As Table 2 also shows, a

supply shock that increased the workforce by almost 17 percent generated a very sizable

increase in GDP, of over $2 trillion. Almost all of this increase, however, goes to the

immigrants themselves as payments for their services.

       Finally, the short-run surplus derived in Figure 2 assumed that capital was fixed.

The rise in the returns to capital encourages capital inflows until the rental rate is again

equalized across markets. The assumption of constant returns implies that the expansion in

the capital stock reestablishes the pre-immigration capital/labor ratio. In the end,

immigration does not alter the price of labor or the returns to capital, and natives neither

gain nor lose from immigration. In the long run, the immigration surplus must be zero.



    Heterogeneous Labor

       Figure 2 assumed natives and immigrants are perfect substitutes. There may exist

production complementarities between the two groups that can increase the gains.

Suppose there are two types of workers, low-skill (LU) and high-skill (LH). The linear

homogeneous production function is now Y = f(K, LU, LH). Suppose further the supply shock

is not “balanced” across skill groups (i.e., immigrants are predominantly low-skill or high-

skill). The long-term adjustment in the capital stock would not lead to a new equilibrium
                                                     16


with the economy simply operating at a proportionately higher scale for all inputs.4 The

potential complementarities between immigrants and natives would help produce a larger

immigration surplus.

        Not surprisingly, capital-skill complementarity suggests that the short-run surplus

might be larger if the immigrant flow was composed of high-skill workers. By assumption,

natives own the capital stock and capital-skill complementarity implies that the returns to

capital increase more when immigrants are high-skill. In fact, simulations of the model

suggest that estimates of the short-run immigration surplus might double if the United

States admitted only high-skill immigrants (Borjas, 2014, p. 158). However, the long-run

capital adjustments would attenuate the importance of capital-skill complementarity and

greatly reduce the gains from high-skill supply shocks.



     Human Capital Externalities

        The calculation of the immigration surplus with a linear homogeneous production

function suggests that even a large supply shock of high-skill workers may not generate

relatively large gains for the native population. Nevertheless, there is a widespread (and

unshakeable) perception that some types of immigration, and particularly the immigration

of high-skill workers, can be hugely beneficial. This perception relies on a crucial departure

from the textbook model, the belief that high-skill immigrants generate human capital




        4 In the homogeneous labor case, an increase of x percent in the number of workers induces an x
percent increase in the capital stock so that the long-run equilibrium has the economy operating at a larger
scale with the same proportionate increase in capital, labor, and output. In the heterogeneous labor case with
an unbalanced supply shock, the input ratios would be different in the pre- and post-shock equilibriums.
                                               17


externalities. The sudden presence of high-skill immigrants exposes natives to new forms

of knowledge, increases their human capital, and makes them more productive.

       It is easy to illustrate how externalities change the immigration surplus. If high-skill

immigrants had positive spillover effects on native productivity, an influx of immigrants

produces an outward shift in the labor demand curve because the value of marginal

product for every native worker rises. Immigration then shifts not only the supply curve,

but also shifts the demand curve to FL in Figure 3. The change in income accruing to natives

is then given by the sum of the triangle B¢C¢D (or the traditional immigration surplus) plus

the shaded area of the trapezoid A¢B¢BA, which measures the impact of immigration on the

total product of native workers. It is obvious that if the externalities are sufficiently

important, high-skill immigration could be an important driver of economic growth.

       Figure 3 suggests a trivial back-of-the-envelope calculation that illustrate just how

important the externalities can be. Suppose a high-skill supply shock raises the marginal

product of every native worker by j percent, so that the new demand curve FL = (1 + j)fL.

This formulation implies that the gains produced by the externalities equal j percent of the

original GDP. Table 2 suggests that the pre-immigration GDP, measured by trapezoid ABN0

in Figure 3, is about $17 trillion. If the externality increases marginal product by 1 percent,

the gains produced by high-skill immigration would be about $170 billion. In short, the

gains from human capital externalities can easily dwarf those measured by the traditional

immigration surplus. Moreover, these large gains do not disappear in the long run, as the

increased productivity of the native workforce is a permanent fixture of the labor market.



5. The Distributional Impact of Immigration
                                              18


       In the absence of human capital externalities, the canonical model of the labor

market suggests that a one-time supply shock will depress the wage of competing workers

in the short run, and that this negative effect is attenuated over time as the economy

adjusts to the larger workforce. Despite the intuitive appeal of these insights, the literature

that estimates the wage elasticity (the crucial parameter for calculating both the gains from

immigration and the distributional impact) has instead produced a confusing labyrinth,

with estimates that often depend on the methodological approach, the sample used, and the

period examined.

       Because immigrants cluster in a relatively small number of geographic areas, many

studies exploit the geographic dispersion of immigrants to measure the wage effect. These

studies compare native earnings in cities where the immigrant share of the workforce is

large (for example, Los Angeles) with earnings in cities where there are relatively few

immigrants. A negative spatial correlation would then be interpreted as showing that the

supply shock reduced the wage of substitutable natives.

       The regression model is typically given by:

              log wrt = β prt + g Xrt + e                                                (24)

where wrt is the mean wage of native workers in city r at time t, and prt is the immigrant

share. The vector X typically includes variables that also generate wage dispersion across

cities and over time and are often proxied by city and year fixed effects.

       It is well known that the OLS estimate of b does not measure the causal effect of

immigration. Immigrants tend to settle in high-wage cities. The endogenous geographic

distribution then generates a positive spurious correlation between immigration and

native wages. As noted earlier, most studies use a shift-share instrument to address the
                                              19


problem. This instrument gives the predicted number of immigrants in a city at time t

based on the geographic distribution of earlier waves. The shift-share instrument, however,

is valid only if the economic conditions that motivated earlier waves to settle in particular

cities are uncorrelated with the conditions in those cities today.

       Some studies avoid the endogeneity problem by searching for natural experiments

where large numbers of immigrants are randomly “dropped off” in a particular location at a

particular time, with the Mariel boatlift being the classic context. On April 20, 1980, Fidel

Castro declared that Cubans wishing to move to the United States could leave freely from

the port of Mariel. By September 1980, about 125,000 Cubans had accepted the invitation,

and Miami’s labor force had unexpectedly grown by 8 percent.

       Card (1990) concluded that the average wage in Miami was barely affected by the

Mariel supply shock (relative to wage trends in comparable cities). Borjas (2017), however,

noted that the refugees were predominantly low-skill. Nearly two-thirds of the Marielitos

did not have a high school diploma, increasing the number of high school dropouts in

Miami by nearly 20 percent. It would then make sense to look for the impact of Mariel in

Miami’s low-skill labor market. Figure 4a shows the wage trends revealed by the March

Current Population Surveys (CPS) in the sample of non-Hispanic men, aged 25-59, who did

not have a high school diploma. The relative wage of this group in Miami took a nosedive

after 1980, and it took a decade for the wage to recover.

       Several subsequent studies have argued that other definitions of the “low-skill”

workforce and that adjusting for sampling issues in the CPS yield different results. Peri and

Yasenov (2015), for instance, examine the wage trends in a low-skill sample given by non-

Cuban workers, aged 16-61, who did not have a high school diploma. As Figure 4b shows,
                                                     20


the wage trends in this sample suggest that Mariel did not affect the low-skill wage.5 The

question then becomes: which sample best captures conditions in Miami’s “low skill” labor

market? As an example of the nuances involved, the addition of workers aged 16-18 to the

low-skill sample implies that high school students are classified as “high school dropouts”

because they do not yet have a high school diploma and the CPS (at the time) did not

provide information on whether a person was enrolled in school. The very large number of

high school students overwhelms the data and potentially contaminates the wage trend.6

        Spatial correlations might also be problematic because natives may respond to

supply shocks migration by moving to other labor markets. If the entry of immigrants into a

particular city lowers the wage, natives might move to places unaffected by immigration

that now offer relatively higher wages, diffusing the impact of immigration over the

national economy. Beginning with Borjas (2003), many studies have moved away from

geographic comparisons and instead examined wage trends for specific skill groups in the

national labor market. The “skill-cell approach” tries to determine if the wage of specific

skill groups is related to the number of immigrants that entered each of those groups.

        Figure 5 illustrates a key empirical implication of this approach. Define a skill group

as the set of workers with a particular combination of educational attainment and labor

market experience (for example, high school dropouts with 6-10 years of experience, or


        5 This is the sample used in the original draft of Peri and Yasenov (2015). Recent work by Clemens
and Hunt (2019) notes an additional problem with the March CPS sample: the fraction of the low-skill
workforce that is black jumped dramatically in 1979, potentially contaminating the wage trend. Borjas
(2019), however, documents that much of the wage decline documented in Figure 4a actually occurred
during a time when the fraction of black workers in the CPS sample was relatively constant.
        6 The reconciliation of the Mariel evidence will likely require data that examines aspects of the Miami
labor market not measured by the CPS. Anastasopoulos et al (2018) examine trends in the number of job
vacancies (as measured by the Conference Board Help-Wanted Index) and document a sizable post-Mariel
decline in the relative number of help-wanted classifieds in the Miami Herald.
                                                  21


college graduates with 20-24 years of experience). Each point in the scatter diagram relates

the wage growth experienced by a particular skill group of natives over a particular decade

to the change in the percent of the group that is foreign born (using decadal Census data

from 1960 through 2010). There is an obvious negative correlation between the two

variables, and the regression line suggests that a 10 percent increase in the size of the skill

group reduces the wage of that group by 3 to 4 percent.

       As this brief overview of a huge literature suggests, there are methodological and

sampling choices that often lead to very different conclusions. A recent National Academy

of Sciences (NAS) report on the economic impact of immigration (Blau and Mackie, 2016)

summarized the value of the wage elasticity estimated in the main studies. Table 3 shows

that the point estimates are all over the map, and can be positive, zero, or negative.

       The skill-cell approach can be expanded to address a limitation of the generic

regression model in equation (24). A supply shock in a particular skill group affects the

wage of workers in that skill group and the wage of other skill groups as well. Given the

vast number of potential skill groups in the workforce, the cross-effects can only be

estimated by specifying a structural model of the production technology that limits the

allowable interactions. Borjas (2003) introduced the nested CES framework:
                                                               K
                                     𝑄" = q𝜆W" 𝐾"s + 𝜆𝐿s" tu                                (25)
                                                           K
                                                           _
                                                       V
                                      𝐿" = vw 𝜃x" 𝐿x" y ,                                   (26)
                                              x
                                                               K
                                                               {
                                                       8
                                    𝐿x" = vw 𝛼xz" 𝐿xz" y ,                                  (27)
                                             z
                                              22


where Qt is output, Kt is capital, Lt denotes the number of efficiency units in the aggregate

labor market; d = 1 – 1/sKL, with sKL being the elasticity of substitution between capital

and labor; Lst gives the effective supply of workers with education s at time t; b = 1 – 1/sS,

with sS being the elasticity of substitution across these education aggregates; Lsxt gives the

number of workers in education group s and experience group x at time t; h = 1 – 1/sX, with

sX being the elasticity of substitution across experience classes.

       The structural approach shows that the elasticities of substitution among different

types of workers are the “fundamentals” that determine the wage impact of immigration.

The (log-linear) marginal productivity conditions implied by the nested CES allow for easy

estimation of these elasticities using data on wages and employment for the skill cells.

Table 4, also drawn from the NAS report, uses the estimated elasticities to simulate the

wage impact of the immigrants who entered between 1990 and 2010 (who are treated as a

one-time shock). Even after accounting for all potential cross-effects, this supply shock

reduced the wage of the least skilled workers by 6.3 percent in the short run and by 3.1

percent in the long run.

       Subsequent extensions of the framework in equations (25)-(27) emphasize the

importance of two additional elasticities of substitution that may change the implications of

the numerical simulation. Ottaviano and Peri (2012) relaxed the assumption in equation

(27) that immigrants and natives who have the same educational attainment and the same

labor market experience are perfect substitutes. The potential complementarity between

observationally equivalent immigrants and natives would attenuate any negative wage
                                             23


effect. Card (2009) argued that high school dropouts and high school graduates are perfect

substitutes, changing the definition of the low-skill workforce.

       The various panels of Table 4 show how the alternative assumptions change the

simulated wage impact. The Ottaviano-Peri (2012) estimate of an elasticity of substitution

of 20 between observationally equivalent immigrants and natives is too large to matter

much in the simulation. The short-run impact on the wage of high school dropouts is -4.9

percent, while the long-run impact is -1.7 percent. But the assumption that high school

dropouts and high school graduates are perfect substitutes makes a difference. By adding

the tens of millions of natives who are high school graduates into the low-skill labor

market, the impact of the entry of millions of low-skill immigrants (who often do not have a

high school diploma) is diluted because the baseline workforce grows even more. It is this

“numerical trick” that produces a simulation suggesting that immigration has no adverse

impact on the wage of low-skill workers.



    Human Capital Externalities

       Human capital externalities can attenuate the adverse impact of immigration on

competing workers and generate very large economic gains at the same time. A number of

recent studies examine specific historical events involving high-skill supply shocks to

determine if there were resulting externalities.

       The work of Waldinger (2010, 2012) exemplifies the methodological approach.

Immediately after seizing power in 1933, the National Socialist Party enacted the Law for

the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, which mandated the dismissal of all Jewish

professors from German universities. Almost 20 percent of German mathematics
                                             24


professors were dismissed, including some of the most famous mathematicians of the era

(such as John von Neumann, Richard Courant, and Richard von Mises).

       The Jewish mathematicians had not been randomly employed across German

universities, so some departments barely noticed the dismissals while other departments

lost over half their faculty. If those exceptional mathematicians produced beneficial

externalities for their students or colleagues, the dismissals would have had a detectable

impact on the eventual productivity of the persons “left behind.” Waldinger (2010) shows

that the students left behind in the departments that suffered the heaviest losses

experienced a relative decline in their productivity, suggesting that human capital

externalities do matter. Waldinger (2012), however, documents that the publication rate of

the colleagues left behind was not affected by the dismissals. The different results in the

two Waldinger studies suggest that human capital externalities are not magically

produced even when the supply shock involves exceptional workers. The outcome seems

to depend on the nature of the relationship between the immigrants and the affected

workers.

       Borjas and Doran (2012) conduct a similar examination of another high-skill supply

shock. For decades prior to 1992, there had been little intellectual contact between Soviet

and Western mathematicians. As a result, the two groups specialized in very different

fields. The two most popular Soviet fields were partial differential equations and ordinary

differential equations. The two most popular American fields were statistics and operations

research. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1992, several hundred Soviet

mathematicians left the country and settled in the United States.
                                               25


       Borjas and Doran (2012) tracked the publication record of every American

mathematician before and after the arrival of the Soviet émigrés to measure the impact of

the supply shock on the mathematicians who had the most Soviet-like research agenda.

There are two possible effects. The first is implied by the law of diminishing returns. An

increase in the number of mathematicians deriving theorems in, say, partial differential

equations makes the comparable American mathematicians less productive. The second is

implied by human capital externalities. Exposing American mathematicians to new

theorems and techniques could increase the productivity of the mathematicians working in

those fields. It turns out that there was a precipitous decline in the publication rate of the

group whose research agenda overlapped most with the Soviets.

       Finally, several studies examine the impact of the high-tech workers admitted in the

H-1B visa program. The number of H-1B visas is capped and this cap has fluctuated over

time. The conclusion that the H-1B program produces externalities often comes from

studies that estimate spatial correlations. Because H-1B visa-holders cluster in a small

number of locations (such as San Francisco), an exogenous increase in the cap would be

expected to have a large impact in “H-1B dependent” cities. Kerr and Lincoln (2010)

showed that an increase in the cap led to more patents originating in those cities. The

increased patenting, however, came mainly from persons with Indian or Chinese surnames,

suggesting that those new patents originated with the immigrants themselves, rather than

from a spillover effect on native workers.

       Some of the subsequent studies that estimate spatial correlations report large

beneficial effects. Peri, Shih, and Farber (2015) relate the H-1B induced increase in the

number of STEM workers to the wage of college graduates in the city and find a very strong
                                              26


positive effect. The magnitude, however, seems implausible; a 1 percent increase in the size

of the STEM workforce raises the wage of college graduates by 8 percent (or a wage

elasticity of +8.0). Most likely, the endogeneity plaguing spatial correlations and the

problems with the shift-share instrument lead the data to regurgitate the obvious fact that

high-skill immigrants end up in places where the high-skill labor market is doing quite well.

       Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2016) avoid the endogeneity bias by examining a natural

experiment created by a peculiarity of the H-1B program. Firms can apply for the visas on a

first-come, first-served basis until the visas run out. On some random day during a year, the

visas run out and on that day more firms typically apply for visas than there are visas

available. The Department of Homeland Security then runs a lottery to determine which

firms get the visas. It turns out that the firms that won the lottery did not patent more and

that native employment in those firms fell.

       In short, the evidence supporting the conjecture that high-skill immigration

generates sizable human capital externalities is mixed. There are some historical events

that produced such externalities, but there are also other events where the externalities are

absent.



6. Immigrant Skills

       As the augmented Solow model suggests, the impact of immigrants on economic

growth depends on the human capital stock they bring into the country, and on how that

stock changes as assimilation takes place (Chiswick, 1978; Borjas, 1985).

       The 2016 NAS report (Blau and Mackie, 2016) used the census cross-sections

between 1970 and 2010 to track the age-adjusted wage of specific immigrant waves over
                                              27


the past few decades. Figure 6a illustrates the trends in the relative wage. The figure

reveals two interesting and well-known findings. The first is the presence of sizable cohort

differences in entry wages, with the more recent cohorts having lower earnings potential

than earlier cohorts through the year 2000. In 1970, the most recent immigrant wave

earned 23.5 percent less than comparable natives at the time of entry. By 1990, the entry

wage disadvantage had grown to 33.1 percent, before contracting to 27.3 percent in 2000.

       Figure 6a also hints at a slowdown in the rate of “economic assimilation.” The

immigrant cohorts that arrived prior to the early 1980s experienced faster relative wage

growth than the more recent arrivals. Consider, for example, the cohort that arrived in the

late 1960s. The relative wage of this group improved from a disadvantage of 23.5 percent

in 1970 to 2.0 percent by 2000—a growth of about 20 percentage points over two decades.

In contrast, the relative wage of the cohort that entered the country in the late 1980s only

improved from an entry disadvantage of 33.1 percent to 25.2 percent by 2010.

       The assimilation slowdown is also evident in data that is far less sensitive to the

impact of transitory economic conditions on the relative wage of immigrants. Figure 6b

shows the comparable trends in the fraction of immigrants who speak English very well (or

only speak English). Note that 30.9 percent of the immigrants who arrived between 1975

and 1980 were English proficient at the time of arrival, and this fraction increased to 46.2

percent by 2000. In contrast, the proficiency rate of the cohort that entered the country in

the late 1980s increased by only 7 percentage points during the first 20 years. The

evidence revealed in Figure 6, therefore, suggest that there is no inevitable assimilation

process that will mechanically increase per-capita income as the immigrant population

acquires skills that attenuate the initial productivity disadvantage.
                                              28


       It is insightful to compare the modern evidence with the historical record. Although

it is widely believed that the human capital stock of the immigrants who arrived at the

beginning of the 20th century increased dramatically during their lifetime, recent research

suggests that the widespread consensus may be wrong. The public release of the census

manuscripts compiled at the time allows modern historians to track specific persons from

census to census. This tracking lets us inspect the career path of specific natives and

immigrants. The exercise turns the widespread perception of rapid improvement on its

head. As Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2014, pp. 269-270) conclude: “The notion

that European immigrants converged with natives after spending 10 to 15 years in the US

is…exaggerated, as we find that initial immigrant-native occupational gaps persisted over

time.” In short, the historical experience provides surprisingly little evidence of any relative

economic improvement for the Ellis Island immigrants during their lifetime.

       Finally, the available evidence suggests a positive correlation between the skills that

immigrants bring into the United States and the rate of subsequent growth in earnings.

Figure 7 illustrates the link the wage of growth experienced by a national origin group in

the first 10 years in the United States and the average education of the group at the time of

arrival. It is evident that more skilled groups experience faster assimilation. The evidence,

therefore, supports the conjecture of complementarity in the production of human capital:

those immigrants who invested more in human capital prior to migration are likely to

invest more in human capital after migration. Put differently, the relative economic

contribution of high-skill immigrants to aggregate output increases over time.



7. The Fiscal Impact
                                               29


       Immigration generates a short-run economic gain through the immigration surplus

and may generate a long-run increase if immigrants are sufficiently skilled or there are

human capital externalities. The economic gains that accrue through the labor market,

however, need to be contrasted with the fiscal impact of immigration. The fiscal impact can

either be positive or negative, depending on how much immigrants contribute to the

funding of government programs and how much it costs to provide services to them.

       The question of whether immigrants use government programs more or less often

than natives is controversial and the answer is highly disputed. In fact, it is enlightening to

illustrate how the same data can be manipulated in different ways to reach very different

conclusions about the relative use of welfare programs by the immigrant population.

       Since 1994, the Current Population Surveys (CPS) provide information on

participation in various assistance programs for both immigrants and natives, making it

possible to document the difference in welfare participation rates. For expositional

convenience, suppose that being “on welfare” means receiving benefits from Medicaid, food

stamps, or cash benefits. We can then use the CPS to determine if the fraction of immigrants

on welfare is higher, lower, or the same as the fraction of natives.

       The two panels of Figure 8 show the trends between 1994 and 2018. Note, however,

that the two panels yield very different results. In Figure 7a, the fraction of immigrants on

welfare is far higher than the fraction of natives, while in Figure 7b, the participation rate is

essentially the same for the two groups.

       Both panels of the figure use the same data but manipulate it in different ways. In

particular, the two panels use a different unit of analysis in the calculations. Figure 7a uses

the household as the unit of analysis, which is the way in which welfare use is most often
                                              30


analyzed. An immigrant household is one where the head of the household is foreign-born,

and a native household is one where the head is native-born. It is evident that households

headed by an immigrant have high rates of welfare use (defined as anyone in the household

receiving one of the three programs under analysis), and that the gap between immigrant

and native households increased over time. By 2018, 35.1 percent of immigrant households

were on welfare as compared to 22.6 percent of native households. In contrast, Figure 7b

uses the person as the unit of analysis. In 2018, 24.5 percent of foreign-born persons and

23.1 percent of the native-born received assistance from one of the three programs.

       The reason for the difference between the two panels is easy to grasp by considering

a trivial example. A young, single immigrant woman arrives in the country. After a few

years, she becomes a single mother, has three children, and qualifies for Medicaid. In Figure

8a, the four-person grouping would be classified as an immigrant household on welfare. In

Figure 8b, the tally would record one immigrant person on welfare and three native persons

on welfare. And therein lies the numerical trick: Because the children were born in the

United States, they enter on the native side of the ledger.

       The 2016 NAS report contains a detailed analysis of the fiscal impact that goes far

beyond the calculation of welfare participation rates (Blau and Mackie, 2016, Chapters 8

and 9). The NAS report adds up both the taxes paid and the cost of the services received for

immigrants and their descendants, so as to come up with a “bottom-line” number that

summarizes the long-run fiscal impact.

       This long-run perspective accounts for the fact that many current expenditures,

such as funding schooling for immigrant children or health care, generate future returns

through higher earnings when the children enter the labor market. The exercise also
                                              31


incorporates the possibility that immigrants might help fiscally because the native

population is aging, and funds will be needed to fund current liabilities in Social Security

and Medicare. The NAS used a 75-year period to calculate the long-run fiscal impact.

       The NAS exercise shows that the bottom line of the long-run calculation for the

average immigrant depends entirely on the assumptions made. It is easy to generate either

a very positive long-run fiscal impact or a very negative one by making different

assumptions. Two distinct assumptions drive the conclusion. First, the calculation needs to

allocate expenditures in public goods between immigrants and natives. Although it makes

sense to assume that the cost of public goods, such as police protection or national defense,

is unchanged if the country admits one more immigrant (so that the marginal cost is zero),

it makes less sense to assume that the cost of public goods is unchanged if the country

admits over 40 million immigrants. Similarly, any long-run scenario must make

assumptions about the future path of taxes and government expenditures, and different

assumptions lead to different conclusions.

       Table 5 summarizes the results from four scenarios presented in the NAS report.

The long-run fiscal impact of the average immigrant (measured as the present value of the

difference between taxes and expenditures) is positive only if immigrants do not affect the

cost of public goods and we also assume that future tax rates and benefit payments follow

the projections made by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO). The positive long-term

impact of an immigrant (a net present value of +$58,000) becomes a loss (potentially as

large as -$119,000) if one gets rid of either of those assumptions.

       Note, however, that the fiscal impact of high-skill immigration is always positive,

while the fiscal impact of low-skill immigration is always negative. Although it is impossible
                                                     32


to know which scenario (if any) best approximates the future, high-skill immigration is

always a better “deal” from a fiscal perspective. The long-run fiscal benefit from an

immigrant with a graduate degree is between $236,000 to $547,000, while the long-run

fiscal burden imposed by a high school dropout is between -$196,000 to -$301,000.

        These estimates imply that a change in immigration policy that only permits the

entry of high-skill workers can be an important contributor to economic growth even in the

absence of human capital externalities. Consider the scenario that generates the smallest

fiscal gain for the average immigrant (i.e., the scenario that assumes average cost pricing

for public goods and disregards the CBO projections). The average immigrant produces a

long-term loss of -$119,000. Suppose, however, that every immigrant had been a college

graduate. The net present value in this scenario jumps from a burden of -$119,000 to a gain

of +$39,000, or a net gain of +$158,000. Assuming a 3 percent rate of discount, the

annualized gain is $4,740. There were 44.5 million immigrants in 2017. If all these

immigrants had been college graduates, the country would have been $211 billion richer.

The projected gain is even larger in the scenario that assumes marginal cost pricing and

uses the CBO projections. The increase in the country’s wealth if all immigrants had been

college graduates would be $311 billion. In short, high-skill immigration can be an

important determinant of economic growth simply because of its fiscal consequences.7



8. Implications




        7 This is a partial equilibrium exercise designed to give a sense of the magnitudes involved. The very
large increase in the number of college graduates would have major labor market consequences, including a
substantial drop in the relative wage of (and taxes paid by) high-skill workers.
                                              33


       The United States offers exceptional opportunities to anyone lucky enough to live

within its borders. As a result, many more people want to immigrate than the country is

willing to admit. Consider, for example, the “diversity lottery” held annually since 1995.

Each year, some visas are made available to persons originating in “countries with low

rates of immigration to the United States.” Persons living in the eligible countries can apply

for a random chance at winning one of the coveted green cards. The 2018 lottery drew 23.1

million qualified applications for the 50,000 available visas.

       The huge excess demand for entry visas implies that immigration policy often

specifies a set of rationing rules to pick and choose from the many applicants. These rules

may stress family ties (as is currently done for the bulk of legal immigrants), or national

origin (as used to be done), or socioeconomic characteristics (as is done in other

countries). Which types of immigrants should the country admit?

       The case that can be made for preferring one type of immigrant over another

ultimately depends on what one assumes about the country’s policy objectives. Specifically,

what should the United States seek to accomplish from immigration? Different policy goals

lead to different choices about the composition of the immigrant flow. If immigration policy

strived to relieve the tax burden on native-born taxpayers, it would be fiscally irresponsible

to admit millions of low-skill immigrants who have a high propensity for participating in

assistance programs. But if the goal were to help the millions of persons now living in

poverty-stricken regions of the world, the increased cost of low-skill immigration is the

price that Americans are willing to pay for their generosity.

       Assume that the goal of immigration policy is to achieve a high rate of economic

growth. A very strong case can be made that there would be faster economic growth,
                                               34


particularly as defined by the trend in per-capita income, if the United States adopted an

immigration policy that limited entry to high-skill workers.

         The argument in favor of this policy contains two distinct parts. Consider first the

role of the fiscal impact of immigration. There is no doubt that high-skill immigrants earn

more, pay higher taxes, and require fewer services. Put simply, high-skill immigration

increases the after-tax income of natives, while the tax burden imposed by the immigration

of low-skill workers reduces the net wealth of native taxpayers. And the National Academy

estimates suggest that the fiscal benefits generated by high-skill immigration can be quite

large.

         The second part of the case for high-skill immigration relies on how immigrants

alter the productivity of the native workforce and of native-owned firms. In the short-run,

the economic pie expands through the immigration surplus. Many studies suggest that

there is more complementarity between high-skill labor and capital than between unskilled

labor and capital. Capital-skill complementarity, therefore, suggests that the immigration

surplus would be larger if the immigrant flow were composed of skilled workers.

         These short-run gains, however, would be dissipated as the economy adjusts to the

larger workforce. In the long-term, the immigrant contribution to economic growth would

depend on the possibility that immigrants introduce human capital externalities, which

permanently increase the productivity of natives. High-skill immigrants are also more

likely to bring in knowledge, skills, and abilities that natives lack, and natives may be able

to somehow pick up this know-how. Although the evidence on the magnitude of these

externalities is mixed, the potential for the externalities to even exist is larger when the

immigrant influx is composed of exceptional workers.
                                              35


       In short, there is little doubt that the immigrant contribution to economic growth

would be far more important if the immigrant inflow was composed of high-skill workers.

If a receiving country wished to pursue an immigration policy that maximized long-term

growth, therefore, there is little uncertainty about the path that country should follow. It is

far from clear, however, that immigration policy should be set solely on the basis of

economic considerations.
                                             36


                                        References

        Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2014. ”A nation of
immigrants: Assimilation and economic outcomes in the age of mass migration,” Journal of
Political Economy 122: 467-506.

       Anastasapoulos, Jason, George J. Borjas, Gavin G. Cook, and Michael Lachanski. 2018.
“Job Vacancies and Immigration: Evidence from Pre- and Post-Mariel Data,” NBER Working
Paper No. 24580.

      Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1999. Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.

      Borjas, George J. 1985. “Assimilation, changes in cohort quality, and the earnings of
immigrants,” Journal of Labor Economics 3: 463-489.

      Borjas, George J. 1995. “The economic benefits from immigration,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 9: 3-22.

       Borjas, George J. 2003. “The labor demand curve is downward sloping: Reexamining
the impact of immigration on the labor market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1335-
1374.

         Borjas, George J. 2014. Immigration Economics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

      Borjas, George J. 2016. We Wanted Workers: Unraveling the Immigration Narrative.
New York, NY: Norton.

       Borjas, George J. 2017. “The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: A Reappraisal,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 70: 1077-1110.

       Borjas, George J. 2019. “The Wage Impact of the Marielitos: The Role of Race,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, in press.

      Borjas, George J., and Kirk B. Doran. 2012. “The collapse of the Soviet Union and the
productivity of American mathematicians,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127: 1143-1203.

       Boubtane, Ekrame, Jean-Christophe Dumont, and Christophe Rault. 2016. “Immigration
and Economic Growth in the OECD Countries 1986-2006,” Oxford Economic Papers: 340-360.

       Card, David. 1990. “The impact of the Mariel boatlift on the Miami labor market,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43: 245-257.

      Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant inflows, native outflows, and the local labor market
impacts of higher immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics 19: 22-64.
                                             37



       Card, David. 2009. Immigration and inequality. American Economic Review 99: 1-21.

      Chiswick, Barry R. 1978. “The effect of Americanization on the earnings of foreign-
born men,” Journal of Political Economy 86: 897-921.

      Clemens, Michael A., and Jennifer Hunt. 2019. “The Labor Market Effects of Refugee
Waves: Reconciling Conflicting Results,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, in press.

       Dolado, Juan, Alessandra Goria, and Andrea Ichino, 1994. “Immigration, Human
Capital and Growth in the Host Country: Evidence from Pooled Country Data,” Journal of
Population Economics 7: 193-215.

       Doran, Kirk, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen. 2015. “The Effects of High-Skilled
Immigration Policy on Firms: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries,” NBER Working Paper No.
20668.

      Jaeger, David A., Joakim Ruist, and Jan Stuhler. 2018. “Shift-Share Instruments and
the Impact of Immigration,” NBER Working Paper No. 24285.

       Kane, Tim and Zach Rutledge. 2018. “Immigration and Economic Performance
Across Fifty U.S. States from 1980-2015,” Hoover Institution Working Paper No. 18112.

        Kerr, William R., and William F. Lincoln. 2010. “The supply side of innovation: H-1B
visa reforms and U.S. ethnic invention,” Journal of Labor Economics 28: 473-508.

      Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil. 1992. “A Contribution to the
Empirics of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 407-437.

      Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P., and Giovanni Peri. 2012. “Rethinking the effect of
immigration on wages,” Journal of the European Economic Association 10: 152-197.

        Peri, Giovanni. 2012. “The Effect of Immigration on Productivity: Evidence From U.S.
States.” Review of Economics and Statistics 94: 348–358.

      Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shi, and Chad Sparber. 2015. “STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and
Productivity in US Cities,” Journal of Labor Economics 33: S225-S255.

       Peri, Giovanni and Yasenov, Vasil. 2015. “The Labor Market Effects of a Refugee
Wave: Synthetic Control Method Meets the Mariel Boatlift,” NBER Working Paper No.
21801.

       Waldinger, Fabian. 2010. “Quality matters: The expulsion of professors and the
consequences for Ph.D. student outcomes in Nazi Germany,” Journal of Political Economy
118: 787-831.
                                            38


       Waldinger, Fabian. 2012. “Peer effects in science: Evidence from the dismissal of
scientists in Nazi Germany,” Review of Economic Studies 79: 838-861.
                                                                                                                 39


        Figure 1. Immigration and economic growth in decadal data, 1850-2017


    A. GDP
                                       0.6                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                        Regression coefficient = 0.008
                                                                                                       GDP growth rate                                                          (0.014)     7

                                       0.5                                                                                                                                                  6


                                                                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Net immigration rate (per 100 persons)
                                       0.4
                                                                                       Net migration rate                                                                                   4
        GDP growth rate




                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                       0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                            0


                                       0.1                                                                                                                                                  -1


                                                                                                                                                                                            -2


                                        0                                                                                                                                                   -3
                                                 1850-60 1860-70 1870-80 1880-90 1890-00 1900-10 1910-20 1920-30 1930-40 1940-50 1950-60 1960-70 1970-80 1980-90 1990-00 2000-10 2010-20
                                                                                                                 Decade




    B. Per-capita GDP
                                       0.45                                                                                                                                                 8
                                                                                                                                                      Regression coefficient = -0.010
                                                                                                                                                                               (0.012)      7
                                        0.4                                                          GDP growth rate

                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                       0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                            5




                                                                                                                                                                                                 Net immigration rate (per 100 persons)
                                        0.3
          Per-capita GDP growth rate




                                                                                       Net migration rate                                                                                   4

                                       0.25                                                                                                                                                 3


                                        0.2                                                                                                                                                 2

                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                       0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                            -1

                                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                            -2


                                             0                                                                                                                                              -3
                                                  1850-60 1860-70 1870-80 1880-90 1890-00 1900-10 1910-20 1920-30 1930-40 1940-50 1950-60 1960-70 1970-80 1980-90 1990-00 2000-10 2010-20
                                                                                                                 Decade




Notes: The historical GDP series was obtained from MeasuringWorth.com and the net migration data was
drawn from the decennial censuses. The data for 2010-2020 are extrapolations from the changes observed
between 2010 and 2017. The reported regression coefficient is the slope from an OLS regression of the
decadal GDP growth rate on the net migration rate (with standard errors in parentheses).
                              40

           FIGURE 2. The immigration surplus

Wage
                          S         S¢
   A




                          B
  w0

  w1                                C
                     D


                                               fL


       0              N            L=N+M            Employment
                                    41


Figure 3. The immigration surplus and human capital externalities


 Wage
     A¢
                               S          S¢



     A
                               B¢

                          D               C¢
    w1

                               B
    w0

                                                        FL




                                                   fL


         0                 N             L=N+M               Employment
                                                                                              42


                                             Figure 4. Mariel and the wage of high school dropouts

A. Non-Hispanic men aged 25-59                                                                 B. Non-Cuban workers aged 16-61


                  5.8                                                                                                5.5

                                                                Outside Miami

                  5.6
                                                                                                                     5.3
                                                                                                                                                               Outside Miami
Log weekly wage




                                                                                                   Log weekly wage
                  5.4

                                                                                                                     5.1

                  5.2


                                                        Miami                                                        4.9
                   5                                                                                                                                        Miami



                  4.8                                                                                                4.7
                        1972   1974   1976   1978   1980 1982     1984   1986   1988   1990                                1972   1974   1976   1978   1980 1982    1984   1986   1988   1990
                                                        Year                                                                                               Year




Notes: Adapted from Borjas (2017). The wage data represent a 3-year moving average and the shaded area is
the 95 percent confidence interval.
                                                                                43


                                                Figure 5. Scatter relating wages and immigrant share
                                                    across skill groups and over time, 1960-2010


                                      0.20


                                      0.15


                                      0.10


                                      0.05
          Change in log weekly wage




                                      0.00


                                      -0.05


                                      -0.10


                                      -0.15


                                      -0.20
                                              -0.2   -0.15   -0.1   -0.05      0        0.05      0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25

                                                                            Change in immigrant share




Source: Borjas (2014), p. 95. Each point in the scatter diagram gives the decadal wage change and the decadal
change in the immigrant share for native working men with a particular level of education and labor market
experience.
                                                                                                       44


                 Figure 6. Economic assimilation of immigrants, 1970-2010

A. Relative wage profiles

                                                                    0



                                                          -0.05



                                                                  -0.1
                  Log wage relative to natives




                                                                                                                                          1975-79 cohort
                                                          -0.15



                                                                  -0.2


                                                                                      1995-99 cohort
                                                          -0.25

                                                                                                                1985-89 cohort

                                                                  -0.3



                                                          -0.35
                                                                         0   5           10                15                  20             25           30

                                                                                                       Years since migration




B. English proficiency profiles

                                                                   0.5


                                                                  0.48
                                                                                                                       1975-79 cohort

                                                                  0.46


                                                                  0.44
                            Fraction speaking English very well




                                                                  0.42


                                                                   0.4

                                                                                                                         1985-89 cohort
                                                                  0.38
                                                                                 1995-99 cohort

                                                                  0.36


                                                                  0.34


                                                                  0.32


                                                                   0.3
                                                                         0   5           10                15                  20             25           30
                                                                                                       Years since migration




Notes: Blau and Mackie (2016), Table 3-12, p. 110, and Figure 3-16, p. 115.
                                                                                                         45


                                                                       Figure 7. Economic assimilation and education

                                            80
                                                                                                                        Syria
 Percent wage improvement in first decade




                                            60                                                                                                                France
                                                                                                                                         Indonesia

                                                                                                                                    Bulgaria
                                            40
                                                                                                                                                     Australia
                                                                                                                                         Turkey
                                                                                       Costa Rica                     Morocco                        China
                                                                                                                                 Italy Russia Canada Germany
                                                                                                                           Sri Lanka
                                            20                                                                Ghana                    Pakistan South Africa
                                                                                                                                   Ireland
                                                                                   Nicaragua               Ethiopia Czechoslovakia                             India
                                                                                                    Yugoslavia                           Iran       U.K.
                                                                                                               Peru            Romania        Egypt
                                                                  El Salvador                                                                         Taiwan
                                             0                                                                                         Kenya
                                                                                                       Iraq Jamaica Brazil Poland                              Netherlands
                                                      Guatemala                        Ecuador                                 Venezuela    Korea        Hong Kong
                                                                                   Vietnam                     Cuba Albania
                                                                    Honduras Mexico                    Haiti                                             Thailand
                                                                                Dominican Rep.                        Argentina Bangladesh
                                            -20                                                                                                       Japan
                                                                                                                            Chile
                                                                                                        Guyana                        Israel
                                                                                     Somalia

                                            -40
                                                  6                     8              10                     12                    14                       16              18
                                                                                      Years of education at time of arrival



Source: Borjas (2016), p. 101.
                                                                                 46


                                              Figure 8. Trends in welfare participation rates, 1994-2018

                                   A. Households                                                                     B. Persons
                                   40                                                                                30

                                   35
                                                                                                                     25
                                   30
                                                      Immigrants
    Percent receiving assistance




                                                                                      Percent receiving assistance
                                                                                                                     20
                                   25                                                                                               Immigrants

                                   20                                                                                15   Natives

                                   15
                                                                                                                     10
                                            Natives
                                   10
                                                                                                                      5
                                    5

                                    0                                                                                 0
                                     1990         2000             2010   2020                                         1990           2000          2010   2020
                                                         Year                                                                                Year



Source: Author’s calculations from the Current Population Surveys, Annual Social and Economic Supplement.
Welfare participation is defined in terms of use of cash benefits, food stamps, or Medicaid.

.
                                                      47


                   Table 1. Immigration and GSP across states, 1960-2017

                                                           Log GSP                  Log per-capita GSP
 Characteristics of workforce                        (1)             (2)             (1)          (2)
 A. OLS
    Immigrant share                                0.032            0.031           -0.002          -0.000
                                                  (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.005)         (0.003)
    Log years of schooling                           ---           -0.702             ---            1.358
                                                                  (0.745)                          (0.302)
    Percent prime age                                ---           -0.045             ---            1.113
                                                                  (1.317)                          (0.743)

 B. IV
    Immigrant share                                0.027            0.019           -0.012          -0.007
                                                  (0.011)         (0.013)          (0.005)         (0.005)
    Log years of schooling                           ---           -1.497             ---            0.920
                                                                  (1.042)                          (0.526)
    Percent prime age                                ---            0.299             ---            1.091
                                                                  (1.128)                          (0.715)

Notes: Standard errors reported in parentheses and clustered at the state level. All regressions include state
and year fixed effects. The pre-2000 GSP data was obtained from usgovernmentspending.com, and the post-
1997 data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The immigrant share was calculated using data from the
1960-2000 decennial censuses and the 2010 and 2017 American Community Surveys. The mean schooling
and prime-age variables are calculated in the sample of native workers. The IV regressions use the 1960
census to construct an instrument based on the geographic settlement of immigrants at that time (within
each national origin group); see text for additional details. The OLS regressions have 350 observations, and
the IV regressions have 300 observations.
                                                     48


                      Table 2. The short-run immigration surplus, 2017
                                                              In billions of dollars
             Immigration surplus                                        56.4

                Loss to native workers                                 566.9

                Gain to native firms                                   623.3

             Total increase in GDP                                  2,322.3

             Payments to immigrants                                 2,265.9


Source: Updated from Borjas (1995). The calculation assume that labor’s share of income is 0.7 and that the
immigrant share of the workforce is 16.6 percent. The value of GDP in 2017 was $19.5 trillion.
                                                      49


                             Table 3. Estimates of the wage elasticity

 Study                                Elasticity        Native sample
 Llull (2015)                            -1.7           Men

 Altonji and Card (1991)                 -1.7           Dropouts, black men
                                         -1.0           Dropouts

 Borjas (2016b)                          -1.4           Dropouts, non-Hispanic men
                                         -0.5           Dropouts, non-Hispanic men

 Monras (2015)                           -0.7           High school graduates or less, non-Hispanic

 Borjas (2003)                           -0.6           Men

 Cortes (2008)                           -0.6           Dropouts, Hispanic with poor English
                                         -0.3           Dropouts, Hispanic
                                         -0.1           Dropouts

 Card and Peri (2016)                    -0.2           Men
                                         -0.1           Men

 Card (2001)                             -0.1           Men
                                         +0.1           Women

 Peri and Yasenov (2015)                 +0.3           Dropouts, non-Cuban
Source: Blau and Mackie (2016), Table 5-2, p. 242. See the NAS report for detailed citations to the studies
included in the table.
                                                   50


                         Table 4. Simulated percent wage effects
                 of 1990-2010 immigrant supply shock on native workers

                                High School High School Some College   Post-    All
                                 Dropouts Graduates College Graduates College Natives
Percent supply shift               25.9        8.4      6.1   10.9     15.0   10.6

Basic simulation:
  Short run                         -6.3          -2.8          -2.3        -3.3        -4.1      -3.2
  Long run                          -3.1           0.4           0.9        -0.1        -0.9       0.0

Similar immigrants and
natives are complements:
   Short run                        -4.9          -2.3          -2.0        -2.7        -3.3      -2.6
   Long run                         -1.7           0.9           1.2         0.5        -0.1       0.6

And high school dropouts
and high school graduates
are perfect substitutes:
   Short run                        -2.1          -3.0          -2.0        -2.7        -3.3      -2.7
   Long run                          1.1           0.2           1.2         0.5        -0.1       0.5

Source: Blau and Mackie (2016), Table 5-1, pp. 236-237. The simulation results that assume statistically
similar immigrants and natives are complements assume an elasticity of substitution between the two groups
equal to 20.
                                                     51


                         Table 5. Long-run fiscal impact of immigration
                                            Future path of taxes and         Current path of taxes
                                             spending projected by          and spending continues
                                                    the CBO                       into future
      Marginal cost pricing for
      public goods
       All workers                                 +$58,000                          -$36,000
        High school dropouts                       -196,000                          -219,000
        High school graduates                       -47,000                          -112,000
        Some college                                 99,000                           -10,000
        Bachelor’s degree                           280,000                           123,000
        Graduate education                          547,000                           318,000

      Average cost pricing for
      public goods
       All workers                                  -$5,000                         -$119,000
        High school dropouts                       -259,000                          -301,000
        High school graduates                      -109,000                          -193,000
        Some college                                 34,000                           -96,000
        Bachelor’s degree                           216,000                            39,000
        Graduate education                          485,000                           236,000
Source: Blau and Mackie (2016), Table 8-12, pp. 430-433. All estimates are in 2013 dollars.
