NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECIAL DEALS WITH CHINESE CHARACTERISTICS
Chong-En Bai
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Zheng Michael Song
Working Paper 25839
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25839

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019

We thank Yasheng Huang, Ruixue Jia, Santiago Levy, Jonathan Parker, Maurice Obstfeld,
Raghuram Rajan, Meg Rithmire, Antoinette Schoar, Yingyi Qian, Yong Wang and Xiaodong Zhu
for helpful discussions. We are grateful to Xin Wang for his assistance with the State
Administration of Industry and Commerce data. Feng Lin, Kazuatsu Shimizu and Jihoon Sung
provided extraordinary research assistance. The data from the US Census has been reviewed by
the U.S. Census Bureau to ensure no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Chong-En Bai, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Special Deals with Chinese Characteristics
Chong-En Bai, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song
NBER Working Paper No. 25839
May 2019
JEL No. E02,F00,N00,P0
ABSTRACT
Chinese local governments wield their enormous political power and administrative capacity to
provide “special deals” for favored private firms. We argue that China’s extraordinary economic
growth comes from these special deals. Local political leaders do so because they derive personal
benefits, either political or monetary, from providing special deals. Competition between local
governments limits the predatory effects of special deals.

Chong-En Bai
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, China
baichn@sem.tsinghua.edu.cn
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu

Zheng Michael Song
Department of Economics
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong
zheng.michael.song@gmail.com

2

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

1.

Introduction

A standard explanation for the extraordinary economic growth in China over
the last four decades is that this growth was driven by the gradual improvement
of formal economic institutions. Advocates of this explanation point to reforms
such as the restoration of incentives to farmers and opening to foreign investment in the 1980s, the centralization of the banking system that started in the
mid-1990s, the restructuring of state-owned firms and clean-up of the bad debts
in the late 1990s and early 2000s, accession to the WTO in 2001 and the gradual
removal of internal migration barriers.1
While these policy reforms are undeniably important, this narrative sits uneasily with other pieces of evidence. Huang (2008) documents that many of the
pro-market reforms of the 1980s were later reversed. It is still the case that there
is no clear formal legal protection for private property in China, nor is there
an independent judiciary that enforces contracts and adjudicates commercial
disputes. Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), drawing on the account in McGregor
(2010), discuss the case of an entrepreneur who was arrested in 2003, allegedly
for competing with a state owned firm, and jailed for five years without a trail
or charges being filed. Formal rules and laws facing private business are still
opaque and onerous. Many foreign companies find their access to the Chinese
market blocked, for reasons that are not immediately transparent. The World
Bank’s Doing Business Indicators has for many years ranked China near the
bottom of the world in terms of the “ease of starting a business,” roughly at the
same level of countries such as Iraq and the Congo.
But how can economy with such poor institutions grow at the rate and for
as long as China has? The answer, we suggest, lies in the set of informal institutions that emerged in China in the early 1990s. The key feature of these
1

See Hsieh and Song (2015) on the quasi-privatization of the state owned firms, Song et al.
(2011) on resource reallocation between state owned and private firms, Brandt et al. (2017) on
China’s accession to the WTO, Lin (1992) on the agricultural reforms in the early 1980s, Kashyap
and Dobson (2006) for an assessment of the 1998 reforms of the banking sector and Tombe and
Zhu (forthcoming) on the reduction in internal migration costs.

SPECIAL DEALS

3

informal institutions is that special deals are readily available to private firms.
As suggested by Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) and the World Bank‘s Doing
Business indicators, formal institutions for private firms are poor in China. Chinese private firms succeed, in part, by obtaining a special deal from a local
political leader which enables them to either break the formal rules or obtain
favorable access to resources. The prevalence of special deals is common in
countries with poor formal institutions, and China is no different.2
The essence of a special deal is that they are only available to some firms,
and there is abundant evidence in many settings that the benefits of firms with
special deals are out-weighted by the costs borne by firms that are left out. In
the case of China however, there are three reasons why the benefits of special
deals may have exceeded the cost. First, Chinese local governments have enormous administrative capacity and use it to provide a “helping hand” to favored
firms. This “helping hand” ranges from exemptions to regulations, lobbying the
central government for the right to break rules, improving local infrastructure,
providing land (and to a lesser extent credit) at below market prices, and blocking entry of other firms that threaten the profits of the favored firms. Some of
this help – such as blocking competitors – lowers welfare, but much of it – such
as exemptions to inefficient regulations – is probably growth enhancing.
Second, local political leaders have high powered incentives to provide special deals. For example, the largest car company in China is a joint venture
between General Motors and the City of Shanghai. Dunne (2011) (pg. 11), a long
time observer of China’s automobile market, describes Shanghai’s support for
General Motors in the following way: “The commercial goal of selling more GM
Buicks and Chevrolets in China becomes a political and economic campaign to
enhance the power and might of the City of Shanghai. Think of it as Shanghai
Inc. with the Mayor as the Chairman and CEO.” Local leaders may support
private firms simply out of a sense of duty or because local leaders that show
2

Hallward-Driemeir and Pritchett (2015) document the widespread use of special deals in
countries with poor formal institutions.

4

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

competence in supporting private business are recognized and promoted. The
benefits can also be entirely monetary, ranging from tuition payments for their
child to (hidden) equity stakes in favored private firms held by family members. Because of the high powered incentives to support private firms, a large
and increasing number of Chinese firms benefit from the special deals. So the
Chinese system is best described not simply as regime of special deals but one
where there is almost “free entry” into special deals.
Third, a large number of local governments actively support private firms.
Moreover, they compete ferociously with other local governments to attract and
support their businesses. As described by McGregor (2010) (pg. 175-176), “What
is obvious for anyone who travels around the country is how much of the economy is driven by another factor altogether, a kind of Darwinian internal competition, that pits localities against each other....each Chinese province, city,
county, and village furiously compete to gulp down any economic advantage
they can lure their way.” Competition between local governments is crucial in
limiting the predatory power of protected firms. A local government can block
competitors of favored firms in its locality but has no ability to do so in other
cities. Competition also gives firms options when faced with incompetent or
predatory local governments.
In summary, as argued forcefully by Huang (2008), China has “extractive
economic institutions” – to borrow Acemoglu and Robinson (2012)’s pithy term
– where political elites extract rents from the rest of society. But our hypothesis
is that “extractive economic institutions” in China come with unique “Chinese
characteristics” that has made all the difference. First, local political elites extract rents by enabling favored firms to generate more profits in the first place.
They can do this because of the enormous administrative capacity of local governments, and the resulting growth of local businesses enables local elites to
extract even more rents. Second, local elites get personal benefits from these
rents, and thus the local administrative apparatus is laser-focused on supporting favored firms. Third, thousands of local governments compete ferociously

SPECIAL DEALS

5

to attract and support firms, thus limiting the ability of an individual local government to harm other businesses.
Understanding the Chinese system as a regime of special deals also clarifies the risks that China faces. First, special deals rely on the discretion of
local officials and their incentives to provide special deals. And here a central
fact is the anti-corruption campaign that has been in place since 2014. While
there is limited information on the crackdown, if local officials are motivated
by private economic benefits, the crackdown on corruption will dampen their
incentive to use their authority to grease the wheel for private firms. If special
deals as practiced in China has been growth enhancing – as we suggest it has
– the crackdown on corruption will result in lower growth. Second, special
deals are at the root of the tension between China and its trading partners.
Companies based in countries that do not have access to special deals find
themselves disadvantaged when they compete with Chinese companies that
do. Foreign companies in the Chinese market either have to make their own
special deal or, as is the case with a Chinese firm that does not have a special
deal, find that their intellectual property and contracts are not well respected.
An important and still unresolved question is how the world trading system
can accommodate countries based on rules as well as those based on access
to special deals.
Our narrative of special deals with Chinese characteristics is closely related
to Huang (2008)’s account of “Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics” and Xu
(2011)’s description of China as “Regionally Decentralized Authoritarianism.”
Huang (2008) documents the emergence of special deals in China in the early
1990s and argues that such deals are harmful to economic growth. Xu (2011)
argues that powerful local governments are behind the growth of private firms,
but is silent on the key fact that local support for private firms almost always
takes the form of special deals. Our hypothesis is that it is precisely the combination of special deals and powerful local governments that underpinned China’s
economic success over the last 30 or so years and, at the same time, has created

6

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

risks for the future.
The paper proceeds as follows. We first describe how special deals in China
work. We then lay out a model of special deals to examine how the “Chinese
characteristics” – high administrative capacity, ability to obtain private benefits,
and local competition – determine the magnitude of special deals and their
effect on economic growth. The next section uses data from multiple sources
– the Chinese Annual Survey of Industrial Firms, the Economic Censuses, firm
registries from the State Administration of Industry and Commerce, micro-data
on land sales, and a survey of politically connected firms – to provide suggestive
evidence on the nature of special deals, that firms grow when they have access
to special deals, and that local governments support their favored local firms.
The last section discusses the risks inherent in an economic institution based
on access to special deals.

2.

How do Special Deals Work in China?

We begin by describing how a specific local government supports private business. We visited a city in Southern China in 2013 where we had extensive discussions with local officials and private businesses.3 It was abundantly clear
that the central focus of the local government was to attract and support private
businesses. There were seven Vice-Mayors in the city and most of their time
was spent prospecting for new businesses to set up in the city and solving the
problems for a subset of local private firms already in the city. We estimate
that each Vice-Mayor was the point person for about 30 private firms. The
Vice Mayors spent most of their time on, even if their official portfolio had
nothing to do with business development. Figure 1 replicates a document the
city’s Vice-Mayor who oversees local department of Education and Civil Affairs
handed to us, as he proudly explained how the document describes his main
job. The city’s Department of Education and Civil Affairs is in charge of local
3

We agreed to not identify the city to have frank discussions.

SPECIAL DEALS

7

Figure 1: Work Program of a Vice-Mayor of Education

Note: The flow-chart in Chinese was given to us by the Vice-Mayor of Education and
Civil Affairs of a Chinese city. The translation in the right column is ours.

schools, but what the Vice-Mayor of Education actually does is “actively look for
quality prospects” and arrange special deals for these businesses. We witnessed
a monthly meeting organized by the Party-Secretary and Mayor with the seven
Vice-Mayors to coordinate their activities supporting private business. We estimate that about 200 private businesses in this city, most of them the city’s largest
employers, have “special deals” negotiated by the Vice-Mayors, Mayor or even
the local Communist Party Secretary.
What we witnessed in this city is evident to anyone who has done business in
China, that a central priority of Chinese local governments is to attract and support private businesses. We illustrate the consequences by looking at how local
governments affected the implementation of China’s formal industrial policy in
the last two decades. In the late 1990s, the central government designated 9
“strategic and pillar” industries that were restricted to a handful of state-owned

8

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

firms.4 In 2015, the central government made explicit an additional list – the so
called “negative list” – of 12 industries where foreign firms were prohibited.5 Of
the 12 “negative list” industries, 7 were also on the list of “strategic and pillar”
industries so a total of 14 industries were off limits for private and/or foreign
firms.
The goal of these policies was to create powerful state owned firms in these
sectors by restricting entry. However, despite the official rules that restricted
entry by private firms, new private firms established between 1998 and 2007
accounted for 62% of all firms in the “strategic” and “negative list” sectors in
2007. This number is only slightly lower than the share of new private firms in
2007 – 67% – in industries where there were no restrictions on private entry.6
The reason private firms were able to enter the strategic industries, despite
the official rules that their presence was illegal, was because local governments
helped certain private firms circumvent the formal rules. We illustrate how this
happened with case studies of two “strategic” industries – the aluminum and
automobile industries.
We begin with the aluminum market in China. In the early 2000s, this market was dominated by the China Aluminum Corporation (Chinalco). Chinalco
is one of the hundred or so state owned companies directly controlled by the
Chinese central government and had a 98% share of the aluminum market in
China in the early 2000s. Chinalco had two main assets. First, the Central
government passed a law that gave the company exclusive rights to purchase all
bauxite deposits in China when the company became a publicly listed company
in 2001. Second, no other company was legally allowed to produce aluminum.
Yet, by 2008, the market share of Chinalco dropped to less than 50 percent,
due to the entry of large private firms in the aluminum market. One of these
4

See http://www.gov.cn/jrzg/2006-12/18/content 472256.htm.
See “Notice of the General Office of the State Council on Printing and Distributing the
Special Management Measures for the Market Entry of Foreign Investment in Pilot Free Trade
Zones,” State Council, 2015
6
We calculate these two numbers from the micro-data of the Annual Survey of Industrial
Production described later in the paper.
5

SPECIAL DEALS

9

companies is the East Hope (Sanmenxia) Aluminum Company, a subsidiary of
the East Hope Group. The East Hope Group was created in 1995 in Sichuan as
one of the four companies by the breakup of the Hope Group. At the time, the
East Hope Group’s main business was as a processor and distributor of animal
feed.
The East Hope Group decided to expand into aluminum (and heavy metals
more generally) in the early 2000s. McGregor (2010) tells the story of how East
Hope viewed that Chinalco’s Achilles heel was that Chinalco’s exclusive right
to purchase Chinese bauxite was granted by the Chinese central government
and not with the local governments with the bauxite mines. East Hope Group
was able to make a deal with the local government of Sanmenxia, a small city
in western Henan Province with large deposits of bauxite, to purchase bauxite.
Chinalco fought the East Hope Group but the local government of Sanmenxia
had enough political clout to make the deal stick. With the support of the local
government of Sanmenxia, the East Hope Group started to produce aluminum
in 2005. Many other private companies in Henan followed a similar path and
had taken away half of Chinalco’s market share by 2008. When asked about the
key to his success in the aluminum industry, East Hope’s owner said: ”Forgive
me for being frank, but local officials, even corrupt ones, need to have political
achievements.”7
Turning to the automobile industry, this was also an industry dominated
by state owned firms in the early 2000s, and with similar restrictions on entry by private firms. In the mid 2000s, the largest car producers in China was
Shanghai-GM, a joint venture between GM and the Shanghai Automobile Industrial Company (SAIC). SAIC is a publicly traded firm with a majority stake
held by the Shanghai local government. SAIC also operates a joint-venture with
Volkswagen (Shanghai-Volkswagen) as well as a stand-alone car company. GM’s
strategy in China was to use the political power of its partner SAIC to obtain
exclusive rights to sell “large” sedans (with engines larger than 2500cc), and the
7

McGregor (2010) pg. 226

10

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

local government of Shanghai worked hard to protect GM’s monopoly power.
As Dunne (2011) (pg. 15) put it, ”car-building Chinese cities act almost like
sovereign countries, building a fortress around their home markets, while working very hard to export their cars to other Chinese cities,” and Shanghai was no
exception to this behavior.
However, GM’s strategy of exploiting its monopoly power ran into resistance.
The third car it wanted to sell in China was a replica of small car made by GM’s
Korean subsidiary, the Daewoo Matiz. Another Chinese company, Chery, based
on the small city of Wuhu, started to sell exactly the same car a full 6 months
before GM was ready to sell the rebranded Daewoo Matiz. Chery had managed
to get hold of the blueprints of the Daewoo Matiz and beat GM-Shanghai to the
market. As a local state owned firm controlled by Wuhu government, Chery was
started in 1996 by the then Wuhu Vice Mayor Zhan Xialai and an engineer Yin
Tongyao from FAW in northern China, another large state owned firm directly
controlled by the central government. Dunne (2011) (pg. 129) tells the story of
the proposed division of labor between Mr. Zhan and Mr. Yin. The Vice Mayor
reportedly told the Mr. Yin: “You let me take care of the licenses; you just focus
on getting some cars built here.” With the political support of the Wuhu local
government, Chery obtained the land, capital, and infrastructure it needed. But
getting access to the license from central government to make cars took longer
and was less straightforward. Initially the Vice Mayor was only able to get a
license to make car engines for Chery. A car engine permit was readily available
because car engines was not one of the “strategic” sectors. Chery then used this
license to buy a shuttered Ford engine factory in the UK and reassembled the
engine assembly line in Wuhu. The Vice Mayor then lobbied the Central Government for a license to make cars, which the Central Government agreed to but
only under the condition that the cars were only to be sold in Wuhu. According
to the Vice-Mayor his next step was to enlist the support of his political patron
in the Central Government, and they decided to pressure Shanghai Automobile
(GM’s partner in Shanghai) to take a 20 percent equity stake in Chery. SAIC

SPECIAL DEALS

11

resisted the move, but succumbed to the political pressure from Wuhu’s Vice
Mayor’s political patron. So in 2000 SAIC took a 20 percent equity share in
Chery, which the Vice Mayor, who was then promoted to the Party Secretary
and Mayer of Wuhu, used to lobby the central government for the license to sell
cars throughout China. This time they were successful, and one of the initial
products of Chery was the replica of GM’s Korean car.
Despite Chery’s license to sell cars throughout China however, it has found
it very difficult to sell in the Shanghai market and in other Chinese cities where
there is a local car company. In 2007, about one third of Chery’s sales were outside of China, where presumably it does not have to compete with companies
that have special deals with the local government.8 GM-Shanghai is formally
registered as a foreign firm in China and was the largest car manufacturer in
China. It has been successful financially primarily because it has used the political power of the Shanghai local government to protect its local market. Chery’s
local market – the city of Wuhu – is simply too small for a similar strategy to be
viable, and thus Chery’s success was largely built on its sales outside of China.
Shanghai-GM, despite being the largest car producer in China, only served the
domestic Chinese market.
Finally, we return to the case of the entrepreneur discussed by Acemoglu and
Robinson (2012) who was jailed for five years for competing with a state owned
firm. The entrepreneur Dai Guofang had established a large steel company
called Jiangsu Tieben in Changzhou City in 2002. However, as was the case
with the aluminum and automobile industries, the steel industry was also one
of the “strategic” industries where entry by large private firms was forbidden.
Dai Guofang had gotten around this restriction by “breaking up” Jiangsu Tieben
into 22 different companies, each of which fell below the official size threshold,
and obtained a separate license for each of the 22 companies. Jiangsu Tieben
was shuttered in 2003 on the orders of the central government and Mr. Dai was
8

Chery accounted for 5% of total domestic sales of cars and 20% of Chinese exports of
passenger cars in 2007.

12

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

arrested and stayed in jail for 4 years without sentence. Acemoglu and Robinson
(2012) use this episode to illustrate the effect of Chinese extractive institutions,
but there is an interesting epilogue to the story. After Mr. Dai was released from
prison in 2008 he created the Jiangsu Delong Nickel Company, this time with
the support of a different local government in Jiangsu.9 Mr. Dai’s new company
is currently (in 2019) China’s largest producer of nickel-iron alloys.10
We take away the following points. First, formal institutions for growth are
poor in China. For example, there was an effort by the central government
to protect favored firms in the aluminum and automobile industries. Second,
support of local governments, such as the one in Southern China we visited, are
crucial to the success of the East Hope Group and Chery. Support of the local
government was critical for both companies to circumvent the rules imposed
by the Central Government to protect the incumbent firms (Chinalco in the
aluminum industry and Shanghai-GM in the car industry). Third, the story
of Chery illustrates how competition between local governments limited the
ability of GM-Shanghai to exploit its monopoly power. And the story of Mr.
Dai illustrates the importance of competition in giving options to entrepreneurs
whose deals fall through in other cities. Fourth, the allusion to corrupt local
officials by East Hope’s CEO hints that private benefits may be important in
providing local officials with an incentive to support local firms.

3.

A Model of Special Deals

This section sketches a model of “special deals” in an environment with “bad”
formal institutions. The key idea is that a subset of firms benefit from special
deals that other firms do not have access to. We will examine the determinants
of the benefits that favored firms obtain, how many firms get access to deals,
9

Jiangsu Delong is located in Yangcheng City.
See http://www.dlnis.com/AboutUs/Profile.asp, accessed on January 29, 2019.
10
Jiangsu Delong also operates several nickel-iron alloy plants in Indonesia.

13

SPECIAL DEALS

and the effect of special deals on the real wage.
Preferences are given by
Z

1

U=

σ−1
σ

Cz

σ
 σ−1

dz

.

0

where z ∈ [0, 1] indexes the product. There are two potential technologies for
each product given by (1 − δ)eA(1−z) (“A” technology) and (1 − δ)eBz (“B” technology) where 0 < δ < 1 represents the TFP loss from “bad” institutions. We view
δ as a reduced form representation of the productivity loss due to the thicket of
official rules and regulations behind China’s poor ranking in the World Bank’s
Doing Business Indicators. Output is the product of the chosen technology and
labor.11 Given preferences and the production function, the profit maximizing
price is the standard markup over marginal cost.
Consider first a benchmark where the chosen technology is the product of
1 − δ and max{eA(1−z) , eBz }. Define z̃ as the cutoff where the A technology is
chosen for z < z̃ and B is chosen for z > z̃. This cutoff is given by:
z̃ =

A
.
A+B

After imposing profit maximization and labor market clearing, the real wage ω
is then:
σ−1
ω=
(1 − δ)
σ

Z

z̃

e

A(1−z)(σ−1)

Z

Bz(σ−1)

e

dz +

0

1
 σ−1

1

dz

.

z̃

where the cutoff product z̃ is defined above.12
Now consider a special deal regime where some firms get benefits and other
firms do not. The political leader provides two types of benefits to a subset of
the A firms. First, local political leaders in China help favored firms circumvent
11

The chosen technology for product z is either (1 − δ)eA(1−z) or (1 − δ)eBz .
Many readers will recognize the model as Dornbusch et al. (1977) with free labor mobility
between two countries.
12

14

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

burdensome rules. These can take the form of firm specific exemptions to official rules and the implicit sanctioning of violations of regulations (such as the
East Hope Group’s foray into the aluminum industry). We model this benefit as
an increase in firm TFP from (1 − δ)eA(1−z) to (1 − δ + γ)eA(1−z) where 0 < γ < δ.
We interpret γ as capturing the ability of the local government to alleviate the
effect of poor overall institutions for specific firms. For example, γ would be low
in places where the local bureaucracy is incompetent or where the local political
leader has other priorities.
A second benefit is that potential competitors of the favored firms are blocked
from the market. Chery found it very difficult to sell in Shanghai because the
three dominant local automobile manufacturers are supported by the City of
Shanghai.13 The only taxis in Beijing are the Hyundai Elantra made by Hyundai’s
joint venture with the City of Beijing. The only taxis in Shanghai are the Volkswagen Santana made by Shanghai-Volkswagen. There is no formal law or regulation that Beijing taxi companies have to use Hyundai cars or Shanghai cab
companies have to buy Volkswagen cars, but taxi companies fully understand
that the incentives of the local taxi regulator.
To capture this idea, suppose all A firms z ∈ [0, zc ] are favored by the political
leader (we will endogenize zc shortly). If zc < z̃, then TFP of all A firms z ∈ [0, zc ]
exceeds the TFP of the corresponding B firms. So blocking has no effect and as
long as γ > 0 the special deal regime raises the real wage. However, if zc > z̃,
then consumers get access to worse technologies for products z ∈ [z̃, zc ]. In this
case, the effect of special deals on the real wage is ambiguous, as it depends on
the benefit of γ > 0 for firms z ∈ [0, zc ] relative to the loss from blocking better B
technologies for z ∈ [z̃, zc ].
A third institutional feature of special deals in China is that they are provided
by local governments that compete ferociously with each other. Suppose that
firms with the A technologies are in city A and firms with B technologies in
13

The three dominant local car companies in Shanghai are SAIC, Shanghai-GM, and
Shanghai-Volkswagen.

SPECIAL DEALS

15

city B. Further, assume that workers freely move between the two cities, which
implies that in equilibrium the real wage is the same in the two cites. There are
two effects of local competition. First, we now have two cities supporting local
firms instead of only one. So some B firms also get supported by their local
government. Second, a local government can only protect their firms in their
locality but has no power in the other locality. Going back to the example of the
automobile industry, GM was the favored firm in Shanghai but it did not have
any preferences in Wuhu (or in any Chinese city outside of Shanghai).
To isolate this third effect, suppose the political leader in A supports local
firms, but the one in B does nothing to support her local firms (we can easily
relax this assumption). We assume zc > z̃ and that workers can freely move
between the two cities. The key difference is that the political boss in A can
only block competitors in her jurisdiction, but has no power in B. These two
assumptions limit the loss due to blocking. Intuitively, when city A blocks better
technologies produced in city B, this raises the cost of living in city A and thus
lowers the real wage in city A relative to B (for a given relative nominal wage).
Workers then reallocate from A to B and the share of products made by A falls
until the real wage is equalized in the two cities.
Why would a political leader choose to provide special deals to some firms
instead of reducing δ which benefits all firms. One answer is that the political
leader can extract rents from providing special deals whereas she has limited
ability to do so if all firms are treated equally. To capture this idea, we assume
firms with special preferences pay a share β σ−1 of their profits to the political
leader (and non-favored firms do not pay). This assumption implies that, all
else equal, the political leader prefers to help more profitable (and presumably
larger) firms.
If the political leader can get a share of the firm’s profits if she provides the
firm with a special deal, why doesn’t the local leader make the deal available to
all firms? One answer is the nature of a special deal regime is that the deals have
to be individually negotiated. Each firm that has a special deal comes with a

16

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

cost to the political leader, either in the form of political capital or in the time
her bureaucracy spends. This is one way to view the fact that the Vice-Mayors in
the city we described work long hours negotiating deals and solving problems
for the favored firms.
We capture this last idea by assuming each special deal entails a fixed cost
 F A σ−1
. The political leader will therefore provide favors to firms
given by e w
when her return exceeds the fixed cost. Profits of the marginal firm zc is pro

A(1−zc ) σ−1
portional to (1−δ+γ)e
. After equating the political leader’s return from
w
helping the marginal firm to the fixed cost, we get the following expression for
zc :
zc =

ln [β (1 − δ + γ)]
.
FA

So the political leader provides deals to the most productive firms z ∈ [0, zc ].
The number of firms with special deals zc is larger when the political leader gets
more private benefits (β is larger), the local government has more capacity (γ is
larger) and can thus provide more assistance, and when the fixed cost F is low.
The key variables that determine the number of firms with access to special
deals and their effect on the real wage are β (“private benefits”), γ (“state capacity”), and local competition. Figure 2 illustrates the effect on the real wage
for different values of these parameters. It is useful to distinguish the following
cases:
• No Private Benefits: This is simply the baseline economy. Here the degree
of local competition and state capacity does not matter. Even when the
local government has high capacity, this is not used because the political
leader has no incentive to help.
• Low Capacity and Large Private Benefits: The top panel in Figure 2 illustrates the effect of special deals on the real wage when γ = 0 for different
values of β. Here the only effect of more private benefits (higher β) is to
increase the number of firms that are protected from competitors. This

SPECIAL DEALS

Figure 2: Effect of Special Deals on the Real Wage
Low State Capacity (γ=0)

High State Capacity (γ = 0.15)

Note: Figures present the real wage when firms with “A” technology have access
to special deals relative to the benchmark where β = 0 and γ = 0. “One-city”
assumes “A” firms with special deals blocks competitors in both city A and B; “Two
cities” assumes “A” firms with special deals only blocks competitors in city A. β is the
political leader’s share of firm profits. γ is the increase in TFP in the “favored” firms.
The bottom panel assumes γ = 0.15.

17

18

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

effect is attenuated with local competition (this is the case labeled “two
cities”) because workers move from city A to B in response to higher costs
in A. Still, the effect of special deals on the real wage is either nothing (for
low levels of β) or negative (for high levels of β).
• High Capacity and Large Private Benefits: The bottom panel of Figure 2
presents the case when local governments also alleviate bad institutions
for favored firms.14 Favored firms get two benefits: a boost in TFP and
protection from competitors. Here, starting from low levels of β, more
private benefits increases the real wage. Intuitively for low levels of private
benefits, an increase in β increases the number of favored firms. These
firms benefit from higher TFP, and these are already the firms with the best
technology so there is no negative effect from blocking better competitors. Beyond the “optimal” level of private benefits (in the figure around
β = 0.35), further increases in β lowers the real wage. The negative effect
of blocking more competitors outweighs the TFP boost of the marginal
favored firms. And here, as in the “low capacity” case, the negative effect
is attenuated with competition between cities.
The model is highly stylized and can be extended in many directions. Here
we mention three. First, we assume perfect allocation of labor within a city. We
can extend the model to allow for other resources such as land and capital, and
a benefit the local leader can provide is access to local resources. The aggregate
effect depends on whether preferential access to resources improve or worsen
the allocation of resources. In the next section we will examine the extent to
which favored firms also obtained preferential access to land and capital.
Second, another benefit of local competition is that it gives options to firms
that find themselves in cities where the local leader is incompetent or more
generally where an entrepreneur does not get the support she needs. The story
of Dai Guofeng, who after trying several times was able to find support for his
14

Figure 2 assumes γ = 0.15.

SPECIAL DEALS

19

heavy metals company in a different city, illustrates this. It would be easy to
extend the model to allow firms to move between cities and locate in the city
that gives them the best deal.15
Third, the only cost of private benefits of political leaders in the model is
the potential loss of better products.16 The model can be extended to consider
other losses. For example, the model is static, but if firms also make a dynamic
investment decision, their incentive to invest is lower because a share of their
profits goes to the political leader. On the other hand, if the political leader
indirectly owns some of the equity (and we will provide some evidence later in
the paper that this might be the case), then she has the incentive to maximize
the present discounted value of the flow of profits of the firm.

4.

Growth with Chinese Characteristics

The period between the early 1990s and 2008 before the onset of the global
financial crisis was the highest growth episode in recent Chinese history, with
GDP growth averaging 11% per year. We suggest that this growth was driven
by the emergence of a special deal regime best characterized as a “high capacity and private benefits” regime. We present four types of evidence consistent
with this interpretation. First, we present aggregate evidence of the growing
importance of large firms, particularly of large conglomerates. Second, we show
employment growth rates are higher in cities where returns to special deals are
higher. Third, we present direct evidence of political ties and preferences of
successful firms. Fourth, we provide evidence that localities block better firms
from selling into their markets.

15

We have also assumed that a firm who gets a special deal wants the special deal. We can
also relax this assumption.
16
It also redistributes profits from the firm’s owner to the politician, but this has no effect on
the real wage.

20

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Table 1: Sales Share of Top 1% Firms

Above-Scale Industrial Firms

All Industrial Firms

1998

25.2%

1995

31.6%

2002

28.9%

2004

37.5%

2007

33.3%

2008

45.1%

Source: Above-Scale Industrial Firms from the Anuual Survey
of Industrial Firms (ASIF). All Industrial Firms from Economic
Census.

4.1.

Growth of Large Firms and Conglomerates

The model described earlier assumes the incentive to provide special deals is
that the local leader gets a share of the firm’s profits. This assumption implies
that all else equal, political leaders prefer to provide deals to larger firms. Furthermore, if part of the special deal is that these firms are exempt from inefficient formal rules, then large firms will gain relative to the other firms as a
consequence of the availability of special deals.
We begin by showing the change in the importance of large firms in China.
Table 1 shows the output share of firms in the top 1% firms in the employment
size distribution. The left panel presents this information for above-scale firms
in the industrial sector in 1998, 2002, and 2007. The right panel shows this
statistic for all industrial firms in 1995, 2004, and 2008.17 The sales share of the
top 1% above-scale industrial firms increased from 25% to 33% between 1998
and 2007. For all industrial firms, the sales share of the top 1% firms increased
from 31% to 45% between 1995 and 2008.
17

The data from the industrial sector is the micro-data of the Chinese Survey of Industrial
Firms. This data is a census of above-scale industrial firms. The sales threshold was 5 million
RMB and changed to 20 million RMB in 2011. We do not use the micro-data from the Survey of
Industrial Firms after 2007 because of the change in the sampling frame. (We do not have the
micro-data for 2008-2010). The data for all industrial firms is from the micro-data of the 1995,
2004, and 2008 Economic Censuses.

SPECIAL DEALS

21

The largest firms in the Industrial Survey and Economic Census do not fully
capture the extent to which large firms increasingly dominate the Chinese economy. Take the East Hope Group. East Hope is one of the four companies created
in 1995 by the breakup of the Hope Group. The original business of the East
Hope Group is animal feed processing and distribution, but East Hope is now
one of the largest aluminum producers in China. By 2015, there were a total of
213 firms in the East Hope Group, one of which is the East Hope (Sanmenxia)
Aluminum Company. The majority of these firms are in the animal feeds or
heavy metals industries.18 The Anbang Group is another example. The original
company – Anbang Insurance – was founded in 2004. By 2015 Anbang Insurance had controlling stakes in 94 companies.
The largest subsidiaries of the East Hope and Anbang Groups are almost
always joint ventures with other companies. The joint ventures of the East Hope
Group have three distinctive features. First, they are all located outside of Sichuan
Province, the home province of the East Hope Group. Second, almost all are
joint ventures with state owned firms. Third, they are typically the first firm
the group established in the province and in a sector that is new to the group.
For example, East Hope’s initial companies in the coal, non-ferrous metals and
chemicals are joint ventures with state owned firms outside of Sichuan Province.
These facts suggest that East Hope uses joint ventures with state owned firms to
buy access to special deals. The average equity share of state owned firms in the
joint ventures with East Hope in the animal feeds sector is 28.6%. The equity
share of SOEs of the joint ventures in heavy metals is 53.2%. We interpret this
number as a rough estimate of the share of profits that East Hope has to give up
– β in the model – in exchange for special deals outside of its core locality and
business.
Anbang’s subsidiaries follow a similar pattern. For example, one of Anbang’s
18

A small number of firms in the East Hope Group are real estate and finance companies.
The numbers in this and the following paragraphs are based on the ownership records from the
State Administration of Industry and Commerce. We provide more details on this data later in
this section.

22

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

subsidiaries is the Chengdu Rural Commercial Bank. Anbang Insurance is the
controlling shareholder of this bank. The other shareholders of Chengdu Bank
are 10 local state owned firms (from Chengdu) and 11 holding companies. Chengdu
Bank itself owns 40 subsidiaries, all of them financial institutions located in
other cities in Sichuan Province and all of them jointly owned by other local
state owned firms and holding companies.
We use the firm registration records from China’s State Administration of
Industry and Commerce (SAIC) to document systematically the emergence of
conglomerates such as the East Hope and Anbang Groups. This data is a universe of all registered firms in China, and the data is unique in that it provides
information on the owners. The owners can be another firm, a holding shell,
or a private individual. Importantly, as long as the shell company is registered
in China, the SAIC data identifies the owners of the holding shells, and these
owners can be individuals or (as is frequently the case) other holding shells.19
But there is very limited economic information – the only information available
is the firm’s registered capital. Following Bai et al. (2019b), we identify conglomerates as groups of firms with common owners. Table 2 presents the average
number of firms in the largest Chinese conglomerates in 1995 and 2015. The
average number of firms of the largest 100 conglomerates increased from 500
to more than 15 thousand from 1995 to 2015. Among the 1000 largest conglomerates, the average number of firms rose from 60 to more than 3 thousand over
the same time period.
Table 3 shows that not only has the size of the largest conglomerates increased, but the ownership structure of the conglomerates has also changed.
The table shows that share of the subsidiaries (all firms outside of the original
core company of the conglomerate) of the conglomerate that are joint ventures
with other firms. Among the top 1000 conglomerates in 1995, about 30% of the
conglomerates subsidiaries were joint ventures. By 2015, the the share of joint19

We have no information on shell companies in the SAIC data that are registered outside of
China.

23

SPECIAL DEALS

Table 2: Average Number of Firms of Chinese Conglomerates

1995

2015

Top 100

509

15,322

Top 500

115

5,979

Top 1000

61

3,120

Source: Firm Registry of State Administration for Industry and Commerce.
Entries are average number of firms per conglomerate among the 100, 500,
and 1000 largest conglomerates in 1995 and 2015.

ventures was more than 80%.
The evidence indicates that the largest Chinese conglomerates have grown
by creating joint ventures with other companies. We interpret this pattern as
an increase in β or γ that makes possible the entry of these firms. East Hope
entered into joint ventures with state owned firms outside of Sichuan to “buy”
access to the political ties of these firms. Anbang entered into joint ventures
with state owned firms in Chengdu when it created the Chengdu Rural Commercial Bank, again presumably to obtain access to that market.
Ownership of the conglomerate’s core firm also becomes shared with other
parties. Let’s go back to the original company of the Anbang Group (Anbang
Insurance). The company was created in 2004 with eight investors, two of which
are state owned firms and six are holding shells.20 By 2015 the equity share of the
eight original investors had dropped to 19% and the new owners are a complex
web of holding companies.
Figure 3 illustrates the ownership structure of Anbang Insurance in 2015.
Anbang Insurance is the dark circle in the middle and the circles with other
20

The state owned firms are Shangai Automobile (15%) and Sinopec (7%). Shanghai
Automobile is owned by the city of Shanghai and GM’s joint venture partner discussed earlier.
Sinopec is one of the three centrally owned oil companies created by the breakup of the Ministry
of Petroleum.

24

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Table 3: Jointly-Owned Subsidiaries of Chinese Conglomerates

1995

2005

Top 100

39%

82%

Top 500

25%

85%

Top 1000

30%

81%

Source: Firm Registry of State Administration for Industry and Commerce.
Entries are the weighted percent of subsidiaries of the 100, 500, and 1000
largest conglomerates that are jointly owned with other companies. Weights
are the firm’s registered capital.

colors represent the owners. We further identify different types of owners by
the color – gray for holding shells, white for state-owned firms, and open circles
for individual owners. The circles immediately connected with the black circle
represent the immediate owners of Anbang Insurance. In 2015, Anbang Insurance had 39 owners, two of which are state owned firms (white circles) and 37 of
which are holding shells (gray circles). And every holding shell in turn is owned
by other holding shells, most of which in turn are owned by other holding shells,
and so on.
It is clear is that the current owners (the individuals represented by the open
circles in Figure 3) have worked really hard to hide their ownership of Anbang
behind a series of holding companies. This pattern suggests that Anbang’s original shareholders may have grown the company by sharing equity of its core
companies in exchange for favorable treatment. We would need to know the
price at which the original investors sold their equity stake to know for sure
whether this was the case, but what seems clear is that Anbang’s new owners
have gone to great lengths to hide their ownership of the company.

SPECIAL DEALS

25

Figure 3: Owners of Anbang Insurance, 2015

Note: Each circle represents a unique company or individual. Arrows denote ownership links. Black
circle is Anbang Insurance (the original company). Grey circles are holding shells. White circles are state
owned firms. Empty circles are individual persons. Subsidiaries of the Anbang Group are not included.
Data from State Administration of Industry and Commerce ownership records.

26

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

4.2.

Heterogeneity Across Cities in Impact of Special Deals

In the previous section, we showed that large private firms, particularly mixedownership conglomerates, increasingly dominate the Chinese economy. In the
model we laid out in the previous section, favored firms benefit from a proportional increase in their TFP, so the return to a special deal is increasing in
firm TFP. We now examine the cross-sectional implication of the same force.
Specifically, if high TFP firms benefit more from special deals, the effect of a city
providing special deals on aggregate TFP in the city will be larger in cities where
the right tail of the firm TFP distribution is thicker.
Figure 4 examines this hypothesis by showing the scatter-plot of the employment growth rate of a city (y-axis) on the initial employment share of private firms with more than 500 employees (x-axis). The data is from the Annual
Survey of Industrial Firms (ASIF), so it only covers above-scale industrial firms.
The employment growth rate of a city is from 1998 to 2007, and is a proxy for
aggregate TFP growth of the city.21 The employment share of large private firms
is from 1998, and is a proxy for the share of privately owned firms with high
TFP. As can be seen, the relationship is clear: cities with more high TFP firms
initially also grow faster over time. After controlling for the city’s initial level of
employment, province fixed effects, and distance to the nearest port, the OLS
regression of the city’s employment growth rate from 1998 to 2007 on the city’s
employment share of large private firms yields a precisely estimated coefficient
of .196 (s.e.=.029).

4.3.

Political Ties and Preferential Treatment

We now turn turn to more direct evidence of links of ties between political leaders and firms. We begin by using the micro-data of a survey of private firms that
21

The logic is that with labor mobility aggregate growth in a city shows up on the extensive
margin.

SPECIAL DEALS

27

Figure 4: Employment Growth and Initial Share of Large Private Firms

Note: Each circle represents city (size of circle represents the size of the city). The y-axis is the
annualized employment growth rate of the city from 1998 to 2007. The x-axis is the employment
share of private firms with more than 1000 workers in 1998. Red line denotes OLS regression line.
Data from micro-data of ASIF.

28

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

are members of the Chinese National Association of Industry and Commerce.22
The survey identifies whether the firm’s owner is a member of the local People’s
Congress or Political Consultative Committee (PC/PCC) so we use this information to measure the relationship between PC/PCC membership and firm
characteristics. About 30-40% of the firms in the survey are owned by PC/PCC
members, and this ratio is roughly constant over the years of the survey (1997
to 2012).23
What has changed over time is the advantage of firms owned by PC/PCC
members. The survey distinguishes between members of the PC/PCC at the
level of the provinces or above, prefectures, or counties or below. Table 4 shows
the sales of firms owned by PC/PCC members (at each level of government) relative to sales of firms whose owners are not in the PC/PCC. Two facts stand out.
First, not surprisingly, firms owned by PC/PCC members are larger. Second, the
sales gap has increased over time. For owners in county-level PC/PCC, the sales
gap increased by 1 log point between 1997 and 2012. And for owners in top-tier
Provincial-level PC/PCC, the sales gap increased by almost 3 log points over this
period.
Table 5 examines whether politically connected firms had better access to
capital.24 The table reports results from a regression of log bank loans on indicator variables for PC/PCC membership (at the three levels), log sales, and
indicator variables for industry. Controlling for industry and firm sales, firms
owned by PC/PCC members have better access to bank loans. But there is no
clear evidence that the preferential access increased between 2002 and 2012.
Figure 5 presents the evidence on capital productivity by firm size for a broader
sample of firms.25 The figure shows average capital productivity for the bal22

The members of this association are generally large and politically connected firms. For
example, average sales in 2008 in the survey are about 9 times larger than in the 2008 Economic
Census.
23
An average 24.4% of the firms in the survey are owned by members of county or below
PC/PCC, 12.6% by prefectural level PC/PCC, and 2.7% by provincial or above PC/PCC.
24
The survey only provides information on bank loans starting in 2002.
25
Firm capital productivity is scaled by the median value in the industry.

29

SPECIAL DEALS

Table 4: Firm Sales and PC/PCC Membership
1997

2006

2012

Provincial PC/PCC

1.25
(.22)

2.09
(.19)

4.18
(.27)

Prefectural PC/PCC

1.02
(.12)

1.63
(.10)

2.51
(.11)

County PCC/PCC

.70
(.09)

.99
(.07)

1.72
(.08)

N

1946

3836

4616

Note: PC/PCC refers to People’s Congress or Political Consultative Committee.
Entries are coefficients (and standard errors) of a regression of log sales on
indicator variables for whether the firm’s owner is a member of a Provincial or
above PC/PCC (row 1), Prefectural Level PC/PCC (row 2), or County Level or
below PC/PCC (row 3). Omitted firms are those whose owners are not PC/PCC
members. All regressions include indicator variables for two digit industries.

Table 5: Access to Bank Loans and PC/PCC Membership
2002

2006

2012

Provincial PC/PCC

1.62
(.31)

1.45
(.28)

1.59
(.40)

Prefectural PC/PCC

.77
(.14)

.86
(.14)

1.04
(.16)

County PCC/PCC

.71
(.11)

.62
(.11)

.63
(.12)

N

2602

3836

3566

Note: Entries are coefficients (and standard errors) of a regression of log bank
loans on indicator variables for whether the firm’s owner is a member of a
Provincial or above PC/PCC (row 1), Prefectural Level PC/PCC (row 2), or
County Level or below PC/PCC (row 3). Omitted firms are those whose owners
are not PC/PCC members. All regressions also include log sales and indicator
variables for two digit industries.

30

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

anced panel of privately owned firms in 1998-2007 (top panel) and 2007-2013
(bottom panel) in the Annual Survey of Industrial Production. The x-axis are
percentiles of the firm’s initial size (in 1998 and 2007), and the y-axis shows the
firm’s capital productivity in the beginning and end years of each panel. Two
points seem clear. First, in all time periods, capital productivity is decreasing
in firm size. And if capital productivity is proportional to the marginal product
of capital, then this suggests that, consistent with evidence shown in Table 5,
larger firms have preferential access to capital. Second, the advantage of large
firms does not seem to change in the 1997-2007 period (the two lines in the
top panel lie on top of each other). There is some evidence from the 2007-2013
period that the relative advantage of large firms is growing, but the magnitude
is quantitatively small.
In Bai et al. (2016), we suggest that the patterns in the 1998-2007 panel can
be explained as a consequence of the centralization of the financial system that
took place in 1998. This reform removed the control of local governments over
appointments to local branches of the state owned banks. As a consequence,
special deals provided by local governments did not include better access to
capital. After 2008 these controls were lifted, with the initial purpose of financing the 4 trillion yuan fiscal stimulus in 2009-2010, and local governments began
to have access to capital through the local financial vehicles. To the extent that
some of these funds ended up in the hands of large favored private firms, this
could explain the pattern seen in the 2008-2013 panel. But still, at least as of
2013, the effect is still quantitatively small.26
Local governments also provide land at below market costs to favored firms.
Using the power of eminent domain, local governments obtain land from farmers, urban residents and other channels, and resell the land to developers and
firms. This is the main mechanism via which land use has been transformed in
China in recent decades. We obtained transaction level records of these sales
26

See also Cong et al. (2018) and Huang et al. (2019) for evidence of capital misallocation after
2008.

SPECIAL DEALS

Figure 5: Return to Capital by Firm Size, 1998-2007 and 2007-2013
Y/K 1998 vs 2007

Y/K 2007 vs 2013

Note: Firm level data from Annual Survey of Industrial Firms. Top panel presents
log Y/K of balanced panel of firms in 1997 and 2007 in the two years. Bottom panel
shows log Y/K of balanced panel of firms in 2007 and 2013 in the initial and ending
years. X-axis is the size (measured by employment) percentile of the firm in 1998
(top panel) and 2007 (bottom panel).

31

32

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

from 2000 to 2014 from China’s Ministry of Land Resources. For each transaction, we have information on the size of the parcel (in hectares), geographic
location, sales price, and indicator variables for whether the land is to be used
for housing, commercial real estate, or industrial real estate.
The top panel in Figure 6 plots the allocation of this land between commercial, industrial, and residential use. Specifically, it shows the share of land
(in hectares) sold to three types of end users. Roughly 50-60% of new land
was dedicated for industrial use. The bottom panel of Figure 6 shows the log
price per hectare of land sold for industrial use and commercial use relative to
land destined for housing. Industrial land is sold at a substantial discount to
residential land. In 2014, for example, the price of industrial land was more
than 2 log points lower than that of residential land. In contrast, the price of
commercial land is roughly the same as that of residential land.
The obvious problem with interpreting Figure 6 as evidence that local governments subsidize favored firms with cheap land is that industrial land may be
very different from residential land. Residential land may be mostly located in
higher priced urban locations, while industrial land is concentrated in cheaper
more remote locations. Table 6 shows the price gap after we introduce a succession of controls for location. Column 1 replicates the mean gap in prices shown
in Figure 6. On average industrial land is -1.7 log points cheaper compared to
residential land. Column 2 shows that the price gap drops to 1.5 log points after
we introduce indicator variables for counties. So counties with cheaper land
allocate more land to industrial use, but within the same county, industrial land
is still cheaper than residential land. Column 3 keeps the indicator variables for
county and adds controls for the distance of the land from the county center.
There is little effect on the price gap. Finally, column 4 looks within narrowly
defined neighborhoods and compares the price of land destined for different
uses within the same neighborhood.27 There is little change in the implied
27

Neighborhoods are defined as square blocks of 9 squared kilometers. We also tried squared
blocks of 1 and 26 squared kilometers and the results are essentially identical.

SPECIAL DEALS

Figure 6: Allocation and Price of Land in China
Share of Land Sales (Hectares)

Log Price per Hectare (relative to residential land)

Source: Transaction level records from Ministry of Land Resources (N=979,206). Top
panel presents share (in hectares) of land sales by type of user. Bottom panel shows
average log price per hectare of commercial and industrial land (both relative to the
price of residential land).

33

34

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Table 6: Price of Industrial and Commercial Relative to Residential Land
1

2

3

4

Commercial Land

-0.37
(.00)

-0.25
(0.00)

-0.24
(0.00)

-0.20
(0.00)

Industrial land

-1.72
(0.00)

-1.51
(0.00)

-1.47
(0.00)

-1.46
(0.00)

No

Yes

Yes

No

Distance from County Center

No

No

Yes

No

Neighborhood

No

No

No

Yes

Controls:
County

Note: Unit of observation is a land sale by a local government from the transaction
level records of the Ministry of Land Resources (N=979,206). Entries are coefficients
(and standard errors) of a regression of log price per hectare of the sale on indicator
variables for commercial land and industrial land (omitted category is residential
land). All regressions include indicator variables for year.

subsidy that recipients of industrial land get.
The ultimate question is whether the subsidies in land prices to industrial
firms improve efficiency relative to the allocation before local governments started
to sell the land. Most of this land comes from farmers, so the question is whether
the land is now used more productively by industrial firms compared to its use
as farmland. We do not have the data to answer this question, but here we point
to evidence that the average productivity of the industrial sector is larger than
in the agricultural sector.

4.4.

Local Protection and Exports

We argue that special deals in China are provided by local governments, and
part of the deal is that competitors of the favored firms are blocked from the
local market. For example, Shanghai-GM is one of the favored car companies
in Shanghai and supposedly the Shanghai municipal government blocks non-

35

SPECIAL DEALS

local car companies (such as Chery) from the market. But if Chery produces
better cars it would out-compete Shanghai-GM in markets where Shanghai-GM
is not protected. For example, as the largest car manufacturer in China in 2007,
Shanghai-GM’s export was negligible. In contrast, while Chery only accounted
for 5% of domestic car sales, 20% of cars exported from China were produced
by Chery. The idea then is that local protection breaks the relationship between
productivity and local sales because some productive firms are blocked.
To examine how special deals affect the relationship between domestic sales
and export sales, we recast utility as
Z

1

σ−1
σ

Cz

U=

σ
α σ−1

dz

M 1−α

0

where M denotes imports of a homogeneous product made outside of China.
The utility of consumers in the foreign country is the same. We assume the
foreign country owns a limitless supply of the homogeneous good sold at a fixed
price and buys differentiated varieties from China (city A or B). The rest of the
model stays the same.
We can now consider the effect of special deals on exports. Revert back to
the case where city A supports firms z ∈ [0, zc ] where zc > z̃ and can only block
competitors in the local market. Figure 7 summarizes the products sold in each
market. Remember that productivity of A’s firms falls as z increases. Figure 7
(top panel) shows that city A’s most productive firms export to all markets (the
foreign market and city B), but the least productive firms z ∈ [z̃, zc ] only sell
in the local market where they are protected from competition. The bottom
panel in Figure 5 shows that this is not true in city B. Remember that B is less
productive as z increases. All firms in B export to the foreign market but only
the most productive firms z ∈ [zc , 1] sell to the other domestic market (city A).
The least productive firms in B sell in the foreign market but are blocked in the
domestic market in City A.

36

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Figure 7: Product Specialization in Two-City Model of Special Deals

City A

z

Exports to
World & B
}|

0

Non-Traded Buys from B
{ z
}|
{ z
}|
{
z̃

zc

1

City B

z
0

Buys from A
}|

Exports to Exports to
World
World & A
{ z
}|
{ z
}|
{
z̃

zc

1

The top panel in Figure 8 summarizes the prediction of the model on the
relationship between the exporting (to the foreign market) and the firm’s domestic sales. In the model, firms with the smallest domestic sales export. These
are the firms in B that find their access to other domestic markets blocked.
Moving up the size distribution, A’s firms z ∈ [z̃, zc ] are less productive than
their counterparts in B but have larger domestic sales because of market A is
larger than market B. These firms do not export. We think of these firms as
reflecting the case of Shanghai-GM that have large domestic sales because of
their privileged position in a large domestic market, but do not export because
they are not competitive without the protection. Lastly, the most productive
firms in the two cities sell to all markets (foreign and all domestic markets).
The middle panel in Figure 8 shows the relationship between exporting and
domestic sales in the cross-section of the Chinese manufacturing data.28 As
can be seen, a remarkable feature of the Chinese data is that there is a cluster
of firms with low domestic sales that also export. For comparison, the bottom
28

Figure 8 plots the data for the 2007 cross-section of the Chinese Annual Industrial Survey.
The pattern is identical in all years of the data. We dropped export-processing plants from the
sample.

SPECIAL DEALS

37

panel in 8 shows the same relationship in the cross-section of the U.S. manufacturing data.29 As can be seen, there is no such pattern in the U.S. data.
The model also makes a strong prediction about the elasticity of domestic
sales with respect to exports. For the most productive firms in the two cities,
the elasticity of the share of the export market with respect to the share of the
domestic market should be close to one. But for the firms in B that find their
access to city A blocked, the elasticity will be significantly lower than one. Intuitively, higher productivity has a larger effect on their sales in the the market
where they face no barriers compared to their sales in the domestic Chinese
market where they are blocked.
The top panel in Figure 9 illustrates this prediction of the model (the thin
line is the 45o line). The elasticity of domestic sales to exports predicted by the
model is lower at low levels of exports. The bottom panel in Figure 9 shows
the elasticity in the Chinese data.30 The elasticity of domestic sales to exports
is essentially zero for small firms, and almost one for firms with above-mean
export sales.
The idea that Chinese local governments protect local firms has a long history. Young (2000) argues that the decentralization of tax revenues in the 1980s
coupled with price wedges prompted local governments to protect local industries to retain the revenues implied by the price wedge. The price wedges disappeared by the late 1980s and the 1994 tax reform that centralized tax revenues
presumably removed the incentive of local governments to protect firms that
generate large tax revenues.
Our argument is that the growth of the special deal regime increasingly became the main incentive for local governments to protect local firms, but this
time only for the favored firms. Our evidence suggests that many Chinese firms
find large segments of the Chinese domestic market closed to them.31 Local
29

The data is from the 1987 cross section of the U.S. manufacturing census.
The data is from the 2007 cross-section of the industrial survey.
31
Barwick et al. (2017) document strong home (city level) bias of car purchases using car
registration data.
30

38

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Figure 8: Probability of Exporting by Firm Size: Model vs. Data (China and US)
Model Simulation

Data: China

Data: United States

Note: Figures present probability of export vs. log firm size (relative to the mean). Top panel is the
model simulation, middle panel the Chinese data and bottom panel is the US data. China data from
1998 Annual Survey of Industrial Production. US data from 1987 Manufacturing Census.

SPECIAL DEALS

39

protection is welfare reducing of course, but we argue that this effect is attenuated by the fact that local governments can only protect firms in their cities.
In addition, the case of the East Hope Group suggests suggests that many large
firms have been able to strike deals with multiple local governments, which in
principle can also attenuate the effect of local protection. A more important
point though is that local protection is only one of the many effects of special
deals, so it is imperative to take all these effects into account. And we argue that
the productivity gains among the favored firms may well be significantly larger
than the negative effects of local protection.

5.

Risks

This paper forwards the hypothesis that China’s growth, particularly since the
early 1990s, is due to the increased availability of special deals by competing local governments. We do not provide a formal empirical “test” of this hypothesis
– we do not believe it is possible to do so – but we believe that the totality of the
circumstantial evidence we present is consistent with this interpretation.
If our hypothesis is correct, then it suggests that Chinese growth is a highwire act. The effectiveness of the Chinese special deal system depends on the
discretion of local officials and on minimizing the damage borne by firms that
do not get special deals. A key question is what exactly are the incentives of local
Party officials to support local companies. One possibility is that local Party
officials provide special deals for local companies because of her devotion to
the job. For example, a local Party official indicated to us that he values the
ability to develop the local economy according to “his likes and dislikes.” If so,
then the question is the extent to which the selection of intrinsically motivated
officials is effective and sustainable.
Another possibility is that local officials provide special deals because local
party leaders that generate more “profits for the party” are promoted by the
Communist Party’s Organization Department. In the absence of access to the

40

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Figure 9: Domestic Sales vs. Exports: Model vs. Data
Model Simulation

Data: China

Figure present the relationship between log domestic sales (y-axis) and log exports
(x-axis) for exporting firms (firms that only sell to domestic market are excluded).
Top panel is the model simulation. Bottom panel is the Chinese data from 1998
Annual Survey of Industrial Production. The thin red line in both panels is the 45
degree line.

SPECIAL DEALS

41

personnel files of the Communist Party, we don’t know whether this is the case.
It is possible, as some authors have done, to examine the the correlation of
promotion probability and local GDP growth, and the evidence from this work
is mixed.32
A third possibility is that local party officials work very hard to support favored private firms because they are able to obtain private rents from these
firms. If this is the case, the danger is that constraints on the ability of local
officials to obtain private benefits will lower growth. Since 2014, there has been
an unprecedented crackdown on corruption. Figure 10 presents the annual
flow of new corruption cases of local party officials. The top panel shows the
number of new corruption cases each year for party officials at the county level
(top panel), city or prefecture level (middle panel), and provincial level (bottom
panel). There was almost a doubling in the number of corruption cases of officials at the county level in 2014 and 2015. At the city-level and provincial level,
the number of anti-corruption cases more than quadrupled. The evidence for
2016 and 2017 show that the anti-corruption campaign, at least as seen by the
number of arrests, has declined relative to 2014 and 2015.
The corruption crackdown was widely supported in China and has been
effective by many accounts. Yet, a concern implied by our theory is that the
corruption crackdown has diminished the willingness of local officials to help
local businesses. This could be because their main incentive was the monetary
payoff, or it could be the fear of being accused of receiving a payoff, or the
resistance of intrinsically motivated officials. All these forces will diminish the
extent to which firms get special deals. Figure 11 shows that the GDP growth
has slowed down significantly since the onset of the 2008 global financial crisis.
We do not know whether the anti-corruption campaign was the main driver of
32

Li and Zhou (2005) find evidence from promotion of Provincial level officials that GDP
growth is positively correlated with promotion. Shih et al. (2012)’s evidence suggests that
personal connections is the primary determinant of promotion. Jia et al. (2015) finds that
political connections and economic performance are complements in terms of promotion in
the Party hierarchy.

42

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Figure 10: Corruption Cases by Level of Government
County Level

City Level

Provincial Level

Source: Annual reports of the Supreme People’s Procuratorate of China

SPECIAL DEALS

43

Figure 11: Growth Rate of GDP/worker

Sources: Official numbers from NBS. GDP growth labeled “with our revisions” are
our estimates from Bai et al. (2019a).

the growth slowdown, as there are other possibilities. In Bai et al. (2016), for
instance, we document that growing financial distortions due to the growth of
local financing vehicles could also be important. At this point, the data we have
at our disposal does not allow us to precisely quantify the importance of these
forces.
Chinese authorities have made multiple efforts in recent years to move away
from a regime of special deals. The Third Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee in November 2013 issued a resolution to “let the market play
the decisive role in the allocation of resources.” The State Council later issued a
follow up document that acknowledged “special deals” as a double-edge sword,
which “promoted the investment growth and industry concentration to some
extent” but “have disturbed the market order.” Then, it laid out specific policies
to stop local leaders from providing special deals. On the government revenue
side, local governments are not allowed to provide preferential tax policies, nor
to reduce administrative fee or government funds from firms or to assign land at
a preferential or zero price. On the government expenditure side, local govern-

44

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

ments are prohibited from developing preferential policies for firms, including
those by means of remitting taxes or granting subsidies.33
Perhaps in reflection of these policy changes, China’s ranking in the World
Bank’s Doing Business indicators has improved dramatically since 2013 from
about the 80th percentile to about the 20th percentile in the world distribution
of “ease of starting of starting a business.”34 However, the attempt to roll back
the use of special deals appeared to have been short lived. The State Council essentially reversed its earlier decision on the use of preferential policies in 2015.35
In 2015, the State Council issued a new document that recognizes the legitimacy
of all the existing preferential policies and authorizes local governments to issue
new preferential policies.
The Chinese “special deals” regime has been enormously successful in moving the Chinese economy to where it is today. We suggest that it has enabled the
growth of the large number of Chinese firms that now dominate many world
markets. There are however three dangers of the current system. First, a special
deals system is that it creates powerful entrenched interests that make reforms
very difficult.36 After all, a special deals regime, even with the Chinese characteristics that have underpinned high growth for two decades, is a second best
solution. In terms of our model, the first best is to reduce δ to zero with no
special deals. But the difficulty is that once a special deal system is in place,
local officials and large businesses benefit from the system, and their interests
are threatened with any reform that reduces δ and the extent of the special deals.
Second, some of the characteristics that made the system work in the past,
33

“Reviewing and Regulating Preferential Policies for Taxation and Other Aspects,” State
Council Document No. 62, 2014.
34
It is difficult to know however whether the improvement shown in Figure 12 reflects
real improvement or simply changes in methodology by the World Bank. The World Bank’s
Doing Business project revised its methodology in response to issues raised by the Chinese
government. See “China Seeks to Water Down Key World Bank Report,” Financial Times, May 6,
2013 for more details.
35
Document No. 25, State Council, 2015.
36
Song and Xiong (2018) review China’s economic and financial risks. Many of them have
roots in the vested interests created by special deals.

SPECIAL DEALS

45

Figure 12: China’s Rank in “Doing Business” Indicators

Note: Figure reports China’s percentile rank in “ease of starting a business” from
the World Bank’s Doing Business project. We scale China’s score by the number of
countries in the data each year to convert the score into a percentile rank.

.
such as unfettered ability to make deals may no longer be there today. At the
same time, other features of the special deal regime, such as the presence of
powerful vested interest groups, are clearly still present and have a strong interest in blocking precisely the reforms that China may want to undertake in the
future.
A third danger of the system is that companies based in other countries find
themselves disadvantaged when they compete with Chinese companies with
access to special deals that export into their market. At the same time, foreign
companies in the Chinese market either have to make their own special deal or,
as is the case with any Chinese firm that does not have a special deal, find that
their intellectual property and contracts are not well respected. This tension
between countries based on rules and one based on special deals is at the root
of the conflict that China currently faces with its trading partners, with no clear
resolution in sight.

References
Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson, Why Nations Fail: Origins of Power, Poverty and
Prosperity, Crown Publishers (Random House), 2012.
Bai, Chong-En, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Zheng Michael Song, “The Long Shadow of
China’s Fiscal Expansion,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2016.
,

, and

, “A Forensic Examination of China’s National Accounts,” Brookings Papers

on Economic Activity, forthcoming, 2019.
,

,

, and Xin Wang, “Conglomerate Formation in China,” 2019.

Barwick, Panle Jia, Shengmao Cao, and Shanghun Li, “Local Protectionism, Market
Structure, and Social Welfare: China’s Automobile Market,” 2017.
Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, Luhang Wang, and Yifan Zhang, “WTO
Accession and Performance of Chinese Manufacturing Firms,” American Economic
Review, 2017, 107 (9), 2784–2820.
Cong, Lin William, Haoyu Gao, Jacopo Ponticelli, and Xiaoguang Yang, “Credit
allocation under economic stimulus: Evidence from China,” 2018.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul Samuelson, “Comparative Advantage,
Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American
Economic Review, 1977, 67 (5), 823–829.
Dunne, Michael, American Wheels, Chinese Roads: The Story of General Motors in
China, John P. Wiley, 2011.
Hallward-Driemeir, Mary and Lant Pritchett, “How Business Is Done in the Developing
World: Deals versus Rules,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2015, 29 (3), 121–140.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Zheng Michael Song, “Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small: The
Transformation of the State Sector in China,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
2015.

46

SPECIAL DEALS

47

Huang, Yasheng, Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics, Cambridge University Press,
2008.
Huang, Yi, Marco Pagano, and Ugo Panizza, “Local crowding out in China,” 2019.
Jia, Ruixue, Masayuki Kudamatsu, and David Seim, “Political Selection in China: The
Complementary Roles of Connections and Performance,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 2015, 13 (4), 631–668.
Kashyap, Anil and Wendy Dobson, “The Contradiction in China’s Gradualist Banking
Reforms,” Brookings Papers in Economic Activity, 2006, 2, 103–148.
Li, Hongbin and Li-An Zhou, “Political turnover and economic performance: the
incentive role of personnel control in China,” Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89
(9-10), 1743–1762.
Lin, Justin, “Rural Reform and Agricultural Growth in China,” American Economic
Review, 1992, 82 (1), 34–51.
McGregor, Richard, The Party: The Secret World of China’s Communist Leaders, Harper
Collins, 2010.
Shih, Victor, Christopher Adolph, and Mingxing Liu, “Getting Ahead in the Communist
Party: Explaining the Advancement of Central Committee Members in China,”
American Political Science Review, 2012, 106, 166–187.
Song, Zheng and Wei Xiong, “Risks in China’s financial system,” Annual Review of
Financial Economics, 2018, 10, 261–286.
, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Growing like china,” American economic
review, 2011, 101 (1), 196–233.
Tombe, Trevor and Xiaodong Zhu, “Trade, migration and productivity: A quantitative
analysis of china,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Xu, Chenggang, “The Fundamental Institutions of China’s Reforms and Development,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 2011, 49 (4), 1076–1151.

48

BAI, HSIEH, SONG

Young, Alwyn, “The Razor’s Edge: Distortions and Incremental Reform in the People’s
Republic of China,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115 (4), 1091–1145.

