                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ILLUSION OF STABLE PREFERENCES OVER MAJOR LIFE DECISIONS

                                    Maximilian W. Mueller
                                      Joan Hamory Hicks
                                    Jennifer Johnson-Hanks
                                        Edward Miguel

                                      Working Paper 25844
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25844


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We thank seminar participants at the University of California, Berkeley and participants at the
2018 Pacifi˝c Development Conference (PacDev) and the 2018 Oxford Center for the Study of
African Economies (CSAE) conference for helpful comments. The data used in this paper was
collected in collaboration with International Child Support and Innovations for Poverty Action,
supported by funding from NIH grants R01-TW05612 and R01-HD044475, NSF grants
SES-0418110 and SES-0962614, the World Bank, the Social Science Research Council, and the
Berkeley Population Center. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily reflect the views of any of our funders, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The data collection for the Kenya Life Panel Survey was approved by the University of
California, Berkeley Committee for Protection of Human Subjects, the Kenya Medical Research
Institute, and Uganda National Council for Science and Technology.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Maximilian W. Mueller, Joan Hamory Hicks, Jennifer Johnson-Hanks, and Edward
Miguel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Illusion of Stable Preferences over Major Life Decisions
Maximilian W. Mueller, Joan Hamory Hicks, Jennifer Johnson-Hanks, and Edward Miguel
NBER Working Paper No. 25844
May 2019
JEL No. D83,D84,D91,I12,J12,J13,O12

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine the stability of preferences over time using panel data from Kenya on fertility
intentions, realizations, and recall of intentions. We find that desired fertility is very unstable, but
that most people perceive their desires to be stable. Under hypothetical scenarios, few expect
their desired fertility to increase over time. Moreover, when asked to recall past intentions, most
respondents report previously wanting exactly as many children as they desire today. Biased
recall of preferences over a major life decision could have important implications for measuring
excess fertility, the evolution of norms, and the perceived need for family planning programs.


Maximilian W. Mueller                              Jennifer Johnson-Hanks
University of California at Berkeley               Department of Demography
mwmueller@berkeley.edu                             University of California
                                                   Berkeley, CA 94720
Joan Hamory Hicks                                  USA
Department of Economics                            johnsonhanks@berkeley.edu
University of Oklahoma
308 Cate Center Drive                              Edward Miguel
Norman, OK 73072                                   Department of Economics
jhamoryhicks@ou.edu                                University of California, Berkeley
                                                   530 Evans Hall #3880
                                                   Berkeley, CA 94720
                                                   and NBER
                                                   emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
Introduction

Many important decisions in young adulthood – regarding human capital investment, career,
residential location, marriage and fertility – share common characteristics: these high-stakes
decisions are relatively infrequent, costly to reverse (or irreversible), informed by limited
personal experience, and made without knowing how own future preferences will evolve or
how the choice itself will impact future preferences. Yet these decisions have the potential
to shape individuals’ entire life trajectories, raising the stakes around getting them “right”.
   Given the lack of personal experience in many significant domains, advice from more
experienced individuals (“experts”) might be especially beneficial for such momentous deci-
sions – but how useful is this advice likely to be? There are many factors that could slow
learning, including the fact that “experts” may be less-informed than they claim, or that
their experience may not be directly applicable to others’ situation. Yet even in cases where
others’ circumstances are similar, the quality of the advice provided will depend critically
on the experts’ understanding and recall of their own choices.
   Previous research has identified the importance of intergenerational transmission for in-
dividual decision-making and cultural persistence (Bisin and Verdier, 2000, 2001), for choices
such as female labor force participation and fertility (Fernández and Fogli, 2006, 2009;
Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn, 2013). For practices such as female genital mutilation, ex-
isting work has found that older women who have gone through the procedure themselves
act as gatekeepers of this tradition (UNHCR (2008), Bellemare, Novak and Steinmetz (2015),
Coyne and Coyne (2014)). This last example in particular raises critical questions. How re-
liable is advice by experts when it is based on recall of their own past preferences, decisions
and outcomes? Since recall and retrospection are supposed to be key ingredients to the learn-
ing that forms the basis for “expertise”, how do people recall earlier desires and thus learn
about their (in-)stability, as well as about the translation of past intentions into outcomes?
   This reflection begs additional questions. First, how do people form their preferences with
respect to important life decisions, and how stable are these preferences? If preferences are

                                              1
unstable and strongly depend on circumstances, it might be difficult to correctly anticipate
future developments and their impact on one’s own preferences. Kuziemko et al. (2018)
illustrate these challenges for the case of first-time mothers, who tend to overestimate their
postnatal labor supply. Second, how stable do individuals expect their own preferences to
be? We know many people have a tendency to extrapolate current preferences to different
future states of the world (Loewenstein, O’Donoghue and Rabin (2003)), with evidence that
this tendency applies to long-term decisions such as which college to attend (Simonsohn
(2010)) or which car to buy (Busse et al. (2015)).
    In this paper, we provide evidence that projection bias is important in choices related
to marriage and fertility as well.1 Moreover, we are among the first in any domain to
examine whether the same tendency applies to retrospection and the reconstruction of past
preferences.
    Using a rich longitudinal data set on young Kenyan adults with up to 9 years of informa-
tion, we explore these questions with an application to reproductive desires, decisions and
outcomes. Reproductive decisions are major life choices with important individual, societal
and even macroeconomic consequences.2 These choices are made over many years, and once
taken, are largely irreversible; having correct expectations about one’s preferences given dif-
ferent future circumstances is therefore crucial when deciding whether and when to have
more children.
    Concretely, we thus seek to answer the following three questions in our sample of Kenyan
women: How stable are reproductive desires with respect to women’s desired number of
children? How accurately do women forecast their future behavior and how their preferences
depend on changing circumstances? And, how accurately do women recall their past fertility
desires?
   1
      As such, it is related to Odermatt and Stutzer (2015) showing projection bias for individuals’ forecasts
of future life satisfaction following major life events, underestimating adaptation to events such as marriage
and widowhood. Consistent with their findings, our results suggest that people underestimate the variability
of preferences over time.
    2
      See Casterline and Lazarus (2010) for a summary.



                                                      2
   We find that even in the context of a life domain as important as having children, desires
vary substantially over time: across horizons of 3 to 9 years, more than 60% of respondents
change their stated desired number of children (henceforth fertility desires), and 20% by 2
or more children.
   Second, we find that many women underestimate how strongly they will adjust their
preferences to certain scenarios, and mispredict own fertility behavior over the next 2 to 5
years. For instance, when asked how they would react to scenarios such as getting married
soon or all children being of the same gender, most respond that they would still like to
have the same number of children. For a small number of negative scenarios such as difficult
pregnancies or worsening finances, sizeable shares suggest they would prefer fewer children.
Opting to want more children is quite rare, and never a majority response to any scenario
posed.
   Despite these asymmetric expectations, large shares of respondents have both upward
and downward changes in stated desired fertility between ages 18 and 28.
   For example, while around 27% (24%) of women expect their desired fertility to increase
in the case in which all children end up being girls (boys), 70% (47%) of those whose children
all turned out to be daughters (sons) actually increase their desired number of children in
future survey rounds.3 Young Kenyan adults who had anticipated being largely indifferent
to the gender of their children in fact end up caring more than they had thought. These
patterns are consistent with theories of projection bias, applied to fertility desires.
   We also find expectations to be incorrect in a more immediate way: when asked whether
they expect to have another child in the next 2 or 5 years, a fair share mispredict their own
behavior: 28% (45%) of women not expecting a child in the next 2 (5) years ended up having
one. Together with increases in desired fertility across survey rounds, these patterns suggest
that ex-post rationalization matters as well.
   Third, we document that very few women are able to recall past desired fertility from
   3
       Among those with at least one son and daughter, 39% increased desired fertility.



                                                      3
three years ago: only 31% correctly recall past desires, and just 9% among those who have
changed their stated desired fertility. Instead, most believe they desired the exact same
number of children 3 years ago as today. The strong anchoring at current desires suggests
that current preferences not only exert a strong influence on expectations of future desires
but also on recall of past preferences, e.g., through projection bias in retrospection or a
cognitive desire for consistency. The anchoring at current preferences is asymmetric: it is
particularly strong for those with higher stated desired fertility today than before. Given
this asymmetry is only present for married women and mothers, it appears the difference
does not stem mechanically from differences between upward or downward changes, but
rather from the potential reasons behind these changes. Psychological concerns over feeling
in control of one’s own life, and perhaps most importantly the fear of expressing cruelty
towards “unwanted” children could therefore drive some of this asymmetry.
    The unique feature of our study - our ability to track Kenyan women over a long time
period from fertility intentions to actual outcomes - allows us to compare individuals’ recalled
vs. actual past fertility intentions. Our finding of asymmetric recall of past fertility desires
is related to a recent study by Zimmermann (2017), who finds asymmetric recall of one’s
IQ-test results a month later, a result driven by motivated reasoning.4
    This illusion of stability has potentially important implications. Incorrect expectations
and beliefs might result in sub-optimal decision-making for some women, such as getting
married or starting childbearing too early. While advice based on accurate recall could be
one way to improve these expectations, advice based on incorrect recall might contribute to
inaccurate expectations instead and help perpetuate high fertility norms.5 This is partic-
ularly harmful if incorrect recall and forgetting one’s true past intentions involves ex-post
rationalization of the benefits of having more children. Moreover, underestimating the extent
   4
      Bénabou and Tirole (2016) provide a summary of motivated reasoning in economics. Further examples
from lab-settings include Eil and Rao (2011) and Mobius et al. (2011).
    5
      This could be one reason behind “imperfect empathy” towards one’s children (Bisin and Verdier (2001))
and the strong correlation found between mothers’ and their children’s fertility levels shown in Fernández
and Fogli (2006).



                                                    4
to which one’s preferences have changed over time might lower tolerance for other viewpoints
and thereby contribute to ideological polarization in society. However, inaccurate recall does
not have to be exclusively negative. For the sake of individuals’ mental health, it might be
better to believe that one succeeded in attaining one’s goals rather than dwelling on failures.
Moreover, believing that all of one’s children were always wanted rather than a “mistake”
could improve their treatment by parents and the community (Guterman (2015)).
   The results also have implications for survey methodology and the use of retrospective
questions. When recalled answers are not only erroneous, but systematically biased, this
could affect results based on them. Measures of excess fertility are an important example.
Retrospective questions on past fertility desires — common in DHS surveys — underestimate
the true extent of excess fertility, perhaps substantially; this contradicts the conclusion one
might take away from the evidence in Pritchett (1994), for example. The frequency of
changes in desired fertility further complicates standard measures of excess fertility. It is
not obvious which reproductive desires to use as the “right” benchmark against one’s actual
number of children. Decomposing fertility into wanted and unwanted fertility is thus more
challenging than it might seem, which affects the interpretation of widely used demographic
measures.
   Our findings are potentially of value to the study of fertility and family planning in
several other ways. First, we contribute to research on reproductive intentions that suggests
they are predictive of behavior, but not always stable.6 Most of these studies focus on the
extensive margin of wanting an additional child or not, and therefore might miss considerable
changes in the intensive margin of fertility. Moreover, we are among the first to assess how
stable people perceive their own reproductive desires to be. The results are also relevant to
questions about the effectiveness of family planning interventions, suggesting reproductive
intentions are alterable.7
   6
      Findings from OECD-countries include Westoff and Ryder (1977), Rocca et al. (2010) or Iacovou and
Tavares (2011), and for non-OECD countries Campbell and Campbell (1997), De Silva (1992), Vlassoff
(1990), Bankole and Westoff (1998), and Curtis and Westoff (1996).
    7
      See Miller and Babiarz (2016) and Mwaikambo et al. (2011) for reviews.


                                                  5
1     Data and context

The analysis utilizes the Kenyan Life Panel Survey (KLPS), a longitudinal data set following
more than 5,000 individuals from Busia, a district in rural western Kenya. Starting in 2003,
a representative sample of children who participated in a primary school-based deworming
program (see Miguel and Kremer (2004)) was chosen to take part in a panel data collection
effort, with survey rounds (so far) in 2003-05, 2007-09 and 2011-2014.
    We focus on the portions of the survey containing information on reproductive intentions,
realizations and recall of past intentions. Table 1 illustrates for which rounds we have these
data. Reproductive intentions, i.e., the desired number of children, for individual i at survey
round t is denoted by xi,t . Realizations, i.e., the number of children born and alive by time
t, are indicated by fi,t . Recall of past fertility desires for time t − j as collected at time t is
denoted as x̂R
             i,t−j|t .

    In KLPS round 1, detailed questions regarding reproductive intentions were posed to a
representative subset of 351 young women. These women were sampled from the subset of
slightly older respondents at round 1, and thus are 1.5 years older on average than the full
sample of females. 239 of them were interviewed for all three KLPS rounds; most of the
analyses will rely on this subset of women, which we call “sample 1”, since we have both
detailed questions about reproductive intentions and expectations from round 1 and can thus
compare recall in round 2 to their actual earlier intentions stated in round 1. “Sample 2”
respondents were interviewed for both rounds 2 and 3, and comprise 4,194 women and men;
this sample is used for some supplementary analyses.
    Throughout the paper, reproductive desires are indicated by the answer to the following
question (which was typically asked in Swahili): “Today, if you could choose exactly, how
many children in total would you like yourself or your partner to give birth to (including
those who have already been born)?”
    There are several reasons why we think it sensible to interpret answers to this question
as an upper bound on the number of desired children, drawing from responses to an ideal

                                                 6
                      Table 1: Survey Structure & Data Availability
                                       Round 1             Round 2               Round 3
                                     (2003 - 2005)       (2005 - 2007)         (2011 - 2014)
Sample 1     Respondents                 351                 277                   283
             Median Age                   19                   23                    28

             Data Availability
             Desires (xt )                X                    X                     X
             Recall (x̂R
                       t−1|t )            -                    X                     -
             Realizations (ft )           X                    X                     X

Sample 2     Respondents                 5,209               5,081                 5,255
             Median Age                   18                   22                    26

               Data Availability
               Desires (xt )                -                  X                     X
                         R
               Recall (x̂t−1|t )            -                  X                      -
               Realizations (ft )           X                  X                     X
Notes: This table shows the timing of each KLPS survey round, the years in which the survey
round was conducted, the number of respondents interviewed and their median age as well as
data availability of key variables used in this paper. Respondents are from the Kenyan Life
Panel Survey (KLPS), a longitudinal dataset including more than 5,000 individuals from Busia
District, Kenya. Sample 1 consists of 351 women who were interviewed in great detail about
reproductive desires in KLPS round 1 (see the text for more details). 277 and 283 of these
women were re-surveyed in rounds 2 and 3, respectively, and 239 were interviewed during all
survey rounds. Sample 2 consists of all individuals interviewed in KLPS rounds 1, 2 or 3 with
women and men constituting equal shares of the sample. Expectations with respect to future
fertility desires and behavior were only asked in Round 1, and recall was only a component in
Round 2. Sample 1 is special, because we have data on reproductive desires from round 1 on,
such that we can track changes for all survey rounds and compare recall of past desires from
round 2 to actual desires in round 1. Throughout the paper, we use survey weights that adjust
for the two-stage nature of KLPS tracking, for more details on the tracking strategy, see Baird
et al. (2016) and Baird, Hamory and Miguel (2008).




                                                 7
life scenario. For one, when asked in round 1 whether they would rather choose to have
one fewer child or one more child relative to their desired level of fertility, 74% of women
say ‘less”. Furthermore, when confronted with hypothetical scenarios (explained in greater
detail in section 3), most women do not expect their desired fertility to increase under
positive scenarios (e.g., a positive household economic shock), but many do expect their
desired fertility to fall under certain negative scenarios.
    Almost all sample respondents would like to have between zero to six children; the ma-
jority of women want either 3 or 4 (see Figure A.1 for the full distribution), and on average
women in rounds 2 and 3 desire 3.25 children. Men want slightly more children than women,
at 3.5 on average, but start having children later: the share of women who have had a child
(are married) increased from 26% (24%) in round 1 to 79% (72%) in round 3, while for men
(who have nearly the exact same age distribution as women) it increases from only 6% (9%)
up to 58% (56%).8
    Desired fertility trends upwards over time, towards 4 children for men and 3.5 for women
by the time they are in their late twenties. These desires are in line with data for the rest
of Kenya, as presented in Askew, Maggwa and Obare (2017), where the “wanted” fertility
rate in rural Kenya ranged from 3.9 in 2003 to 3.4 in 2014. The total fertility rate for all of
Kenya was at 3.9 in 2014, with 3.1 in urban and 4.5 in rural areas. The “unwanted” fertility
rate (using standard definitions) declined from 2.0 in 1993 to 0.9 in 2014.
    Note that if we observe fi,2 > xi,1 and xi,2 ≥ fi,2 , we cannot be sure whether changes to
preferences before round 2 was collected drove the higher fertility realizations by round 2, or
whether this fertility itself led to some ex-post rationalization, as reflected in higher stated
fertility preferences. This fundamental measurement issue (caused by infrequent survey data
collection) complicates interpreting cases in which this pattern holds as being solely due to
ex-post rationalization, an issue we return to below.
    Importantly, for our confidence in the reliability of the data, fertility intentions are
   8
     Table A.1 presents these summary statistics. Figure A.2 displays desired fertility and fertility realiza-
tions separately for women and men by age.


                                                      8
strongly correlated with subsequent behavior, confirming many previous findings in the
demography literature.9 Higher fertility intentions in round 1 are associated with more
additional children born by round 3. Wanting one additional child is, on average, associated
with having had roughly 0.3 more children between round 1 and 3. This pattern is similar
both for those who already had a child at round 1 and for those who had not yet had a child
(see Table 2). As expected, the coefficient estimates (on earlier fertility intentions) tend to
rise over time as individuals have more time to attain their desired level of fertility.

                            Table 2: Reproductive desires and outcomes

                     Dep. Var.: Number of Additional Children between Round 1 and ...
                Round 2    Round 3    Round 2      Round 3       Round 2      Round 3
                     All Women        Pregnancies>0 (Rd 1) Never Pregnant (Rd 1)
 Desires         -0.002     0.188       0.097        0.290         0.159       0.330
                (0.057)    (0.052)     (0.083)      (0.084)       (0.076)     (0.105)

 Mean             1.065          1.812          1.368            1.973            0.741            1.655
 Std. Dev.        0.929          1.199          0.775            1.029            0.973            1.331
 N                 236            236            115              115              121              121
 R-squared        0.000          0.040          0.020            0.101            0.034            0.078
 Notes: “Desires” denotes the number of additional children desired, while “Number of Subsequent Children”
 denotes the number of children born after the first survey round. We report results from the following
 regressions: fi,t − fi,1 = α + β(xi,1 − fi,1 ) + i for t = 2, 3. The sample comprises all women in sample
 1 who were interviewed for rounds 1, 2 and 3. Two out of 239 women gave non-numeric answers to the
 question on fertility desires, and one woman is missing information on fertility realizations for round 1. 115
 of these 236 women had been pregnant at least once by round 1 (P regnancies > 0(Rd1)), 121 had not
 (Never Pregnant (Rd 1)). Each column represents a separate regression. Regressions include no additional
 controls. Standard errors are clustered at the baseline school level and in parentheses. Tracking rate adjusted
 observation weights from the later survey round are used in each regression. Rows “Mean” and “Std. Dev.”
 show these respective measures for the number of additional children between round 1 and later rounds.




2       Changes in Desired Fertility over Time

Examination of both the average and the distribution of desired fertility suggests that desires
are quite stable over time at a population level. However, this pattern obscures substantial
variation over time in individual reproductive intentions, which are, in fact, not stable at all.
    9
    See for example Günther and Harttgen (2016), Pritchett (1994), Campbell and Campbell (1997),
Bankole and Westoff (1998), or Westoff and Ryder (1977).


                                                      9
    Between each survey round, roughly 60% of women stated a different desired fertility
level, with 20% of respondents changing by 2 or more children across rounds (see Figure
1). Moreover, individual men’s desired fertility between rounds 2 and 3 is equally unstable
(Figure A.3).

            Figure 1: Distribution of changes in desired children between survey rounds

                                      Change in the number of Children desired
                                  Round 1 to 2                         Round 2 to 3                         Round 1 to 3
                                (ca. age 19 to 23)                   (ca. age 23 to 28)                   (ca. age 19 to 28)
                           .5




                                                                .5




                                                                                                     .5
                           .4




                                                                .4




                                                                                                     .4
                           .3




                                                                .3




                                                                                                     .3
                 Density




                                                      Density




                                                                                           Density
                           .2




                                                                .2




                                                                                                     .2
                           .1




                                                                .1




                                                                                                     .1
                           0




                                                                0




                                                                                                     0




                                −4   −2   0   2   4                  −4   −2   0   2   4                  −4   −2   0   2   4




Notes: This figure plots the distribution of changes in fertility desires between survey rounds 1 and 2 (x2 −x1 ),
survey rounds 2 and 3 (x3 − x2 ) and survey rounds 1 to 3 (x3 − x1 ) for the 239 women of sample 1 who
were interviewed in all three survey rounds. Women who gave non-numerical answers to the desired fertility
question in one of the two survey rounds used for each graph are dropped. Observations are weighted using
weights from the later survey round. The vertical lines denote the average change in desires between rounds,
with -0.146 between round 1 and 2, +0.196 between round 2 and 3, -0.029 between round 1 and 3.


    These changes are not pure noise; they appear to carry meaningful signal. Not only
do many women change their minds between adolescence and adulthood, the majority still
continue to change their desired fertility into their 20’s, whether or not they were initially
married or had children. While the subset of women who had still not had children by round
3 were slightly more likely to have had stable desired fertility over time, a full 59% of them
still changed stated desired fertility across survey rounds.10 Yet compared to those women
   10
        These results make use of the larger sample 2.

                                                                          10
who had had a child by survey round 2, non-mothers were 14 percentage points less likely to
have increased desired fertility. Most patterns are qualitatively similar for men, see Figure
A.3.
   “Power” within the household also appears to matter: women who (in round 3) said that
they had at least a joint say (rather than less say) over whether to have another child with
their partner were 8 percentage points less likely to have increased their desired fertility and
13 percentage points more likely to have lowered them. On average, more empowered women
show a small average increase in desired fertility across survey rounds of just 0.04 children,
while less empowered women have a larger increase, of 0.36 children.
   Finally, we find that changes in desired fertility are statistically associated with many
other factors, including individual migration to urban areas, educational attainment, the
gender composition of one’s children, and the use of contraceptives. For instance, those who
in survey round 2 stated that they used any contraceptives were 11 percentage points less
likely to show increased desired fertility over time, with an average change in desired fertility
that was 0.26 children lower than the increase observed among those who stated that they
did not use contraception.11
   We take these strong statistical associations as evidence that changes in stated fertility
desires carry meaningful signal in capturing individual preferences. Some of the changes we
observe across survey rounds represent important departures from initial desires: 11.5% of
women have more children by round 3 than their initially stated desires in round 1. Either
these respondents later decided that they did in fact want more children and acted upon
this change in preferences, or they had additional children unexpectedly. The empirical
evidence on how women’s power within the household, their use of contraceptives, and past
experience having children affect the evolution of desired fertility over time suggests that a
lack of control over some fertility outcomes, combined with some ex-post rationalization, is
likely to be an element of the explanation.
  11
       All of these results are available upon request.



                                                          11
     Overall, our data indicate that experiencing meaningful changes in reproductive desires
over time appears to be the norm rather than the exception among young Kenyans.12 One
potential explanation could be that reproductive intentions are weakly held by most individ-
uals, and many people could be aware, say, that they are almost indifferent between having
3, 4 or 5 children. Yet this case seems unlikely in our data: in such a case, we might expect
respondents to anticipate that their desired fertility could easily change over time and to
have little confidence in the accuracy of their recall of previous fertility intentions. In the
next section, we show that neither of these patterns holds empirically in our data, suggesting
that people believe their fertility intentions to be quite strongly and stably held, despite the
considerable variability over time that we document.



3        Expectations over Future Fertility

Many individuals in the sample appear to be open to lowering their desired fertility, as
suggested by answers to a series of hypothetical scenarios. For instance, the KLPS survey
asks: “In each situation, would you like to bear the same number of children, or a larger or
smaller number?” For most scenarios, the vast majority of women said they would either
want the same or fewer number of children.13 As shown in Figure 2, the only scenarios in
response to which at least 10% of women would like to have more children are: improving
household finances; a situation in which all children are of the same gender; and if her
husband wants more children. That said, only about 25% of respondents expect to increase
desired fertility under the latter two scenarios, whereas 70% do not expect to change desired
fertility at all. In comparison, in the case of worsening household finances, 55% of respondents
state that they would want to have fewer children, and even higher shares of women state
that they would reduce desired fertility if they no longer got along with their spouse, or if
their pregnancies were difficult.
    12
      Quesnel-Vallée and Morgan (2003) show that American women also change their intended fertility over
time, but in contrast to young Kenyan women, they tend to lower it over time.
   13
      All 19 scenarios are presented in Appendix Figure A.5.

                                                   12
   The patterns documented in Figure 2 suggest that respondents expect to respond asym-
metrically to positive and negative life scenarios: they state that they will largely not update
their desired fertility under positive scenarios, but would lower it under negative scenarios,
such as the negative household economic shocks that are all too common in Kenya. Together
with the overwhelming majority of women stating that they prefer to have one fewer child
rather than one more child, we view this pattern as suggestive evidence that the stated
number of desired children is often an upper bound that corresponds to a rather ideal life
scenario. Having more children than initially desired can thus potentially be seen as an
indication that respondents’ life outcomes turned out to be rosier than they had initially
anticipated, or alternatively, that some of this additional fertility is due to respondents ex-
periencing unexpected pregnancies.

Figure 2: Expectations for different scenarios: “In each situation, would you like to bear the
same number of children, or a larger or smaller number?”




Notes: This figure portrays the share of women in sample 1 who answered “more”, “same” or “less” for 7
selected hypothetical scenarios posed in the KLPS Round 1 data collection. Respondents answering “don’t
know” to a specific question are dropped. The maximum number of respondents answering “don’t know” is
3 (for the scenario “Husband wants more children”). Data are available for sample 1. Those questions only
applying to unmarried women were asked to 227 unmarried women. Observation weights are used. Results
for all 19 scenarios posed in the survey are shown in Appendix Figure A.5.


   Respondents’ initial expectations that their desired fertility would be unchanging or
even decreasing over time appear to be at odds with the fact that desired fertility does

                                                   13
change substantially across survey rounds for many respondents, and often in an upward
direction: 30% of women increased their stated desired fertility between rounds 1 and 3.
Respondents’ expectations about how they would respond to particular scenarios also appear
to understate how responsive their fertility would be: for instance, while 25% of women
expect to increase their desired fertility in the case in which all children were the same
gender (in the initial survey), 67% (50%) of women actually increased their stated desired
fertility in a future survey round when they had had only daughters (sons), and had reached,
but not yet surpassed, their previously reported desired number of children, fi,3 = xi,2 .14 In
contrast to what they initially said they would like to do, a large majority of the sample
therefore does in fact want to have more children once they reach their previously stated
desired fertility levels, particularly when all of their children are daughters. Expectations
about changes in future desired fertility also seem to be systematically inaccurate for the
case in which a woman’s husband takes another wife: while respondents on average expect
to have falling desired fertility in this case, women in our data who had no co-wife at round
2 but did have one by the round 3 survey were 10 percentage points more likely to have an
increase in desired fertility.
   While these inaccurate expectations are consistent with projection bias, we also asked
women more directly whether they expected to have another child in the next 2 or 5 years.
27% (68%) expected to have another child in the next 2 (5) years, whereas 71% (29%) did
not, and only 2% (3%) either said it depends or did not know. Among those who expected
to have a child in the next 2 (5) years, 58% (76%) had at least one child. However, so did
28% (45%) of those who did not expect to have a child. While women who were mothers or
married by round 1 were quite accurate when forecasting whether they would have another
child — almost 90% of them end up having one — they are also particularly likely to be
wrong if they had forecast that they would not have a child in the next 5 years: almost 70%
of them end up having at least one additional child, and 35% have at least two, within the
  14
    Even among women who had children of different genders, 39% increased their desired fertility. See
Figure A.4 for a graphical illustration.


                                                 14
next 5 years. 16% (12.5%) of mothers (married women) make this forecasting error.15
   Taken together, the results presented in this section suggest that expectations about
future fertility are far from perfect, both in terms of general forecasts of fertility over a given
time horizon and under specific common life scenarios. Most women initially claim that they
would prefer to have fewer children than their stated desired fertility, rather than more, but
average fertility intentions are stagnant or even rise across survey rounds.
   Of course, one of the many challenges individuals face when forming their expectations
regarding future fertility is that they lack one key ingredient: the experience of having chil-
dren. We next turn to retrospection in the later KLPS survey rounds regarding respondents’
own earlier stated desired fertility. In principle, this lack of experience should not present
an obstacle to accurate retrospection about one’s own earlier intentions.
  15
     Among the initially unmarried women or non-mothers who forecast they would not have a child in the
next 5 years, 38% and 31%, respectively, end up having a child within 5 years.




                                                  15
                                                      Figure 3: Recall patterns
                                                  (a) Recall Performance Overall




                         1
                         .9
                         .8
                         .7.6
                     Share
                      .5 .4
                         .3
                         .2
                         .1
                         0




                                 Correct Recall                      Correct Recall Direction                      Recall 0 Change

                            (b) Recall Performance By Change in Desired Fertility

                                   Correct Recall               Correct Recall Direction                   Recall 0 Change
                         1




                                                              1




                                                                                                    1


                                                                                                                      p−value=.062
                         .9




                                                              .9




                                                                                                    .9
                         .8




                                                              .8




                                                                                                    .8
                         .7




                                                              .7




                                                                                                    .7
                         .6




                                                              .6




                                                                                                    .6
                      Share




                                                             Share




                                                                                                  Share
                       .5




                                                              .5




                                                                                                   .5




                                                                                p−value=.025
                         .4




                                                              .4




                                                                                                    .4




                                           p−value=.237
                         .3




                                                              .3




                                                                                                    .3
                         .2




                                                              .2




                                                                                                    .2
                         .1




                                                              .1




                                                                                                    .1
                         0




                                                              0




                                                                                                    0




                                Stable   Lowered Increased           Stable   Lowered Increased           Stable    Lowered Increased




Notes: This graph plots the recall performance for all 277 women of sample 1 interviewed in both rounds
1 and 2, using round 2 observation weights. Recall measures are the following: Correct Recall (x̂R     1|2 = x1 ),
Correct Recall Direction, i.e., correctly recalling into which direction one changed desires (sgn(x2 − x̂R 1|2 ) =
sgn(x2 − x1 )) and Recall 0 Change, i.e., setting one’s recalled equal to one’s current desires (x̂R 1|2 =  x2 or
  R
x̂1|2 − x2 = 0). Those recalling 0 change are correct if x2 = x1 , but wrong when x2 6= x1 . Panel (b) reports
recall performance by desire stability, for the women who had stable desires (N=101), those who lowered
(N=100) and those who increased (N=76) desires between survey round 1 and 2. P-values provide results
of a test of equality of proportions between those who increased vs. decreased desires. Not reported in the
graph are p-values from testing equality of proportions between those with stable fertility desires and those
whose fertility desires decreased (increased): p-values are 0.000 for all comparisons except for recalling 0
change with p-values of 0.628 (0.021) for comparing those with stable desires to those whose fertility desires
decreased (increased). P-values from Fisher’s exact test and bootstrapped [1,000 draws] tests for decreasing
vs. increasing desires (using unweighted shares) are as 16follows: 0.122 and 0.071 for correct recall, 0.040 and
0.034 for recall direction and 0.061 and 0.052 for recalling 0 change.
4        Recall of Desired Fertility

Despite the fact that most individuals show large changes in desired fertility over time, few
individuals appear able to recall these changes when asked in later survey rounds (see Figure
3). When discussing recall, we mean the answer to the following question asked in KLPS
round 2: “If I had asked you the same question 3 years ago, how many children in total
would you have said you would like you or your partner to give birth to (including those
who had already been born)?” Not all respondents were interviewed exactly 3 years after
their round 1 interview; patterns are largely the same for those who were interviewed 4 or 5
years after their round 1 interview, which we take as evidence that this imprecision in the
question is not driving the results.16
     We find that only about 30% of respondents correctly recalled their own past desired
fertility, and fewer than 40% correctly recalled even the direction of the change in their
desired fertility over time.17 Among those whose desired fertility changed across survey
rounds, just 9% were able to correctly recall their earlier stated desired fertility (and only
19% recall the change in sign). Instead, more than 70% of women state that they had wanted
exactly the same number of children in the past as they currently desire, and nearly equal
shares of men make the same claim (see Figure A.6).
     Recall is thus strongly anchored at current fertility desires, and it is particularly so for
those whose desired fertility increased over time. The right graph of Figure 3b shows that
just 12% of those whose stated desired fertility increased across survey rounds are able to
recall the direction of the change over time; a much higher proportion (25%) of respondents
whose desired fertility fell over time were able to recall the direction of the change.
     Taking all of this together, three empirical patterns stand out. First, recall of past fertility
    16
      Only 50 out of 5077 respondents (0.98%) interviewed in round 2 chose the option “do not know”, and
none who are included in sample 1.
   17
      This measure of a correct “recall direction” defines success as the respondent stating their past desired
fertility was lower (higher/stable) than current desired fertility if they had increased (decreased/kept con-
stant) desired fertility between rounds 1 and 2. Formally, it takes on a value of 1 if recalled desired fertility
satisfies the following condition: sgn(x2 − x̂R
                                              1|2 ) = sgn(x2 − x1 ).




                                                       17
intentions is poor overall, with most respondents failing to recall their past desired fertility.
Second, this appears to be largely driven by recalled desired fertility being strongly anchored
at current fertility intentions. Third, this anchoring is most pronounced — and recall errors
therefore most common — for women whose desired fertility increased over time.
   Why might recall performance be so poor? Given that most respondents apparently
believe they did not change their desired fertility at all, current preferences may not only
affect expectations of future preferences (as in projection bias), but also perceptions of past
preferences. This “retrospection bias” implies that many people find it difficult to imagine
that they ever wanted to have a different number of children in the past. Alternatively, the
same pattern could be driven by a desire for cognitive consistency over time.
   However, neither of these two explanations can easily account for the asymmetric recall
performance we document above, in which those who have rising desired fertility over time
appear to have particular difficulty recalling their earlier intentions.
   Instead, this could be due to social image or self-image costs associated with a perceived
lack of control over one’s fertility, as well as a desire to avoid stating that some of one’s
children were (at least initially) “unwanted”. Three additional patterns in recall behavior
provide further suggestive evidence that active manipulation of memory is playing some
role, too. First, the recall errors made by those whose desired fertility rises over time are not
random; instead, those whose desired fertility rises over time are actually more likely than
others to believe that their desired fertility has not changed at all. Second, this asymmetry
in recall is particularly strong for those who initially had children or were married at the
time of KLPS round 1, and are much weaker for others (Figure A.7). Third, the asymmetry
is especially pronounced for those whose desired fertility changed by two children across
survey rounds: those with large drops in desired fertility are much more likely to recall
having lowered desired fertility over time, while those with large increases (of two children)
in desired fertility are no more likely to state that their desired fertility rose than those whose
desired fertility only increased by one child (see Figure A.8).


                                                18
    Regardless of the exact reasons for the poor recall of desired fertility, it has important
implications both for the measurement of “excess fertility”, as well as for learning about how
fertility intentions map into outcomes.
    The use of retrospective measures of reproductive desires — which is common in de-
mographic research — in our data would likely result in massive underestimation of excess
fertility. While 7.3% of young Kenyan women in our sample already had more children by
KLPS round 2 than their stated desires in round 1, according to the earlier fertility desires
they recalled (in round 2) this share would only be 2.4%. Had we relied only on the later
survey round (as is typical in much other research), we would underestimate the prevalence
of excess fertility among young Kenya women by over two-thirds, as shown in Figure A.9.
Excess fertility would be even smaller, at just 1.3%, if judged against current desired fertility
(x2 ).
    Further, systematically biased recall of desired fertility, in part driven by ex-post ratio-
nalization, could affect both individual and social learning about the mapping of fertility
intentions into later outcomes. This could directly affect individuals’ beliefs about how chal-
lenging it is to achieve goals that they set for themselves, possibly leading to greater optimism
about future success and shaping later attitudes and behaviors. Moreover, beyond these in-
dividual impacts, inaccurate recall could contribute to maintaining high fertility norms in
the Kenyan communities that we study, and complicate inter-generational learning about
how best to use contraception and otherwise control fertility. Biased recall will make advice
from older and more “experienced” adults (directed at younger adults) less valuable, might
lead to rosy and unrealistic expectations about the process of having children, and transmit
preferences about desired fertility that are higher than older individuals actually possessed
at a younger age.
    Of course, there could also be social gains from this type of biased recall. The most
obvious beneficiaries are children whose parents have convinced themselves and others that
they are in fact “wanted”. Internalizing this belief may positively affect how parents interact


                                               19
with their children, with a range of benefits for these children and their families.



5     Conclusion

“Life can only be understood backwards; but it must be lived forwards.”
–Kierkegaard (1843)
    We use an unusual multi-year panel data on reproductive desires and realizations among
a population of Kenyan adults to document that preferences over a major life decision —
having children — change frequently and substantially over time. Individuals’ stated fertility
preferences appear to depend strongly on circumstances such as intra-household bargaining,
the gender composition of earlier children, and local social norms. The birth of unplanned
or unexpected children, and later ex-post rationalization, also appear to play an important
role in shaping recall of one’s own earlier fertility intentions, with few parents stating that
they had earlier wanted fewer children than they currently have.
    We also provide evidence that many individuals struggle to think through and anticipate
how their desired fertility will change in the future. This could lead to costly mistakes: not
being able to predict how one’s future behavior will be shaped by today’s decisions could
change the timing of marriage or fertility choices. While Kierkegaard’s quote (above) is
rather optimistic about human beings’ ability to understanding life in hindsight, our panel
data on fertility intentions and realizations among young Kenyan adults does not support
his optimism: when reflecting on earlier fertility preferences, few respondents appear able
(or willing) to acknowledge that their desires have changed at all. This illusion of stability
in one’s preferences may be important in shaping self-image and identity, local attitudes
about the “ideal” number of children and fertility norms, as well as the type of advice that
is transmitted to younger people about parenting, the process of having children, and even
the need for government family planning programs.
    While learning from more experienced individuals could, in principle, be highly benefi-



                                              20
cial for infrequent high-stake decisions when there is limited scope for learning from own
experience (such as having children), our data indicates that this advice may be distorted by
systematically biased recall, ex post rationalization, and wishful thinking. Further research
on these issues could be useful in the fertility domain and beyond, to generate better un-
derstanding of how — and why — people create narratives about their own life paths, draw
lessons from them, and provide advice to others based on their own experience.




                                             21
References
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn. 2013. “On the origins of gender
 roles: Women and the plough.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 469–530.

Askew, Ian, Ndugga Maggwa, and Francis Obare. 2017. “Fertility Transitions in
 Ghana and Kenya: Trends, Determinants, and Implications for Policy and Programs.”
 Population and Development Review, 43(S1): 289–307.

Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory, and Edward Miguel. 2008. “Tracking, Attrition and Data
 Quality in the Kenyan Life Panel Survey Round 1 (KLPS-1).” Center for International
 and Development Economics Research Working Paper No. C08-151.

Baird, Sarah, Joan Hamory Hicks, Michael Kremer, and Edward Miguel. 2016.
 “Worms at work: Long-run impacts of a child health investment.” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 131(4): 1637–1680.

Bankole, Akinrinola, and Charles F Westoff. 1998. “The consistency and validity of
 reproductive attitudes: evidence from Morocco.” Journal of biosocial science, 30(4): 439–
 455.

Bellemare, Marc F, Lindsey Novak, and Tara L Steinmetz. 2015. “All in the family:
 Explaining the persistence of female genital cutting in West Africa.” Journal of Develop-
 ment Economics, 116: 252–265.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2016. “Mindful economics: The production, con-
  sumption, and value of beliefs.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(3): 141–164.

Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2000. “Beyond the melting pot: cultural transmis-
  sion, marriage, and the evolution of ethnic and religious traits.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 115(3): 955–988.

Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2001. “The economics of cultural transmission
  and the dynamics of preferences.” Journal of Economic theory, 97(2): 298–319.

Busse, Meghan R, Devin G Pope, Jaren C Pope, and Jorge Silva-Risso. 2015. “The
 psychological effect of weather on car purchases.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 130(1): 371–414.

Campbell, Eugene K, and Puni G Campbell. 1997. “Family size and sex preferences
 and eventual fertility in Botswana.” Journal of Biosocial Science, 29(2): 191–204.

Casterline, John B, and RT Lazarus. 2010. “Determinants and consequences of high
 fertility: a synopsis of the evidence.” Addressing the Neglected MDG: World Bank Review
 of Population and High Fertility, World Bank publications.

Coyne, Christopher J, and Rachel L Coyne. 2014. “The identity economics of female
 genital mutilation.” The Journal of Developing Areas, 48(2): 137–152.


                                             22
Curtis, Siân L, and Charles F Westoff. 1996. “Intention to use contraceptives and
 subsequent contraceptive behavior in Morocco.” Studies in family planning, 239–250.
De Silva, W Indralal. 1992. “Achievement of reproductive intentions in Sri Lanka, 1982–
 1985: a longitudinal study.” Social Biology, 39(1-2): 123–138.
Eil, David, and Justin M Rao. 2011. “The good news-bad news effect: asymmetric
  processing of objective information about yourself.” American Economic Journal: Mi-
  croeconomics, 3(2): 114–138.
Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2006. “Fertility: The role of culture and
  family experience.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3): 552–561.
Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. “Culture: An empirical investigation
  of beliefs, work, and fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 146–
  177.
Günther, Isabel, and Kenneth Harttgen. 2016. “Desired fertility and number of children
 born across time and space.” Demography, 53(1): 55–83.
Guterman, Kai. 2015. “Unintended pregnancy as a predictor of child maltreatment.” Child
 abuse & neglect, 48: 160–169.
Iacovou, Maria, and Lara Patrı́cio Tavares. 2011. “Yearning, learning, and conceding:
  reasons men and women change their childbearing intentions.” Population and Develop-
  ment Review, 37(1): 89–123.
Kierkegaard, S. 1843. “Journalen JJ: 167, Søren Kierkegaards Skrifter (1997, Vol. 18, p.
 306).” Copenhagen: Søren Kierkegaard Research Center.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Jessica Pan, Jenny Shen, and Ebonya Washington. 2018. “The
 Mommy Effect: Do Women Anticipate the Employment Effects of Motherhood?” National
 Bureau of Economic Research.
Loewenstein, George, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Projection
  Bias in Predicting Future Utility.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1209–1248.
Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer. 2004. “Worms: identifying impacts on education
 and health in the presence of treatment externalities.” Econometrica, 72(1): 159–217.
Miller, Grant, and Kimberly Singer Babiarz. 2016. “Family planning program effects:
 Evidence from microdata.” Population and Development Review, 42(1): 7–26.
Mobius, Markus M, Muriel Niederle, Paul Niehaus, and Tanya S Rosenblat.
 2011. “Managing self-confidence: Theory and experimental evidence.” National Bureau of
 Economic Research.
Mwaikambo, Lisa, Ilene S Speizer, Anna Schurmann, Gwen Morgan, and Fariyal
 Fikree. 2011. “What works in family planning interventions: a systematic review.” Studies
 in family planning, 42(2): 67–82.

                                           23
Odermatt, Reto, and Alois Stutzer. 2015. “(Mis-) predicted subjective well-being fol-
 lowing life events.” Journal of the European Economic Association.

Pritchett, Lant H. 1994. “Desired fertility and the impact of population policies.” Popu-
 lation and Development Review, 1–55.

Quesnel-Vallée, Amélie, and S Philip Morgan. 2003. “Missing the target? Corre-
 spondence of fertility intentions and behavior in the US.” Population research and policy
 review, 22(5-6): 497–525.

Rocca, Corinne H, Irene Doherty, Nancy S Padian, Alan E Hubbard, and Alexan-
 dra M Minnis. 2010. “Pregnancy intentions and teenage pregnancy among Latinas: a
 mediation analysis.” Perspectives on sexual and reproductive health, 42(3): 186–196.

Simonsohn, Uri. 2010. “Weather to go to college.” The Economic Journal, 120(543): 270–
  280.

UNHCR. 2008. Eliminating female genital mutilation: an interagency statement. World
 Health Organization.

Vlassoff, Carol. 1990. “Fertility intentions and subsequent behavior: a longitudinal study
 in rural India.” Studies in Family Planning, 21(4): 216–225.

Westoff, Charles F, and Norman B Ryder. 1977. “The predictive validity of reproduc-
 tive intentions.” Demography, 14(4): 431–453.

Zimmermann, Florian. 2017. “The Dynamics of Motivated Beliefs.” Working Paper.




                                           24
A     Appendix

                                   Table A.1: Summary Statistics

                                                Women                                     Men
                                Sample 1                  Full Sample                  Full Sample
     Round                   1     2      3             1       2     3             1       2       3
       Age                 19.30 23.46 28.11          17.62 21.47 25.91           17.94 21.92 26.20
# Desired Children         3.46 3.29 3.39             N.A. 3.25 3.27              N.A. 3.52       3.50
# Living Children          0.75 1.64 2.34             0.35 1.07 1.85              0.08 0.52       1.20
     Parent                0.48 0.73 0.88             0.26 0.57 0.79              0.06 0.30       0.58
    Married                0.43 0.67 0.80             0.24 0.50 0.72              0.09 0.28       0.56
  Observations              239   239    239          2,343 2,506 2,575           2,866 2,575 2,680
Notes: Data for “sample 1” is only shown for those 239 women interviewed for all survey rounds. In all
cases, information is based on those individuals for whom data is available. Presented here are weighted
averages where observation weights are adjusted for the intense tracking rate in each round.“Parent” is
an indicator taking the value 1 if one has at least one living child. “Married” takes the value one if one is
married at the moment of the interview for the respective round. Desired fertility at the time of round 1
was only gathered from sample 1, which is why there is missing information for all men and all remaining
women of sample 2.




                                                     25
                    Table A.2: Desired Number of Children across 2 survey rounds




                                                         Desired Number of Children at Round 1
                                      0           1       2          3         4          5         6      7      8   Total
                         0         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.67       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00    0.67
                         1         0.00        0.53    0.25       1.15      0.78       0.00      0.33   0.00   0.00    3.05
          Desired
                         2         0.39        0.00    6.92       5.67      7.04       1.02      0.00   0.00   0.00   21.05
         Number
                         3         0.00        0.00    8.18      12.86    10.72        1.31      0.18   0.37   0.22   33.83
             of
                         4         0.00        0.00    3.41      10.13    13.55        1.45      1.21   0.00   0.00   29.75
         Children
                         5         0.00        0.00    0.18       1.08      1.66       5.45      0.00   0.00   0.00    8.37
         at Round
                         6         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.20       2.56      0.53   0.00   0.00    3.28
             2
                         7         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00
                         8         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00
                      Total        0.39        0.53   18.93      30.90    34.63       11.79      2.25   0.37   0.22     100

                              Sample Size               235
                              On-Diagonal             39.84
                              Off-Diagonal            60.16
                              Below Diagonal          27.78
                              Above Diagonal          32.38


                                                         Desired Number of Children at Round 2
                                      0           1       2          3         4          5         6      7      8   Total
                         0         0.00        0.00    0.35       0.27      0.19       0.40      0.00   0.00   0.00    1.21
                         1         0.00        0.00    1.59       0.71      0.00       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00    2.29
          Desired
                         2         0.00        1.84   10.74       5.39      2.46       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00   20.43
         Number
                         3         0.00        0.50    6.61      17.19      6.07       0.96      0.56   0.00   0.00   31.89
             of
                         4         0.00        0.92    4.13      10.22    10.56        2.52      0.42   0.00   0.00   28.76
         Children
                         5         0.71        0.00    0.50       2.71      5.48       1.40      0.40   0.00   0.00   11.20
         at Round
                         6         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.60      1.46       1.04      0.92   0.00   0.00    4.03
             3
                         7         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00
                         8         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.00       0.19      0.00   0.00   0.00    0.19
                      Total        0.71        3.25   23.92      37.09    26.22        6.51      2.29   0.00   0.00     100

                              Sample Size               237
                              On-Diagonal             40.80
                              Off-Diagonal            59.20
                              Below Diagonal          36.91
                              Above Diagonal          22.29


                                                         Desired Number of Children at Round 1
                                      0           1       2          3         4          5         6      7      8   Total
                         0         0.00        0.00    0.27       0.36      0.19       0.40      0.00   0.00   0.00    1.21
                         1         0.00        0.00    1.59       0.40      0.00       0.31      0.00   0.00   0.00    2.30
          Desired
                         2         0.42        0.56    5.92       5.95      6.19       0.79      0.36   0.00   0.00   20.19
         Number
                         3         0.00        0.00    6.23      14.37      9.25       1.63      0.75   0.00   0.00   32.23
             of
                         4         0.00        0.00    5.25       6.92    13.91        2.57      0.19   0.00   0.00   28.84
         Children
                         5         0.00        0.00    0.36       2.24      5.00       2.59      0.19   0.40   0.23   11.00
         at Round
                         6         0.00        0.00    0.00       1.23      1.51       0.92      0.38   0.00   0.00    4.04
             3
                         7         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00    0.00
                         8         0.00        0.00    0.00       0.00      0.19       0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00    0.19
                      Total        0.42        0.56   19.62      31.46    36.22        9.22      1.86   0.40   0.23     100

                              Sample Size               236
                              On-Diagonal             37.16
                              Off-Diagonal            62.84
                              Below Diagonal          30.83
                              Above Diagonal          32.01




Notes: These tables show the share of respondents for each combination of desired children in rounds 1 and
2, 2 and 3 and 1 and 3 (as long as the number of desired children is 8 or lower in both survey rounds).
Observations are weighted by weights in the later survey round.
                                                                       26
        Figure A.1: Distribution of Number of Children desired across survey rounds

                                          Number of Children Desired
                           Round 1                            Round 2                            Round 3
                 .4     (Ages 16 to 22)                    (Ages 20 to 26)                    (Ages 25 to 31)




                                                    .4




                                                                                       .4
                 .3




                                                    .3




                                                                                       .3
              Density




                                                 Density




                                                                                    Density
               .2




                                                  .2




                                                                                     .2
                 .1




                                                    .1




                                                                                       .1
                 0




                                                    0




                                                                                       0
                        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10             0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10             0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10


Notes: This figure shows the distribution of desired fertility for the 239 women of sample 1 who were
interviewed for all three survey rounds. Observations are weighted by the respective survey round weights.
Respondents who answered “don’t know” are excluded. Those who answered “as many as possible” are
re-coded as wanting 10 children. Vertical lines show the average desires of 3.46 in round 1, 3.29 in round 2
and 3.39 in round 3.




                                                                27
        Figure A.2: Evolution of desired fertility and fertility realizations across ages
                                             (a) Round 2 Data




                                             (b) Round 3 Data




Notes: The figure plots average desired fertility and fertility realizations by age for sample 2 and separate by
gender, using both rounds 2 and 3. Both panels display weighted averages of desired children and number of
living children conditional on age, where the weights are adjusted for the intensive tracking rate. Only ages
for which there are at least 100 observations for each gender are included, resulting in ages 18 to 26 for round
2 and 22 to 30 for round 3. Individuals answering “don’t know” or “as many as possible” are excluded.




                                                      28
         Figure A.3: Changes in Desired Fertility by Marital Status and Parenthood
                              (a) Changes in Desires Round 2 to 3 by Marital Status

                                                                       Women
                              Married (Rd 2) (N=992)              Newly Married (N=440)              Unmarried (Rd 3) (N=537)

                       .5




                                                           .5




                                                                                              .5
                       .4




                                                           .4




                                                                                              .4
                    Density




                                                        Density




                                                                                           Density
                        .3




                                                            .3




                                                                                               .3
                   .2




                                                       .2




                                                                                          .2
                       .1




                                                           .1




                                                                                              .1
                       0




                                                           0




                                                                                              0
                              −4   −2   0    2    4               −4   −2   0   2    4                −4     −2    0   2       4



                                                                        Men
                              Married (Rd 2) (N=603)              Newly Married (N=612)              Unmarried (Rd 3) (N=867)
                       .5




                                                           .5




                                                                                              .5
                       .4




                                                           .4




                                                                                              .4
                    Density




                                                        Density




                                                                                           Density
                        .3




                                                            .3




                                                                                               .3
                   .2




                                                       .2




                                                                                          .2
                       .1




                                                           .1




                                                                                              .1
                       0




                                                           0




                                                                                              0
                              −4   −2   0    2    4               −4   −2   0   2    4                −4     −2    0   2       4




                               (b) Changes in Desires Round 2 to 3 by Parenthood

                                                                       Women
                              Parent (Rd 2) (N=1153)               New Parent (N=424)                      Childless (N=392)
                       .5




                                                           .5




                                                                                              .5
                       .4




                                                           .4




                                                                                              .4
                    Density




                                                        Density




                                                                                           Density
                        .3




                                                            .3




                                                                                               .3
                   .2




                                                       .2




                                                                                          .2
                       .1




                                                           .1




                                                                                              .1
                       0




                                                           0




                                                                                              0




                              −4   −2   0    2    4               −4   −2   0   2    4                −4     −2    0   2       4



                                                                        Men
                              Parent (Rd 2) (N=644)                New Parent (N=639)                      Childless (N=799)
                       .5




                                                           .5




                                                                                              .5
                       .4




                                                           .4




                                                                                              .4
                    Density




                                                        Density




                                                                                           Density
                        .3




                                                            .3




                                                                                               .3
                   .2




                                                       .2




                                                                                          .2
                       .1




                                                           .1




                                                                                              .1
                       0




                                                           0




                                                                                              0




                              −4   −2   0    2    4               −4   −2   0   2    4                −4     −2    0   2       4




Notes: This figure plots changes in desires (x3 − x2 ), for both women and men, separately by marital status
and parenthood. From left to right, it distinguishes those who had been married (parents) by round 2,
those who married or became parents between round 2 and 3 and those who were unmarried or childless by
round 3. Observations are weighted using round 3 weights. Among ”Unmarried (Rd. 3)”, 26.83% increased
desires, compared to 37.14% among ”Newly Married” (p-value of 0.001). Average change in desires is -0.08
vs. +0.13 (p-value of 0.005). Comparisons of ”Unmarried (Rd 3)” vs. ”Married (Rd 2)” are similar. There
are no significant differences between ”Married (Rd 2)” and ”Newly Married”. For men, the patterns are
similar. For panel b), the difference is between mothers at round 2 and the two other groups, recent mothers
are significantly less likely (28.09%) to have increased desires than more experienced mothers (”Round 2”)
with 40.58% (p-value of 0.001). The average change in desires is -0.05 vs. +0.17 (significant at 1% level).
The same qualititative patterns apply to men.
                                                                        29
Figure A.4: Changes in Desired Fertility: Gender Realizations (Mothers who achieved their
round 2 desired fertility, but do not yet have more children than they earlier desired)

                                              Round 2 to 3
                                            (ca. age 21 to 26)
          One Child Away                 Mixed Gender                  Sons Only               Daughters Only
             (N=437)                        (N=224)                     (N=38)                    (N=40)
      .6




                                  .6




                                                                .6




                                                                                       .6
      .5




                                  .5




                                                                .5




                                                                                       .5
      .4




                                  .4




                                                                .4




                                                                                       .4
    Density




                               Density




                                                             Density




                                                                                     Density
     .3




                                .3




                                                              .3




                                                                                      .3
      .2




                                  .2




                                                                .2




                                                                                       .2
      .1




                                  .1




                                                                .1




                                                                                       .1
      0




                                  0




                                                                0




                                                                                       0




              −4 −2 0 2 4                 −4 −2 0 2 4                  −4 −2 0 2 4               −4 −2 0 2 4


Notes: This graph depicts the change in desires (x3 − x2 ) for women who have not exceeded the number of
children they desired in round 2 yet, who have at least two children and who did not experienced a dead
birth or the death of a child between the survey rounds 2 and 3. Observations are weighted by round 3
weights. The left panel shows changes for the 437 women who by survey round 3 are one child away from
their desired fertility (f3 = x2 − 1), call this “group 1”. The 3 panels to the right of this graph show changes
for women who have reached their round 2 desired fertility by round 3 (f3 = x2 ), separately for those whose
desired children were of both genders (N=224, “group 2”), only boys (N=38, “group 3”) or only girls (N=40,
“group 4”). Average changes in desires [and shares increasing desires] (from left to right) were 0.12 [33%],
0.34 [39%], 0.64 [50%] and 0.72 [67%]. Following differences are statistically significant: the share increasing
for groups 1 and 2 against group 4 (at the 1% level); the average change for group 1 vs. all other groups
(1% level), group 2 vs. 3 (10% level) and group 4 (5% level).




                                                        30
Figure A.5: Expectations for different scenarios: “In each situation, would you like to bear
the same number of children, or a larger or smaller number?”




Notes: This figure portrays the share of women in sample 1 who answered “more”, “same” or “less” for all 19
selected hypothetical scenarios. Respondents answering “don’t know” to a specific question are dropped. The
maximum number of respondents answering “don’t know” is 9 (for the scenario “Unable to find husband”).
For all other scenarios, at most 3 women said they do not know. Answers are available only for women of
sample 1 such that 351 women were asked these questions. Those questions only applying to unmarried
women were asked to 227 unmarried women. Observation weights from round 1 are used.




                                                    31
                             Figure A.6: Recalled Change for Women and Men

                                              Recalled Change
                                           Intentions Rd. 2 − Recall Rd. 1

                             All                            Women                                Men
                         (N=4945)                            (N=2464)                        (N=2481)
            .8




                                                .8




                                                                                .8
            .6




                                                .6




                                                                                .6
         Density




                                             Density




                                                                             Density
          .4




                                              .4




                                                                              .4
            .2




                                                .2




                                                                                .2
            0




                                                0




                                                                                0




                   −4   −2   0     2   4               −4   −2   0   2   4             −4   −2    0    2   4


Notes: This graph plots the distribution of change individuals recall (i.e. x2 − x̂R
                                                                                   1|2 ) for all respondents who
answered the recall question in round 2, as well as broken down for women and men separately. As noted
above the individual panels, 4,945 individuals answered these questions, 2,464 women and 2,481 men. Since
we do not require data on desired fertility in round 1, the sample we can use in this case is much bigger.
Observations are weighted by round 2 weights.




                                                            32
       Figure A.7: Recall Performance By Parenthood and Marital Status at Round 1
                                                       (a) Recall Performance By Parenthood at Round 1

                                                                No Parent (Rd 1)                                                               Parent (Rd 1)
                                                                  Recall Direction                                                              Recall Direction




                     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                    0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                            p−value=.426                                                                  p−value=.02
                                Share




                                                                                                               Share
                                                       Stable         Lowered        Increased                                       Stable         Lowered        Increased


                                                                 Recall 0 Change                                                               Recall 0 Change
                                                                            p−value=.309                                                                  p−value=.026
                     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                    0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                 Share




                                                                                                                Share
                                                Stable (N=55)     Lowered (N=67) Increased (N=39)                              Stable (N=46)    Lowered (N=30) Increased (N=35)



                                                      (b) Recall Performance By Marital Status at Round 1

                                                                Unmarried (Rd 1)                                                               Married (Rd 1)
                                                                  Recall Direction                                                              Recall Direction
                     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                    0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                            p−value=.534                                                                  p−value=.006
                                Share




                                                                                                               Share




                                                       Stable         Lowered        Increased                                       Stable         Lowered        Increased


                                                                 Recall 0 Change                                                               Recall 0 Change
                                                                            p−value=.397                                                                  p−value=.008
                     0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                    0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                 Share




                                                                                                                Share




                                                Stable (N=64)     Lowered (N=71) Increased (N=42)                              Stable (N=37)    Lowered (N=26) Increased (N=32)


Notes: For all 277 women of sample 1 in both round 1 and 2, these graphs plot the shares for correctly
recalling the direction of change and recalling zero change, separately by whether they were mothers (panel
a)) or married (panel b)) by round 1 or not. Observation weights from round 2 are used. Fisher’s exact
test and bootstrapped versions (1,000 repetitions) for comparing those who increased vs. lowered desires
(using unweighted observations) yield the following p-values: for “Recall Direction” 0.489 and 0.344 (for
those without a child), 0.069 and 0.040 (for mothers). For recalling zero change: 0.399 and 0.325 (for those
without a child), 0.094 and 0.053 (for mothers). For panel b): for “Recall Direction” 0.495 and 0.436 (for
those not married), 0.032 and 0.017 (for those married). For recalling zero change: 0.528 and 0.376 (not
married), 0.025 and 0.021 (married). There is no significant difference for either recall measure for those
who lowered desires depending on whether they were married or not, or mothers or not at round 1. P-
values for comparisons for those who increased desires are the following: by marital status (0.111 for recall
direction, 0.067 for recalling zero change) and by motherhood (0.063 for recall direction, 0.031 for recalling
zero change). Repeating the same for those with stable desires, the p-values are 0.004 in panel a) and 0.030
for panel b).
                                                                                                 33
Figure A.8: Recall Performance conditional on the Magnitude of Changes in Desired Fertility

                                                          Recall Direction


                      1
                      .9
                      .8
                                     p−value=.023                                     p−value=0.81
                      .7
                  .4 .5 .6
                   Share
                      .3
                      .2
                      .1
                      0




                                −2                  −1            0               1                  2
                                                           Change in Desires


                                                          Recall 0 Change
                      1




                                     p−value=.085                                     p−value=.535
                      .9
                      .8
                      .7
                  .5 .6
                  Share
                      .4
                      .3
                      .2
                      .1
                      0




                             −2 (N=30)        −1 (N=56)       0 (N=101)        1 (N=59)        2 (N=13)
                                                           Change in Desires

Notes: This table plots recall performance and behavior depending on how much women changed their
desires between survey round 1 and 2 (i.e. x2 − x1 ), for all women who changed their desires by at most
2 children. This applies to 259 out of the 277 women who participated in the fertility modules for both,
round 1 and 2. Observation weights from round 2 are used. The reported p-values are from testing for
equivalence of proportions between those who lowered (increased) desires by two vs. one child. When
using unweighted observations, p-values from Fisher’s exact and bootstrapped tests (1,000 repetitions) are
the following: for recall direction .037 and .028 (for those who lowered) and 1.0 and .870 (for those who
increased). For recalling zero change: .093 and .057 (for those who lowered), 1.0 and .671 (for those who
increased). Comparing proportions of those who lowered vs. those who increased desires, conditional on
having changed by 2 children (1 child), yields following p-values: 0.073 (0.646) for recall direction, 0.041
(0.358) for recalling zero change.



                                                               34
                 Figure A.9: Measured and Perceived Excess Fertility by Round 2

                                                Excess Fertility against...
                                           Past Desires (Children Rd. 2 − Desires Rd. 1)
                                        Recalled Desires (Children Rd. 2 − Recall Rd. 1)
                              .3
                              .2
                    Density
                              .1
                              0




                                   −5                              0                            5

Notes: This figure plots the distribution of excess fertility by round 2 as judged against true desires in round
1 (i.e. f2 − x1 ) [unfilled bars] as well as excess fertility as judged against recalled desires (i.e. f2 − x̂R
                                                                                                              1|2 ) [filled
bars]. 273 women who participated in the fertility modules in round 1 and 2 and gave numeric answers in
all rounds are included. The share of those with excess fertility is 7.30% as judged against true past desires
and 2.38% as judged against recalled desires. It is 1.34% if judged against current desires (x2 ). Intensive
tracking adjusted respondent weights from round 2 are used.




                                                             35
