                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


      REGRESSIVE SIN TAXES, WITH AN APPLICATION TO THE OPTIMAL SODA
                                   TAX

                                         Hunt Allcott
                                      Benjamin Lockwood
                                       Dmitry Taubinsky

                                      Working Paper 25841
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25841


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge MA 02138
                                     May 2019


We thank Kelly Brownell, Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, Stefano DellaVigna, Rebecca Diamond,
Jean-Pierre Dube, Matt Gentzkow, Anna Grummon, David Laibson, Alex Rees-Jones, Christina
Roberto, Na'ama Shenhav, Claire Wang, Danny Yagan, and seminar participants at Berkeley,
Bonne, Brown, Carnegie Mellon and the University of Pittsburgh, Columbia, Cologne, Davis,
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Michigan State University, the National Tax
Association, National University of Singapore, the NBER Public Economics 2018 Spring
Meetings, NYU, Princeton, Stanford, the Society for Benefit-Cost Analysis, UCLA, University of
British Columbia, University of Michigan, University of Virginia, and Wharton for helpful
feedback. We are grateful to the Sloan Foundation for grant funding. The survey was determined
to be exempt from review by the Institutional Review Boards at the University of Pennsylvania
(protocol number 828341) and NYU (application FY2017-1123). Nielsen requires the following
text: This paper reflects the authors' own analyses and calculations based in part on data reported
by Nielsen through its Homescan, RMS, and PanelViews services for beverage categories over
2006-2016, for all retail channels in the U.S. market. Calculated based on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided by the Kilts Center for Marketing Data
Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The conclusions drawn from the
Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views of Nielsen or the National
Bureau of economic Research. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not
involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. Replication files are available
from https://sites.google.com/site/allcott/research. This paper subsumes and replaces Lockwood
and Taubinsky (2017).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hunt Allcott, Benjamin Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Regressive Sin Taxes, With an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax
Hunt Allcott, Benjamin Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 25841
May 2019
JEL No. D9,H0,I1

                                           ABSTRACT

A common objection to “sin taxes”—corrective taxes on goods that are thought to be
overconsumed, such as cigarettes, alcohol, and sugary drinks—is that they often fall
disproportionately on low-income consumers. This paper studies the interaction between
corrective and redistributive motives in a general optimal taxation framework and delivers
empirically implementable sufficient statistics formulas for the optimal commodity tax. The
optimal sin tax is increasing in the price elasticity of demand, increasing in the degree to which
lower-income consumers are more biased or more elastic to the tax, decreasing in the extent to
which consumption is concentrated among the poor, and decreasing in income effects, because
income effects imply that commodity taxes create labor supply distortions. Contrary to common
intuitions, stronger preferences for redistribution can increase the optimal sin tax, if lower-income
consumers are more responsive to taxes or are more biased. As an application, we estimate the
optimal nationwide tax on sugar-sweetened beverages in our model, using Nielsen Homescan
data and a specially designed survey measuring nutrition knowledge and self-control. Holding
federal income tax rates constant, we find an optimal federal sugar-sweetened beverage tax of 1
to 2.1 cents per ounce in our model, although optimal city-level taxes could be as much as 60%
lower due to cross-border shopping.

Hunt Allcott                                      Dmitry Taubinsky
Department of Economics                           University of California, Berkeley
New York University                               Department of Economics
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                       530 Evans Hall #3880
New York, NY 10012                                Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                          and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu                              dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu

Benjamin Lockwood
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1400 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall 3620
Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ben.lockwood@wharton.upenn.edu
      “The only way to protect all of us, including the poor, from further harm is through a
      sugary drink tax...”
          – Forbes magazine article (Huehnergarth, 2016)

      “A tax on soda and juice drinks would disproportionately increase taxes on low-income
      families in Philadelphia.”
          – U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders (2016)

      “They’ve [big soda] made their money of the backs of poor people, but this money [soda
      tax revenue] will stay in poor neighborhoods.”
          – Philadelphia Mayor Jim Kenney (quoted in Blumgart (2016))


I    Introduction
A large literature in behavioral economics suggests that biases such as self-control problems, inat-
tention, and incorrect beliefs can lead to over-consumption of “sin goods” such as cigarettes, alcohol,
unhealthy foods, and energy-inefficient durable goods. Consumption of these goods can also gen-
erate externalities in the form of health care costs or pollution. Consequently, “sin taxes” that
discourage consumption of such goods could increase social welfare. This argument has led to
widespread taxation of cigarettes and alcohol, as well as newer taxes on sugar-sweetened beverages
in seven U.S. cities and 34 countries around the world (GFRP 2019).
    What is the optimal level of a sin tax? The existing literature frequently invokes a corrective
logic dating to Pigou (1920) and Diamond (1973): the optimal corrective tax equals the sum of
the externality and the average mistake (or “internality”) of marginal consumers.1 This principle,
however, assumes that consumers do not vary in their marginal utility of money, and thus that
policymakers care equally about the poor versus the rich. This assumption is starkly out of sync
with public debates about sin taxes. As highlighted by the above quote from Senator Bernie
Sanders, a common objection to sin taxes is that they are regressive.2
    In response to such objections, however, others argue that the harms caused by overconsumption
from behavioral biases are themselves regressive, so a corrective tax might confer greater benefits
on the poor than the rich. For example, smoking and sugary drink consumption cause lung cancer,
diabetes, and other health problems that disproportionately affect the poor. Furthermore, as
emphasized in the above quote from Philadelphia Mayor Jim Kenney, regressivity can be reduced
by “recycling” sin tax revenues to programs that benefit the poor.
    This paper presents a general theoretical model delivering the first explicit formulas for an opti-
mal commodity tax that accounts for each of the three central considerations in such policy debates:
   1
     For Pigouvian taxation of internalities, see O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006), Gruber and Kőszegi (2001), Allcott,
Mullainathan, and Taubinsky (2014), Allcott and Taubinsky (2015), Heutel (2015), and Mullainathan, Schwartzstein,
and Congdon (2012).
   2
     The poor disproportionately consume cigarettes and sugary drinks, while the rich disproportionately take up
energy efficiency subsidies (Gruber and Kőszegi, 2004; Goldin and Homonoff, 2013; Allcott, Knittel, and Taubinsky,
2015; Davis and Borenstein, 2016; Davis and Knittel, 2016).



                                                        1
correction of externalities and/or consumer bias, regressivity, and revenue recycling. We then use
the theoretical formulas to estimate the optimal nationwide tax on sugar-sweetened beverages using
new data and empirical techniques to estimate elasticities and biases.
       Our theoretical model in Section II builds on Saez’s (2002a) extension of Atkinson and Stiglitz
(1976) by considering an economy of consumers with heterogeneous earning abilities and tastes
who choose labor supply and a consumption bundle that exhausts their after-tax income. The
policymaker chooses a set of linear commodity taxes and a nonlinear income tax, which can be used
to provide transfers to poor consumers, to raise money for commodity subsidies, or to distribute
commodity tax revenue (in a progressive way, if desired). Unlike those models, however, we allow
for a corrective motive of taxation, driven by externalities or internalities from consumer mistakes.
       Our theoretical results fill two gaps in the literature. First, even in the absence of internalities
or externalities, there was no known general formula for optimal commodity taxes in the presence
of nonlinear income taxation and preference heterogeneity.3 As a result, tax economists’ policy
recommendations have relied on the canonical result of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) that commodity
tax rates should be uniform. This extreme result, however, requires a homogeneous preferences
assumption that is likely unrealistic in many settings—and which we show is strongly rejected
in the case of sugary drinks. Second, there has been no general account of how redistributive
motives and behavioral biases jointly shape optimal commodity taxes. Although this is not the
first paper to study internality-correcting commodity taxes, it is the first to embed internalities in
the dominant optimal taxation framework of public economics, allowing for redistributive motives
and a nonlinear income tax, as well as commodity taxes. Most previous papers studying internality
taxes abstract from redistributive motives. Those that do not (such as Gruber and Kőszegi, 2004;
Bernheim and Rangel, 2004; Farhi and Gabaix, 2015) focus on specialized models of bias and/or
consider simplified tax environments that do not permit redistribution through nonlinear income
taxation, means-tested transfer programs, or progressive revenue recycling.4
       Our optimal commodity tax formula decomposes into two terms that address these two gaps.
The first term represents the “redistributive motive”: the desire to use the commodity tax to
transfer money from the rich to the poor by subsidizing goods consumed by low earners. This
motive depends on the extent of between-income preference heterogeneity, which is assumed away
in the special case studied by Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976). We derive a novel sufficient statistic
that quantifies this preference heterogeneity: the difference between the cross-sectional variation in
consumption of the sin good across incomes and the (causal) income effect.5
   3
     Saez (2002a) answered the qualitative question of when a “small” commodity tax can increase welfare in the
presence of preference heterogeneity, but left to future work the task of deriving an expression for the optimal
tax, writing “It would of course be extremely useful to obtain optimal commodity tax formulas” in such a general
framework. See also Diamond and Spinnewijn (2011) and Gauthier and Henriet (2018) for work on discrete type
models.
   4
     Gruber and Kőszegi (2004) study the incidence of cigarette taxes on low- and high-income consumers with self-
control problems, but they do not characterize the optimal tax implications. Both Farhi and Gabaix (2015) and
Bernheim and Rangel (2004) assume that commodity taxes are the sole source of redistribution: the commodity tax
revenue has to be distributed lump-sum and cannot, for example, be spent on transfers to the poor or programs that
benefit the poor.
   5
     Our results also generalize Jacobs and Boadway (2014), Jacobs and de Mooij (2015), and Kaplow (2012), who


                                                        2
    The second term in our optimal commodity tax formula represents the “corrective motive”: the
desire to reduce over-consumption arising from internalities and externalities by imposing taxes on
harmful goods. To incorporate internalities, we follow the sufficient statistics approach to behavioral
public finance (Farhi and Gabaix, 2015; Chetty, 2015; Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon,
2012) by adopting a money-metric definition of bias, which can transparently accommodate many
specific behavioral biases and lends itself to direct empirical quantification.
    The price elasticity of demand determines the relative importance of the corrective versus
redistributive motives. High demand elasticity implies a large change in sin good consumption
for a given degree of redistribution, and thus that the effects of the tax are primarily corrective
rather than redistributive. Conversely, low demand elasticity implies that the effects of the tax are
mostly redistributive rather than corrective.
    In contrast to the conventional wisdom that inequality aversion unambiguously reduces optimal
taxes on sin goods heavily consumed by the poor, we show that it can either decrease or increase
the optimal sin tax. Although inequality aversion does magnify the redistributive motive, pushing
toward a lower sin tax, it also amplifies the corrective motive when poor consumers are relatively
more biased or more elastic, which pushes toward a higher sin tax.
    A key contribution of our theoretical work is that it delivers formulas for optimal commodity
taxes as a function of sufficient statistics that can be estimated in a wide variety of empirical appli-
cations. In Section III, we apply the theory by estimating the necessary statistics for the optimal
nationwide tax on sugar-sweetened beverages (hereafter, “SSBs”). We use Nielsen Homescan, a
60,000-household, nationally representative panel dataset of grocery purchases, and Nielsen Retail
Measurement Services (RMS), a panel dataset from 37,000 stores covering about 40 percent of all
U.S. grocery purchases. A plot of the Homescan data in Figure 1 illustrates how SSB taxes could
be regressive: households with annual income below $10,000 purchase about 101 liters of SSBs per
adult each year, while households with income above $100,000 purchase only half that amount.
    To identify the price elasticity of demand, we develop an instrument that exploits retail chains’
idiosyncratic pricing decisions for the UPCs that a household usually buys at the retailers where
the household usually buys them. For example, if Safeway puts Gatorade on sale, people who
often buy Gatorade at Safeway face a lower price for their SSBs compared to people who don’t buy
Gatorade and/or don’t shop at Safeway. We ensure that the instrument is not contaminated by local
or national demand shocks by using the retailer’s average price charged outside of a household’s
county, and by using only deviations from each UPC’s national average price. Because retailers
regularly vary prices independently of each other while keeping prices fairly rigid across their stores
(DellaVigna and Gentzkow, Forthcoming), the instrument delivers higher power while relaxing
stronger assumptions required for traditional instruments such as those proposed by Hausman
(1996) and Nevo (2001).
study optimal commodity taxes under strong homogeneity assumptions. Our work also extends the “double dividend”
literature analyzing the interaction between carbon taxes and income tax distortions (e.g. Bovenberg and Goulder
1996; Goulder 1995; Goulder and Williams 2003; Goulder 2013); this literature assumes linear income taxes and does
not consider redistributive motives.



                                                        3
   We estimate the income elasticity of demand using within-county income variation over time.
We find a small positive income elasticity, which means that the downward-sloping consumption-
income profile illustrated in Figure 1 is driven by strong between-income preference heterogene-
ity, not by causal income effects. This strong preference heterogeneity—but not the declining
consumption-income profile per se—reduces the socially optimal SSB tax.
   To quantify consumer bias, we designed a survey of 18,000 Homescan households measuring
nutrition knowledge and self-control. We find that both of these bias proxies are strongly associated
with SSB purchases. For example, households in the lowest decile of nutrition knowledge purchase
more than twice as many SSBs as households in the highest decile. Furthermore, the distribution
of these proxies suggests that bias may be regressive. People with household incomes below $10,000
have 0.82 standard deviations lower nutrition knowledge and report that they have 0.40 standard
deviations lower self-control than do people with household incomes above $100,000.
   We formally quantify consumer bias using what we call the “counterfactual normative consumer”
strategy, which builds on Bronnenberg et al. (2015), Handel and Kolstad (2015), and other work.
We estimate the relationship between SSB consumption and bias proxies after conditioning on a
rich set of preference measures and demographics and correcting for measurement error. We then
predict “normative” consumption—that is, consumption if people had the nutrition knowledge of
dietitians and nutritionists as well as perfect self-control. To interpret this prediction, we assume
that any unobserved preferences are conditionally independent of bias. This unconfoundedness
assumption is the key weakness of our approach.
   We predict that American households would consume 31 to 37 percent fewer SSBs if they had the
nutrition knowledge of dietitians and nutritionists as well as perfect self-control. This estimated
overconsumption is higher among the poor, accounting for 37 to 48 percent of consumption for
households with incomes below $10,000, compared to 27 to 32 percent of consumption for households
with incomes above $100,000. This regressive bias implies a higher optimal soda tax.
   In Section IV, we implement our optimal tax formulas using our empirical results. In our
baseline specification, the optimal federal-level SSB tax is 1.42 cents per ounce, or 39 percent of the
quantity-weighted average price of SSBs recorded in Homescan. For a broad range of parameter
specifications, the federal SSB tax that maximizes welfare in our model lies in the range of 1 to
2.1 cents per ounce, or 28 to 59 percent of the quantity-weighted average price. Our preferred
estimates imply that the welfare benefits from implementing the optimal tax are between $2.4
billion and $6.8 billion per year. Although SSB consumption is highly concentrated among low
earners, the overall welfare effects are distributed much more evenly across incomes, since our
estimates imply that the internality corrections are also greatest at low incomes. The welfare gains
are about $100 million per year higher than what would be realized by imposing a one cent per
ounce federal tax—currently the modal policy among U.S. cities that have implemented SSB taxes.
After adjusting for the estimated cross-border shopping induced by recent city-level taxes, however,
we estimate that the optimal city-level tax could be as low as 0.53 cents per ounce, which is lower
than the current modal policy. Finally, we emphasize the importance of accounting for behavioral


                                                  4
biases when designing policy: a tax designed without accounting for behavioral biases foregoes
nearly $1 billion per year in potential welfare gains.
       In addition to contributing to optimal tax theory and behavioral public economics, our work
also connects to a large and growing empirical literature on SSB taxes. One set of papers estimates
the price elasticity of SSB demand and/or the effect of SSB taxes on consumption.6 Our work con-
tributes transparent estimates in a large nationwide sample, whereas most previous papers require
more restrictive identifying assumptions or deliver less precise estimates, for example because they
exploit only one specific SSB tax change. A second set of papers additionally estimates how SSB
taxes would affect consumer surplus, including Dubois, Griffith, and O’Connell (2017), Harding and
Lovenheim (2015), Wang (2015), and Zhen et al. (2014). These papers do not attempt to quantify
consumer bias, making it difficult to use the estimates to evaluate a policy motivated by consumer
bias. The most important difference between our paper and the existing soda tax literature is that,
to our knowledge, ours is the only one that develops a theoretical and empirical framework for
asking the following question: what is the optimal soda tax? More broadly, this paper provides a
theoretical and empirical framework for calculating optimal commodity taxes that can be applied
in a wide variety of contexts.


II       Deriving the Optimal Sin Tax
II.A       Model
We begin with a conventional static optimal taxation setting: consumers have multidimensional
heterogeneous types θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rn+ , distributed with measure µ(θ). They supply labor to generate
pre-tax income z, which is subject to a nonlinear tax T (z). Net income is spent on a two goods:
a numeraire consumption good c and a “sin good” s, with pre-tax price p, which is subject to a
linear commodity tax t. Therefore the consumer’s budget constraint is c + (p + t)s ≤ z − T (z).
       Each consumer chooses a bundle (c, s, z), subject to her budget constraint, to maximize “decision
utility” U (c, s, z; θ). U is assumed to be increasing and weakly concave in its first two arguments,
and decreasing and strictly concave in the third. Decision utility may differ from “normative utility”
V (c, s, z; θ), which the consumers would choose to maximize if they were fully informed and free
from behavioral biases. Sin good consumption also generates a fiscal cost to the government of
e per unit of s consumed. Pecuniary fiscal externalities are a natural case for sin goods such as
sugar-sweetened beverages and cigarettes that raise the health care costs for public programs like
Medicare.
       The policymaker selects taxes T (·) and t to maximize normative utility, aggregated across all
consumers using type-specific Pareto weights α(θ),
   6
    This includes Bollinger and Sexton (2019), Duffey et al. (2010), Finkelstein et al. (2013), Fletcher, Frisvold, and
Teft (2010), Rojas and Wang (2017), Silver et al. (2017), Smith, Lin, and Lee (2010), Tiffin, Kehlbacher, and Salois
(2015), Zhen et al. (2011), and others; see Andreyeva, Long, and Brownell (2010), Powell et al. (2013), and Thow,
Downs, and Jan (2014) for reviews.




                                                          5
                                            Z                                         
                                    max              α(θ)[V (c(θ), s(θ), z(θ); θ)]dµ(θ) ,                                   (1)
                                      T,t        Θ

subject to a government budget constraint, which includes the externality costs of sin good con-
sumption,
                                        Z
                                                (ts(θ) + T (z(θ) − es(θ))dµ(θ) ≥ R                                          (2)
                                            Θ

and to consumer optimization

             {c(θ), s(θ), z(θ)} = arg max U (c, s, z; θ)                s.t.   c + (p + t)s ≤ z − T (z) for all θ.          (3)
                                            {c,s,z}


The difference between U and V can capture a variety of different psychological biases. For ex-
ample, consumers may have incorrect beliefs about certain attributes of s, such as calorie content,
future health costs, or energy efficiency (Attari et al., 2010; Bollinger, Leslie, and Sorensen, 2011;
Allcott, 2013). Alternatively, consumers may have limited attention or salience bias with respect
to certain attributes of s (Allcott and Taubinsky, 2015). Finally, present focus may lead consumers
to underweight the future health costs of some goods (e.g, potato chips or cigarettes) as in (Gruber
and Kőszegi, 2004) and O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006). Our framework allows us to treat present
focus as a bias. However, our framework also allows us to study other welfare criteria that may
be applied to the model—for example, the policy might place some normative weight both on the
“future-oriented self” and on the “in-the-moment self.”
       A key goal of our theoretical analysis is to derive optimal tax formulas that can accommodate
a variety of possible consumer biases while still being empirically implementable. We do this by
constructing a price metric for consumer bias.
       Formally, let s(p + t, y, z, θ) be the sin good consumption chosen at total price p + t by a type θ
consumer who earns z and has disposable income y.7 Analogously, define sV (p + t, y, z, θ) to be the
amount of s that would be chosen if the consumer were maximizing V instead. We define the bias,
denoted γ(p + t, y, z, θ), as the value for which s(p + t, y, z, θ) = sV (p + t − γ, y − sγ, z, θ). In words,
γ is equal to the compensated price reduction that produces the same change in demand as the
                                                      Us0      0
bias does. In terms of primitives, γ =                Uc0   − VVs0 .8 (Throughout, we will use the notation fx0 to denote
                                                               c
                                                   00 for the the cross-partial derivative with respect
the derivative of f (x, y) with respect to x, and fxy
to x and y, etc. When no ambiguity arises, we sometimes suppress some arguments and write, for
example, s(θ) for concision.) If γ(θ) > 0, this means that type θ consumers over-consume s relative
to their normative preferences, whereas γ(θ) < 0 means that type θ consumers under-consume.
Throughout the paper, we will assume that the sole source of disagreement between the consumer
and policy maker is about the merits of s; we do not focus on labor supply misoptimization.
   7
     Recall that because our model allows utility to not be weakly separable in leisure and consumption of s, s depends
not only on disposable income but also on earned income z.
   8
     The first-order condition for consumer choice is Us0 (c, s, z)/Uc0 (c, s, z) = p + t, with s · (p + t) + c = z − T (z). By
definition, Vs0 (c, s, z)/Vc0 (c, s, z) = p + t − γ with s · (p + t − γ) + c = z − T (z) − sγ, from which the statement follows.



                                                                    6
       The statistic can be quantified by comparing consumers’ choices in “biased” and “debiased”
states, as we do in our empirical application. Other examples that informally employ this definition
of bias include Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) and Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018), who
quantify the (average) value of tax salience as the change in up-front prices that would alter
demand as much as a debiasing intervention that displays tax-inclusive prices. Similarly, Allcott
and Taubinsky (2015) estimate γ by measuring consumers’ demand responses to an experimental
intervention that targets informational and attentional biases.
       To represent the policymaker’s inequality aversion concisely, we employ the notion, common in
the optimal taxation literature, of “social marginal welfare weights”—the social value (from the
policymaker’s perspective) of a marginal unit of consumption for a particular consumer, measured
in terms of public funds. We define
                                                  g(θ) := α(θ)Vc0 /λ,                                                  (4)

where Vc0 represents the derivative of V with respect to its first argument, and λ is the marginal
value of public funds (i.e., the multiplier on the government budget constraint at the optimum).9
These weights are endogenous to the tax system, but are useful for characterizing the necessary
                                                     R
conditions that must hold at the optimum. We use ḡ = Θ g(θ)dµ(θ) to denote the average marginal
social welfare weight. If there are no income effects on consumption and labor supply, then ḡ = 1
by construction.10

II.B       Our Approach
We derive an expression for the optimal sin tax using variational calculus arguments. This generates
a first-order (necessary) condition for the optimal sin tax in terms of empirically estimable sufficient
statistics and social marginal welfare weights. These statistics are themselves endogenous to the
tax system, and so this expression should not be understood as a closed-form expression for the
optimal tax. However, to the extent that these statistics are stable around modest variations in tax
policy, we can approximate the optimal tax by evaluating the statistics at the current tax policy.
In Appendix M we calibrate two different structural models that account for the endogeneity, and
we show that the resulting optimal taxes are very close to those computed using estimates of the
sufficient statistics at the current tax system.
       Before formally defining the elasticity concepts and presenting the optimal tax formula, we
briefly summarize the core economic forces that correspond to our elasticity concepts and that
feature in the formula. Intuitively, any variation in the sin tax has three main effects. First, a
   9
      This definition implies that g represents the social value of a unit of marginal composite consumption c, rather than
sin good consumption. When agents make rational decisions about consumption of s, this distinction is immaterial
due to the envelope theorem.
   10
      Because the Pareto weights α(θ) are exogenous, and because U and V produce identical behavior (and identical
choice-based measures of bias) up to monotonic transformations, the social marginal welfare weights reflect a pol-
icymaker’s or society’s normative preference for reducing wealth inequality—they cannot be inferred by observing
behavior. As in the rest of the optimal taxation literature, our formulas for optimal taxes will thus depend both on
observable behavior (and people’s quantifiable mistakes) and on the policymaker’s (or society’s) inequality aversion,
as encoded by these weights.


                                                            7
higher sin tax has a direct (“mechanical”) effect on government revenue and on consumers’ post-
tax incomes. The social welfare consequences of this effect depend on the marginal value of public
funds, and on whether the increased tax burden is shouldered more by those with higher or lower
marginal utility of money.
    Second, an increase in the sin tax leads to substitution away from the sin good, which reduces
the revenue collected from taxing the sin good. In the absence of externalities or internalities,
the envelope theorem implies the loss in sin tax revenues is the only consequential effect. In the
presence of externalities and/or internalities, the behavior change is beneficial because it reduces
externalities from consumption, and because consumers now consume less of a good that they have
been overconsuming. The internality correction benefits are highest when the consumers with the
highest biases are also most elastic to the sin tax. Moreover, when the low-income consumers are
the most responsive and/or the most biased, the internality benefits of behavior change have the
additional virtue of being “progressive.”
    Third, the sin tax could affect consumers’ labor supply decisions. Imagine that the sin good is
a normal good, so that if a consumer chooses to earn more, she consumes more of the sin good.
In this case, increasing the sin tax indirectly increases the marginal tax burden from choosing
higher earnings. This disincentive for higher labor supply would then lead to lower income tax
revenue. The converse holds for inferior goods. Consequently, when the consumption of a sin good
is decreasing with income, it is crucial to determine whether this is because it is an inferior good,
or because preferences for this good are negatively correlated with earnings ability.
    This potential earnings response may substantially affect the optimal sin tax even if consumers
spend only a small share of their budget on the sin good. Intuitively, what matters is the change
in earnings due to the sin tax as a share of expenditures on the sin good —and that share may be
substantial even if spending on the sin good is small. This channel of behavioral response is the
foundation for the classic Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) result.11
    There are also higher order effects that are present in the general formula in the appendix that
are negligible under the simplifying assumptions we make in our main theoretical result. These
include considerations such as the fact that changes in labor supply can also affect consumption of
the sin good through the income effects channel, and that at a given income level there may be a
covariance between income effects and internalities.

II.C     Elasticity Concepts, Sufficient Statistics, and Simplifying Assumptions
The optimal sin tax depends on three types of sufficient statistics: elasticities, money-metric mea-
sure of bias, and the “progressivity of bias correction.” We describe these statistics here, and collect
them in Table 1 for reference. These statistics are understood to be endogenous to the tax regime
(t, T ), though we suppress those arguments for notational simplicity. We begin by defining the
  11
     It is also possible that taxes on items that constitute a small share of consumers’ budgets might not be salient
when labor supply decisions are made. Nonsalience is an alternative form of behavioral misoptimization which may
lead to departures from Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976), and though it is beyond the scope of this paper, we consider it
in our companion paper Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky (2018).


                                                         8
elasticities related to sin good consumption.
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                  ds(θ)       p+t
    • ζ(θ): the price elasticity of demand for s from type θ, formally equal to −                                  dt         s(θ) .   We
      assume that the price elasticity of demand equals the tax elasticity of demand.
                                                                                 
    • ζ c (θ): the compensated price elasticity of demand for s, equal to − ds(θ)
                                                                              dt
                                                                                    p+t
                                                                                    s(θ) .                u

    • η(θ): the income effect on s expenditure, equal to ζ −                  ζ c.

    • ξ(θ): the causal income elasticity of demand for s, equal to                    d
                                                                                      dz s (p   + t, z − T (z), z; θ) · zs .12

Additionally, we represent the labor supply response to tax reforms using the following parameters,
which are defined formally in Appendix A. All behavioral responses are defined to include the full
sequence of adjustments due to any nonlinearities in the income tax (Jacquet and Lehmann, 2014).

    • ζzc (θ): the compensated elasticity of taxable income with respect to the marginal income tax
       rate.

    • ηz (θ): the income effect on labor supply.

We denote averages of theses statistics using “bar” notation; for example, average consumption
                                                                                    p+t
of s is denoted s̄ := Θ s(θ)dµ(θ), with aggregate elasticity of demand ζ̄ := − ds̄
                     R
                                                                               dt     s̄ . Similarly,
we denote average consumption among consumers  with  a given income z as s̄(z), with income-
                                               ds̄(z) p+t
conditional elasticities denoted by ζ̄(z) := − dt     s̄(z) . The income distribution is denoted
         R
H(z) := Θ 1 {z(θ) ≤ z} dµ(θ), with income density denoted h(z).
    It is necessary to distinguish between two sources of cross-sectional variation in s̄(z): income
effects and (decision) preference heterogeneity. Let s̄0 (z) denote the cross-sectional change in s with
respect to income z at a particular point in the income distribution. This total derivative can be
decomposed into two partial derivatives: the (causal) income effect, s0inc (z), and between-income
preference heterogeneity s0pref (z). The causal income effect depends on the empirically estimable
                                     h                     i
income elasticity of s: s0inc (z) = E ξ(θ) s(θ)
                                            z   | z(θ) = z  . Between-income preference heterogeneity
is the residual: s0pref (z) = s̄0 (z) − s0inc (z). The key sufficient statistic for preference heterogeneity,
“cumulative between-income preference heterogeneity” is defined as:
                                                          Z   z
                                           spref (z) :=               s0pref (x)dx.                                                    (5)
                                                           x=zmin
   12
      A change in net earnings may come from either a change in labor supply or a change in non-labor income
(e.g., due to a tax level reduction). If sin good consumption and labor are weakly separable in the utility function,
sin good consumption will respond identically to either type of change in earnings. In that case, ξ(θ) is equal to
η(θ) z(θ)
 p+t
      · s(θ) (1 − T 0 (z(θ))). More generally, ξ quantifies the sin good response to an increase in earnings from labor, for
example due to a local reduction in marginal income tax rates. Weak separability implies that the change of s with
                                   ds
response to income shock dz , dz      , will not depend on whether dz comes from a change in hours or nonlabor earnings,
                                        ds
and so the estimated relationship dz       will be insensitive to the inclusion of controls for hours worked. Using this test,
we find support for weak separability in our empirical application, as discussed in footnote 20.




                                                                  9
This term quantifies the amount of sin good consumption at income z, relative to the lowest income
level zmin , that can be attributed to preference heterogeneity rather than income effects.13
    To aggregate bias across consumers, we follow Allcott, Mullainathan, and Taubinsky (2014)
and Allcott and Taubinsky (2015) in defining the average marginal bias
                                                              
                                                R       ds(θ)
                                               Θ γ(θ)     dt u dµ(θ)
                                         γ̄ := R                   .                                             (6)
                                                     ds(θ)
                                                 Θ     dt      dµ(θ)
                                                               u

Intuitively, this aggregation represents the marginal bias weighted by consumers’ marginal responses
to a tax reform that raises t while reforming T to offset the average effect on wealth at each income
z. In other words, if a tax perturbation causes a given change in total consumption of s, γ̄ is the
average amount by which consumers over- or under-estimate the change in utility from that change
in consumption. We analogously define γ̄(z) as the response-weighted bias conditional on income.14
    Because our framework considers redistributive motives, unlike Allcott, Mullainathan, and
Taubinsky (2014) and Allcott and Taubinsky (2015), we must also account for the progressivity
of bias correction:
                                                      γ̄(z) ζ̄ c (z) s̄(z)
                                                                          
                                       σ := Cov g(z),                        .                                     (7)
                                                        γ̄     ζ̄ c    s̄
The term σ is the covariance of welfare weight with the product of consumption-weighted bias and
(compensated) elasticity. If this term is positive, it indicates that bias reductions in response to
a tax increase are concentrated among consumers with high welfare weights, i.e., those with lower
incomes.
    We impose the following assumptions, common in the optimal commodity taxation literature,
in order to focus on the interesting features of sin taxes in a tractable context.

Assumption 1. Constant social marginal welfare weights conditional on income: g(θ) = g(θ0 ) if
z(θ) = z(θ0 ).

    This assumption is analogous to Assumption 1 in Saez (2002a). It holds immediately if types
are homogeneous conditional on income. More generally, Saez (2002a) argues this is a reasonable
normative requirement even under heterogeneity “if we want to model a government that does not
  13
     One question that arises here is the relevant time horizon for income effects, since preferences may themselves be
endogenous to income over long periods. For example, consumption patterns of children in poor households—including
those causally driven by low income—may affect their preferences later in life, even if their income has increased.
Conceptually, the relevant statistic for the optimal tax formula is the labor supply distortion generated by the
commodity tax, which is proportional to the income effect on that commodity, measured over the same time horizon
as labor supply decisions. Therefore, to the extent that preferences are endogenous to income patterns at longer
horizons than labor supply decisions, these should be treated as preference heterogeneity rather than income effects.
In practice, our empirical estimates of income effects will be estimated using annual income variation.
  14
     Formally,                                                   
                                              R           ds(θ)
                                                Θ
                                                  γ(θ)     dt
                                                                    1 {z(θ) = z} dµ(θ)
                                     γ̄(z) := R               u                      .
                                                       ds(θ)
                                                  Θ     dt
                                                                 1 {z(θ) =  z} dµ(θ)
                                                         u




                                                          10
want to discriminate between different consumption patterns....” Therefore we sometimes write
g(z) to denote the welfare weight directly as a function of earnings.

Assumption 2. U and V are smooth functions that are strictly concave in c, s, and z, and µ is
differentiable with full support.

Assumption 3. The optimal income tax function T (·) is twice differentiable, and each consumer’s
choice of income z admits a unique global optimum, with the second-order condition holding strictly
at the optimum.

   Assumptions 2 and 3 ensure that the income distribution does not exhibit any atoms and
consumers’ labor supply and consumption decisions respond smoothly to perturbations of the tax
system (Jacquet and Lehmann, 2014).

Assumption 4. One of the two following conditions hold: (a) heterogeneity is unidimensional, so
that consumers with a given ability all have the same preferences and behavioral responses, or (b)
                                                                                               (p+t)s
the sin good s accounts for a small share of all consumers’ budgets (so that terms of order      z
are negligible) and demand for s is orthogonal to ηz and ζz conditional on income.

   Assumptions 1 through 4 are the required conditions for our primary characterization of the
optimal sin tax in Proposition 1 below. However, the expressions simplify further, and become
empirically more feasible to implement, if we additionally impose the following assumption.

Assumption 5. Assumption 4(b) holds, and income effects on labor supply are negligible.

   The negligible labor supply income effects assumption is supported by Gruber and Saez (2002),
who find small and insignificant income effects on labor supply, and by Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz
(2012), who review the empirical literature on labor supply elasticities and argue that “in the
absence of compelling evidence about significant income effects in the case of overall reported
income, it seems reasonable to consider the case with no income effects.”
   Assumptions 4 and 5 are not necessary for our proof strategy, and the full optimal commodity
tax without these assumptions is derived in Appendix C.A, Proposition 6. However, they simplify
the optimal tax expressions, and they are realistic for sin goods such as sugary drinks that account
for a relatively small share of expenditures. Therefore we will impose the full set of Assumptions 1
through 5 in our empirical implementation in Sections III and IV. In the empirical implementation
we will also assume that the elasticities conditional on income are homogeneous, which is weaker
than assumption 4(a).

II.D    General Expression for the Optimal Sin Tax
To characterize the optimal commodity tax, it is helpful to define the social marginal utility of
income, denoted ĝ(z), which is defined (as in Farhi and Gabaix, 2015) as the average welfare effect
of marginally increasing the disposable incomes of consumers currently earning income z. The
weights ĝ(z) incorporate any fiscal externalities resulting from income effects, and also the social

                                                 11
welfare effect from mis-spending this marginal income due to bias.15 In Appendix B.C, we provide
formulas expressed entirely in terms of the social marginal welfare weights g(z). All proofs are
contained in Appendix C.A.

Proposition 1. Under Assumptions 1 through 4, the commodity tax t and the income tax T satisfy
the following conditions at the optimum:
                                              p
                        γ̄(ḡ + σ) + e −    s̄ζ̄ c
                                                   Cov [ĝ(z), spref (z)]
                  t =                  1                                                                                                     (8)
                               1+    s̄ζ̄ c
                                            Cov [ĝ(z), spref (z)]
                         h                                   c
                                                                             i
                        E (g(z ∗ )γ(θ) + e − t) ξ(θ)s(θ)ζ   z (θ)
                                                  ζ c (z ∗ )z ∗   |z(θ) = z ∗ +                    1
                                                                                              ζzc zh(z ∗ ) E [(1   − ĝ(z))|z ≥ z ∗ ]
          0   ∗                                             z
         T (z ) =                                                    1                                                                  .    (9)
                                                     1+    ζzc (z ∗ )zh(z ∗ ) E [(1   − ĝ(z))|z ≥ z ∗ ]

If Assumption 5 also holds, then the taxes are approximated by
                                                                           p
                                                 γ̄(1 + σ) + e −         s̄ζ̄ c
                                                                                Cov [g(z), spref (z)]
                                         t≈                          1                                                                      (10)
                                                          1+       s̄ζ̄ c
                                                                          Cov [g(z), spref (z)]
                                                            1                                 ∗
                                                       ζzc zh(z ∗ ) E [(1 − g(z))|z ≥ z ]
                                  T 0 (z ∗ ) ≈                   1                                                                          (11)
                                                 1   + ζ c (z ∗ )zh(z     ∗ ) E [(1 − g(z))|z ≥   z∗]
                                                         z


       The expression in Equation (10) is an approximation because it represents the optimal tax in
the limit as the “small” terms in Assumptions 4(b) and 5 go to zero.
       For the purpose of building intuition, note that Equation 10 can be rearranged as

                                                         1
                                     t = γ̄(1 + σ) + e + ds̄ Cov [g(z), spref (z)] .                                                        (12)
                                         |     {z    } dt |          {z          }
                                          corrective motive                redistributive motive

Equation (12) shows that the optimal tax is the combination of two main terms. The first term,
γ̄(1 + σ) + e, corresponds to the corrective motive of the tax, and rises with both the negative
externality e and internality (average marginal bias) γ̄. The latter is scaled by 1+σ, illustrating a key
difference between externalities and internalities: the magnitude of correction for internalities—but
not externalities—depends on whether the bias is bigger for the rich or the poor, and on whether
the rich or the poor have more elastic demand.16
       Intuitively, the internality costs from an consumer’s overconsumption fall back on that consumer,
so they are scaled by the consumer’s social marginal welfare weight. In contrast, the externality
                                     h                         i    h                                                      i
                                              T0
  15
     Formally, ĝ(z ∗ ) = g(z ∗ ) + E ηz (θ) 1−T 0 |z(θ) = z
                                                             ∗
                                                                 + E (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) η(θ)
                                                                                         p+t
                                                                                               ηz (θ) ξ(θ)s(θ)
                                                                                             + 1−T  0   z(θ)
                                                                                                                 | z(θ) = z ∗ . See
Appendix C.A for further details. If Assumption 5 holds, then ĝ = g.
  16
     This asymmetry is not an artifact of the assumption that externalities fall on the government’s budget. We could
alternatively allow for more flexible externalities which are nonlinear in s̄ and heterogeneous across agents, reducing
each consumer’s net income by a type-specific amount E(s̄). Then the consumer’s budget constraint in Equation (3)
would instead be written c+(p+t)s ≤ z −T (z)−E(s̄). We can then define e = Es̄0 (s̄), and the optimal tax formulas in
Proposition (1) remain the same. That is, under heterogeneous externalities one should set the externality correction
equal to the average marginal externality; however, there is no covariance with individual demand elasticity or the
level of s consumption, as is the case with internalities.



                                                                    12
generated by any given consumer’s consumption is borne by the whole population, and thus receives
the same weight regardless of whose consumption generates it.
   The second term, proportional to Cov [g(z), spref (z)], corresponds to the redistributive motive
of the tax. This term depends on the extent to which sin good consumption acts as a tag for
ability. As a result, it depends on the covariation of welfare weights with only that component of
consumption which is driven by preference heterogeneity. Intuitively, this term represents the power
of the sin tax to accomplish redistribution which cannot already be achieved via income taxation.
The importance of this term relative to the corrective component depends on how responsive
consumption of s̄ is to the tax: the more consumer behavior responds to the tax, the less important
the redistributive motive relative to the corrective motive.
   The income tax formula
                      h    is a slight modification of Jacqueti and Lehmann (2014), with the
                                                        c
addition of the term E (g(z )γ(θ) + e − t) ξ(θ)s(θ)ζ
                           ∗                           z (θ)        ∗
                                             ζ c (z ∗ )z ∗ |z(θ) = z , which accounts for the way a
                                                 z
perturbation of the marginal income tax rate affects consumption of the sin good through the
channel of changing consumers’ earnings.

II.E    Interpreting the Formula: Special Cases and Additional Intuition
The optimal tax formula in Equation (10) has a number of special cases which illustrate important
insights about the forces governing the optimal tax. We highlight three special cases of particular
interest.

Special Case 1: No inequality aversion.

If social marginal welfare weights are constant (implying the policymaker has no desire to redis-
tribute marginal resources from high to low income consumers), then

                                               t = γ̄ + e.                                          (13)

This matches the core principal of Pigouvian taxation and the typical sin tax results in the be-
havioral economics literature (e.g., O’Donoghue and Rabin 2006; Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and
Congdon 2012; Allcott, Mullainathan, and Taubinsky 2014; Allcott and Taubinsky 2015). This
special case obtains either if welfare weights are constant across incomes (e.g., if V is linear in c) or
if there is no income inequality (so that all consumers have the same marginal utility of consump-
tion). In both cases, the optimal commodity tax must exactly offset the average marginal bias plus
the externality.

Special Case 2: No (correlated) preference heterogeneity.

When differences in consumption are due purely to differences in income, regressive consequences
of a sin tax can be perfectly offset by modifications to the income tax. Equivalently, all feasible
distribution can be carried out most efficiently through the income tax itself, and the redistributive



                                                     13
motive in Equation (12) is zero.17 Therefore in this case the optimal sin tax is

                                                t = γ̄ (1 + σ) + e.                                             (14)

In contrast to Special Case 1, inequality aversion still plays a role in the size of the optimal
commodity tax, as reflected by the σ term. For a given average marginal bias γ̄, a relative increase
in the biases or elasticities of low-income consumers increases σ and thus increases the social welfare
benefit of bias correction. When bias and elasticity are constant across incomes, σ > 0, and the
size of the optimal tax will exceed the optimal Pigouvian tax that prevails absent any inequality
aversion.

Special Case 3: No corrective concerns.

A third important special case is when both internalities and externalities are equal to zero, so that
only distributional concerns are relevant. In this case,

                                          t     Cov [g(z), spref (z)]
                                             =−                       .                                         (15)
                                         p+t           s̄ζ̄ c

Equation (15) bears a striking resemblance to Diamond’s (1975) “many-person Ramsey tax rule.”
Diamond (1975) studies a Ramsey framework in which the income tax is constrained to be a lump-
sum transfer, and he obtains almost the same expression as Equation (15), except with spref (z)
replaced by s̄(z). Equation (15) generalizes that result, showing that in the presence of a nonlinear
income tax, the optimal commodity tax still resembles the familiar inverse elasticity rule, with the
modification that instead of taxing goods that high-earners consume, the planner taxes goods that
they prefer. Equation (15) also generalizes the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem to the case of arbitrary
preference heterogeneity. The Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem itself obtains as a special case of (15) when
all variation in s consumption is driven by income effects, which then implies that spref ≡ 0 and
thus t = 0.

Further insights and intuition

In addition to the three special cases above, there are a few other insights from Proposition 1 that
relate to results elsewhere in the literature. First, Equation (10) holds when γ̄ = 0, which may
arise even with non-zero internalities if the consumers who over-consume (or under-consume) the
good are inelastic to the tax (or subsidy). A striking implication of the result then is that when
lower-income consumers prefer the good more, the optimal sin tax will be negative (a sin subsidy).
This captures the spirit of a key result of Bernheim and Rangel (2004) about the optimality of
subsidizing addictive goods when the marginal utility of income is increasing with the consumption
  17
    Note that s0pref (z) = 0 need not imply that preferences for s are homogeneous; only that they are not correlated
with earnings ability. This special case corresponds to Assumption 3 in Saez (2002a), who shows that the Atkinson-
Stiglitz result continues to hold under this assumption.




                                                         14
of the addictive good.18 Although the Bernheim and Rangel (2004) result that the sin good should
be subsidized is seemingly in stark contrast to the sin tax results of O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006)
and elsewhere, our general tax formula clarifies the economic forces that lead to each result.
       A second key insight from Proposition 1 involves the role of the demand elasticity in governing
the relative importance of corrective and redistributive concerns. As is evident from Equation
(10), when the demand elasticity grows large, the redistributive motive becomes small and the
optimal tax t approaches γ̄(ḡ + σ) + e, corresponding to Special Case 2 above. At the opposite
extreme, when the elasticity grows small, the corrective motive becomes negligible and the optimal
tax approaches the expression in Equation (15) above. More generally, if preference heterogeneity
accounts for any share of the decrease in s consumption across incomes, then for a sufficiently low
elasticity, the optimal tax becomes negative (a subsidy). Intuitively, if consumers do not respond
to commodity taxes, then such taxes become a powerful instrument to enact redistribution through
targeted subsidies.
       Together, these results show how the price elasticity of demand modulates the role of consumer
bias in determining both the sign and magnitude of the optimal commodity tax. Perhaps most
importantly, the demand elasticity also provides practical guidance on how sensitive the optimal
tax is to different values of the bias γ̄ and the externality e. A lower elasticity dampens the
responsiveness of the optimal tax to the bias γ̄, since the corrective benefits in Equation (10)
depend on the products ζ̄ c γ̄ and ζ̄ c e. Simply put, learning that the average marginal bias or the
externality are $1 per unit higher than previously thought does not imply that the optimal tax
should increase by $1—the optimal adjustment could be higher or lower, depending on the demand
elasticity.
       Finally, Proposition 1 clarifies the role of revenue recycling—the possibility of using sin tax
revenues to offset their regressivity. By including a nonlinear income tax, this model allows for
tax revenues to be redistributed in a means-tested fashion. Yet our results also explain why such
recycling may not be optimal. If sin good consumption differences are driven by income effects, then
the sin tax and income tax cause similar labor supply distortions. In this case, when a corrective
sin tax is implemented, the optimal income tax should be jointly reformed to be more progressive,
effectively recycling sin tax revenues in a progressive manner. (This corresponds to Special Case
2 above, and accords with the argument behind the quote from Jim Kenney in the introduction.)
However, if sin good consumption differences are driven by preference heterogeneity, then sin good
consumption serves as a tag that is useful for redistribution, even in the presence of the optimal
income tax. In this case the optimal sin tax is reduced, in order to effectively subsidize the sin
good for redistributive reasons relative to the pure Pigovian benchmark.
  18
    Because in Bernheim and Rangel (2004) over-consumption of the good is a consequence of cue-triggered neural
processes that render the consumer inelastic to prices, the average bias of consumers who are elastic to the tax is
zero.




                                                        15
II.F      Optimal Sin Tax at a Fixed Income Tax
Tax authorities may not be able to optimize the income tax system at the same time that a sin tax
is imposed and, indeed, the income tax may be suboptimal from their perspective. For example,
in the U.S., many SSB taxes are set by cities that do not control the income tax structure. In such
cases, the optimal sin tax satisfies the following condition:

Proposition 2. If Assumptions 1 through 5 hold, then the optimal commodity tax is approximated
by:
                                                         p
                                  γ̄(1 + σ) + e −      s̄ζ̄ c
                                                                (Cov [g(z), s(z)] + A)
                             t≈               1                                          ,                       (16)
                                       1+   s̄ζ̄ c
                                                     (Cov [g(z), s(z)] + A)
           h 0                         i
             T (z(θ))
where A = E 1−T 0 (z(θ)) ζz (θ)s(θ)ξ(θ) .


      The expression for the constrained optimal SSB tax resembles that in Proposition 10, but it
replaces the term Cov [g(z), spref (z)] with Cov [g(z), s(z)] + A. This reflects the fact that under the
optimal income tax, the fiscal externality from income adjustments in response to the tax (captured
by the term A in Proposition 2) is exactly equal to Cov [g(z), sinc (z)], leaving Cov [g(z), spref (z)]
as the residual term. The term A is proportional to the income elasticity ξ.Intuitively, when the
sin good is a normal good, a higher sin tax is equivalent to an increase in the marginal income tax
rate. The converse obtains when the sin good is an inferior good.

II.G      Multiple Sin Goods and Substitution
Thus far, our model has involved only a single sin good. We extend our results in a number of ways
to account for substitution between sin goods. In Online Appendix B.A we derive a general formula
for the optimal set of sin taxes, allowing for a general relationship between cross-price elasticities
and biases. In Appendix B.B, we also characterize results when the sin good s is a composite good
consisting of several different items, such as soft drinks of various sizes.
      A third important and practical case is when the policymaker is constrained to tax only one
of the sin goods. For example, the policymaker may impose a sin tax on sugary drinks, while not
taxing other sugary foods like ice cream and candy bars. We focus on this case here.
      Formally, let s denote consumption of the taxed sin good sold at price p and let r1 , . . . , rN
denote consumption of other sin goods sold at prices p1 , . . . pN . Let xs = ps and xn = pn rn denote
                                                                                  P     dxn (θ)
the pre-tax expenditures of the respective goods. Define ϕ(θ) := −                    n    dt
                                                                                      dxs (θ)     to measure how much
                                                                                        dt
of the reduction in pre-tax expenditures on s is reallocated to expenditures on the other sin goods
rn in response to a local increase in the sin tax.
      We continue to let γ and e denote the money-metric measures of the bias and externality on s,
respectively, and we define γn and en analogously for the other sin goods rn . These measures are
hard to compare, however, because each is in units of dollars per unit of the respective sin good
(e.g., dollars per ounce, dollars per pack, etc). We therefore convert these to unitless measures


                                                           16
by dividing by the pre-tax price of the respective sin good: γ̃s := γ/p, ẽs := e/p, γ̃n := γn /pn ,
                                                  P           dx (θ)
                                                               n
                                                      nγ̃n (θ) dt
ẽn := en /pn . We then define γ̃r (θ) :=             P dxn (θ)           as the expenditure elasticity-weighted average
                                                          n   dt
bias of type θ, and we define γ̃(θ) := γ̃s (θ)−ϕ(θ)γ̃r (θ). In words, γ̃(θ) measures the extent to which
consumers over-estimate the value of the marginal change in consumption of all sin goods that is
                                                                       ¯ γ̃(z),
induced by an increase in t. Using this definition of γ̃(θ), we define γ̃, ¯    and σ̃ in exact analogue
                                                                              ẽn dx̄n
                                                                         P
                                                                          n
to the single sin good case. Finally, we define ẽr :=                    P        dt
                                                                                 dx̄n    as the expenditure-elasticity-weighted
                                                                             n    dt                        P   dx̄n
externality for untaxed sin goods for the whole population, and we set ẽ¯ := ẽs −                          n dt
                                                                                                             dx̄s      ẽr to denote
                                                                                                              dt
the expenditure-weighted externality, per unit change in pre-tax expenditures on s. Using these
definitions, the formula for the optimal commodity tax is analogous to that in Proposition 1:

Proposition 3. If Assumptions 1 through 5 hold and all sin goods are a small share of the con-
sumers’ total expenditures, then the optimal commodity tax at any fixed tax is approximated by

                                       ¯ + σ̃) + ẽ¯ −
                                       γ̃(1                      1
                                                                        (Cov [g(z), s(z)] + A)
                                                               s̄ζ̄ c
                                t≈p                         1                                         ,                        (17)
                                                  1+      s̄ζ̄ c
                                                                 Cov [g(z), s(z)]        +A

                    T 0 (z(θ))
               h                                 i
where A = E        1−T 0 (z(θ)) ζz (θ)s(θ)ξ(θ)    . If the income tax is optimal, then the optimal commodity
tax is approximated by
                                         ¯ + σ̃) + ẽ¯ −
                                         γ̃(1                        1
                                                                          Cov [g(z), spref (z)]
                                                                   s̄ζ̄ c
                                  t≈p                       1                                     .                            (18)
                                                  1+      s̄ζ̄ c
                                                                 Cov [g(z), spref (z)]

   We provide a proof of this result, as well as a formula for the optimal income tax, in Appendix
C.C. The key difference between this formula and the formulas with a single sin good is in the
construction of the bias and externality variables γ̃(θ) and ẽ. In the absence of cross-price effects,
pγ̃¯ = pγ and pẽ¯ = e, and thus the formula reduces to our initial result. In general, substitution
to untaxed sin goods will reduce the total average marginal bias γ̃¯ and the average marginal
            ¯ For example, if the normalized values of bias and externality are all equal across
externality ẽ.
the sin goods, and if the cross-price expenditure outflow ϕ is equal to 30%, then we would have
pγ̃ = 0.7γ and pẽ¯ = 0.7e; that is, the corrective benefits are reduced by 30 percent. On the other
hand, if untaxed sin goods are complements—for example, if drinking lowers inhibitions to smoking
or using drugs—then the optimal sin tax is higher.
   The formula can also be applied to study “leakage”: cases in which consumers shop outside the
jurisdiction to avoid a local sin tax. In this case, we can think of r as the sin good available across
the border, with γr = γ. Then ϕ is simply the change in demand for the sin good across the border
divided by the change in demand for the sin good within the taxed jurisdiction. Because leakage
is typically relevant at the city level but not the national level, optimal tax rates will typically be
lower for city-level taxes than for nationwide taxes.




                                                                   17
III     Estimating Key Parameters for the Optimal Soda Tax
In this section, we gather the empirical parameters needed to calibrate the optimal nationwide tax
on sugar-sweetened beverages in our modeling framework. First, we describe our data sources.
Second, we estimate the price and income elasticities ζ and ξ, and also how elasticity varies by
income. Third, we decompose the SSB consumption vs. income relationship into causal income
effects s0inc (z) and between-income preference heterogeneity s0pref (z). Fourth, we estimate bias γ,
and how this varies by income. Fifth, we discuss the externality e.
   See Appendix D.A for additional notes on data preparation, and see Appendix D.B for an
assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of our data and empirical approaches. In Appendix
(D.C) we show how our estimating equations can be derived from a class of utility functions.

III.A     Data
III.A.1   Nielsen Retail Measurement Services and Homescan data

The Nielsen Retail Measurement Services (RMS) data include sales volumes and sales-weighted
average prices at the UPC-by-store-by-week level at about 37,000 stores each year from 106 retail
chains for 2006–2016. RMS includes 53, 32, 55, 2, and 1 percent of national sales in the grocery,
mass merchandiser, drug, convenience store, and liquor channels, respectively. For a rotating subset
of stores that Nielsen audits each week, we also observe merchandising conditions: whether each
UPC was “featured” by the retailer in the market where each store is located (through newspaper
or online ads and coupons), and whether the UPC was on “display” inside each store.
   To measure household grocery purchases, we use the Nielsen Homescan Panel for 2006-2016.
Homescan includes about 38,000 households in 2006, and about 61,000 households each year for
2007-2016.
   Each year, Homescan households report demographic variables such as household income (in 16
bins), educational attainment, household composition, race, binary employment status, and weekly
hours worked (in three bins). Panel (a) of Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for Homescan
households at the household-by-year level. All households report either one or two heads. If
there are two heads, we use their average age, years of education, employment status, and weekly
work hours. The U.S. government Dietary Guidelines provide calorie needs by age and gender; we
combine that with Homescan household composition to get each household member’s daily calorie
need. Household size in “adult equivalents” is the number of household heads plus the total calorie
needs of all other household members divided by the nationwide average calorie consumption of
household heads. In all tables and figures, we weight the sample for national representativeness.
   Nielsen groups UPCs into product modules. We define sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) as
the product modules that have typically been included in existing SSB taxes: fruit drinks (which
includes sports drinks and energy drinks), pre-made coffee and tea (for example, bottled iced cof-
fee and iced tea), carbonated soft drinks, and non-carbonated soft drinks (which includes cocktail
mixes, breakfast drinks, ice pops, and powdered soft drinks). Fruit and vegetable juice and ar-


                                                 18
tificially sweetened drinks such as diet soda are not included. The bottom two rows of Panel
(a) of Table 2 show that the average Homescan household purchases 156 liters of SSBs per year,
at an average price of $1.14 per liter. (Average price paid is undefined for the 3.1 percent of
household-by-year observations with no SSB purchases.) We deflate all prices and incomes to real
2016 dollars.
       There are two important differences between Homescan grocery purchase data and total SSB
consumption. First, Homescan does not include data on beverages purchased and consumed away
from home, such as at restaurants and vending machines. Second, people might give soda to others
or throw it out instead of drinking it themselves. For these reasons, we also record total SSB
consumption in the survey described below.

III.A.2       Homescan PanelViews Survey

We designed a special survey to measure total SSB consumption as well as biases and preferences
affecting consumption. Using its PanelViews survey platform, Nielsen fielded the survey in October
2017 to all adult heads of the approximately 60,000 eligible households that were in the 2015 or
2016 Homescan data. We have complete responses from 20,640 people at 18,159 households; there
are 2,481 households where both heads responded. Panel (b) of Table 2 summarizes the respondent-
level data. Appendix E gives the exact text of the survey questions.
       We quantify two classes of consumer bias that might drive a wedge between consumers’ decisions
and normative utility: imperfect nutrition knowledge and imperfect self-control. To measure nu-
trition knowledge, we delivered 28 questions from the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire
(GNKQ).19 The GNKQ is widely used in the public health literature; see Kliemann et al. (2016)
for a validation study. The nutrition knowledge variable is the share correct of the 28 questions;
the average score was approximately 0.70 out of 1.
       To measure self-control, we asked respondents to state their level of agreement with the following
statements: “I drink soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than I should,” and,
if the household has a second head, “The other head of household in my house drinks soda pop
or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than they should.” There were four responses:
“Definitely,” “Mostly,” “Somewhat,” and “Not at all.” To construct the self-control variable, we
code those responses as 0, 1/3, 2/3, and 1, respectively.
       To measure taste and preference heterogeneity, we asked, “Leaving aside any health or nutrition
considerations, how much would you say you like the taste and generally enjoy drinking the follow-
ing?” We asked this question for five types of SSBs (sweetened juice drinks, regular soft drinks,
pre-made coffee and tea, sports drinks, and caffeinated energy drinks) and two non-SSBs (100%
  19
    One example question is, “If a person wanted to buy a yogurt at the supermarket, which would have the least
sugar/sweetener?” The four possible responses were “0% fat cherry yogurt,” “Plain yogurt,” “Creamy fruit yogurt,”
and “Not sure.” A second example is, “ Which is the main type of fat present in each of these foods?” The five
possible responses were “Polyunsaturated fat,” “Monounsaturated fat,” “Saturated fat,” “Cholesterol,” and “Not
sure.” This question was asked about olive oil (correct answer: monounsaturated), butter (saturated), sunflower oil
(polyunsaturated), and eggs (cholesterol).



                                                        19
fruit juice and diet soft drinks). To measure health preferences, we asked, “In general, how impor-
tant is it to you to stay healthy, for example by maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes
and heart disease, etc.?” Responses to each question were originally on a scale from 0 to 10, which
we rescale to between 0 and 1.
       To measure total SSB consumption, we asked people to report how many 12-ounce servings of
seven different types of beverages they drink in an average week. Finally, we asked gender, age,
occupation, and whether the respondent makes the majority of the grocery purchase decisions.

III.B       Price and Income Elasticities
III.B.1      Empirical Model

In this section, we estimate the price and income elasticities of demand, ζ and ξ, and how they vary
by income. Let sit denote Homescan SSB purchases (in liters per adult equivalent) by household i in
quarter t. Let pit denote the price per liter of household i’s SSBs in quarter t, and let f it denote the
vector of feature and display variables; we detail these variables below. zct is the mean per capita
income reported by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2017) for county c in the calendar year that
contains quarter t, ωt is a vector of quarter of sample indicators, and µic is a household-by-county
fixed effect. Our base regression specification to estimate uniform elasticities that do not vary by
income is


                             ln sit = −ζ ln pit + ξ ln zct + νf it + ωt + µic + εit ,                        (19)

with standard errors clustered by county and with ln pit instrumented in a manner we describe
below.20 To allow elasticities to vary by income, we will add linear interaction terms.
       Because SSBs are storable, previous purchases could affect current stockpiles and thus current
purchases, and Hendel and Nevo (2006b) and others document stockpiling in weekly data. In our
quarterly data, however, there is no statistically detectable effect of lagged prices and merchandising
conditions on current purchases, and it is statistically optimal to not include lags in Equation (19)
according to both the Akaike and Bayesian information criteria. See Appendix F for details.
       We use county mean income zct instead of Homescan panelists’ self-reported income because
we are concerned about measurement error in the within-household self-reported income variation.
This is for three reasons: there is likely to be measurement error in self-reported year-to-year
changes in household income, there is uncertainty as to the time period for which the self-reported
incomes apply, and variation in income that is not due to variation in labor market conditions is less
likely to be exogenous to preferences for SSBs. However, county income shares some of the same
problems, and could in principle be correlated with other market prices or consumer preferences.
  20
    As we show in Appendix Table A9, employment status and weekly hours worked are not statistically significantly
associated with SSB consumption when included in Equation (3), so we cannot reject weak separability of SSB
consumption and labor. Thus, it does not matter whether variation in zct results from non-labor windfalls such as
government benefits or from wage changes, nor does it matter whether such a wage change results from a shift in
local labor supply or demand.



                                                       20
See Appendix G for more detailed discussion and alternative estimates using self-reported income.

III.B.2    Price, Merchandising Conditions, and the Local Price Deviation Instrument

Household i’s SSB price pit is the average price of the UPCs they usually buy at the stores where
they usually buy them. Specially, define pijkt as the average price that household i pays for UPC
k at store j in quarter t. Define sijkc as household i’s total purchases of UPC k at store j while
living in county c, and define sic as household i’s total SSB purchases while living in county c, both
measured in liters. Then πijkc = sijkc /sic is the share of household i’s SSB liters purchased while
                                                                                P
in county c that are of UPC k at store j. Household i’s price variable is pit = k,j πijkc ln pijkt . pit
differs from the average price paid per liter because pit does not vary with the household’s quantity
choices in quarter t, although the results are very similar if we simply use the average price paid.
   The feature and display variables are constructed analogously, except using RMS data. Let the
2-vector f jkt denote the number of weeks in which UPC k is featured at RMS store j in quarter
t, divided by the number of weeks in which feature is observed for that store in that quarter, as
well as the analogous share of weeks in which UPC k is observed to be on display at store j. The
feature and display variables we use in the household-by-quarter regressions are

                                                  X
                                       f it =              πijkc f jkt .                           (20)
                                                k,j∈RM S

   A key challenge in demand estimation is addressing simultaneity bias: omitted variables bias
generated by a potential correlation between price and unobserved demand shifters. We address
simultaneity bias using a price instrument leveraging two facts documented by DellaVigna and
Gentzkow (Forthcoming) and Hitsch, Hortacsu, and Lin (2017). First, retail chains vary prices
over time in a highly coordinated way across their stores: if retailer X is offering Gatorade on
sale right now in Toledo, it’s probably also offering Gatorade on sale in Topeka. Second, different
chains vary their prices independently of each other over time: retailer X’s current sale has little
relationship to what other retailers are doing. Appendix H illustrates these patterns in more detail.
   To construct the instrument, define ln pjkw as the natural log of the price charged at store
j for UPC k in week w. Further define ln pkw as the national average of natural log price of
UPC k in week w, unweighted across stores. Then, let ln pkrt,−c denote the unweighted average of
ln pjkw − ln pkw at all of retail chain r’s stores outside of county c during quarter t. The leave-out
construction guarantees that our instrument is not contaminated by store-specific responses to local
demand shocks, although in practice the leave-out construction makes little difference because price
variation is so coordinated within chains. Differencing out the national average price helps remove
responses to national-level demand shocks that might influence the price of the specific UPC k,
which could still be a concern even after we condition on time fixed effects ωt that soak up shocks
to overall SSB demand.
   To construct an instrument for the average SSB price faced by each household, we fit the
leave-out price deviations ln pkrt,−c to the household’s average purchasing patterns. Household i’s


                                                    21
predicted local price deviation in quarter t is

                                              X
                                    Zit =              πijkc ln pkrt,−c .                       (21)
                                            k,j∈RM S

   Price deviations ln pkrt,−c are only observed at RMS stores, so Zit sums only over purchases
at RMS stores; approximately 34 percent of SSB purchases are at RMS chains. Because πijkc is
the purchase share across all SSB purchases (at both RMS and non-RMS stores), each household’s
quantity-weighted prices paid ln pit should vary approximately one-for-one with Zit .
   The exclusion restriction is that the local price instrument Zit is uncorrelated with demand
shifters εit , conditional on the set of controls in Equation (19). The economic content of this as-
sumption is that when retail chains vary prices across weeks and quarters, they do not observe and
respond to chain-specific demand shocks. One threat to this assumption would be price cuts coor-
dinated with retailer-specific advertising, but retailers do little advertising beyond the newspaper
and online ads and coupons that are already captured by RMS feature variable (DellaVigna and
Gentzkow, Forthcoming). Furthermore, we show below that the estimates are largely unaffected by
alternative instrument constructions and fixed effect controls that address other types of regional
and city-specific demand shocks.

III.B.3    Estimation Results

Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 2 present binned scatterplots of the first stage and reduced form of
our instrumental variables estimates of uniform elasticities, conditioning on the other controls in
Equation (19). Dividing the reduced form slope by the first stage slope implies a price elasticity of
approximately 1.66/1.21 ≈ 1.37.
   Table 3 presents estimates of Equation (19). The first four columns evaluate robustness of the
uniform elasticity estimates, and the final column presents estimates allowing elasticities to vary
by income. Column 1 presents the primary instrumental variable (IV) estimates of Equation (19),
which give estimated price elasticity ζ̂ ≈ 1.37 and income elasticity ξˆ ≈ 0.20.
   The exclusion restriction would be violated if chains vary prices in response to chain-specific
demand shocks. For example, retailers might respond to local economic downturns in cities where
they operate, or to seasonal variation in soft drink demand that could vary across warm and cold
cities. Column 2 addresses these concerns by adding city-by-quarter fixed effects. Demand shocks
could also vary across chains serving different demographic groups, for example if an economic
downturn primarily affects low-income households that shop at some retailers more than others.
Column 3 addresses this by allowing the city-by-quarter fixed effects to differ for above- versus
below-median household income. In both columns, the point estimates move slightly but are
statistically indistinguishable.
   While these control strategies can address demand shocks that are common across SSB UPCs,
they cannot address UPC-specific demand shocks. For example, a warm spring on the east coast
might increase demand for soft drinks more than it increases demand for bottled coffee. If retailers


                                                   22
were to recognize and respond to this, then the subgroup of east coast households that often buy
soft drinks would have a positive demand shock and an instrument Zit that is correlated with that
shock, even conditional on city-by-time fixed effects. Column 4 addresses this concern by using
an instrument constructed with deviations from the census region average log price instead of the
national average log price. The estimates are again very similar. Thus, for the exclusion restriction
to be violated, there must be some specific form of endogeneity not addressed by these multiple
alternative specifications.21
       To measure whether elasticities vary by income, column 5 of Table 3 presents estimates of
Equation (19) that additionally include interactions with household i’s mean income over the years
it appears in the sample. The interaction with price is not statistically significant, although the
point estimate suggests that lower-income households are slightly more price elastic: the fitted
elasticity is 1.40 at $5,000 household income and 1.34 at $125,000. While low-income consumers
are more price elastic in many other product markets, SSBs may be different because lower-income
                                                                          ds
households have much higher demand; SSB demand slopes                     dp   are much steeper at lower incomes.
The interaction with income is also not statistically significant, although the point estimate suggests
the intuitive result that SSB purchases are less responsive to additional income at higher income
levels. For the analysis that follows, we use the fitted values from this column as household-specific
price and income elasticities ζ̂i and ξˆi .

III.B.4      Substitution to Untaxed Sin Goods

In Section II.G, we derived the optimal SSB tax when complement or substitute sin goods are not
taxed. A key statistic for that formula is ϕ, the share of SSB expenditures that are reallocated to
other sin goods in response to an SSB tax increase. We now estimate that statistic.
       To keep the scope manageable, we first define a set of goods that are both unhealthy and
plausible substitutes or complements to SSBs. We consider all Nielsen product modules averaging
more than 15 percent sugar content by weight. This definition includes everything from the highest-
sugar modules (sugar, syrups, sweeteners, etc.) down to moderate-sugar modules such as sauces
(pickle relish, ketchup, etc.) and crackers (graham crackers, wafers, etc.). We add diet drinks,
because these are likely substitutes even though the health harms are uncertain. We also add
alcohol and cigarettes, which could be substitutes or complements to sugary drinks if consumers
think of them together as a class of tempting pleasures. We group these into 12 groups, indexed by
n, and construct household i’s grams purchased in quarter t, rnit , as well as price pnit , instrument
Znit , and feature and display f nit analogous to the SSB variables described above. We estimate
the following regression:
  21
    The estimates include only observations with positive SSB consumption, as price paid pit is undefined for the
15 percent of quarterly observations with no SSB purchases. In theory, this can bias our estimates, as high prices
are more likely to cause zero-purchase observations. Appendix Table A8 addresses this by presenting Tobit estimates
(thereby formally accounting for latent demand that is censored at zero) of the reduced form (thereby giving an
instrumented price for every observation), with SSB purchases in levels instead of logs (thereby giving a dependent
variable for every observation). Price elasticity estimates are economically similar and statistically indistinguishable.



                                                           23
                    ln rnit = ζ̃ ln pit + ζn ln pnit + ξ˜ ln zct + νf it + νn f nit + ωt + µic + εit ,                           (22)

instrumenting for ln pit and ln pnit with Zit and Znit .
      Table 4 presents results. The first three columns present substitute beverages, the next eight
columns present substitute foods, and the final column of the bottom panel presents tobacco. The
estimated own-price elasticities ζ̂n are in a reasonable range between 0.5 and 2. Unsurprisingly, we
find that SSBs and diet drinks are substitutes. Only one of the other 11 groups has a statistically
significant cross-price elasticity. The average of the 12 cross-price elasticities is a statistically
insignificant −.02, suggesting that if anything, these other goods are slight complements on average.
      Using these estimates, we construct an estimated ϕ̂i for each household and get the population
average, which is ϕ̂ ≈ −.03.22 Because the health effects of diet drinks are under debate in the
public health literature, we construct a second ϕ̂ excluding diet drinks (ϕ̂ ≈ −.18). Finally, because
diet drinks are the most natural substitute to sugary drinks, while the other estimates may simply
be imprecise zeros, we construct a third ϕ̂ with only diet drinks (ϕ̂ ≈ .15). In the first two cases,
the point estimate of ϕ̂ is negative, meaning that if anything, an SSB tax reduces expenditures on
these other goods, and accounting for this complementarity will slightly increase the optimal SSB
tax. In the final case, substitution to diet drinks will decrease the optimal SSB tax if diet drinks
generate internalities and externalities.

III.C       Causal Income Effects vs. Between-Income Preference Heterogeneity
The second key empirical statistic needed to determine the optimal sin tax is between-income
preference heterogeneity s0pref (z). The dark circles on Figure 3 repeat the consumption-income
relationship from Figure 1; this is now compressed due to an expanded y-axis range. The curve at
the top of the figure uses the income elasticity estimates from column 5 of Table 3 to predict the
causal effects of income increases on the SSB consumption of households earning less than $10,000
                                                  ξ̂h +ξ̂h−1
per year: sinc (zd ) = s̄(z < $10, 000) dh=2 zh−1
                                        Q      zh        2
                                                               , where d and h index income groups.
Between-income preference heterogeneity is spref (z) = s̄(z) − sinc (z), the difference between actual
consumption and consumption predicted by income effects. On the graph, spref (z) is thus the
vertical difference between the dark circles and the curve.
      The estimate of spref (z) indicates large between-income preference heterogeneity. If all house-
holds were exogenously re-assigned to earn the same income, households currently making over
$100,000 per year would purchase 184 liters fewer SSBs than households currently making under
$10,000 per year. This difference is about 2.7 times average consumption. This result that lower-
income households have stronger preferences for SSBs—regardless of whether they have higher
consumption—means that in the absence of internalities and externalities, a policymaker would
want to subsidize SSBs.
                                                                                                             P      \
                                                                                                                   dx  nit
 22
      Specifically, we assume dt = dpit and construct d[
                                                       xnit
                                                       dt
                                                            = ζ̂n xnit
                                                                    pit
                                                                       pnit d
                                                                           , dxsi
                                                                              dt
                                                                                  = ζ̂i sit , and ϕ̂it = −       n
                                                                                                                  dx
                                                                                                                   ds
                                                                                                                      dt
                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                   dt




                                                              24
III.D       Measuring Bias
III.D.1       The Counterfactual Normative Consumer Estimation Strategy

In section II, we defined bias γ as the compensated price cut that would induce the counterfactual
normative self to consume as much of the sin good as the actual biased self. Our counterfactual
normative consumer empirical strategy directly implements this definition, using an approach that
builds on Bronnenberg et al. (2015), Handel and Kolstad (2015), and other work.23 The process is
to use surveys to elicit proxies of bias, estimate the relationship between bias proxies and quantity
consumed, use that relationship to predict the counterfactual quantity that would be consumed if
consumers instead maximized normative utility, and finally transform the quantity difference into
dollar units using the price elasticity.
       To formalize the approach, recall that money-metric bias γ is defined to satisfy s(p, y, θ) =
sV (p   − γ, y − sγ, θ). We log-linearize this equation as described in Appendix D.C.1, and we now
use an i subscript for each household in the data, recognizing that each i maps to a (p, y, θ) triple.
This gives


                                             ln si = ln sVi + ζic γi /pi ,                                      (23)

where ln sVi denotes the log of the quantity that household i would consume in the absence of
bias, si and pi are observed in the Homescan data, and ζic is the compensated price elasticity of
demand, which we obtain from the Slutsky equation using our estimates of the uncompensated price
elasticity and income effects. As an example, imagine that bias increases quantity demanded by
15% and that the compensated demand elasticity is 1.5. Then the impact of bias on consumption
is the same as a 10% price reduction: γi = pi · 15%/1.5 = 10% · pi .
       Let bi = [bki , bsi ] denote a vector of indices measuring household i’s bias: nutrition knowledge
bki and self-control bsi , as measured in the PanelViews survey. Let bV = [bVk , bVs ] denote the value
of b for a “normative” consumer that maximizes V . ai is the vector of preferences (beverage
tastes and health preferences) measured in the PanelViews survey, xi is the vector of household
characteristics introduced in Table 2, and µc is a county fixed effect.
       We assume that a household’s SSB purchases depend on the average biases, preferences, and
demographics of all (one or two) household heads.24 For two-head households, bsi is the average
  23
     Bartels (1996), Cutler et al. (2015), Handel and Kolstad (2015), Johnson and Rehavi (2016), and Levitt and
Syverson (2008) similarly compare informed to uninformed agents to identify the effects of imperfect information.
All of these papers require the same identifying assumption: that preferences are conditionally uncorrelated with
measures of informedness. Bronnenberg et al. (2015) show that sophisticated shoppers—in their application, doctors
and pharmacists—are more likely to buy generic instead of branded drugs, and use this to infer that unsophisticated
shoppers are making mistakes by not buying generics. The Bronnenberg et al. (2015) identifying assumptions may
initially seem more plausible because branded vs. generic drugs are close substitutes, while consumer tastes for
SSBs vary substantially. But if generic drugs are perfect substitutes, then the sophisticated shoppers’ decisions are
not needed to identify consumer mistakes. The reason to study sophisticated shoppers is to avoid the assumption
that generics are perfect substitutes, at which point one must maintain the same assumption that sophisticated and
unsophisticated shoppers do not have heterogeneous preferences for the attributes that differentiate branded drugs.
  24
     Appendix Table A11 presents estimates under the alternative assumption that a household’s SSB purchases
depend on the biases and preferences of the primary shopper only. The pattern of results is very similar, but the


                                                         25
of the primary shopper’s self-control assessments for herself and the other head. In two-head
households where only one head responded, we impute household average nutrition knowledge bki
and preferences ai based on the observed head’s bias proxies and preferences; see Appendix I for
details.
    Our empirical strategy for estimating γi requires the following three assumptions:

Assumption 6. Normative consumers: bVk = E[bki |dietitian, nutritionist], bVs = 1.

    For nutrition knowledge, we set bVk equal to the average nutrition knowledge score of the 24
dietitians and nutritionists in the PanelViews survey, which is 0.92. For self-control, we set bVs = 1:
normative consumers are those for whom “not at all” is the correct response to the statement, “I
drink soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than I should.”

Assumption 7. Linearity: ζic γi /pi = τ · (bV − bi ), where τ comprises two parameters scaling the
effects of nutrition knowledge and self-control.

    In our data, linearity is a realistic assumption, as demonstrated in Appendix Figure A5.25

Assumption 8. Unconfoundedness: bi ⊥(ln sVi |ai , xi , µc ).

    In words, bias is conditionally independent of normative consumption. While such uncon-
foundedness assumptions are often unrealistic, this is more plausible in our setting because of our
tailor-made survey measures of beverage tastes and health preferences.
    Equation 23 and Assumptions 7 and 8 imply our estimating equation:


                                   ln(si + 1) = τ bi + βa ai + βx xi + µc + εi .                                   (24)

We add 1 to SSB purchases before taking the natural log so as to include households with zero
purchases.
    Inserting our parameter estimates into Equation 23 and Assumption 7, we obtain estimates of
counterfactual normative consumption and money-metric bias:



                                           log ŝVi = log si − τ̂ (bV − b̂i )                                      (25)
                                                          V
                                                γ̂i = τ̂ (b −   b̂i )pi /ζ̂ic .                                    (26)

    For these empirical analyses, we use each household’s most recent year in the Homescan data,
which for about 98 percent of households is 2016.
coefficient estimates and resulting bias magnitudes are attenuated by about 15 percent.
   25
      Linearity is also theoretically plausible, as it results from any “structural” behavioral model in which bi scales
the share of costs that are misperceived—for example, a β, δ model in which consumers downweight future health
effects and bi is proportional to β.




                                                          26
III.D.2       Descriptive Facts

Figure 4, shows that there is a strong unconditional relationship between our bias proxies and SSB
purchases. Panel (a) shows that households whose primary shoppers are in the lowest decile of
nutrition knowledge purchase more than twice as many SSBs as households in the highest decile.
Panel (b) shows that households whose primary shoppers answer that they “definitely” drink SSBs
“more often than I should” purchase more than twice as many SSBs as households whose primary
shoppers answer “not at all.” After conditioning on other controls, this is the variation that
identifies τ in Equation (24).
       Figure 5 shows that both nutrition knowledge and self-control are strongly correlated with
income. Panel (a) shows that people with household income above $100,000 score 0.12 higher
(0.82 standard deviations) than people with income below $10,000 on the nutrition knowledge
questionnaire. Panel (b) shows that people with income above $100,000 also report about 0.14
higher (0.40 standard deviations) self-control. These relationships suggest that bias is regressive,
which augments the corrective benefits of SSB taxes.
       Figure 6 shows that preferences entering normative utility also differ systematically by income.
Panel (a) shows that relative to people with household income above $100,000, people with income
below $10,000 average about 0.09 higher (0.24 standard deviations) in terms of how much they “like
the taste and generally enjoy drinking” regular soft drinks. Panel (b) shows that relative to that
highest-income group, the lowest-income group averages about 0.06 points lower (0.36 standard
deviations) in their reported importance of staying healthy. Both results imply that lower-income
consumers have stronger normative preferences for SSBs. This corroborates the result illustrated in
Figure 3 that the declining consumption-income relationship is driven by preference heterogeneity,
not income effects.

III.D.3       Regression Results

Table 5 presents estimates of Equation (24). Column 1 is our primary specification. Paralleling
the unconditional relationships illustrated in Figure 4, both nutrition knowledge and self-control
are highly conditionally associated with lower SSB purchases.
       There are at least three important reasons to be concerned about this empirical strategy, some
of which can be partially addressed in Table 5. First, a central concern is our unconfoundedness
assumption.26 Our demographics and taste variables are potentially noisy and incomplete measures
of normatively valid preferences, meaning that unobserved preferences might bias the estimated τ̂ .
To explore this, columns 2-4 illustrate coefficient movement: how the τ̂ estimates change with the
  26
     An alternative approach that would identify the causal effect of nutrition knowledge would be to run an informa-
tion provision field experiment, as in Allcott and Taubinsky (2015) or the nutrition education interventions reviewed
by Vargas-Garcia et al. (2017). However, this is also an imperfect way to measure γ, as it requires the assumption
that the intervention is sufficiently comprehensive and well-understood to remove all bias from the treatment group.
Furthermore, such experiments in practice involve additional challenges around demand effects and external valid-
ity. The finding in Vargas-Garcia et al. (2017) that nutrition information interventions have limited effects could
be because lack of nutrition knowledge has little impact on purchases, or it could be because the interventions were
incomplete or easily forgotten.


                                                         27
exclusion of different controls. Preferences, income, and education are correlated with both SSB
purchases and bias proxies, so it is unsurprising that their exclusion increases the τ̂ in column
2 relative to the primary estimates in column 1. Other demographics (age, race, the presence
of children, household size, employment status, and weekly work hours) and county indicators,
however, have relatively little effect on τ̂ in columns 3 and 4. This limited coefficient movement
in columns 3 and 4 is consistent with the idea that unobservables also have limited impacts on τ̂ ,
although this is certainly not dispositive due to the low R2 values (Oster, 2017).
       A second concern is measurement error in the self-control variable. For example, survey respon-
dents with different incomes and SSB demands might not interpret the response categories (not at
all, mostly, etc.) in the same way, as highlighted in a related setting by Bond and Lang (2018). As
another example, respondents might have interpreted the “more often than I should” phrasing of
the question in different ways that don’t necessarily reflect bias, e.g. that they are optimizing but
would aspire to something different in the absence of financial or other constraints.27 In general,
measurement error could bias our estimates of γ up or down. One natural model is a type of
classical measurement error: noise is uncorrelated with SSB purchases, uncorrelated with income,
and uncorrelated across different survey responses within the same household. In this model, our
estimated τ̂ for self-control in column 1 would attenuated toward zero, but we can recover unbiased
estimates by instrumenting for self-control.
       We address measurement error through several sensitivity analyses. First, we construct γ by
halving or doubling the τ̂ coefficient on self-control from column 1. Second, column 5 of Table 5
simply omits the self-control variable, allowing an estimate of γ that depends only on nutrition
knowledge. Because knowledge and self-control are positively correlated, the nutrition knowledge
coefficient is stronger in this column. Third, we instrument for self-control using the repeated
measurements in the households where two heads responded to the PanelViews survey, using a
two-sample two-stage least squares procedure detailed in Appendix I. Column 6 presents results.
Comparing to column 1, we see that the measurement error correction addresses what would
otherwise be substantial attenuation bias in the self-control coefficient. We use the results in
this column to construct yet another alternative estimate of γ, which is unbiased under classical
measurement error. Positive (negative) correlation in measurement error across household heads
would imply that the column 6 estimates are lower (upper) bounds.
       A final important concern with the empirical strategy is that we assume that our survey mea-
sures fully capture the only types of biases that affect SSB consumption. In reality, our measures
may be incomplete measures of all types of imperfect knowledge and self-control that could affect
SSB consumption. Furthermore, if other biases increase SSB consumption—for example, projec-
tion bias or inattention to health harms—then we could understate the optimal SSB tax. We chose
these two biases and these specific survey questions because we thought that these best reflected
  27
    Appendix Table A10 presents additional estimates including an interaction term between knowledge and self-
control. This interaction term is highly significant, perhaps because it takes knowledge of health damages to believe
that one “should” consume less. Including this interaction in the model, however, does not materially change the
estimates of γ.



                                                         28
the most relevant and plausible sources of bias.

III.D.4           Estimates of Bias

For the average American household, predicted normative SSB consumption from our primary
                                              ŝV
estimates in column 1 of Table 5 is only       si   ≈ 69 percent of actual consumption. Put differently, we
                                                                     si −ŝV
predict that the average American household would consume               si
                                                                           i
                                                                               ≈ 31 percent fewer SSBs if they
had the nutrition knowledge of dietitians and nutritionists and no self-control problems. Figure 7
                                                                                                 si −ŝV
plots the share of consumption attributable to bias, i.e. the unweighted average of                 si
                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                           across
households, by income. Predicted overconsumption is much larger for low-income households: it is
37 and 27 percent, respectively, for households with income below $10,000 and above $100,000.
   Figure 8 plots our primary estimates of the demand-slope weighted average marginal bias γ̄ˆ =
      c si
P
  i ζ̂i pi γ̂i
 P      c si     by income. The average marginal bias across all American households is 0.91 cents per
    i ζ̂i pi
ounce. Since nutrition knowledge and self-control increase with income and elasticities and prices
do not differ much by income, we know from Equation (26) that money-metric bias γ̄ˆ will decline
in income. Indeed, average marginal biases are 1.10 and 0.83 cents per ounce, respectively, for
households with income below $10,000 and above $100,000.
     In Appendix J, we present alternative bias estimates using the PanelViews self-reported SSB
consumption. The τ̂ parameters (the associations between SSB consumption and bias proxies)
are larger, which makes the bias estimates larger: with the PanelViews data, 37 of the average
household’s consumption is attributable to bias (48 and 32 percent, respectively, for household
incomes below $10,000 and above $100,000), and average marginal bias is 2.14 cents per ounce.

III.E            Externalities
We import an externality estimate from outside sources. Using epidemiological simulation models,
Wang et al. (2012) estimate that one ounce of soda consumption increases health care costs by
an average of approximately one cent per ounce. Yong, Bertko, and Kronick (2011) estimate that
for people with employer-provided insurance, about 15 percent of health costs are borne by the
individual, while 85 percent are covered by insurance. Similarly, Cawley and Meyerhoefer (2012)
estimate that 88 percent of the total medical costs of obesity are borne by third parties, and
obesity is one of the primary diseases thought to be caused by SSB consumption. Accordingly, we
approximate the health system externality at e ≈ 0.85 cents per ounce.
     There are two caveats to this calculation. First, Bhattacharya and Bundorf (2009) find that
obese people in jobs with employer-provided health insurance bear the full health costs of obesity
through lower wages. However, this result may or may not apply to the other diseases caused by
SSB consumption, including diabetes and cardiovascular disease, and it does not apply to people
with government-provided health insurance through Medicaid or Medicare. Second, the diseases
caused by SSBs might decrease life expectancy, reducing the amount of social security benefits
that people claim and thereby imposing a positive fiscal externality (Bhattacharya and Sood, 2011;


                                                        29
Fontaine et al., 2003). Accounting for these two factors would reduce the externality estimate.
Section IV presents optimal tax estimates under alternative assumptions that illustrate the impact
of externalities.


IV     Computing the Optimal Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax
We now combine the theoretical results from Section II with the empirical estimates from Section
III to compute the optimal nationwide tax on SSBs in our modeling framework. We compute the
optimal tax across a range of specifications, under two different assumptions about the income
tax. First, we compute the optimal SSB tax assuming the income tax is held fixed at the current
status quo in the U.S., using Proposition 2. Second, we compute the optimal SSB tax assuming
the income tax is also reformed to be optimal, using Equation (10) in Proposition 1.
   These computations require an assumption about inequality aversion. We employ a schedule
of social marginal welfare weights common in the optimal taxation literature (see, for example,
Saez, 2002b) proportional to yU−νS , where yU S is post-tax income in the U.S., and ν is a parameter
which governs the strength of inequality aversion. We use ν = 1 as our baseline, and ν = 0.25 and
ν = 4 as our “weak” and “strong” redistributive preferences, respectively. We also report optimal
taxes computed under the assumption that redistributive preferences rationalize the observed U.S.
income tax. Calibrations of the status quo U.S. income distribution and income tax are drawn from
Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018); see Appendix M.B for details.
   The sufficient statistics formulas for the optimal tax depend on a number of statistics, as well as
their covariances with welfare weights. These statistics are reported in Table 6. Panel (a) presents
estimates of the key population-level statistics estimated in Section III, while Panel (b) presents
estimates of statistics within each Homescan income bin. Details of these calculations are reported
in the table notes for Table 6. We compute the sufficient statistics involving covariances using the
discrete covariance formula reported in the table notes.
   Equation 27 shows how these statistics enter the theoretical formula from Proposition 2 for the
optimal sin tax under a fixed income tax—this represents our baseline calculation of the optimal
SSB tax, which is 1.42 cents per ounce.
                                                                h 0                          i
                                                                    T (z(θ))
                  γ̄(1 + σ) + e − s̄pζ̄ c Cov [g(z), s(z)] + E 1−T             ζ
                                                                       0 (z(θ)) z (θ)s(θ)ξ(θ)
               t≈                                       h 0                           i        ,
                                                            T (z(θ))
                        1 + s̄1ζ̄ c Cov [g(z), s(z)] + E 1−T           ζ
                                                               0 (z(θ)) z  (θ)s(θ)ξ(θ)
                                                     3.63
                        [0.93(1 + 0.2) + 0.85] − 46.48·1.39 (6.72 + 0.26)
                    ≈                     1
                                  1 + 46.48·1.39 (6.72 + 0.26)
                    ≈ 1.42.                                                                          (27)

   This calculation also provides intuition for the key determinants of the optimal tax. The
denominator is close to one. In the numerator, the corrective motive is equal to γ̄(1 + σ) + e ≈
0.93(1 + 0.2) + 0.85 ≈ 1.97 cents per ounce. Less than half of the corrective motive is driven by


                                                        30
externality correction, as the average marginal bias γ̄ is larger than the externality. Moreover, the
internality correction is further inflated by about 20 percent due to the bias correction progressivity
term σ, reflecting the fact that the benefits of bias correction accrue disproportionately to poorer
consumers.
   Counteracting this corrective motive, the redistributive motive pushes toward a smaller optimal
SSB tax, because the poor have much stronger hpreferences for SSBs   i than the wealthy. Using Table 6,
                                                T 0 (z)          ¯
we can calculate Cov[g(z), s(z)] ≈ 6.72 and E        0  ζ̄z s̄(z)ξ(z) ≈ 0.26. The first term represents
                                                  1−T (z)
the mechanical distributional effect of the tax based on actual SSB consumption, while the second
represents the change in income tax revenues due to the effect of the SSB tax on labor supply.
Thus the redistributive motive reduces the tax by about 20 percent relative to the pure corrective
motive.
   The baseline calculation above holds fixed the status quo income tax. If the optimal income tax
is allowed to adjust to be optimal, the impact of the redistributive motive is instead proportional
to −Cov [g(z), spref (z)]. This statistic can be computed directly from Table 6, Panel B, where
spref (z) is constructed as the difference between observed SSB consumption s̄(z) and consumption
predicted from estimated income elasticities, similarly to Figure 3. In this case, the estimated
covariance is Cov [g(z), spref (z)] ≈ 24.8. Proposition 1 therefore implies an optimal sin tax of 0.41
cents per ounce.
   The optimal SSB tax is higher under the status quo income tax than under the optimal income
tax because under our assumed welfare weights, status quo marginal income tax rates are “too
low” relative to the optimum. Since SSB taxes distort labor supply downward when SSBs are a
normal good, they create a negative fiscal externality through the income tax. That negative fiscal
externality is much larger under the optimal income tax than under the status quo because the
marginal income tax rates of the optimal income tax are much larges than those of the status quo.
Consequently, the optimal SSB tax is lower under the optimal income tax.
   These estimates of the optimal SSB tax are reported in Table 7, along with calculations under
several alternative assumptions that we now summarize.
   The second row of Table 7 reports the optimal tax estimated using self-reported SSB con-
sumption from our PanelViews survey, rather than data captured by Homescan. This specification
results in a higher optimal SSB tax of 2.13 cents per ounce. (All other rows use the Homescan data
used for the baseline calculation.)
   The next three rows consider alternative assumptions about the policymaker’s preference for
redistribution. The “Pigouvian” specification reports the optimal tax in the absence of any in-
equality aversion, in which case the tax is simply equal to γ̄ + e. We then report the optimal
tax under weaker preferences for redistribution, which lead to a higher tax than in the baseline
specification, since the redistributive motive of the tax is weakened. (The corrective motive also de-
creases, due to smaller bias correction progressivity, but this is a smaller effect.) Similarly, stronger
inequality aversion leads to a lower tax than in the baseline. In both cases, the deviation from
baseline is greater under the optimal income tax than under the status quo, for the same reason


                                                   31
that the baseline SSB tax is lower under the optimal income tax: SSB tax fiscal externalities are
more costly under stronger redistributive preferences. Finally, we consider the assumption that the
policymaker’s redistributive preferences exactly rationalize the observed U.S. income tax. This as-
sumption implies very weak redistributive motives and social marginal welfare weights that are not
even everywhere decreasing with income.28 Consequently, this assumption raises the tax toward the
“Pigouvian” case.29 However, we are skeptical that the implied redistributive preferences represent
deep normative judgments—as opposed to political economy constraints or other factors—and so
we use our more conventionally chosen “baseline” weights for the other rows of Table 7.
       We next consider alternative assumptions about the SSB demand elasticity. A higher elasticity
scales down the redistributive motive, raising the optimal tax. Conversely, a lower elasticity reduces
the optimal tax. The next two rows of Table 7 report the optimal tax assuming a (constant)
demand elasticity of either 2 or 1, rather than our heterogeneous empirical estimate. The following
row explores the effect of assuming elasticities decline more steeply with income—there we assume
that the interaction term on elasticities and household income is four times as large as our estimate
from Table A4, while adjusting the intercept to leave the population average elasticity unchanged.
This raises the optimal tax, through the bias concentration progressivity term σ, but the effect is
muted.
       The next two rows consider different possible roles of preference heterogeneity versus income
effects in accounting for cross-sectional variation in SSB consumption. The first case, “Pure pref-
erence heterogeneity,” assumes that all SSB consumption differences are driven by between-income
preference heterogeneity. In this case, the optimal SSB tax is independent of the income tax, and
so it is the same in both columns. The “Pure income effects” case instead assumes preferences are
homogeneous, implying that SSBs are highly inferior goods. In this case, redistribution is more
efficiently carried out through the optimal income tax. This does not substantially alter the optimal
SSB tax under the (suboptimal) status quo income tax. If the income tax is optimal, however, then
the optimal SSB tax is higher than the Pigouvian case of no inequality aversion, as in special case
2 in Section II.E.
       The next four specifications report alternative sets of assumptions about our internality esti-
mates from limited self control. First, we employ a measurement error correction for our estimate
of bias from self-control, as in Column (6) of Table 5. The measurement error correction raises the
estimated bias from self control problems, which increases the optimal tax. Second, we report the
optimal tax assuming consumers have no self control problems—that is, assuming bias is driven
solely by incorrect nutrition knowledge. This reduces the optimal tax, relative to our baseline.
Finally, to reflect the relative uncertainty about the precision of bias due to limited self control, we
report the optimal tax assuming that bias due to limited self control is either one half or twice as
  28
     See Lockwood and Weinzierl (2016) for a description of this inversion procedure and a discussion of the implied
preferences for redistribution.
  29
     Theory predicts that in a continuous model, the optimal SSB tax would be the same in the two columns, since the
existing U.S. income tax is optimal by assumption. Under this discretized calculation, the two values differ slightly,
but they are much closer than under the alternative assumptions about redistributive preferences.



                                                         32
large as our baseline estimate.
   The next five specifications compute the optimal tax accounting for substitution patterns across
sweetened goods, using the theoretical formula presented in Proposition 3. These substitution
patterns are based on the estimates reported in Table 4. In the specification “With substitution:
untaxed goods equally harmful,” we assume each of the categories reported in Table 4 is equally
harmful to SSBs (in terms of price-normalized externalities and internalities). Since these other
categories of goods are estimated to be slightly complementary to SSB consumption on average,
accounting for substitution raises the corrective motive of the tax, resulting in a higher optimal
tax. We report analogous exercises on the following two lines, assuming the other categories of
goods are either half or twice as harmful as SSBs, respectively. Finally, because diet drinks are
the one category that is estimated to be a significant substitute for SSBs in Table 4, we consider
two possible assumptions about their role. In the specification “With substitution: diet drinks not
harmful,” we assume that diet drinks are unharmful, with no internalities or externalities, while
all other categories are as harmful as SSBs. Since the other categories (excluding diet drinks) are
a stronger complement to SSBs as a whole, this assumption implies that the corrective benefits of
SSB taxes are larger, resulting in a higher optimal tax. For a contrasting assumption, we note that
the insignificant (or barely significant) substitution patterns estimated for goods other than diet
drinks in Table 4 could be due to statistical noise. Therefore, the specification “With substitution:
only to diet drinks, equally harmful” we assume that all categories other than diet drinks are neither
substitutes nor complements, and that diet drinks are equally harmful to regular SSBs. Since diet
drinks are a strong substitute for SSBs, this reduces the corrective strength of an SSB tax, resulting
in a lower optimal tax rate.
   We next consider two more extreme assumptions about internalities and externalities. The row
labeled “No internality” reports the optimal tax if consumer bias is assumed to be zero, which
substantially reduces the optimal tax. The specification “No corrective motive” also assumes that
externalities (in addition to internalities) are zero. In this case, only the redistributive motive is
active, resulting in an optimal subsidy for SSBs.
   The final two rows beginning with “Optimal local tax” report SSB tax calculations assuming
that the tax is implemented at a local level, with some leakage due to cross border shopping. As
noted in Section II.G, the optimal tax in the presence of leakage can be derived from Proposition 3,
interpreting cross-border goods as a substitute untaxed good that generates identical internalities
and externalities. Although we focus on the optimal nationwide SSB tax for our benchmark analysis,
allowing for such leakage may be informative for determining the optimal city-level policy. There
are several existing estimates of leakage. Seiler, Tuchman, and Yao (2019) estimate that about
half of the total consumption change due to the Philadelphia beverage tax was offset by increased
purchases outside the city. This may be an upper bound, however, as Philadelphia’s beverage tax
applied to diet beverages, so some cross-border shopping may be replaced by substitution from
regular to diet beverages under a conventional SSB tax. Bollinger and Sexton (2019) study the
SSB tax in Berkeley and also find about half of the consumption reduction is offset by cross-


                                                 33
border shopping. We compute the optimal local SSB tax under the assumption that either 25%
or 50% of the consumption reduction is offset by cross-border shopping. We do not compute these
specifications under the optimal income tax, as it is unclear what assumption should be made about
local income taxes.
       We compute the welfare gains from SSB taxes in Appendix L. In our baseline specification, the
optimal tax generates an estimated increase in social welfare of $7.86 per adult equivalent consumer
per year, or about $2.4 billion in aggregate across the U.S.30 This generates $100 million more in
annual welfare gains than a nationwide one-cent-per-ounce tax—the modal policy among U.S. cities
with SSB taxes—and $1 billion more than the tax that would incorrectly be deemed “optimal” if
policymakers do not account for consumer bias. These gains from the optimal tax highlight the
importance of using empirical estimates of internalities and externalities, rather than assuming
them away, or using round number “rules of thumb” to design policy. In the specification using
self-reported SSB consumption from the second line of Table 7, the optimal tax generates welfare
gains of $21.86 per adult equivalent consumer per year, or $6.8 billion across the U.S..
       The welfare gains can be decomposed into four distinct components, plotted in Figure 9 across
the income distribution and described in Appendix L. The net gains vary across income groups
for two competing reasons. First, groups that consume more SSBs have a larger decision utility
equivalent variation loss due to the financial burden of the tax. Second, groups that are more
biased and more elastic experience a larger benefit from bias correction due to the tax. As a result,
the profile of net benefits from a seemingly “regressive” sin tax can be increasing or decreasing
with income. The former force tends to dominate in our baseline estimate, generating an upward-
sloping profile of net benefits across the income distribution. That slope is modest, however, and
a similar exercise using the PanelViews self-reports—which give a steeper negative slope of bias in
income—suggests that the poor benefit nearly as much as the rich; see Appendix Figure A6.
       A potential concern about the estimates in Table 7, and the corresponding welfare calculations,
is that our implementation of the sufficient statistics formulas yield only an approximation to the
optimal tax, for two reasons. First, our formulas assume that income effects on labor supply and the
budget share of SSBs are negligible. Second, we estimate the statistics at the status quo equilibrium,
rather than under the optimal tax—that is, we do not account for how a new tax regime would
change the consumption of s by income, or how it would affect the elasticities. To explore the
importance of these sources of error, Appendix M presents estimates of the optimal tax using two
different structural models, with taxes computed using sufficient statistics at the optimum and
fully accounting for all behavioral responses. Those estimates exhibit the same qualitative patterns
and are quantitatively close to the values reported here, particularly in the case where the income
tax is held fixed, providing additional evidence that an empirically feasible implementation of our
  30
    For intuition on the magnitudes, consider the efficiency gains from a purely corrective tax based on our estimated
population-level statistics. The sum of the estimated average internality and externality is γ̄ + e ≈ 0.93 + 0.85 ≈
1.78 cents per ounce, and the (absolute inverse) slope of the population demand curve is approximated by ζ̄ c ps̄ ≈
17.72. Thus the deadweight loss triangle eliminated by a fully corrective tax is approximated by 0.5(17.72)(1.78)2 ≈
28.04 cents per week, or $14.58 per year. The actual welfare gains are somewhat smaller because of redistributive
considerations.


                                                         34
sufficient statistics formulas provides a close approximation to the optimal tax.


V     Conclusion
This paper provides a tractable theoretical and empirical framework for setting and evaluating opti-
mal commodity taxes in the presence of internalities and externalities. We provide the first optimal
commodity tax formula that takes account of the three key elements of public policy debates around
sin taxes: correcting consumer bias and externalities, distributional concerns, and revenue recycling
through income taxes or income-targeted transfers. Prior work in behavioral economics and public
economics has considered only subsets of these three issues or imposed unrealistic assumptions
around preference heterogeneity and other parameters.
    We demonstrate the usefulness of the theoretical results by focusing on a particularly timely and
controversial public policy question: what is the optimal soda tax? Our PanelViews survey data
provide novel insights about the relationship between nutrition knowledge, self-control, income
and SSB consumption, and we provide a credible estimate of the price elasticity of demand for
SSBs using a new and broadly usable instrument. In our model, externalities and internalities
each provide about half of the corrective rationale for SSB taxes, highlighting the importance of
attempting to measure internalities. The socially optimal nationwide SSB tax in our model is
between 1 and 2.1 cents per ounce, or between 28 and 59 percent of the quantity-weighted average
price of SSBs recorded in Homescan. Our preferred specifications of the model imply that the
optimal federal tax would increase welfare by $2.4 billion to $6.8 billion per year.
    Although we take seriously the possibility that consumers might make mistakes, our methodol-
ogy fundamentally relies on revealed preference. Our methods are designed to identify the choices
people would make if they were fully informed and consumed sugary drinks as much as they feel
they actually should. In parallel with other work in behavioral public economics, our approach al-
lows us to continue to use standard tools of public economics to evaluate policies. One alternative
approach implicit in much of the public health literature is to assume that the only social objective
is to maximize positive health outcomes. However, it is difficult to justify why one should ignore
all other factors, such as the benefits of enjoying sugary drinks. A second alternative is to elicit
subjective well-being or other measures of “experienced utility,” as in the Gruber and Mullainathan
(2005) study of the impact of cigarette taxes on smokers’ happiness. However, this approach is
fundamentally retrospective, so it cannot be used to evaluate policies that have not yet been im-
plemented. A central problem shared by both alternative approaches is that they do not generate
consumer surplus estimates in units of dollars, which are necessary for a comprehensive welfare
analysis that also includes producer surplus, externalities, government revenue, and redistributive
concerns.
    Our theoretical results and empirical methodology could immediately be applied to study op-
timal taxes (or subsidies) on cigarettes, alcohol, unhealthy foods such as sugar or saturated fat,
and consumer products such as energy-efficient appliances. Leaving aside internalities, our results


                                                 35
can be used to clarify active debates about the regressivity of externality correction policies such
as carbon taxes and fuel economy standards. Our theory is also applicable to questions about cap-
ital income taxation or subsidies on saving, and with some appropriate modification our empirical
methods could be extended to quantify taxes in those domains as well. Finally, our theory could
be extended in a number of potentially fruitful directions, such as allowing for issues of tax salience
or incorporating endogenous producer pricing and product line choice.
   As we discuss throughout the paper, our approach has its weaknesses. One should be cautious
about advocating any particular optimal tax estimate too strongly, and we encourage further work
extending, generalizing, and critiquing our approach. But by leveraging robust economic prin-
ciples tied closely to data, our methods almost surely provide valuable input into thorny public
policy debates that often revolve around loose intuitions, unsubstantiated assumptions, personal
philosophies, or political agendas.




                                                  36
References
Allcott, Hunt. 2013. “The Welfare Effects of Misperceived Product Costs: Data and Calibrations
  from the Automobile Market.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (3):30–66.

Allcott, Hunt, Christopher Knittel, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2015. “Tagging and Targeting of Energy
  Efficiency Subsidies.” American Economic Review 105 (5):187–01.

Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2018. “Ramsey Strikes Back: Op-
  timal Commodity Taxes and Redistribution in the Presence of Salience Effects.” American
  Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 108:88–92.

Allcott, Hunt, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2014. “Energy Policy with External-
  ities and Internalities.” Journal of Public Economics 112:72–88.

Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2015. “Evaluating Behaviorally-Motivated Policy: Experi-
  mental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market.” American Economic Review 105 (8):2501–2538.

Andreyeva, Tatiana, Michael W. Long, and Kelly D. Brownell. 2010. “The Impact of Food Prices
  on Consumption: A Systematic Review of Research on the Price Elasticity of Demand for Food.”
  American Journal of Public Health 100 (2):216–222.

Atkinson, Anthony B and J.E. Stiglitz. 1976. “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct Versus Indirect
  Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics 6 (1-2):55–75.

Attari, Shahzeen, Michael DeKay, Cliff Davidson, and Wandi Bruine de Bruin. 2010. “Public
  Perceptions of Energy Consumption and Savings.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences 107 (37):16054–16059.

Bartels, Larry M. 1996. “Uninformed Votes: Information Effects in Presidential Elections.” Amer-
  ican Journal of Political Science 40 (1):194–230.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel. 2004. “Addiction and Cue-Triggered Decision Pro-
  cesses.” American Economic Review 94 (5):1558–1590.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2018. “Behavioral Public Economics.” In The
  Handbook of Behavioral Economics, vol. 1, edited by B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna,
  and David Laibson. New York: Elsevier.

Bhattacharya, Jay and M. Kate Bundorf. 2009. “The Incidence of the Healthcare Costs of Obesity.”
  Journal of Health Economics 28 (3):649–658.

Bhattacharya, Jay and Neeraj Sood. 2011. “Who Pays for Obesity?” Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives 25 (1):139–158.




                                                37
Blumgart, Jake. 2016. “A Soda Tax is Fundamentally Regressive. What If It’s Philadelphia’s Best
  Hope for Progressive Change?” The Nation .

Bollinger, Bryan, Phillip Leslie, and Alan Sorensen. 2011. “Calorie Posting in Chain Restaurants.”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (1):91–128.

Bollinger, Bryan and Steven Sexton. 2019. “Local Excise Taxes, Sticky Prices, and Spillovers:
  Evidence from Berkeley’s Soda Tax.” Working Paper.

Bond, Timothy N. and Kevin Lang. 2018. “The Sad Truth About Happiness Scales: Empirical
  Results.” NBER Working Paper No. 24853.

Bovenberg, A. Lans and Lawrence H. Goulder. 1996. “Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Pres-
  ence of Other Taxes: General-Equilibrium Analyses.” American Economic Review 86 (4):985–
  1000.

Bronnenberg, Bart, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse Shapiro. 2015. “Do Phar-
  macists Buy Bayer? Sophisticated Shoppers and the Brand Premium.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 130 (4):1669–1726.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2017. Personal Income Summary: Personal Income, Population,
  Per Capita Personal Income.

Cawley, John and Chad Meyerhoefer. 2012. “The Medical Care Costs of Obesity: An Instrumental
  Variables Approach.” Journal of Health Economics 31 (1):219–230.

Chetty, Raj. 2012. “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro and
  Macro Evidence on Labor Supply.” Econometrica 80 (3):969–1018.

———. 2015. “Behavioral Economics and Public Policy: A Pragmatic Perspective.” American
  Economic Review 105 (5):1–33.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. 2009. “Salience and Taxation: Theory and Evidence.”
  American Economic Review 99 (4):1145–1177.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel and Johannes Wieland. 2016. “Secular Labor Reallocation and Business
  Cycles.” NBER Working Paper No. 21864.

Cutler, David, Amber Jessup, Donald Kenkel, and Martha Starr. 2015. “Valuing Regulations
  Affecting Addictive or Habitual Goods.” Journal of Benefit Cost Analysis 6 (2):247–280.

Davis, Lucas and Severin Borenstein. 2016. “The Distributional Effects of U.S. Clean Energy Tax
  Credits.” Tax Policy and the Economy 30 (1):191–234.

Davis, Lucas and Christopher Knittel. 2016. “Are Fuel Economy Standards Regressive?” NBER
  Working Paper No. 22925.

                                               38
DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow. Forthcoming. “Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics .

Diamond, Peter and Johannes Spinnewijn. 2011. “Capital Income Taxes with Heterogeneous Dis-
  count Rates.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3 (4):52–76.

Diamond, Peter A. 1973. “Consumption Externalities and Imperfect Corrective Pricing.” The Bell
  Journal of Economics and Management Science :526–538.

———. 1975. “A Many-Person Ramsey Tax Rule.” Journal of Public Economics 4 (4):335–342.

Dubois, Pierre, Rachel Griffith, and Martin O’Connell. 2017. “How Well-Targeted Are Soda Taxes?”
  Working Paper.

Duffey, Kiyah J., Penny Gordon-Larsen, James M. Shikany, David Guilkey, David R. Jacobs, and
  Barry M. Popkin. 2010. “Food Price and Diet and Health Outcomes.” Archives of Internal
  Medicine 170 (5):420–426.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix. 2015. “Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents.” NBER
  Working Paper No. 21524.

Finkelstein, Eric A., Chen Zhen, Marcel Bilger, James Nonnemaker, Assad M. Farooqui, and Jes-
  sica E. Todd. 2013. “Implications of a Sugar-Sweetened Beverage (SSB) Tax When Substitutions
  to Non-Beverage Items are Considered.” Journal of Health Economics 32 (1):219–239.

Fletcher, Jason M., David E. Frisvold, and Nathan Teft. 2010. “The Effects of Soft Drink Taxes
  on Child and Adolescent Consumption and Weight Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics
  94 (11-12):967–974.

Fontaine, Kevin R., David T. Redden, Chenxi Wang, Andrew O. Westfall, and David B. Alli-
  son. 2003. “Years of Life Lost Due to Obesity.” Journal of the American Medical Association
  289 (2):187–193.

Gauthier, Stephane and Fanny Henriet. 2018. “European Economic Review.” Commodity taxes
  and taste heterogeneity (101):284–296.

Gillen, Ben, Erik Snowberg, and Leeat Yariv. 2015. “Experimenting with Measurement Error:
  Techniques with Applications to the Caltech Cohort Study.” NBER Working Paper No. 21517.

Global Food Research Program (GFRP). 2019. “Sugary Drink Taxes Around the World.” URL
  https://www.dropbox.com/s/bqbj501wgocor24/UNCGFRP_SSB_tax_maps.pdf?dl=0.

Goldin, Jacob and Tatiana Homonoff. 2013. “Smoke Gets In Your Eyes: Cigarette Tax Salience
  and Regressivity.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 5 (1):302–336.

Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend: A Reader’s
  Guide.” International Tax and Public Finance 2 (2):157–183.

                                              39
———. 2013. “Climate Change Policy’s Interactions with the Tax System.” Energy Economics
  40 (1):3–11.

Goulder, Lawrence H. and Roberton C. Williams. 2003. “The Substantial Bias from Ignoring
  General Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden, and a Practical Solution.” Journal of
  Political Economy 111 (4):898–927.

Gruber, Jon and Emmanuel Saez. 2002. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income: Evidence and Impli-
  cations.” Journal of Public Economics 84 (1):1–32.

Gruber, Jonathan and Botond Kőszegi. 2001. “Is Addiction ‘Rational’ ? Theory and Evidence.”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4):1261–1303.

———. 2004. “Tax Incidence When Individuals Are Time-Inconsistent: The Case of Cigarette
  Excise Taxes.” Journal of Public Economics 88 (9-10):1959–1987.

Gruber, Jonathan and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers Happier.”
  The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 5 (1).

Handel, Benjamin R and Jonathan T Kolstad. 2015. “Health Insurance for ‘Humans’: Information
  Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare.” American Economic Review 105 (8):2449–2500.

Harding, Matthew and Michael Lovenheim. 2015. “The Effect of Prices on Nutrition: Comparing
  the Impact of Product- and Nutrient-Specific Taxes.” Journal of Health Economics 53:53–71.

Hausman, Jerry. 1996. “Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition.”
  In The Economics of New Goods, vol. 58, edited by Timothy Bresnaham and Roger Gordon.
  University of Chicago Press, 207–248.

Hedrick, Valisa, Jyoti Savla, Dana Comber, Kyle Flack, Paul Estabrooks, Phyllis Nsiah-Kumi,
  Stacie Ortmeier, and Brenda Davy. 2012. “Development of a Brief Questionnaire to Assess
  Habitual Beverage Intake (BEVQ-15): Sugar-Sweetened Beverages and Total Beverage Energy
  Intake.” Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 112 (6):840–849.

Hendel, Igal and Aviv Nevo. 2006a. “Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer Inventory
  Behavior.” Econometrica 74 (6):1637–1673.

———. 2006b. “Sales and Consumer Inventory.” RAND Journal of Economics 37 (3):543–561.

———. 2010. “A Simple Model of Demand Anticipation.” Working Paper.

Heutel, Garth. 2015. “Optimal Policy Instruments for Externality-Producing Durable Goods under
  Present Bias.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 72:54–70.

Hirth, Richard A., Michael E. Chernew, Edward Miller, Mark Fendrick, and William G. Weissert.
  2000. “Willingness to Pay for a Quality-Adjusted Life Year: In Search of a Standard.” Medical
  Decision Making 20 (3):332–342.

                                              40
Hitsch, Günter J., Ali Hortacsu, and Xiliang Lin. 2017. “Prices and Promotions in U.S. Retail
  Markets: Evidence from Big Data.” Working Paper.

Huehnergarth, Nancy Fink. 2016. “Senator Sanders Is Wrong: A Soda Tax Is Progressive, Not
  Regressive.” Forbes .

Jacobs, Bas and Robin Boadway. 2014. “Optimal Linear Commodity Taxation under Optimal
  Non-Linear Income Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics 117:201–210.

Jacobs, Bas and Ruud A. de Mooij. 2015. “Pigou Meets Mirrlees: On the Irrelevance of Tax Distor-
  tions for the Second-Best Pigouvian Tax.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
  71:90–108.

Jacquet, Laurence and Etienne Lehmann. 2014. “Optimal Nonlinear Income Taxation with Multi-
  dimensional Types: The Case with Heterogeneous Behavioral Responses.” Working Paper.

Johnson, Erin M. and M. Marit Rehavi. 2016. “Physicians Treating Physicians: Information and
  Incentives in Childbirth.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (1):115–141.

Kaplow, Louis. 2012. “Optimal Control of Externalities in the Presence of Income Taxation.”
  International Economic Review 53 (2):487–509.

Kilts Center for Marketing. 2018. Retail Scanner Dataset Manual.

Kit, Brian, Tala Fakhouri, Sohyun Park, Samara Joy Nielsen, and Cynthia Ogden. 2013. “Trends
  in Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption among Youth and Adults in the United States: 1999-
  2010.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 98 (1):180–188.

Kliemann, N, J Wardle, F Johnson, and H Croker. 2016. “Reliability and Validity of a Revised Ver-
  sion of the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition
  70 (10):1174–1180.

Levitt, Steven D. and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Market Distortions when Agents are Better Informed:
  The Value of Information in Real Estate Transactions.” Review of Economics and Statistics
  90 (4):599–611.

Lockwood, Benjamin B. and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2017. “Regressive Sin Taxes.” NBER Working
  Paper No. 23085.

Lockwood, Benjamin B and Matthew Weinzierl. 2016. “Positive and Normative Judgments Implicit
  in US Tax Policy, and the Costs of Unequal Growth and Recessions.” Journal of Monetary
  Economics 77:30–47.

Long, Michael W., Steven L. Gortmaker, Zachary J. Ward, Stephen C. Resch, Marj L. Moodie,
  Gary Sacks, Boyd A. Swinburn, Rob C. Carter, and Y. Claire Wang. 2015. “Cost Effectiveness of


                                               41
  a Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Excise Tax in the U.S.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine
  49 (1):112–123.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, Joshua Schwartzstein, and William J Congdon. 2012. “A Reduced-Form
  Approach to Behavioral Public Finance.” Annual Review of Economics 4 (1):511–540.

Nevo, Aviv. 2001. “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry.” Econometrica
  69 (2):307–342.

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “Optimal Sin Taxes.” Journal of Public Economics
  90 (10-11):1825–1849.

Oster, Emily. 2017. “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence.”
  Journal of Business and Economic Statistics :1–18.

Pigou, Arthur Cecil. 1920. The Economics of Welfare.

Piketty, Thomas, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. 2018. “Distributional National Accounts:
  Methods and Estimates for the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (2):553–609.

Powell, Lisa M., Jamie F. Chriqui, Tamkeen Khan, Roy Wada, and Frank J. Chaloupka. 2013.
  “Assessing the Potential Effectiveness of Food and Beverage Taxes and Subsidies for Improving
  Public Health: A Systematic Review of Prices, Demand and Body Weight Outcomes.” Obesity
  Reviews 14 (2):110–128.

Rees-Jones, Alex and Kyle Rozema. 2018. “Price Isn’t Everything: Behavioral Response around
  Changes in Sin Taxes.” Working Paper.

Rojas, Christian and Emily Wang. 2017. “Do Taxes for Soda and Sugary Drinks Work? Scanner
  Data Evidence from Berkeley and Washington.” Working Paper.

Sadoff, Sally, Anya Samek, and Charles Sprenger. 2015. “Dynamic Inconsistency in Food Choice:
  Experimental Evidence from a Food Desert.” Working Paper.

Saez, Emmanuel. 2001. “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates.” The Review of
  Economic Studies 68 (1):205–229.

———. 2002a. “The Desirability of Commodity Taxation Under Non-Linear Income Taxation and
  Heterogeneous Tastes.” Journal of Public Economics 83 (2):217–230.

———. 2002b. “Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive versus Extensive Labor Supply
  Responses.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3):1039–1073.

Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth H Giertz. 2012. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with
  Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1):3–50.



                                              42
Sanders, Bernie. 2016. “A Soda Tax Would Hurt Philly’s Low-Income Families.” Philadelphia
  Magazine .

Seiler, Stephan, Anna Tuchman, and Song Yao. 2019. “The Impact of Soda Taxes: Pass-through,
  Tax Avoidance, and Nutritional Effects.” Working Paper.

Silver, Lynn D., Shu Wen Ng, Suzanne Ryan-Ibarra, Lindsey Smith Taillie, Marta Induni, Donna R.
  Miles, Jennifer M. Poti, and Barry M. Popkin. 2017. “Changes in Prices, Sales, Consumer
  Spending, and Beverage Consumption One Year After a Tax on Sugar-Sweetened Beverages in
  Berkeley, California, US: A Before-And-After Study.” PLoS: Medicine 14 (4).

Smith, Travis A, Biing-Hwan Lin, and Jonq-Ying Lee. 2010. “Taxing Caloric Sweetened Beverages:
  Potential Effects on Beverage Consumption, Calorie Intake, and Obesity.” USDA Economic
  Research Report Number 100.

Taubinsky, Dmitry and Alex Rees-Jones. 2018. “Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory and
  Evidence from a Tax Salience Experiment.” Review of Economic Studies Forthcoming.

Thow, Anne Marie, Shauna Downs, and Stephen Jan. 2014. “A Systematic Review of the Effec-
  tiveness of Food Taxes and Subsidies to Improve Diets: Understanding the Recent Evidence.”
  Nutrition Reviews 72 (9):551–565.

Tiffin, Richard, Ariane Kehlbacher, and Matthew Salois. 2015. “The Effects of A Soft Drink Tax
  in the UK.” Health Economics 24 (5):583–600.

Vargas-Garcia, E.J., C.E.L. Evans, A. Prestwich, B.J. Sykes-Muskett, J. Hooson, and J.E. Cade.
  2017. “Interventions to Reduce Consumption of Sugar-Sweetened Beverages or Increase Water
  Intake: Evidence from a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Obesity Reviews 18 (11):1350–
  1363.

Wang, Emily Yucai. 2015. “The Impact of Soda Taxes on Consumer Welfare: Implications of
  Storability and Taste Heterogeneity.” The RAND Journal of Economics 46 (2):409–441.

Wang, Y Claire, Pamela Coxson, Yu-Ming Shen, Lee Goldman, and Kirsten Bibbins-Domingo.
  2012. “A Penny-Per-Ounce Tax on Sugar-Sweetened Beverages Would Cut Health and Cost
  Burdens of Diabetes.” Health Affairs 31 (1):199–207.

Yong, Pierre L., John Bertko, and Richard Kronick. 2011.      “Actuarial Value and Employer-
  Sponsored Insurance.”

Zhen, Chen, Eric A. Finkelstein, James Nonnemaker, Shawn Karns, and Jessica E. Todd. 2014.
  “Predicting the Effects of Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Taxes on Food and Beverage Demand in a
  Large Demand System.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 96 (1):1–25.




                                              43
Zhen, Chen, Michael K. Wohlgenant, Shawn Karns, and Phillip Kaufman. 2011. “Habit Formation
  and Demand for Sugar-Sweetened Beverages.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics
  93 (1):175–193.




                                            44
                    Table 1: Names and Definitions of Selected Statistics

Statistic    Name                                                                               Definition
     p       Price of sin good
     e       Fiscal externality cost from sin good consumption
  s(θ)       Individual sin good consumption
 z(θ)        Individual labor income
 γ(θ)        Individual price metric bias in sin good consumption                        See Section II
                                                                             d                                                     z
  ξ(θ)       Individual causal income elasticity of sin good demand          dz s (p    + t, z − T (z), z; θ) ·                    s
 ζzc (θ)     Individual compensated elasticity of taxable income                     R See Appendix A
 h(z)        Labor income density                                                     Θ 1 {z(θ) = z} dµ(θ)
  s̄(z)      Average sin good consumption at income z                                  E [s(θ)|z(θ) = z]
                                                                                                ds̄(z)
 s̄0 (z)     Cross sectional variation of sin good consumption with income             h         dz             i
s0inc (z)    Causal income effect on sin good consumption                            E ξ(θ) s(θ)
                                                                                               z     | z(θ) = z
s0pref (z)   Between-income preference heterogeneity                                    s̄0 (z) − s0inc (z)
                                                                                      Rz           0
spref (z)    Cumulative between-income preference heterogeneity                        x=zmin spref (x)dx
  g(z)       Social marginal welfare weight on consumers earning z                         See Equation 4
  ĝ(z)      Social marginal utility of income                                             See
                                                                                            
                                                                                               Footnote
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                        15
                                                                             R                 ds(θ)
                                                                                 Θγ(θ)    dt
                                                                                               1{z(θ)=z}dµ(θ)
  γ̄(z)      Average marginal bias at income z                                   R  ds(θ) 
                                                                                             u

                                                                                  Θ    dt
                                                                                             1{z(θ)=z}dµ(θ)
                                                                                 h               u
                                                                                                               i
                                                                                       ds(θ)                                   p+t
 ζ̄ c (z)    Average compensated elasticity of sin good demand at income z   E          dt u           |z(θ) = z ·             s̄(z)
                                                                                          R
    s̄       Average sin good consumption                                                      Rz s̄(z)h(z)dz
    ḡ       Average social marginal welfare weight                                             z g(z)h(z)dz
                                                                                                         
                                                                                       R               ds(θ)
                                                                                           Θγ(θ)    dt
                                                                                                         dµ(θ)
    γ̄       Average marginal bias                                                         R  ds(θ) 
                                                                                                       u

                                                                                            Θ    dt
                                                                                                       dµ(θ)
                                                                                           h               u                   i
                                                                                                        γ̄(z) ζ̄ c (z) s̄(z)
    σ        Progressivity of bias correction                                    Cov g(z),                γ̄     ζ̄ c    s̄




                                                 45
                                   Table 2: Descriptive Statistics


                                                     Obs.     Mean     Std. dev.     Min      Max
             Household income ($000s)               653,554    68.00     47.59        3       167
             Years education                        653,554    13.92      2.06        6        18
             Age                                    653,554    52.24     14.41       18        95
             1(White)                               653,554     0.77      0.42        0         1
             1(Black)                               653,554     0.12      0.33        0         1
             1(Have children)                       653,554     0.33      0.47        0         1
             Household size (adult equivalents)     653,554     2.48      1.36        1        11
             1(Employed)                            653,554    0.61       0.44        0         1
             Weekly work hours                      653,554    22.84     16.73        0        40
             SSBs purchased (liters)                653,554   155.90    192.57        0      13,257
             Average price ($/liter)                633,136     1.14      1.45        0       228
                                 (a) Homescan Household-by-Year Data

                                                   Obs.    Mean    Std. dev.   Min    Max
                    Nutrition knowledge           20,640   0.70      0.15       0       1
                    Self-control                  20,640   0.77      0.34       0       1
                    Other head self-control       13,066    0.67     0.38       0       1
                    Taste for juice drinks        20,640    0.49     0.32       0       1
                    Taste for soda                20,640   0.52      0.36       0       1
                    Taste for tea/coffee          20,640   0.45      0.36       0       1
                    Taste for sports drinks       20,640   0.29      0.32       0       1
                    Taste for energy drinks       20,640   0.17      0.28       0       1
                    Taste for fruit juice         20,640    0.72     0.29       0       1
                    Taste for diet drinks         20,640    0.32     0.37       0       1
                    Health importance             20,640   0.84      0.18       0       1
                    SSB consumption (liters)      20,640   87.70    146.13      0     1735
                    1(Male)                       20,640    0.28     0.45       0       1
                    1(Primary shopper)            20,640   0.88      0.33       0       1
                                 (b) PanelViews Respondent-Level Data
Notes: Panel (a) presents descriptive statistics on the Nielsen Homescan data, which are at the household-
by-year level for 2006-2016. If there are two household heads, we use the two heads’ mean age, education,
employment status, and weekly work hours. We code weekly work hours as zero for people who are not
employed. For people who are employed, weekly work hours is reported in three bins: <30, 30-34, and ≥35,
which we code as 24, 32, and 40, respectively. The U.S. government Dietary Guidelines include calorie needs
by age and gender; we combine that with Homescan household composition to get each household member’s
daily calorie need. Household size in “adult equivalents” is the number of household heads plus the total
calorie needs of all other household members divided by the nationwide average calorie need of household
heads. Prices and incomes are in real 2016 dollars. Panel (b) presents descriptive statistics on the Homescan
PanelViews data, with one observation for each respondent. See Appendix E for the text of the PanelViews
survey questions. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.




                                                      46
       Table 3: Instrumental Variables Estimates of Price and Income Elasticities

                                                    (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)          (5)
  ln(Average price/liter)                       -1.373∗∗∗   -1.463∗∗∗    -1.481∗∗∗   -1.354∗∗∗   -1.406∗∗∗
                                                  (0.089)    (0.098)       (0.099)    (0.091)     (0.168)
  ln(County income)                              0.204∗∗∗   0.234∗∗∗      0.197∗∗    0.201∗∗∗    0.340∗∗∗
                                                  (0.073)    (0.080)       (0.080)    (0.073)     (0.126)
  Feature                                        1.154∗∗∗   1.164∗∗∗      1.150∗∗∗   1.161∗∗∗    1.229∗∗∗
                                                  (0.065)    (0.067)       (0.066)    (0.067)     (0.136)
  Display                                        0.503∗∗∗   0.524∗∗∗      0.510∗∗∗   0.504∗∗∗    0.445∗∗∗
                                                  (0.089)    (0.088)       (0.088)    (0.089)     (0.162)
  Income ($100k) × ln(Average price/liter)                                                          0.050
                                                                                                  (0.234)
  Income ($100k) × ln(County income)                                                               -0.203
                                                                                                  (0.158)
  Income ($100k) × Feature                                                                         -0.106
                                                                                                  (0.172)
  Income ($100k) × Display                                                                          0.088
                                                                                                  (0.217)
  Market-quarter fixed effects                     No          Yes          No          No            No
  Market-quarter-income fixed effects              No          No           Yes         No            No
  Kleibergen-Paap first stage F stat              272.3       256.1        259.3       302.7         42.3
  N                                             2,219,344   2,219,344    2,219,296   2,219,344   2,219,344

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (19). All regressions include quarter of sample indicators
and household-by-county fixed effects. Columns 1-3 present instrumental variables estimates using the
primary IV. Column 4 constructs the instrument using deviations from regional average prices instead of
national average prices. In columns 2 and 3, “market” is Nielsen’s Designated Market Area (DMA). Column
5 includes interactions with household i’s average income over all years it appears in the sample. Observations
are weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by county, are in parentheses.
*, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                      47
                 Table 4: Estimates of Substitution to Other Product Groups

                                           (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                       Diet        Fruit        Baked       Baking     Breakfast
                                         Alcohol      drinks       juice         goods      supplies     foods
 ln(Average price/liter) (SSBs)           0.058      0.248∗∗       0.095         -0.137       0.009      -0.129
                                         (0.131)     (0.120)      (0.077)       (0.088)      (0.116)    (0.079)
 ln(Average price/kg)                   -1.332∗∗∗   -0.953∗∗∗    -1.150∗∗∗    -1.767∗∗∗    -1.197∗∗∗   -1.127∗∗∗
                                         (0.250)     (0.120)      (0.153)       (0.167)      (0.106)    (0.119)
 ln(County income)                        0.131       0.140∗      0.131∗∗        0.086        0.063      0.051
                                         (0.095)     (0.079)      (0.066)       (0.060)      (0.058)    (0.058)
 Feature (SSBs)                           0.054     -0.307∗∗∗      0.002          0.055       0.049       0.029
                                         (0.106)     (0.091)      (0.073)       (0.070)      (0.085)    (0.062)
 Display (SSBs)                           0.017       -0.130       0.006          0.077       0.029       0.058
                                         (0.127)     (0.140)      (0.113)       (0.105)      (0.102)    (0.085)
 Feature                                0.480∗∗∗    0.830∗∗∗     1.793∗∗∗      2.196∗∗∗    0.962∗∗∗    1.544∗∗∗
                                         (0.100)     (0.063)      (0.094)       (0.126)      (0.099)    (0.060)
 Display                                  0.208∗    0.306∗∗∗     0.759∗∗∗      1.181∗∗∗    0.414∗∗∗    1.379∗∗∗
                                         (0.120)     (0.081)      (0.198)       (0.163)      (0.141)    (0.160)
 Kleibergen-Paap first stage F stat        26.6        96.7        143.5           94.0       118.7       131.4
 N                                       913,107    1,128,236    1,701,540    2,004,353    1,408,264   1,816,889
 Expenditures ($/adult-quarter)           19.66        6.80         7.23          10.69        2.87        8.89

                                           (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                     Canned,                    Sauces,
                                          Candy      dry fruit   Desserts     condiments     Sweeteners    Tobacco
 ln(Average price/liter) (SSBs)           -0.113      -0.192∗∗     -0.033         -0.057         -0.069       0.071
                                         (0.100)       (0.083)    (0.091)        (0.086)        (0.115)     (0.335)
 ln(Average price/kg)                   -1.997∗∗∗    -1.023∗∗∗   -0.926∗∗∗     -0.529∗∗∗      -1.093∗∗∗      -1.453
                                         (0.173)       (0.140)    (0.163)        (0.075)        (0.125)     (1.136)
 ln(County income)                        0.111∗      0.210∗∗∗     0.035           0.014       -0.122∗∗      0.021
                                         (0.065)       (0.061)    (0.060)        (0.052)        (0.057)     (0.195)
 Feature (SSBs)                            0.065         0.053     0.126∗         -0.058         -0.015       0.298
                                         (0.078)       (0.077)    (0.067)        (0.061)        (0.067)     (0.189)
 Display (SSBs)                           -0.022        -0.136      0.131         -0.026          0.044       0.103
                                         (0.119)       (0.112)    (0.088)        (0.092)        (0.081)     (0.241)
 Feature                                3.366∗∗∗      1.895∗∗∗   1.753∗∗∗       0.863∗∗∗       0.681∗∗∗    0.547∗∗∗
                                         (0.151)       (0.147)    (0.115)        (0.098)        (0.199)     (0.160)
 Display                                 1.800∗∗∗     0.817∗∗∗   1.023∗∗∗          0.078         0.181        0.000
                                         (0.181)       (0.163)    (0.251)        (0.084)        (0.137)        (.)
 Kleibergen-Paap first stage F stat         54.8          53.4       71.8          131.7          45.5         9.9
 N                                      1,969,025    1,453,957   1,931,588     1,077,121      1,595,505    239,106
 Expenditures ($/adult-quarter)            11.08          3.22       9.49           0.89          3.13        12.85

Notes: This table presents instrumental variables estimates of Equation (22). The product groups are as
described in the column headers. Observations are weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard
errors, clustered by county, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent
confidence, respectively.




                                                       48
   Table 5: Regressions of Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption on Bias Proxies

                                    (1)        (2)               (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)
       Nutrition knowledge      -0.854∗∗∗   -1.187∗∗∗       -0.939∗∗∗   -0.851∗∗∗   -1.030∗∗∗   -0.659∗∗∗
                                  (0.086)    (0.083)          (0.086)    (0.079)     (0.087)      (0.083)
       Self-control             -0.825∗∗∗   -1.163∗∗∗       -0.775∗∗∗   -0.865∗∗∗               -1.408∗∗∗
                                  (0.042)    (0.039)          (0.043)    (0.039)                  (0.068)
       Taste for soda            0.560∗∗∗                    0.547∗∗∗   0.553∗∗∗    0.894∗∗∗     0.390∗∗∗
                                  (0.044)                     (0.045)    (0.042)     (0.042)      (0.046)
       Health importance        -0.258∗∗∗                      -0.121   -0.275∗∗∗   -0.388∗∗∗    -0.184∗∗
                                  (0.075)                     (0.075)    (0.072)     (0.076)      (0.072)
       ln(Household income)      -0.045∗∗                   -0.077∗∗∗   -0.066∗∗∗   -0.055∗∗∗      -0.024
                                  (0.018)                     (0.017)    (0.017)     (0.019)      (0.017)
       ln(Years education)      -0.708∗∗∗                   -0.718∗∗∗   -0.851∗∗∗   -0.753∗∗∗   -0.681∗∗∗
                                  (0.101)                     (0.101)    (0.096)     (0.103)      (0.096)
       Other beverage tastes        Yes         No               Yes       Yes         Yes           Yes
       Other demographics           Yes         Yes              No        Yes         Yes           Yes
       County indicators            Yes         Yes              Yes       No          Yes           Yes
       Self-control 2SLS            No          No               No        No          No            Yes
       R2                          0.285       0.250            0.272     0.166       0.263         0.285
       N                          18,568      18,568          18,568     18,568      18,568       18,568

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (24). Data are at the household level, and the dependent
variable is the natural log of SSB purchases per adult equivalent in the most recent year that the household
was in Homescan. Column 6 corrects for measurement error in self-control using two-sample 2SLS, with
standard errors calculated per Chodorow-Reich and Wieland (2016). Taste for soda is the response to the
question, “Leaving aside any health or nutrition considerations, how much would you say you like the taste
and generally enjoy drinking [Regular soft drinks (soda pop)]?” “Other beverage tastes” are the responses to
parallel questions for other beverages. Health importance is the response to the question, “In general, how
important is it to you to stay healthy, for example by maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes and
heart disease, etc.?” Responses to each question were originally on a scale from 0 to 10, which we rescale
to between 0 and 1. “Other demographics” are natural log of age, race, an indicator for the presence of
children, household size in adult equivalents, employment status, and weekly work hours. Observations are
weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically
significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                       49
                               Table 6: Baseline Optimal Tax Calculation


                                                                                             Value
                               SSB consumption (ounces per week): s̄                         46.48
                               SSB price (cents per ounce): p                                 3.63
                               SSB demand elasticity: ζ̄ c                                    1.39
                               Elasticity of taxable income: ζ̄z                              0.33
                               Average marginal bias (cents per ounce): γ̄                    0.93
                               Externality (cents per ounce): e                               0.85
                                        (a) Population Sufficient Statistics

                      z           f      s̄(z)   ζ̄ c (z)    ξ(z)       γ̄(z)    T 0 (z) spref (z)
                                                                                 g(z)
                      5000       0.11    63.1     1.40       0.33       1.07     2.75
                                                                                 -0.19        0.0
                      15000      0.16    56.7     1.40       0.31       0.92     1.42
                                                                                 -0.05       -32.9
                      25000      0.14    53.3     1.39       0.29       0.91     1.03
                                                                                  0.08       -51.1
                      35000      0.10    47.2     1.39       0.27       0.90     0.82
                                                                                  0.15       -67.5
                      45000      0.08    44.8     1.38       0.25       0.91     0.69
                                                                                  0.19       -77.6
                      55000      0.07    42.9     1.38       0.23       0.90     0.60
                                                                                  0.21       -85.5
                      65000      0.09    39.3     1.37       0.21       0.91     0.53
                                                                                  0.21       -93.8
                      85000      0.09    35.2     1.36       0.17       0.91     0.43
                                                                                  0.22      -104.8
                      125000     0.15    30.3     1.34       0.09       0.85     0.31
                                                                                  0.23 i -116.8
                                                                T 0 (z)
                                                                         h
                      σ ≈ 0.2, Cov [g(z), spref (z)] ≈ 24.8, E 1−T 0 (z) ζ̄z s̄(z)ξ¯inc (z) ≈ 0.26

                                            (b) Calculating Covariances


                                                                 s̄ζ̄ c (γ̄(ḡ+σ)+e)−p(Cov[g(z),s(z)]+A)
                     Under existing income tax          t≈                    s̄ζ̄ c +Cov[g(z),s(z)]+A
                                                                                                           ≈ 1.42
                                                                 s̄ζ̄ c (γ̄(1+σ)+e)−pCov[g(z),spref (z)]
                     Under optimal income tax               t≈              s̄ζ̄ c +Cov[g(z),spref (z)]
                                                                                                           ≈ 0.41

                                  (c) Optimal Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax
Notes: Panel (a) reports estimates of population-level sufficient statistics required to compute the optimal
SSB tax. All statistics are computed using the data described in Section III, except for the externality e, the
calculation of which is described in Section III.E, and the elasticity of taxable income ζzc , which is drawn from
Chetty (2012). SSB consumption and price data are computed for the year 2016. Panel (b) reports        P sufficient
statistics
P           by
            P  income   bin, which  are used to compute covariances  using the formula  Cov  [a, b] =      d fd (ad bd ) −
    d fd ad  d fd bd , where d indexes rows. Income bins (z) are those recorded in the Homescan data discussed in
III.A; f represents the U.S. population share with pre-tax incomes in ranges bracketed by midpoints between
each income bin, according to Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018). The statistics s̄(z), ζ̄ c (z), ξ(z), and γ̄(z)
represent SSB consumption (in ounces per week), the compensated SSB demand elasticity, the SSB income
elasticity, and average marginal money-metric bias estimated within each income bin, as described in Sections
III.B to III.D. ζ̄ c (z) and ξ(z) are computed across incomes using the regression specification reported
in Column (5) of Table 3. The column g(z) reports our assumed marginal social welfare weights, while
T 0 (z) represents estimated net marginal tax rates (see text for discussion of each). The column spref (z) is
                                                                    ξ +ξ
                                                      Qd  zh  h 2h−1
computed as s̄(z)−sinc (z), where sinc (zd ) = s̄(z1 ) h=2 zh−1             . Panel (c) uses each of these values to
                                                                                               h 0                       i
                                                                                                  T (z)             ¯
compute the optimal tax estimates using Equation (10) and Proposition 2, where A = E 1−T             0 (z) ζ̄z s̄(z)ξ(z) .




                                                                 50
  Table 7: Optimal Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax Under Alternative Assumptions

                                                             Existing income tax   Optimal income tax
   Baseline                                                          1.42                 0.41
   Self-reported SSB consumption                                     2.13                 0.96
   Pigouvian (no redistributive motive)                              1.78                   -
   Weaker redistributive preferences                                 1.66                 1.35
   Stronger redistributive preferences                               1.10                -0.64
   Redistributive preferences rationalize U.S. income tax            1.73                 1.68
   Higher demand elasticity (ζ c (θ) = 2)                            1.57                 0.78
   Lower demand elasticity (ζ c (θ) = 1)                             1.23                 0.01
   Demand elasticity declines faster with income                     1.44                 0.44
   Pure preference heterogeneity                                     1.44                 1.44
   Pure income effects                                               1.49                 1.97
   Measurement error correction for self control                     1.70                 0.64
   Internality from nutrition knowledge only                         1.00                 0.08
   Self control bias set to 50% of estimated value                   1.16                 0.20
   Self control bias set to 200% of estimated value                  1.93                 0.82
   With substitution: untaxed goods equally harmful                  1.48                 0.45
   With substitution: untaxed goods half as harmful                  1.45                 0.43
   With substitution: untaxed goods doubly harmful                   1.53                 0.50
   With substitution: diet drinks not harmful                        1.73                 0.66
   With substitution: only to diet drinks, equally harmful           1.16                 0.20
   No internality                                                    0.41                -0.40
   No corrective motive                                             -0.36                -1.01
   Optimal local tax, with 25% cross-border shopping                 0.97                   -
   Optimal local tax, with 50% cross-border shopping                 0.53                   -
Notes: This table reports the optimal sweetened beverage tax, as computed using the sufficient statistics
formulas for t∗ under the status quo U.S. income tax (using Equation (10)) and under the optimal income
tax (using Proposition 2) across a range of assumptions. The first row reports our baseline calculations,
which employ the sufficient statistics by income bin displayed in Table 6. The second row reports the
Pigouvian optimal tax, equal to γ̄ + e. The following two rows report the optimal tax under weaker and and
stronger redistributive social preferences than the baseline. (Social marginal welfare weights are computed
                        −ν
to be proportional to yU S , where yU S is post-tax income in each bin—see Appendix M.B for details—with
ν = 1, ν = 0.25, and ν = 4 in the baseline, and under “weaker” and “stronger” redistributive preferences,
respectively.) “No internality” assumes zero bias for all consumers, while “No corrective motive” assumes
zero bias and zero externality. “Self-reported SSB consumption” reports results using SSB consumption data
from our PanelViews survey, rather than from Homescan.




                                                    51
          Figure 1: Homescan Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Purchases by Income




                                                                 100
                   Liters purchased per adult equivalent per year
                                60           40 80




                                                                       0   25       50            75       100   125
                                                                                Household income ($000s)


Notes: This figure presents the average purchases of sugar-sweetened beverages by household income, us-
ing Nielsen Homescan data for 2006-2016. Purchases are measured in liters per “adult equivalent,” where
household members other than the household heads are rescaled into adult equivalents using the recom-
mended average daily consumption for their age and gender group. Observations are weighted for national
representativeness.




                                                                                       52
Figure 2: Contemporaneous First Stage and Reduced Form of the Local Price Instru-
ment
                                                                               (a) First Stage




                                          0 -.02
                    ln(Average price/liter)
                            -.04          -.06
                                          -.08




                                                                -.03   -.02       -.01            0   .01   .02
                                                                                     Local price IV


                                                                              (b) Reduced Form
                                          2.3
                    ln(Liters purchased per adult equivalent)
                         2.22      2.24     2.26
                                          2.2         2.28




                                                                -.03   -.02       -.01            0   .01   .02
                                                                                     Local price IV



Notes: These figures present binned scatterplots of the first stage (in Panel (a)) and reduced form (in
Panel (b)) of the instrumental variables estimates of Equation (19). Both relationships are residual of the
other variables in Equation (19): feature and display, natural log of county mean income, quarter of sample
indicators, and household-by-county fixed effects. Purchases are measured in liters per “adult equivalent,”
where household members other than the household heads are rescaled into adult equivalents using the
recommended average daily consumption for their age and gender group. Observations are weighted for
national representativeness.




                                                                                      53
    Figure 3: Causal Income Effects and Between-Income Preference Heterogeneity




                    Liters purchased per adult equivalent per year
                    -200      -100      0        100       200




                                                                     0            25         50            75                100            125
                                                                                         Household income ($000s)

                                                                         Actual        Predicted using only income elasticity
                                                                                       Actual - predicted (effect of preference heterogeneity)



Notes: The dark circles plot average purchases of sugar-sweetened beverages by household income, using
Nielsen Homescan data for 2006-2016. Purchases are measured in liters per “adult equivalent,” where house-
hold members other than the household heads are rescaled into adult equivalents using the recommended
average daily consumption for their age and gender group. The curve at the top of the figure uses the income
elasticity estimates from column 5 of Table 3 to predict the causal effects of income increases on the SSB
                                                                                                     ξ̂ +ξ̂
                                                                                       Qd  zh  h 2h−1
consumption of households earning less than $10,000 per year: sinc (zd ) = s̄(z < $10k) h=2 zh−1            ,
where d and h index income groups. The x’s are s̄pref (z) = s̄(z) − sinc (z), the difference between actual
consumption and consumption predicted only using income elasticity. Observations are weighted for national
representativeness.




                                                                                                  54
Figure 4: Nutrition Knowledge and Self-Control vs. Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Con-
sumption
                                                                                         (a) Nutrition Knowledge




                                                                    90
                     Liters purchased per adult equivalent per year
                                                          80
                                                                                                              Average score of dietitians
                                                                                                                        and nutritionists
                            50       60         70
                                                40




                                                                          .4   .5            .6             .7        .8                 .9         1
                                                                                                  Nutrition knowledge


                                                                                             (b) Self-Control
                                                                    120
                     Liters purchased per adult equivalent per year




                                                                                                                                 I drink SSBs more
                                                                                                                                often than I should:
                                                                                                                                           Not at all
                              60          80    40     100




                                                                          0         .2             .4                  .6           .8              1
                                                                                                        Self-control



Notes: These figures present average purchases of sugar-sweetened beverages for each household’s most
recent year in the Nielsen Homescan data against the primary shopper’s nutrition knowledge (in Panel (a))
and self-control (in Panel (b)). Nutrition knowledge is the share correct out of 28 questions from the General
Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire (Kliemann et al., 2016). Self-control is level of agreement with the
statement, “I drink soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than I should,” with answers
coded as “Definitely”=0, “Mostly”=1/3, “Somewhat”= 2/3, and “Not at all”=1. Purchases are measured
in liters per “adult equivalent,” where household members other than the household heads are rescaled
into adult equivalents using the recommended average daily consumption for their age and gender group.
Observations are weighted for national representativeness.


                                                                                                        55
                Figure 5: Nutrition Knowledge and Self-Control by Income
                                                    (a) Nutrition Knowledge




                              .75
                     Nutrition knowledge
                    .65       .6     .7




                                           0   25           50            75       100   125
                                                        Household income ($000s)


                                                        (b) Self-Control
                              .85
                              .8
                    Self-control
                        .75   .7
                              .65




                                           0   25           50            75       100   125
                                                        Household income ($000s)



Notes: These figures present average nutrition knowledge (in Panel (a)) and self-control (in Panel (b)) by
household income. Nutrition knowledge is the share correct out of 28 questions from the General Nutrition
Knowledge Questionnaire (Kliemann et al., 2016). Self-control is level of agreement with the statement,
“I drink soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than I should,” with answers coded as
“Definitely”=0, “Mostly”=1/3, “Somewhat”= 2/3, and “Not at all”=1. Observations are weighted for
national representativeness.




                                                               56
                                                                 Figure 6: Preferences by Income
                                                                           (a) Taste for Soda




                                        .58
                    Like the taste and enjoy drinking soda
                         .5        .52  .48 .54       .56




                                                             0      25          50            75       100   125
                                                                            Household income ($000s)


                                                                         (b) Health Importance
                                        .88
                    How important is it to stay healthy?
                      .82          .84  .8        .86




                                                             0      25          50            75       100   125
                                                                            Household income ($000s)



Notes: These figures present average taste for soda (in Panel (a)) and health importance (in Panel (b)) by
household income. Taste for soda is the response to the question, “Leaving aside any health or nutrition
considerations, how much would you say you like the taste and generally enjoy drinking [Regular soft drinks
(soda pop)]?” Health importance is the response to the question, “In general, how important is it to you
to stay healthy, for example by maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes and heart disease, etc.?”
Responses to each question were originally on a scale from 0 to 10, which we rescale to between 0 and 1.
Observations are weighted for national representativeness.




                                                                                   57
             Figure 7: Share of Consumption Attributable to Bias by Income




                                          .4
                    Share of consumption attributable to bias
                               .3         .25  .35




                                                                0       25        50            75       100   125
                                                                              Household income ($000s)


Notes: This figure presents the share of sugar-sweetened beverage consumption attributable to bias, i.e. the
                        s −ŝV
unweighted average of i si i , by income, using Homescan purchase data. Observations are weighted for
national representativeness.


                                                                Figure 8: Average Marginal Bias by Income
                                          1.1
                    Average marginal bias (cents per ounce)
                              .9          .8   1




                                                                0       25        50            75       100   125
                                                                              Household income ($000s)


Notes: This figure presents the demand slope-weighted average marginal bias by income, using Homescan
purchase data. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.




                                                                                     58
      Figure 9: Welfare Consequences of Optimal Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Tax


                                       60



                                       40
        Dollars per capita, annually




                                       20



                                         0



                                       -20


                                                                                Externality correction
                                       -40                                      Redistributed Revenues
                                                                                Internality Correction
                                                                                Decision utility EV
                                                                                Total
                                       -60
                                             $5k   $15k $25k $35k $45k $55k $65k $85k $125k
                                                               Income bin

Notes: This figure plots the decomposition of welfare changes resulting from the baseline optimal sugar-
sweetened beverage tax, across income bins. “Redistributed revenues” and “Externality correction” are
money-metric values, assumed to be distributed equally across the income distribution. “Internality correc-
tion” is the increase in (money-metric) welfare due to the change in consumption resulting from the tax,
at each income level. “Decision utility EV” is the value dy such that consumers are indifferent between a
change in net income dy and the introduction of the optimal SSB tax.




                                                                  59
Online Appendix                                            Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


                        Online Appendix: Not for Publication



             Regressive Sin Taxes, with an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax

                  Hunt Allcott, Benjamin B. Lockwood, Dmitry Taubinsky




                                            60
Online Appendix                                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


A     Income Elasticity Definitions
We define labor supply responses to include any “circularities” due to the curvature of the income
tax function, which is assumed to be differentiable. Thus, following Jacquet and Lehmann (2014),
we define a tax function T̂ which has been locally perturbed around the income level z0 by raising
the marginal tax rate by τ and reducing the tax level by ν:


                                  T̂ (z; z0 , τ, ν) := T (z) + τ (z − z0 ) − ν.                                    (28)

Let z ∗ (θ) denote a type θ’s choice of earnings under the status quo income tax T , and let ẑ(θ; τ, ν)
denote θ’s choice of earnings under the perturbed income tax T̂ (z; z ∗ (θ), τ, ν). Then the com-
pensated elasticity of taxable income is defined in terms of the response of ẑ to τ , evaluated at
τ = ν = 0:
                                                                              1 − T 0 (z ∗ (θ))
                                                                         
                                              ∂ ẑ(θ; τ, 0)
                              ζzc (θ) :=    −                                                   .                  (29)
                                                   ∂τ              τ =0           z ∗ (θ)
The income tax is similarly defined in terms of the response of ẑ to a tax credit ν (this statistic
will be nonpositive if leisure is a non-inferior good):
                                                                    
                                               ∂ ẑ(θ; 0, ν)
                                                                          1 − T 0 (z ∗ (θ)) .
                                                                                           
                              ηz (θ) :=                                                                            (30)
                                                    ∂ν         ν=0

These definitions are comparable to those in Saez (2001), except that they include circularities and
thus permit a representation of the optimal income tax in terms of the actual earnings density,
rather than the “virtual density” employed in that paper.


B     Extensions and Additional Results
In this appendix we present additional theoretical results. To facilitate clarity, we restrict to the
case of unidimensional types θ. Unless otherwise noted, the proofs of these results are contained in
Appendix C.

B.A     Many Dimensions of Consumption
Our results readily generalize to N > 2 dimensions of consumption. Let utility be given by
U (c1 , c2 , . . . , cn , z; θ), with c1 representing the numeraire, and assume that Uc1 /Uz = Vc1 /Vz . Let
S denote the Slutsky matrix of compensated demand responses in which the j, i entry is the com-
pensated demand response of cj with respect to ti .
    Let γi (θ) denote the bias in consumption dimension i, with γ1 (θ) = 0 for all θ. Let γ̄ij denote
the average marginal bias from consumption of j with respect to tax i:
                                                                                 
                                           R                    dcj (θ,t,T )
                                       Θ γj (θ, t, T )               dti      dµ(θ)
                                γ̄ij =     R                             u        ,                              (31)
                                                        dcj (θ,t,T )
                                                   Θ        dti           dµ(θ)
                                                                      u


                                                           61
Online Appendix                                                                       Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


             cj (z)
where         dti u    denotes the (compensated) derivative of θ’s consumption of cj with respect to tax ti .
                                              dc (z)
                                                      
                                                            j
                                 γ̄ (z)                    dti
We also define σij := CovH g(z), jγ̄j                     dc̄j
                                                                 u   , where c̄j denotes population average consumption
                                                           dti u

of cj . Finally, let ej denote the marginal negative fiscal externality from consumption of cj . We
                                                                   P dc (θ,t,T )
define R to be a column vector in which the ith entry is Ri = − j j dti          (γ̄ij (ḡ + σij ) + ej ).
                                                                                                         u
That is, Ri is the total corrective benefit from increasing tax ti , keeping income constant.
        Employing notation similar to Section II, we define cinc,j (z) to be the portion of cj consumption
explained by cumulative income effects, and we define cpref,j (z) := (cj (z) − cinc,j (z)) to be cumu-
lative between-income preference heterogeneity. We define ρ to be the column vector in which the
jth entry is Cov[ĝ(z), cpref,j (z)]/c̄j .

Proposition 4. The optimal commodity taxes t = (t1, . . . , tN ) satisfy

                                                              tS = ρ − R                                             (32)

and the optimal income tax satisfies
                                                                                             ∞
                      T 0 (z)   X g(z)γ̄i (z) + ei − ti dci (z, θ)                      Z
                                                                        1
                           0
                              =               0
                                                                   + c                           (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x).   (33)
                    1 − T (z)         1 − T (z)            dz       ζz zh(z)             z
                                         i


B.B           Composite Goods
We can also allow for the possibility that the sin good s is a composite of several sin goods,
(s1 , s2 , . . . sn ) with pre-tax prices (p1 , p2 , . . . , pn ), and with marginal (money metric) bias of γi (θ) =
Us0 i       Vs0i
Uc0     −   Vc0    at the optimum. Assume all sin goods are subject to a common ad valorem tax τ , so
that the post-tax price of each si is pi (1 + τ ). Under this composite setup, the optimal sin tax
τ still satisfies the general expression from Proposition 1, provided the parameters therein are
reinterpreted as follows:

    • s(θ) := i pi si (θ), representing total revenues (net of taxes) from sin good spending by θ
              P

                                      ∂si (qi ,θ) P ∂si (qi ,θ)
        • γ(θ) :=
                       P
                           i γi (θ)     ∂qi pi /   i  ∂qi pi ,       representing the response-weighted bias, where qi :=
            (1 + τ )pi
                             ∂si (qi ,θ)
        • ζ(θ) :=
                       P
                         i     ∂qi pi        · (1 + τ )/s(θ), representing the aggregate elasticity of sin good spending

        • p :=         pi ssi , representing the average price of the composite
                   P


B.C           Computing the Optimal Tax in Terms of g(z) rather than ĝ(z)
Here we solve for the optimal tax system in terms of the social marginal welfare weights g rather
than ĝ.
        The key variable needed for this solution is the following: “When we raise the commodity tax
by dt, how much money can we give back to each person to offset the tax so as to keep the average

                                                                       62
Online Appendix                                                           Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


labor supply choices of each z-earner constant?” Roughly, we seek to characterize the extent to
which we can offset the regressivity costs of the commodity tax by making the income tax more
progressive. We begin with a lemma providing this characterization:
                              Rz                                                      hR 0               i
                                                                                        x =z
Lemma 1. Let χ(z) := sinc (z)− 0 w(x, z) ζ̄ηczx (s(x)−sinc (x))dx, where w(x, z) = exp z 0 =x − ζηczz dx0 .
                                                  z                                                       z
Then increasing the commodity tax by dt and decreasing the income tax by χ(z)dt leaves the average
labor supply of z-earners unchanged.

    The intuition for the “income effect adjustment” term is that the higher the income effect, the
more the commodity tax increases labor supply through the income effect, and thus the higher χ
can be. Note that χ(z) = sinc (z) when ηz = 0. That is, in the absence of labor supply income
effects, the term sinc (z)—which we defined as the portion of s consumption explained by income
effects—is the extent to which the income tax should be optimally lowered for z-earners. When
ηz 6= 0 and sinc (z) < s̄(z), χ(z) will be higher than sinc (z). Intuitively, this is because giving
back sinc (z)dt to consumers offsets the effective impact on the marginal keep-rate from before-tax
earnings, but does not fully offset the income effect as it leaves consumers poorer by an amount
(s − sinc )dt.

Proposition 5. The optimal commodity tax t satisfies


                               redistributive effect               additional impact from income effect
       corrective effect
                    z           }|              { z                  }|                 {
      z }| {        p+t                             1
  t = s̄γ̄(ḡ + σ) + c E[(1 − g(z))(s(z) − χ(z))] − c E [s(z) − χ(z)])η(z)(t − g(z)γ̄(z))].                   (34)
                      ζ̄                           ζ̄

    Proposition 5 provides a commodity tax formula similar to Equation (10), with two differences.
First, the covariance term Cov[g(z), spref (z)], where spref (z) = s(z) − sinc (z), corresponding to
regressivity costs is written more generally as E[(g(z)−1), s(z)−χ(z)]. In the absence of labor supply
income effects, χ(z) = sinc (z) and thus the two terms are equivalent. Second, the presence of income
effects η means that a tax reform that decreases consumers’ after-tax income by s(z) − χ(z) also
impacts consumption of s, beyond the compensated elasticity with respect to prices. This generates
fiscal externalities proportional to tη(s(z) − χ(z)) and additional corrective benefits proportional to
gγ̄(s(z) − χ(z)). Combined, this generates the third term in Equation (34) above. In the absence
of both kinds of income effects it is easy to see that the formula reduces to

                                                p+t
                            t = γ̄(ḡ + σ) −           Cov [g(z), s(z) − sinc (z)] ,                          (35)
                                                s̄ζ̄ c

which can be solved for t to get the formula in Equation (10).




                                                       63
Online Appendix                                                                            Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


C       Proofs of propositions
C.A       Proof of Proposition 1
We prove Proposition 1 in three steps. First, we characterize the optimal income tax. Second,
we characterize the optimal commodity tax under fully general heterogeneity, which constitutes
Proposition 6 below. Third, we invoke Assumption 4 from Section II.C, which simplifies the com-
modity tax expression in Proposition 6 to yield the optimal commodity tax formula in Proposition
1.
     For the general result, we define two new elasticity concepts. First, we define the elasticity of
s with respect to a windfall of pre-tax income, ξν :=                        ∂s
                                                                             ∂ν   ·   z
                                                                                      s   · (1 − T 0 ), where ν is defined as in
Appendix A. Note that ξν relates to the standard income effect η as follows: η = ξν (p+t)s
                                                                                      z    ·                                1
                                                                                                                          1−T 0 .
                                             (p+t)s         1
We analogously define ηξ := ξ ·                z      ·   1−T 0 .   In words, ηξ is the change in expenditure on s from
an extra $1 of post-tax income earned.

C.A.1       Proof of Proposition 1, Equation 9 (optimal income tax)

Following Saez (2001), we have the following effect from increasing the marginal tax rate between
z ∗ and z ∗ + dz:
                                           R∞
     1. Direct effect (fiscal and welfare): x=z ∗ (1 − g(x))dH(x)

     2. Compensated elasticity effect (including both fiscal and welfare components):

                              T0              ξ(θ)ζzc (θ)s(θ)
                                                                                             
           −  ζ̄zc (z ∗ )
                     ·z ·   ∗         ∗
                                  h(z ) − E                   (t − g(z)γ(θ) − e) | z(θ) = z h(z ∗ ) =
                                                                                            ∗
                           1 − T0                 1 − T0
                                 T0              ξ(θ)ζzc (θ)s(θ)
                                                                                                 
                 c ∗       ∗            ∗
             − ζ̄z (z ) · z ·        h(z ) − E                   (t − g(z)γ(θ) − e) | z(θ) = z h(z ∗ ) (36)
                                                                                                ∗
                              1 − T0                 1 − T0

     3. Income effect (fiscal and welfare):

                        T0
                                        
                                       ∗
           − E ηz (θ)        |z(θ) > z
                      1 − T0
                                                                                           
                                                         η(θ)   ηz (θ) ξ(θ)s(θ)             ∗
                                − E (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e)        +                   | z(θ) > z , (37)
                                                         p + t 1 − T 0 z(θ)

        where the second term combines the income effect on s from the change in after-tax income
        with the income effect on s from the adjustment in earnings earnings z.
These three terms must sum to zero, as the net welfare effect of this reform should be zero at the
optimum. Using the definition of ĝ(z) from footnote 15, the direct effect from 1 combines with the
                                R∞
income effects from 3 to become x=z (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x). Therefore, the optimal income tax satisfies

                            R∞
       T 0 (z ∗ )               x=z ∗ (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x)           (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) ξ(θ)ζzc (θ)s(θ)
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                              ∗
                        =                                     −E                   · c ∗            | z(θ) = z (. 38)
     1 − T 0 (z ∗ )                ζ̄zc (z ∗ )z ∗ h(z ∗ )           1 − T 0 (z(θ))   ζ̄z (z )z(θ)

                                                                      64
Online Appendix                                                                    Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Re-solving for T 0 (z ∗ ) yields the desired result.

C.A.2            Expression for the optimal commodity tax under full heterogeneity
        (z ∗ )
Let Σa,b := Covµ|z ∗ [ a(θ), b(θ)| z(θ) = z ∗ ] denote the income-conditional covariance between vari-
ables a(θ) and b(θ) at the optimum. Then we have the following proposition.

Proposition 6. The optimal commodity tax satisfies

                            s̄ζ̄ c (γ̄(ḡ + σ) + e) + A2 + eA1 − pCov[ĝ(z), spref (z)] − pA3
                       t=                                                                     ,                (39)
                                             s̄ζ̄ c + Cov[ĝ(z), spref (z)] + A1 + A3

where
                                    Z   ∞
                                                            (z ∗ )
                                                                               
                                                  (z ∗ )                    ∗)       ∗
                            A1 :=                Σs,η    + Σξs,ζ c ηξ + Σ(z
                                                                         sηz ,ηξ dH(z )                        (40)
                                        ∗                     z
                                    Zz ∞=0
                                                                    (z ∗ )
                                                  ∗                                         
                                                                                    (z ∗ )
                            A2 :=         g(z ∗ ) Σ(z  s,ηγ
                                                           )
                                                             +   Σ        c
                                                                    ξs,ζz ηξ γ + Σ                ∗
                                                                                    sηz ,ηξ γ dH(z )           (41)
                                     ∗
                                   z =0
                                  Z ∞ R∞
                                           x=z ∗ (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x) (z ∗ ) ∗
                            A3 :=                                            Σηz ,s dz .                       (42)
                                   z ∗ =0         ζ̄zc (z ∗ ) · z ∗

    Term A1 concerns income-conditional covariances that affect substitution, and thus affect the
fiscal externality and the impact on externality reduction. Term A2 is similar: it involves income-
conditional covariances between the substitution and the bias, which may also be heterogeneous
conditional on income. To begin the proof, consider the total effect on welfare of a marginal increase
in the commodity tax dt. The total welfare effect, written in terms of the marginal value of public
funds, can be decomposed into the following components:

   • Mechanical revenue effect: the reform mechanically raises revenue from each consumer by
        dt · s(θ), for a total of dt · S.

   • Mechanical welfare effect: the reform mechanically reduces each consumer’s net income by
        dt · s(θ). To isolate the mechanical effect, we compute the loss in welfare as if this reduction
        all comes from composite consumption c for a welfare loss of dt · s(θ)g(θ), and we account
        for adjustments in s and z in the behavioral effects below. Thus the total mechanical welfare
                     R
        effect is −dt Θ s(θ)g(θ)dµ(θ).

   • Direct effect on sin good consumption: the reform causes each consumer to decrease their s
     consumption by dt·ζ(θ) s(θ)                                                             s(θ)
                                                                                     R
                              p+t . This generates a fiscal externality equal to −dt Θ tζ(θ) p+t dµ(θ).
     It also generates a behavioral welfare effect equal to dt Θ g(θ)γ(θ)ζ(θ) s(θ)
                                                                 R
                                                                                  p+t dµ(θ) and an ex-
                                 R        s(θ)
     ternality effect equal to dt Θ eζ(θ) p+t dµ(θ).

   • Effect on earnings: The reform causes a change in income tax revenue collected from type
                        dz(θ) 0                              dz(θ)
        θ equal to       dt T (z(θ)).       To compute        dt ,   we use Lemma 1 from Saez (2002a), which
        carries through in this context: the change in earnings for type θ due to the increase in the

                                                               65
Online Appendix                                                      Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


     commodity tax dt is equal to the change in earnings that would be induced by imposing a
     type-specific income tax reform, raising the income tax by dT θ (z) = dt · s(p + t, z − T (z), z; θ).
     Intuitively, an increase in the commodity tax alters the utility that type θ would gain from
     selecting each possible level of earnings, in proportion to the amount of s that θ would
     consume at each income. This alternative income tax reform reduces the utility θ would
     realize at each possible income by instead altering the income tax. The resulting adjustment
     in earnings can be decomposed into a compensated elasticity effect and an income effect. The
     compensated elasticity effect depends on the change in the marginal income tax rate, which
     equals dt · ds(z;θ)
                   dz . (We adopt the shorthand
                                                    ds(z;θ)
                                                      dz    := ds(p+t,z−T
                                                                       dz
                                                                          (z),z;θ)
                                                                                   . Because this derivative
     holds type constant, it is different from      0
                                                  s̄ (z) even with unidimensional types, which also
     incorporates how types vary with z.) The income effect depends on the change
                                                                                 in thetax level,
                                                                     dz(θ)                  z(θ)         ds(z;θ)
     which equals dt · s(θ). Combining these effects, we have         dt     = −ζzc (θ)   1−T 0 (z(θ))     dz      −
       ηz (θ)
     1−T 0 (z(θ)) s(θ). This generates a total fiscal
                                                  
                                                       externality   through the income tax equal to
            R T0                ds(z;θ)
     −dt · Θ 1−T 0 ζzc (θ)z(θ) dz + ηz (θ)s(θ) dµ(θ).

   • Indirect effects on sin good consumption: The change in earnings affects consumption indi-
     rectly. This generates additional fiscal externalities and welfare effects. These total to
              Z
              dz(θ) ds(z; θ)
       dt ·                  (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e)dµ(θ)
           Θ dt        dz
                Z                                                 
                        1          ds(z; θ) c                        ds(z; θ)
        = −dt ·          0
                                           ζz (θ)z(θ) + ηz (θ)s(θ)            (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e)dµ(θ).
                 Θ 1 − T (z(θ))       dz                               dz
                                                                                                    (43)

Combining these components, the total welfare effect of the tax reform dt is equal to




                                                   66
Online Appendix                                                         Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky




                                    Direct effect on s consumption
       zZ                        c }|                               {
 dW                               ζ (θ)   η(θ)
     =     s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ)        +        (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) dµ(θ)                                   (44)
  dt     Θ                        p+t p+t
                              Effect on labor supply
         z Z                           }|                        {
              T 0 (z(θ))
                                                           
                                       ds(z; θ)
         −             0
                           ζzc (θ)z(θ)          + ηz (θ)s(θ) dµ(θ)                                          (45)
            Θ  1  −  T                    dz
                  Indirect effects on s consumption
         z Z                       }|                      {
               dz(θ) ds(z; θ)
         +                       (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e)dµ(θ)                                                    (46)
            Θ dt          dz
         Z                               c                                  
                                           ζ (θ)      η(θ)
       =      s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ)               +          (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) dµ(θ)                       (47)
          Θ                                p+t p+t
               T 0 (z(θ))
           Z                                                  
                              c          ds(z; θ)
         −              0
                             ζz (θ)z(θ)           + ηz (θ)s(θ) dµ(θ)                                        (48)
             Θ 1−T                          dz
                                          ds(z; θ) 2
           Z                                     
                      1            c
         −                     zζ (θ)                  (t − gγ − e)dµ(θ)                                    (49)
               1 − T 0 (z(θ)) z              dz
           ZΘ
                      1                    ds(z; θ)
         −            0
                               ηz (θ)s(θ)           (t − gγ − e)dµ(θ)                                       (50)
             Θ 1 − T (z(θ))                   dz
         Z                               c                                  
                                           ζ (θ)      η(θ)
       =      s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ)               +          (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) dµ(θ)                       (51)
          Θ                                p+t p+t
                              T 0 (z(θ)) t − g(z)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
           Z                                                                                
                c                                                          ds(z; θ) ηz (θ)s(θ)
         −     ζz (θ)z(θ)                +                                         + c           dµ(θ).     (52)
             Θ                 1 − T0         1 − T 0 (z(θ))     dz          dz     ζz (θ)z(θ)

If the income tax is optimal, any small perturbation to it generates no first-order change in welfare.
In particular, this statement must hold for a reform which raises the income tax at each z in
proportion to average s consumption at that z, i.e., for the perturbation dT (z) = dt · s̄(z). Letting
dW
dT   denote the total welfare effect of this marginal reform, we have

         Z                                                                
  dW                                               η(θ)
     =       s̄(z(θ))(1 − g(θ)) − s̄(z(θ))               (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) dµ(θ)                            (53)
  dT      Θ                                       p+t
               T 0 (z(θ)) c
           Z
                                           0
                                                                  
         −                   ζ z (θ)z(θ)s̄   (z(θ)) + η z s̄(z(θ))  dµ(θ)                                    (54)
                1 − T0
           ZΘ
                              t − g(z)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
         −    zζzc s̄0 (z(θ))                                 dµ(θ)                                          (55)
            Θ                     1 − T 0 (z(θ))      dz
                         t − g(z)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
           Z
         −    ηz (θ)s̄                                 dµ(θ)                                                 (56)
            Θ              1 − T 0 (z(θ))        dz
         Z                                                                
                                                   η(θ)
       =     s̄(z(θ))(1 − g(θ)) − s̄(z(θ))               (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) dµ(θ)                            (57)
          Θ                                       p+t
                             0                                                                      
                               T (z(θ)) t − g(z)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
           Z
                c                                                              0        ηz (θ)s̄(z(θ))
         −    ζz (θ)z(θ)                   +                                 s̄ (z(θ)) + c               dµ(θ).
            Θ                    1 − T0          1 − T 0 (z(θ))      dz                  ζz (θ)z(θ)
                                                                                                             (58)



                                                         67
Online Appendix                                                                                                 Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


                                                                                                                 dW                           dW
Since the income tax is optimal by assumption, we can simplify                                                    dt   by subtracting         dT      = 0. Using
the fact that g(θ) is constant conditional on income, we have


                        ζ c (θ)
                   Z
 dW
     =−                  s(θ)   (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e)dµ(θ)                                                   (59)
  dt            Θ       p+t
               Z
                                       η(θ)
             − (s(θ) − s̄(z(θ)))            (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e)dµ(θ)                                       (60)
                                      p+t
               ZΘ                0                                                          
                                  T (z(θ)) t − g(z)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)    ds(z; θ)
             −    ζzc (θ)z(θ)            0
                                            +          0
                                                                                  − s̄0 (z(θ)) dµ(θ)      (61)
                Θ                  1 − T        1 −  T   (z(θ))  dz          dz
                                 0                                                                
                                  T (z(θ)) t − g(z)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
               Z
                    c                                                   ηz (θ)s(θ) ηz (θ)s̄(z(θ))
             −    ζz (θ)z(θ)                +                                       − c                dµ(θ).
                Θ                  1 − T0       1 − T 0 (z(θ))   dz     ζzc (θ)z(θ)       ζz (θ)z(θ)
                                                                                                          (62)

        The term in line (59) can be written as


                                              ζ c (θ)                           s̄ζ̄ c
                                 Z
                                       s(θ)           (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e)dµ(θ) =        (t − γ̄(ḡ + σ) − e) .                                                    (63)
                                  Θ           p+t                               p+t

        The term in line (60) can be rewritten as

                             Z    ∞                                                                 
                                                             η(θ)
                                      E (s(θ) − s̄(z(θ)))          (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) | z(θ) = z dH(z ∗ )
                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                                                                                 (64)
                               ∗                            p +  t
                             Zz ∞=0                                                       
                                                 η(θ)
                           =          Cov s(θ),          (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) | z(θ) = z dH(z ∗ )
                                                                                         ∗
                                                                                                                                                                 (65)
                               ∗
                              z =0              p  +   t
                                Z ∞                                                         
                                            t   (z ∗ )      1        ∗  (z ∗ )   e    (z ∗ )
                             =                 Σs,η −           g(z )Σs,ηγ −        Σ          dH(z ∗ ).                                                         (66)
                                  z ∗ =0 p + t            p+t                  p + t s,η

The term in line (61) can be written as
        ∞
                                      T 0 (z ∗ ) t − g(z ∗ )γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
    Z                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                        ds(z; θ)
             E       ζzc (θ)z ∗                 +                                                                − s̄0 (z ∗ )          | z(θ) = z   ∗
                                                                                                                                                            dH(z ∗ )
    z ∗ =0                            1 − T0           1 − T0          dz                                 dz
                                                                                                                                                                 (67)
        ∞
                                     T 0 (z ∗ )            g(z ∗ )γ(θ)                           ζzc (θ)
                                                                                                                             
                                                      t−                   − e ds(z, θ)
    Z
             ζ̄zc (z ∗ )z ∗ E                                                                                 | z(θ) = z ∗        s0inc (z ∗ ) − s̄0 (z ∗ ) dH(z ∗ )
                                                                                                                                                           
=                                                 +
    z ∗ =0                           1−    T0                  1−    T0          dz             ζ̄zc (z ∗ )
                                                                                                                                                                 (68)
             ∞
                                                  T 0 (z ∗ )
         Z                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                      ηξ (θ)                 s(θ)
    +              z ∗ Cov ζzc (θ)                                 + (t − g(z ∗ )γ(θ) − e)                          , ξ(θ)        | z(θ) = z ∗ dH(z ∗ )
          z ∗ =0                               1−     T 0 (z ∗ )                                      p+t                     z∗
                                                                                                                                                      (69)
    Z   ∞    Z        ∞                                                                  
                                                           s0inc (z ∗ )      0   ∗
                                                                                              dz ∗
                                                                                      
=                           (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x)                              − s̄ (z )                                                                              (70)
    z ∗ =0         x=z ∗
      Z ∞
                                                         g(z ∗ ) (z ∗ )
                                                                           
                        t  (z ∗ )        e  (z ∗ )
    +                     Σζ c ηξ ,ξs −    Σζ c ηξ ,ξs −        Σζ c γηξ ,ξs dH(z ∗ ).                                                                           (71)
          z ∗ =0       p+t z            p+t z            p+t z

                                                                                 68
Online Appendix                                                                                Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


The term in line (62) can be written as
       ∞
                                      T 0 (z ∗ ) t − g(z)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
  Z                                                                                                                             
                                                                                          ηz (θ)s(θ) ηz (θ)s̄(z(θ))
           E        ζzc (θ)z(θ)                 +                                                     − c              ) | z(θ) = z dH(z ∗ )
                                                                                                                                   ∗
   z ∗ =0                             1 − T0          1 − T0        dz                    ζzc (θ)z(θ)     ζz (θ)z(θ)
                                                                                                                                (72)
  Z ∞                  0   ∗                     ∗
                                                                                                                    
                     T (z )              t − g(z )γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
=          E               0    ∗
                                     +                                         ηz (θ) (s(θ) − s̄(z ∗ )) | z(θ) = z ∗ dH(z ∗ )
   z ∗ =0         1 − T (z )                  1 − T 0 (z ∗ )          dz
                                                                                                                                (73)
  Z ∞                 0 ∗                         ∗
                                                                                              
                        T (z ) t − g(z )γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
=          h(z ∗ )E                 +                                       | z(θ) = z ∗ E [ηz (θ) (s(θ) − s̄(z ∗ )) | z(θ) = z ∗ ] dz ∗
   z ∗ =0               1 − T0                   1 − T0               dz
                                                                                                                                (74)
     Z ∞
                        t − g(z ∗ )γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
                                                                                                        
  +           Cov                     0    ∗
                                                               , ηz (θ) (s(θ) − s̄(z ∗ )) | z(θ) = z ∗ dH(z ∗ )                 (75)
       z ∗ =0                1  −   T   (z   )         dz
  Z ∞      R ∞
            x=z ∗ (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x) (z ∗ ) ∗
=                                              Σηz ,s dz                                                                        (76)
   z ∗ =0          ζ̄zc (z ∗ ) · z ∗
     Z ∞                                                                                               
                                    ∗                ηξ (θ)
  +           Cov (t − g(z )γ(θ) − e)                        , ηz (θ) (s(θ) − s̄(z )) | z(θ) = z dH(z ∗ )
                                                                                       ∗              ∗
                                                                                                                                (77)
         ∗
       z =0                                           p +  t
  Z ∞ R∞
            x=z ∗ (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x) (z ∗ ) ∗
=                                              Σηz ,s dz                                                                        (78)
   z ∗ =0          ζ̄zc (z ∗ ) · z ∗
     Z ∞                                                                                
                   t       (z ∗ )          1         ∗   (z ∗ )           e     (z ∗ )
  +                      Σsηz ,ηξ −              g(z )Σsηz ,ηξ γ −            Σsηz ,ηξ dH(z ∗ ).                                (79)
         ∗
       z =0     p +    t                 p +   t                       p +  t

Finally, integration by parts, using ∆s̄(z) to denote s̄(z) − s̄(zmin ), yields
   Z   ∞       Z     ∞                                                       
                                                      s0inc (z ∗ )   − s̄ (z ) dz ∗
                                                                           0    ∗
                                                                              
                              (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x)
      z ∗ =0          x=z ∗
                                 Z ∞                    Z           z                          
                                               ∗     ∗
                              =       (1 − ĝ(z ))h(z )                  s0inc (x)dx   − ∆s̄(z ) dz ∗ = Cov[ĝ(z), spref (z)]. (80)
                                                                                              ∗
                                  0                             0

      We now employ the terms A1 , A2 , and A3 , defined in Proposition 6. Using the simplifications
                                                                                                  dW
in Equations (63), (66), (71), and (79), and the requirement that                                  dt   = 0 at the optimum, we have


            t                 1
               s̄ζ̄ c + A1 −     s̄ζ̄ c (γ̄(ḡ + σ) + e) + A2 + eA1 + Cov[ĝ(z), spref (z)] + A3 .
                                                                  
      0=                                                                                                                       (81)
           p+t               p+t

Rearranging this expression yields Equation (39).

C.A.3          Proof of Proposition 1, Equation 8 (optimal commodity tax)

Equation (39) characterizes the optimal tax under arbitrary multidimensional heterogeneity. We
now show how Assumption 4 simplifies this expression to the one presented in Proposition 1.
Under condition (a) types are unidimensional, in which case there is no heterogeneity conditional
on income, and all of the Σ terms in A1 , A2 , and A3 are equal to zero. Then Equation (39)


                                                                           69
Online Appendix                                                                 Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


immediately reduces to the expression in Proposition 1.
                                                 (p+t)s
    Under condition (b), terms of order            z      are negligible, and so we find the optimal tax by taking
                                    (p+t)s(θ)
the limit of Equation (39) as         z(θ)      → 0 for all θ. Note that by the definitions ηξ := ξ · (p+t)s
                                                                                                        z
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                             · 1−T 0

and η = ξν (p+t)s
             z    ·     1
                      1−T 0 ,   the income effect terms ηξ and η go to zero as            (p+t)s(θ)
                                                                                            z(θ)      → 0, and therefore
A1 and A2 go to zero. Condition (b) further assumes that ηz is orthogonal to s conditional on
earnings, implying A3 is equal to zero. Therefore under this assumption, the limit of Equation (39)
is the simplified expression in Proposition 1.

C.B     Proof of Proposition 2
We now characterize the optimal commodity tax when the income tax is suboptimal at some fixed
T (z), assuming η and ηz are negligible, and that ζz , ξ, and s are uncorrelated conditional on
                                                           dW
income. We can begin with the derivation for                dt   on lines (51) and (52) above, before we made use
of the optimality of     T 0:


                                         ζ c (θ)
          Z                                                                 
  dW                                                η(θ)
      =       s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ)              +           (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) dµ(θ)                               (82)
   dt     Θ                              p+t p+t
                           0                                                                  
                           T (z(θ)) t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e ds(z, θ)
           Z
                c                                                          ds(z; θ) ηz (θ)s(θ)
         −     ζz (θ)z(θ)              +                                            + c            dµ(θ)            (83)
             Θ              1 − T0           1 − T 0 (z(θ))       dz         dz       ζz (θ)z(θ)
         Z                             c                            
                                         ζ (θ)
       =      s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ)               (t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e) dµ(θ)                                          (84)
          Θ                              p+t
                       0                                       
                       T (z(θ)) t − g(θ)γ(θ) − e
           Z
                c
         −     ζz (θ)            +                       ηξ (θ) ξ(θ)s(θ)dµ(θ)                                       (85)
             Θ          1 − T0               p+t
                                                                         0
                               s̄ζ̄ c
                                                                                           
                                                                     c     T (z) ¯
       =E [s(z)(1 − g(z))] −          (t − γ̄(ḡ + σ) − e) − E ζ̄z (z)              ξ(z)s̄(z) .                     (86)
                              p+t                                         1 − T0

Where we have invoked the assumption of negligible income effects the assumption in Proposition
2, and the orthogonality of ζz , ξ, and s conditional on income. Noting that absent income effects,
E [g(z)] = 1, setting this expression equal to zero and yields Proposition 2 in the paper.

C.C     Proof of Proposition 3
We maintain our assumptions that ηz and terms of order s/z and rk /z, are negligible. Note that
                      ds(z;θ) drn (z;θ)
the terms ηs , ηn ,     dz ,     dz       , s̄0 (z) are all of order s/z or rn /z.

C.C.1     Optimal Income tax

Since income effects are negligible, the optimal income tax satisfies the conditions in Saez (2001):

                                                           R∞
                                       T 0 (z ∗ )           x=z ∗ (1 − g(x))dH(x)
                                                      =                               .                             (87)
                                     1 − T 0 (z ∗ )            ζ̄zc (z ∗ )z ∗ h(z ∗ )



                                                             70
Online Appendix                                                                  Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


C.C.2    Expression for the optimal commodity tax under full heterogeneity

To begin the proof, consider the total effect on welfare of a marginal increase in the commodity
tax dt. The total welfare effect, written in terms of the marginal value of public funds, can be
decomposed into the following components:

   • Mechanical revenue effect: the reform mechanically raises revenue from each consumer by
     dt · s(θ), for a total of dt · S.

   • Mechanical welfare effect: the reform mechanically reduces each consumer’s net income by
     dt · s(θ). To isolate the mechanical effect, we compute the loss in welfare as if this reduction
     all comes from composite consumption c for a welfare loss of dt · s(θ)g(θ), and we account
     for adjustments in s and z in the behavioral effects below. Thus the total mechanical welfare
                  R
     effect is −dt Θ s(θ)g(θ)dµ(θ).

   • Direct effect on sin good consumption: The benefits for each type θ are given by

                              ds(θ)                       X drn (θ)
                            −        (γ̃s (θ) + ẽs )ps −               (γ̃n (θ) + ẽn )pn                   (88)
                               dt                          n
                                                                  dt
                                                  dxs (θ) X                       dxn (θ)
                            = − (γ̃s (θ) + ẽs )          −      (γ̃n (θ) + ẽn )                            (89)
                                                     dt        n
                                                                                     dt
                                dxs (θ)                                   X           dxj (θ)
                            =−             (γ̃s (θ) − ϕ(θ)γ̃r (θ)) −              ẽj                        (90)
                                   dt                                                    dt
                                                                            j∈{s,1,...,n}
                                  ds                X                 dxj (θ)
                            =−       pγ̃(θ) −                   ẽj                                          (91)
                                  dt                                    dt
                                                j∈{s,1,...,n}


   • Effect on earnings: The reform causes a change in income tax revenue collected from type
                  dz(θ) 0                           dz(θ)
     θ equal to    dt T (z(θ)).    To compute        dt ,    we note that as before, the change in earnings
     for type θ due to the increase in the commodity tax dt is equal to the change in earnings
     that would be induced by imposing a type-specific income tax reform, raising
                                                                                 the income
                                                                                               tax
           θ                                                 dz(θ)     c        z(θ)      ds(z;θ)
     by dT (z) = dt · s(p + t, z − T (z), z; θ). We thus have dt = −ζz (θ) 1−T 0 (z(θ))     dz    −
       ηz (θ)
     1−T 0 (z(θ)) s(θ). This generates a total fiscal
                                                   
                                                       externality through the income tax equal                to
            R T0                                                   R T0  c                     
     −dt · Θ 1−T 0 ζzc (θ)z(θ) ds(z;θ)
                                  dz   + ηz (θ)s(θ)  dµ(θ) = −dt ·  Θ 1−T 0 ζ z (θ)z(θ) ds(z;θ)
                                                                                          dz      dµ(θ).

   • Indirect effects on sin good consumption: The change in earnings affects consumption indi-
     rectly. However, these terms are proportional to s/z and rn /z; that is, only a small share of
     earnings are spent on the sin goods, and thus the change in earnings has a negligible effect.

Combining these components, the total welfare effect of the tax reform dt is equal to




                                                        71
Online Appendix                                                                  Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky




                                                 Direct effect on sin good consumption
        z                                     }|                                                                           {
        Z                         c          
  dW       s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ) ζ (θ) + η(θ) (t − g(θ)pγ̃(θ)) −
                                                                                              X                 dxj (θ) 
      =                                                                                                   ẽj             dµ(θ)
   dt    Θ                        p+t p+t                                                                         dt
                                                                                          j∈{s,1,...,n}
                                                                                                                            (92)
                        Effect on labor supply
          z Z               }|                             {
                T 0 (z(θ))
                                                     
                                          ds(z;   θ)
          −             0
                            ζzc (θ)z(θ)                dµ(θ)                                                                (93)
             Θ 1−T                           dz
                                             ζ c (θ)
          Z                                                                    X dx̄j
        =      s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ)                   (t − g(θ)γ(θ)) dµ(θ) −          ẽj                                  (94)
           Θ                                 p+t                                           dt
                   0
            Z                                       
                T (z(θ))                  ds(z; θ)
          −              0
                             ζzc (θ)z(θ)               dµ(θ)                                                                (95)
              Θ 1−T                          dz
                                             ζ c (θ)
          Z                                                                  
        =      s(θ)(1 − g(θ)) − s(θ)                                         ¯ dµ(θ)
                                                       (t − g(θ)ps γ̃(θ) − pẽ)                                             (96)
           Θ                                 p+t
            Z               0                         
                 c            T (z(θ))         ds(z; θ)
          −     ζz (θ)z(θ)                                 dµ(θ).                                                           (97)
              Θ                 1 − T0             dz
                                                                              0
                                   s̄ζ̄ c
                                                                                                 
                                                ¯             ¯          c      T (z) ¯
        =E [s(z)(1 − g(z))] −             (t − γ̃(ḡ + σ̃) − ẽ) − E ζ̄z (z)              ξ(z)s̄(z) .                       (98)
                                  p+t                                           1 − T0

     Equation 98 must equal 0 at the optimal t, which delivers the first expression in the proposition.
If the income tax is optimal, any small perturbation to it generates no first-order change in welfare.
In particular, this statement must hold for a reform which raises the income tax at each z in
proportion to average s consumption at that z, i.e., for the perturbation dT (z) = dt · s̄(z). Letting
dW
dT   denote the total welfare effect of this marginal reform, we have

                                        Z
                               dW
                                  =        s̄(z(θ))(1 − g(θ))dµ(θ)                                                          (99)
                               dT        Θ
                                               T 0 (z(θ)) c
                                          Z
                                                          ζz (θ)z(θ)s̄0 (z(θ)) dµ(θ)
                                                                              
                                        −              0
                                                                                                                           (100)
                                            Θ 1−T

                                                                                  dW                             dW
Since the income tax is optimal by assumption, we can simplify                     dt    by subtracting          dT   = 0. Using
the fact that g(θ) is constant conditional on income, we have


                                         ζ c (θ)
                                 Z
                      dW                                            ¯
                          =−         s(θ)        (t − g(θ)pγ̃(θ) − pẽ)dµ(θ)                                               (101)
                       dt               p s  + t
                                ZΘ               0                              
                                    c             T (z(θ))     ds(z; θ)     0
                              −    ζz (θ)z(θ)                           − s̄ (z(θ)) dµ(θ)                                  (102)
                                 Θ                  1 − T0        dz

Proceeding as in the proof of Proposition 1 delivers the result.




                                                             72
Online Appendix                                                                      Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


C.D     Extension to Many Dimensions of Consumption: Proof of Proposition 4
Extending Equation (38) from the proof of Proposition 1, the income tax must satisfy


                                         ∞
    T 0 (z)
                                     Z
                      1
         0
            = c                              (1 − ĝ(x))dH(x)
  1 − T (z)  ζ̄z (z) · z · h(z)        x=z
                                                        X  ti − g(z)γi (θ) − ei dci (z; θ)            
                                                      −    E                    ·           | z(θ) = z   (103)
                                                               1 − T 0 (z(θ))       dz
                                                              i
                                                                    
                             dz(θ)                      z(θ)             dci (z;θ)
   Next, we have that         dti    = −ζzc (θ)       1−T 0 (z(θ))          dz
   The welfare impact of increasing commodity tax ti is given by


                                                Direct effect on consumption
                 z                           }|                              {
                 Z                      X dcj (θ)
        dW          ci (θ)(1 − g(θ)) +
               =                                  (tj − g(θ)γj (θ) − ej ) dµ(θ)                                (104)
        dti       Θ                        dti
                                                        j
                                         Direct effect on labor supply
                   z                             }|                         {
                           T 0 (z)
                   Z                                                  
                                     c        dci (z; θ)
               −                    ζ (θ)z(θ)            + ηz (θ)ci (θ) dµ(θ)                                   (105)
                    Θ      1 − T0 z              dz
                           Indirect effect on consumption through changes in z
                   z Z                         }|                              {
                   X       dz(θ) dcj (z; θ)
               −                              (tj − g(θ)γj (θ) − ej ) dµ(θ)                                     (106)
                    j  Θ dti           dz
                   XZ                               dcj (θ)
                                                                                     
               =             ci (θ)(1 − g(θ)) +              (tj − g(θ)γj (θ) − ej ) dµ(θ)                      (107)
                       Θ                              dti
                    j
                      T 0 (z)
                   Z                                                    
                                    c         dci (z; θ)
               −             0
                                  ζz (θ)z(θ)              + ηz (θ)ci (θ) dµ(θ)                                  (108)
                    Θ 1−T                        dz
                   XZ              1                    dci (z; θ) dcj (z; θ)
               +                   0 (z(θ))
                                            z(θ)ζzc (θ)                       (tj − g(θ)γj (θ) − ej ) dµ(θ)     (109)
                       Θ   1 −   T                         dz         dz
                    j


The welfare impact of an income tax perturbation dT (z) = dtc̄i (z) is


        dW         XZ                                               ηj (θ)
                                                                                                   
               =                  c̄i (z(θ))(1 − g(θ)) − c̄i (z(θ))         (tj − g(θ)γj (θ) − ej ) dµ(θ)       (110)
        dT                   Θ                                      pj + tj
                       j
                   T 0 (z) c
                   Z
                                              0
                                                                          
               −          0
                                ζ  z (θ)z(θ)c̄i (z(θ)) + η z (θ)c̄i (z(θ))  dµ(θ)                               (111)
                 Θ 1−T
                 XZ                       t − g(z)γ(θ) − e dcj (z, θ)
               +        zζzc c̄0i (z(θ))                                 dµ(θ).                                 (112)
                    Θ                       1 − T 0 (z(θ))         dz
                       j


Proceeding exactly as in the proof of Proposition 1 (keeping in mind the unidimensional types
assumption), we have

                                                                  73
Online Appendix                                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky




                                dW    X Z ∞ cj (z)
                                    =                (tj − g(z)γ̄j (z) − e) dH(z)
                                dti      z=0 dti u
                                       j
                                      Z ∞Z
                                             (1 − ĝ(x))dx s0inc (z) − s̄0 (z) dH(z).
                                                                              
                                    −                                                                                  (113)
                                         z=0    x≥z

We can transform Equation (113) using integration by parts as in the proof of Proposition 1, exactly
as we did in Equation (80). This yields, for each i,

    XZ       ∞                          XZ     ∞
                   c̄j                                                  cj (z)
                tj            dH(z) =                (g(z)γj (z) − e)                dH(z) + Cov[ĝ(z), cpref,j (z)]   (114)
            z=0    dt i   u                    z=0                       dti     u
      j                                  j
                                        X cj (θ, t, T )
                                    −                          (γ̄ij (ḡ + σij ) + e) + Cov[ĝ(z), cpref,j (z)]        (115)
                                              dti          u
                                         j

                                    = −Ri + ρi .                                                                       (116)

C.E        Extension to a Composite Sin Good
A composite sin good can be represented in the utility function by assuming that consumers maxi-
mize decision utility U (c, s1 , s2 , . . . , sn , z; θ) subject to their budget constraint c+(1+τ ) ni=1 pi si ≤
                                                                                                    P

z−T (z), while the policymaker seeks to maximize aggregate normative utility V (c, s1 , s2 , . . . , sn , z; θ).
    As in the proof of Proposition 1 above, consider the implications of a small joint perturbation
to the commodity tax dτ , combined with an offsetting compensation through the income tax which
preserves labor supply choices for all consumers. This reform has the following effects:
   • Mechanical revenue effect: dτ · i pi si (θ) = dτ · p · s(θ).
                                       P

   • Mechanical welfare effect: the reform mechanically reduces each consumer’s net income by
         P                                                  P
     dτ · i pi si (θ), for a mechanical welfare loss of dτ · i pi si (θ)g(θ). Thus the total mechanical
                             R P                            R
     welfare effect is −dτ Θ i pi si (θ)g(θ)dµ(θ) = −dτ Θ ps(θ)g(θ)dµ(θ).

   • Direct effect on sin good consumption: each consumer alters their consumption of each sin
     good i by dτ · ∂si∂q
                       (qi ,θ)
                               pi , where qi := (1+τ )pi , generating a fiscal externality of dτ Θ τ pi ∂si∂q  (qi ,θ)
                                                                                                    R
                         i                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                       dµ(θ)
                                                                                                                            
                                                                 α(θ) P        0 (θ) − V 0 (θ)p (1 + τ )
                                                                                                              ∂s i i ,θ)
                                                                                                                    (q
     and a behavioral effect (in terms of public funds) of λ             i  V s i         c    i            dτ     ∂qi    pi   ,
          R         P            ∂si (qi ,θ)           R        P         ∂s(q,θ)
     or dτ Θ g(θ) i γi (θ) ∂qi pi dµ(θ) = dτ Θ g(θ) i γ(θ) ∂q pdµ(θ). Then the direct effect
                                                             R                    s(θ)
     on sin good consumption can be written dτ Θ g(θ)γ(θ)ζ(θ) p(1+τ                    ) dµ(θ), equivalent to the
          expression from C.A.

C.F        Computing the Optimal Tax in Terms of g(z) rather than ĝ(z)
Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. We can instead ask the following intuitive question: “When we raise the commodity tax by
dt, how much money can we give back to each person to offset the tax so as to keep the average

                                                                  74
Online Appendix                                                                                              Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


labor supply choices of each z-earner constant?” Call this quantity χ(z). This term satisfies the
following differential equation:


                                      ζ̄zc zχ0 (z) + ηz χ(z) = ζ̄zc zs0inc (z) + ηz s(z)                                                (117)

The right-hand side is the impact of the commodity-tax, as shown in Appendix C.A. The left-hand
side follows straightforwardly: the first term is just compensated effect of increasing the marginal
tax rate, while the second term is the income effect. Rearranging yields

                                                          ηz                      ηz
                                           χ0 (z) +        c
                                                               χ(z) = s0inc (z) + c s(z)                                                (118)
                                                         ζ̄z z                   ζ̄z z

The solution to this first-order differential equation is
                                                      Rx     ηz     0                                            
                                                             c x0 dx
                                           Rz                                                        ηz
                                            x=0 e
                                                           ζ̄z               s0inc (x) +            ζ̄zc x
                                                                                                           s(x)       dx + K
                             χ(z) =                                            Rz     ηz     0
                                                                                                                               .        (119)
                                                                                      c x0 dx
                                                                             e      ζ̄z


where K is some integration constant.
   Now
                                                                                                                                  
                         d                                                                                    ηz
                                            Rx     ηz      0
                                                                        Rx     ηz      0
                                                   c x0 dx                     c x0 dx
                           sinc (x)e             ζ̄z           =e            ζ̄z               s0inc (x)    + c sinc (x)                (120)
                        dx                                                                                   ζ̄z x
and thus


                                                                                                    z
                                                               K − sinc (0)
                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                                   ηz
                        χ(z) = sinc (z) +                          Rz    ηz     0
                                                                                       +                w(x, z)          (s(x))dx       (121)
                                                                e         c z dx
                                                                        ζ̄z                     0                 ζ̄zc x
                   R x0 =z
                    x0 =x    − ζηczz dx0
where w(x, z) = e               z          . And to get the initial conditions χ(0) = sinc (0), we must have
K = sinc (0), so that
                                                               Z    z
                                                                                      ηz
                             χ(z) = sinc (z) +                          w(x, z)             (s̄(x) − sinc (x))dx .                      (122)
                                                                                     ζ̄zc x
                                                               |0                            {z                }
                                                                   labor supply income effect adjustment




Proof of Proposition 5

Proof. Consider now the welfare impacts of a reform that increase the commodity tax by dt and
the income tax χ(z) at each point z. Because by Lemma 1 this has no effect on labor supply, it
has the following impact on welfare4:




                                                                              75
Online Appendix                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky




                 Mechanical revenue and welfare
         Z   ∞     z            }|           {
  dW =            (1 − g(z))(s(z) − χ(z))  dH(z)
          z=0
                                                                                       
                                    Corrective benefit I         Corrective benefit II
                         Z ∞ z         }|         { z                 }|              {
                                             ζ c (z) η(z)                               
                       +      − s(z)(t − γ)         −       (t − g(z)γ(z))(s(z) − χ(z)) dH(z) (123)
                                                                                       
                          z=0               p  +  t   p + t                            


Equation (123) follows from the following effects. The first effect is the direct revenue and welfare
effect of decreasing each consumer’s income by s(z) − χ(z) and transferring that to public funds.
The second effect corresponds to the compensated demand response, which generates both a welfare
effect and a fiscal externality from substitution. The third effect comes from the effect that a wealth
decrease of s(z) − χ(z) has on s consumption; again, this generates both a fiscal externality and a
welfare effect. Setting dW = 0, we have

                                           Z ∞
                                     1
                  t = γ̄(ḡ + σ) − c           (s(z) − χ(z))η(z)(t − g(z)γ̄(z))dz                    (124)
                                   s̄ζ̄ z=0
                         p+t
                      + c E[(1 − g(z))(s(z) − χ(z))]                                                 (125)
                           s̄ζ̄
                                   p+t
                    = γ̄(ḡ + σ) +          E[(1 − g(z))(s(z) − χ(z))]                               (126)
                                     s̄ζ̄ c
                           1                                       t
                      + c E [(s(z) − χ(z))η(z)g(z)γ̄(z)] − c E[(s(z) − χ(z))η(z)]                    (127)
                         s̄ζ̄                                    s̄ζ̄

Resolving for t yields


                  s̄ζ̄ c (ḡ + σ) + pE[(1 − g(z))(s(z) − χ(z))] + E [(s(z) − χ(z))η(z)g(z)γ̄(z)]
             t=                                                                                  .   (128)
                               s̄ζ̄ c − E[(1 − g(z))(s(z) − χ(z))] + E[(s(z) − χ(z))η(z)]




D     Comments on Empirical Analysis
D.A     Data Preparation Notes
    • We define a retail chain by the RMS “parent code,” with the exception that we define a
      separate retail chain for any RMS “retailer code” within a parent code that has more than
      100 store-by-year observations. We rely primarily on parent codes because there are occasional
      errors in assigning retailer codes to RMS stores.

    • The raw data include feature and display information for one original set of audited stores,


                                                           76
Online Appendix                                                          Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


      but a retailer’s advertising captured by the feature variable is generally market-wide. Fol-
      lowing standard practice with the RMS data (Kilts Center 2018), we thus impute the feature
      variable from audited stores to all other stores in a UPC-retailer-market-week cell, where
      “markets” are defined using Nielsen’s Designated Market Areas. After this imputation, we
      observe the feature and display variables in approximately 8.5 and 81 percent of store-by-week
      observations, respectively.

   • In all tables and figures, we weight the sample for national representativeness. For analyses
      using the full sample, we use the “projection factors” provided by Nielsen. For analyses
      using the subsample of PanelViews survey respondents, we construct our own nationally
      representative sample weights using the first seven variables presented in Panel (a) of Table
      2.

   • We measure quantity interchangeably in liters and ounces, under the standard approximation
      that all drinks have the density of water. For liquid drinks, the weight is reported by Nielsen
      directly from the package label. For powdered drinks, we transform to the weight when
      consumed as liquid, i.e. with water added.

   • In constructing ln pkrt,−c , we include only the 81 percent of store-week observations where the
      feature variable is observed. This is important because the majority of features are associated
      with a price discount, and Appendix Table A9 shows that omitting the feature variable
      does change the estimated price elasticity. Therefore, we could introduce bias by including
      weekly price observations where feature is unobserved. By contrast, in-store displays are less
      frequently associated with a price decrease, and Appendix Table A9 shows that omitting
      display does not generate significant omitted variables bias. Thus, to increase power in
      the instrument, we construct ln pkrt,−c with weekly price observations regardless of whether
      display is observed.

D.B        Assessment of Strengths and Weaknesses
In this appendix, we assess the strengths and weaknesses of the empirical strategies employed in
Section III.
    Identifying the price elasticity of demand. Our instrumental variables approach has
advantages relative to alternative methods of identifying price elasticity. One alternative is to use
recent SSB tax changes in U.S. cities as an instrument. This would require the assumption that
no other factors affected SSB demand at the time the SSB tax was implemented. Rees-Jones and
Rozema (2018) document one potential violation of this assumption: local public debates about
sin taxes also affect demand, even in cities where prices never changed because the tax never went
into effect.31 Furthermore, because there have been only a small handful of city-level SSB taxes
  31
     In our theory model, a tax affects demand only through prices, not through signaling or public awareness. The
tax elasticity of demand estimated in these papers would be one crucial input into a richer model.



                                                       77
Online Appendix                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


implemented in the U.S., this approach will tend to deliver less precise estimates for the foreseeable
future.
    A second alternative is to use pricing instruments such as those introduced by Hausman (1996)
and Nevo (2001), who instrument for the price of a product at time t using the average price of
that product in all other cities. This requires the assumption that time-varying demand shocks for
a given product are uncorrelated across cities, which assumes away possibilities such as national
advertising campaigns. Our instrument also delivers more power, because it exploits the extensive
idiosyncratic chain-specific price variation instead of the more limited variation in national average
prices.
    A third alternative is to regress quantities on prices without an instrument, as in Dubois,
Griffith, and O’Connell (2017), Tiffin, Kehlbacher, and Salois (2015), Zhen et al. (2011), and others.
With our particular vector of controls, Appendix Table A9 shows that the OLS estimates understate
price elasticity by about a factor of two, which is suggestive of either a standard simultaneity bias
or measurement error in prices.32
    Long-run versus short-run elasticities. Because the commodity taxes and income taxes we
model are long-lasting, we ideally want long-run elasticities to calibrate optimal taxes. In the ab-
sence of plausibly exogenous long-run price and income variation, we estimate the price and income
elasticities of demand for SSBs using quarterly prices and annual income. To the extent that there
is habit formation in SSB consumption, this variation would cause us to understate elasticities. In
Appendix Table A2, we see no impact of lagged quarterly prices on current consumption, although
this does not rule out habit formation over a longer time horizon.
    Measuring SSB consumption with scanner data vs. self-reports. While purchase
data are incomplete for the reasons discussed in the paper, self-reported intake data have other
limitations that could bias τ̂ up or down. For example, self-reports of consumption and self-
control could both suffer from recency or salience bias: the judgments may be constructed based
on only the most recent or salient consumption episodes. The resulting correlated measurement
error would generate an upward-biased relationship between self-reported consumption and self-
control. Additionally, social desirability bias could cause people with more health knowledge or less
perceived self-control to under-report consumption, which could bias τ̂ either up or down. Using
scanner-based purchase data avoids these potential problems.
    Homescan’s incomplete consumption measures could also affect our price elasticity estimate. If
households substitute between scanned and non-scanned SSBs, for example by buying less soda at a
restaurant when grocery store prices are lower, the estimated price elasticity of scanned purchases
will likely overstate the true SSB price elasticity. We explore the policy implications of a more
inelastic alternative elasticity assumption in Section IV.
    Comparison to other bias measurement approaches. Bernheim and Taubinsky (2018),
Mullainathan, Schwartzstein, and Congdon (2012), and others review the possible approaches to
  32
     Dubois, Griffith, and O’Connell (2017) and the other papers adopting this approach have different data and
control strategies, so their estimates certainly need not be biased in this same way.



                                                      78
Online Appendix                                                  Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


estimating biases for public policy applications. We briefly discuss the merits of these other ap-
proaches in the context of SSB consumption.
   One approach is to calibrate or estimate models of “bias” parameters. For example, in the
older working paper version of this paper, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2017) assume that all bias
is a consequence of present bias, and use evidence from behavioral economics and public health
to calibrate a present bias parameter β and a marginal health cost parameter h to arrive to an
estimate of bias γ = (1 − β)h. This strategy rests on many assumptions: that measures of present
bias from laboratory experiments about effort or money can be extrapolated to a representative
population and to the alternate domain of SSB consumption; that the measures of marginal health
costs (obtained from mostly correlational public health studies) are accurate and independent of the
types of SSBs purchased; and that bias is homogeneous across the population; and that there are no
biases besides present bias. Preference reversal experiments with groceries such as Sadoff, Samek,
and Sprenger (2015) could be used to provide qualitative within-domain evidence of present bias,
but such designs do not deliver money-metric bias estimates and would be prohibitively difficult to
carry out on a nationally representative sample.
   Mistakes arising from misinformation could also be measured using survey-elicited beliefs. This
approach of eliciting beliefs about health costs is similar in spirit to our approach, but unlike our
approach requires strong assumptions about the “true” marginal health costs as well as reason-
ably strong structural assumptions about how health costs affect decision and normative utility.
Furthermore, consumers may or may not act on the beliefs that they state in a survey.
   Finally, one might estimate informational and attentional biases through an information provi-
sion field experiment, as we discuss in Section III.D. This strategy requires the assumption that the
information provided fully debiases the information treatment group, which could be unrealistic
in the case of complex information around nutrition and health. Our nutrition knowledge scores
capture information gathered over a long period, which would probably be prohibitively difficult to
induce experimentally. Moreover, if the dependent variable reflects naturally-occurring decisions
such as those in Homescan, this strategy would also require that the information provision is pro-
cessed by all consumers, is remembered, and is salient at the time of choice—conditions that seem
implausible outside a controlled, online shopping experiment as in Allcott and Taubinsky (2015).
At the same time, a controlled online shopping experiment would not lead to plausible estimates
of demand curves (and therefore bias) in our context, because SSBs are easy to purchase and these
outside options would be perfect substitutes for the products in the experiment.
   In sum, while our approach requires a strong unconfoundedness assumption and has other
weaknesses, other possible approaches to estimating bias involve arguably stronger assumptions
and are, in our view, even more likely to suffer from confounds. Moreover, and in contrast to
the requirements of some other approaches, the dataset we use to estimate demand elasticities is
essentially the same one we use for estimating bias—a key advantage for internal consistency.




                                                 79
Online Appendix                                                            Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


D.C      Deriving the Estimating Equations
In this appendix we derive the estimating equations used in Section III to estimate both the
elasticities and the bias. We do this in two ways. First, we show that the estimating equations can
be derived by log-linearizing the general utility function. This approach is in line with the sufficient
statistics approach of much of the optimal tax literature, which considers only local variation of the
parameters. Although the elasticities are not guaranteed to be globally constant, they are locally
constant. The key assumption assumption for the log-linearized approximation to be a good one is
that the empirical variation in prices and incomes that we consider is not too big.
    In our second approach, we show that our estimating equation can be derived from a CES
utility function, using only the approximation that expenditures on s are a negligibly small share
of income.

D.C.1      Log-linearization to Derive Equation (23)

Recall that bias is defined by s(θ, z, y, p) = sV (θ, z, y − γsV , p − γ). Denote the tuples (θ, z, y, p)
by x and set x̄ = (θ, z̄, y, p̄). We assumed terms of order two or higher (with respect to price,
bias, z, or y) are negligible.                 Formally, we assume that for n1 + n2 + n3 = n and n ≥ 2,
            dn ln sV                               n1     V     n2               n3 is negligible, which also implies
(d ln z)n1 (d ln y)n2 (d ln p)n3 x=x̄ (ln(zt /z)) (γs /y) (1 − p/p̄ + γ/p̄)
                    n      V
that (d ln z)n1 (dd lnlny)sn2 (d ln p)n3      (ln(zt /z))n1 (ln(1−γsV /y))n2 (ln(p/p̄−γ/p̄))n3 is negligible. We now
                                         x=x̄
consider an expansion of normative consumption around the average price p̄ and average income z̄:



   ln s(θ, zt , y, p) − ln sV (θ, z̄, y, p̄)                                                                  (129)
           V                 V                 V
    = ln s (θ, zt , y − γs , p − γ) − ln s (θ, z̄, y, p̄)                                                     (130)
      d ln sV                           d ln sV                           d ln sV
    ≈               (ln zt − ln z̄) +                (ln(1 − γsV /y)) +                (ln(p/p̄ − γ/p̄)))     (131)
       d ln z x=x̄                       d ln y x=x̄                       d ln p x=x̄
      d ln s                    d ln sV                       d ln sV
    =        (ln zt − ln z̄) +           (ln(1 − γsV /y)) +           (ln(p/p̄ − γ/p̄))                       (132)
      d ln z                     d ln y                        d ln p
                     dsV y γs                             γ
    ≈ ξ ln(zt /z̄) −       · ·       − ζ V ln(p/p̄) + ζ V                                                     (133)
                      dy s y                               p̄
                                V
                              ds γ           γ
    = ξ ln(zt ) − ζ ln p − p̄         + ζ V + ζ V ln p̄ − ξ ln(z̄)                                            (134)
                               dy p̄         p̄
                                         γ
    = ξ ln(zt /z̄) − ζ ln(p/p̄) + ζ c,V + ζ ln p̄ − ξ ln(z̄)                                                  (135)
                                          p̄

Since ζ ln p̄ − ξ ln z̄ is a constant, we have the estimating equation used in the body of the paper.
    We assume that ζic,V ≈ ζic . This holds in many standard cases—for example, if marginal health
costs are locally constant and are underweighted by some constant amount due to present bias or
incorrect beliefs. In general, a sufficient condition is that γi is locally constant in p. Substituting
the i subscript for the (p, y, θ) triple and re-arranging gives ln si = ln sVi + ζic γi /pi .
    Compensated elasticity is ζic = ζi − 1−Tξ0i(zi ) · pzi si i , because ζ c = ζ − dy
                                                                                    ds
                                                                                       p per the Slutsky equation,

                                                         80
Online Appendix                                                                    Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


      ds         ds dz         ds   1                 ξ      ps
and   dy p   =   dz dy p   =   dz 1−T 0 (z) p   =  1−T 0 (z) z . We use the ζi and ξi estimated at household i’s income
from Appendix Table A4 and                      the T 0 (zi ) implied by the U.S. income tax schedule, as described in
Appendix M.B.

D.C.2        Almost Exact Functional Form for Equation (23)

We consider
                                                                            s1−1/ζ
                                   V (c, s, z; θ) = cξ/ζ + ea0 (θ) b(γ̃)           − ψ(z/w(θ))                   (136)
                                                                           1 − 1/ζ
The term a0 (θ) incorporates tastes for s. The increasing function b(γ̃) determines how the marginal
bias affects consumption of s, satisfying b(0) = 1. We assume the functional forms b(γ̃) = eγ̃/ζ ,
                     1/ζ
a(c, θ) = ea0 (θ) cξ      . This leads to the first order condition for s given by


                                    a0 (θ) + ln b(γ̃) − (1/ζ) ln s = ln p − (ξ/ζ) ln(y − ps)                     (137)

or
                                         log s = −ζ log p + ξ log(y − ps) + γ̃ + ζa0 (θ)                         (138)

Now let y = z − T (z) and y ∗ = z ∗ − T (z ∗ ). Under the assumption y − y ∗ is small and that the sin
good is a small share of expenditures, meaning that ps/y is small, we have that ln(y(1 − ps/y)) =
ln(y) + ln(1 − ps/y) ≈ ln(y). Moreover, since y ≈ z(1 − T 0 (z ∗ )) for y not too far from y ∗ , we have

                                       ln s ≈ −ζ ln p + ξ ln(z(1 − T 0 (z ∗ )) + γ̃ + ζa0 (θ)                    (139)

and thus


                                  ln s ≈ −ζ ln p + ξ ln(z) + γ̃ + ζa0 (θ) + ξ ln(1 − T 0 (z ∗ ))                 (140)

The last three terms are the terms we estimate in our empirical models, while the last two terms
are merely a constant term.


E      PanelViews Survey Questions
This appendix presents the text of the PanelViews survey questions used for this project.

E.A      Self-Reported Beverage Intake
For each of the following types of drinks, please tell us how many 12-ounce servings you drink in
an average week. (A normal can of soda is 12 ounces.)

     • 100% fruit juice

     • Sweetened juice drinks (for example, fruit ades, lemonade, punch, and orange drinks)



                                                                  81
Online Appendix                                                     Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


   • Regular soft drinks (soda pop)

   • Diet soft drinks and all other artificially sweetened drinks

   • Pre-packaged (i.e. canned or bottled) tea or coffee (for example, iced tea, iced coffee, and
      flavored tea)

   • Sports drinks

   • Caffeinated energy drinks

E.B    Self-Control
Please indicate how much each of the following statements reflects how you typically are: I drink
soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more often than I should.

   • Not at all

   • Somewhat

   • Mostly

   • Definitely

Please indicate how much each of the following statements describes the other head of household:
The other head of household in my house drinks soda pop or other sugar-sweetened beverages more
often than they should.

   • Not at all

   • Somewhat

   • Mostly

   • Definitely

   • I am the only head of household

E.C    Preferences: Taste for Beverages and Health Importance
Imagine for a moment that you could drink whatever beverages you want without any health or
nutritional considerations. Leaving aside any health or nutrition considerations, how much would
you say you like the taste and generally enjoy drinking the following? Please indicate your liking
by selecting a number on a scale of 0-10, with 0 being “not at all” and 10 being “very much.”

   • 100% fruit juice

   • Sweetened juice drinks (for example, fruit ades, lemonade, punch, and orange drinks)


                                                82
Online Appendix                                                     Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


   • Regular soft drinks (soda pop)

   • Diet soft drinks and all other artificially sweetened drinks

   • Pre-made tea or coffee

   • Sports drinks

   • Caffeinated energy drinks

   In general, how important is it to you to stay healthy, for example by maintaining a healthy
weight, avoiding diabetes and heart disease, etc.? Please indicate the importance by selecting a
number on a scale of 0-10, with 0 being “not at all important” and 10 being “extremely important.”

E.D    Nutrition Knowledge
Now we’d like to ask about nutrition knowledge. This is a survey, not a test. If you don’t know the
answer, mark “not sure” rather than guess. Your answers will help identify which dietary advice
people find confusing.

   Do health experts recommend that people should be eating more, the same amount, or less of
the following foods? Please select one response for each. Possible responses: More, Same, Less,
Not sure.

   • Fruit

   • Food and drinks with added sugar

   • Vegetables

   • Fatty foods

   • Processed red meat

   • Whole grains

   • Salty foods

   • Water

Which of these types of fats do experts recommend that people should eat less of? Please select
one response for each. Possible responses: Eat less, Not eat less, Not sure.

   • Unsaturated fats

   • Trans fats

   • Saturated fats


                                                83
Online Appendix                                                 Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Do you think these foods and drinks are typically high or low in added sugar? Please select one
response for each. Possible responses: High in added sugar, Low in added sugar, Not sure.

   • Diet cola drinks

   • Plain yogurt

   • Ice cream

   • Tomato ketchup

   • Melon

Do you think these foods are typically high or low in salt? Please select one response for each.
Possible responses: High in salt, Low in salt, Not sure.

   • Breakfast cereals

   • Frozen vegetables

   • Bread

   • Baked beans

   • Red meat

   • Canned soup

Do you think these foods are typically high or low in fiber? Please select one response for each.
Possible responses: High in fiber, Low in fiber, Not sure.

   • Oats

   • Bananas

   • White rice

   • Eggs

   • Potatoes with skin

   • Pasta

Do you think these foods are a good source of protein? Please select one response for each. Possible
responses: Good source of protein, Not a good source of protein, Not sure.

   • Poultry

   • Cheese


                                                 84
Online Appendix                                                   Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


   • Fruit

   • Baked beans

   • Butter

   • Nuts

Which of the following foods do experts count as starchy foods? Please select one response for
each. Possible responses: Starchy food, Not a starchy food, Not sure.

   • Cheese

   • Pasta

   • Potatoes

   • Nuts

   • Plantains

Which is the main type of fat present in each of these foods? Please select one response for each.
Possible responses: Polyunsaturated fat, Monounsaturated fat, Saturated fat, Cholesterol, Not sure.

   • Olive oil

   • Butter

   • Sunflower oil

   • Eggs

Which of these foods has the most trans-fat? Please select one.

   • Biscuits, cakes and pastries

   • Fish

   • Rapeseed oil

   • Eggs

   • Not sure

The amount of calcium in a glass of whole milk compared to a glass of skimmed milk is. . . ? Please
select one.

   • Much higher

   • About the same


                                                85
Online Appendix                                                Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


   • Much lower

   • Not sure

Which one of the following nutrients has the most calories for the same weight of food? Please
select one.

   • Sugar

   • Starchy

   • Fiber/roughage

   • Fat

   • Not sure

If a person wanted to buy a yogurt at the supermarket, which would have the least sugar/sweetener?
Please select one.

   • 0% fat cherry yogurt

   • Plain yogurt

   • Creamy fruit yogurt

   • Not sure

If a person wanted soup in a restaurant or cafe, which one would be the lowest fat option? Please
select one.

   • Mushroom risotto soup (field mushrooms, porcini mushrooms, arborio rice, butter, cream,
      parsley and cracked black pepper)

   • Carrot butternut and spice soup (carrot , butternut squash, sweet potato, cumin, red chilies,
      coriander seeds and lemon)

   • Cream of chicken soup (British chicken, onions, carrots, celery, potatoes, garlic, sage, wheat
      flour, double cream)

   • Not sure

Which of these combinations of vegetables in a salad would give the greatest variety of vitamins
and antioxidants? Please select one.

   • Lettuce, green peppers and cabbage

   • Broccoli, carrot and tomatoes

   • Red peppers, tomatoes and lettuce

                                                86
Online Appendix                                                  Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


   • Not sure

One healthy way to add flavor to food without adding extra fat or salt is to add. . . ? Please select
one.

   • Coconut milk

   • Herbs

   • Soy sauce

   • Not sure

Which of these diseases is related to how much sugar people eat? Please select one.

   • High blood pressure

   • Tooth decay

   • Anemia

   • Not sure

Which of these diseases is related to how much salt (or sodium) people eat? Please select one.

   • Hypothyroidism

   • Diabetes

   • High blood pressure

   • Not sure

Which of these options do experts recommend to prevent heart disease? Please select one.

   • Taking nutritional supplements

   • Eating less oily fish

   • Eating less trans-fats

   • Not sure

Which of these options do experts recommend to prevent diabetes? Please select one.

   • Eating less refined foods

   • Drinking more fruit juice

   • Eating more processed meat


                                                 87
Online Appendix                                                 Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


   • Not sure

Which one of these foods is more likely to raise people’s blood cholesterol? Please select one.

   • Eggs

   • Vegetable oils

   • Animal fat

   • Not sure

Which one of these foods is classified as having a high Glycemic Index (Glycemic Index is a measure
of the impact of a food on blood sugar levels, thus a high Glycemic Index means a greater rise in
blood sugar after eating)? Please select one.

   • Wholegrain cereals

   • White bread

   • Fruit and vegetables

   • Not sure

Fiber can decrease the chances of gaining weight. Please select one.

   • Agree

   • Disagree

   • Not sure

If someone has a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 23, what would their weight status be? (BMI is
conventionally measured in kg/m2) Please select one.

   • Underweight

   • Normal weight

   • Overweight

   • Obese

   • Not sure

If someone has a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 31, what would their weight status be? (BMI is
conventionally measured in kg/m2) Please select one.

   • Underweight

   • Normal weight

                                                88
Online Appendix                                                                    Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


    • Overweight

    • Obese

    • Not sure

E.E     Other Questions
Are you the primary shopper? By this we mean, the one household member who makes the majority
of your household’s grocery purchase decisions.
    Are you. . .

    • Male

    • Female

    What is your primary occupation?


F     Stockpiling and Optimal Lag Length for Price Elasticity Esti-
      mates
Because SSBs are storable, past prices and merchandising conditions that affect past purchases
could in theory affect current stockpiles and thus current purchases. To address this, we estimate
a version of Equation (19) that includes lags of the price and merchandising condition variables.
Letting l index quarterly lags, we estimate the following regression:

                                  L
                                  X                      L
                                                         X
                       ln sit =         ζl ln pi,t−l +         νl f i,t−l + ξ ln zct + ωt + µic + εit ,       (141)
                                  l=0                    l=0

with standard errors clustered by county.
    In Table A1, we find that the local price IV Zit is a powerful predictor of price paid in quarter t
but is not strongly conditionally correlated with prices paid in the quarters before and after. This
implies that we have strong first stages and do not have large serial autocorrelation problems.
    A standard approach to determining the optimal number of lags in a distributed lag model is to
choose the specification that minimizes the Aikake Information Criterion (AIC) or Bayesian Infor-
mation Criteria (BIC). In essence, these criteria find the specification that best predicts purchases
in period t. As shown in Table A2, the specification that minimizes AIC and BIC is to set L = 0,
i.e. to include only contemporaneous quarter prices. Furthermore, the coefficients on lagged prices
in the table are all statistically zero, implying no statistically detectable stockpiling of SSBs from
quarter to quarter.33 For these reasons, we set L = 0 when estimating demand in the body of the
  33
     This result is consistent with DellaVigna and Gentzkow (Forthcoming), who find that stores offering lower prices
in a given week see little decrease in sales in future weeks and months, even for relatively storable goods. Prior
work highlighting household stockpiling (e.g. Hendel and Nevo (2006a; 2006b; 2010) and Wang (2015)) typically uses
weekly purchase data, and stockpiling is naturally more relevant across weeks than across quarters.


                                                                89
Online Appendix                                                               Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


paper, thereby including only contemporaneous prices and merchandising conditions.

                  Table A1: Regressions of Price Paid on the Local Price IV

                                           (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)
                                      Price (t)   Price (t-1)   Price (t-2)    Price (t-3)   Price (t-4)
              Local price IV (t)      1.215∗∗∗       -0.087     -0.177∗∗∗         0.042       0.253∗∗∗
                                        (0.067)     (0.063)       (0.060)        (0.070)       (0.086)
              Local price IV (t-1)     -0.131∗∗    1.351∗∗∗         0.037      -0.177∗∗∗        -0.080
                                        (0.054)     (0.074)       (0.070)        (0.063)       (0.062)
              Local price IV (t-2)      -0.114∗    -0.135∗∗      1.307∗∗∗         0.016      -0.184∗∗∗
                                        (0.067)     (0.056)       (0.085)        (0.075)       (0.068)
              Local price IV (t-3)       -0.036     -0.108∗      -0.139∗∗       1.288∗∗∗         0.015
                                        (0.052)     (0.065)       (0.060)        (0.086)       (0.078)
              Local price IV (t-4)      0.117∗        0.026        -0.056       -0.144∗∗      1.166∗∗∗
                                        (0.068)     (0.055)       (0.070)        (0.067)       (0.090)
              N                       2,219,344   2,076,761     1,920,252      1,728,145     1,625,238

Notes: This table presents regressions of price paid ln pi,t−l on the local price instrumental variable Zit
and four additional quarterly lags. All regressions include the additional control variables in Equation (141):
feature and display (and four lags thereof), natural log of county average per capita income, quarter of sample
indicators, and a household-by-county fixed effect. Columns 1-5, respectively, use the contemporaneous price
paid and then the first through fourth lags of prices paid as the dependent variable. Sample sizes vary across
columns because using a longer lag of price paid pi,t−l reduces the number of observations. Observations are
weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by county, are in parentheses. *,
**, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.


                         Table A2: Determining Optimal Number of Lags

                                                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)
           ln(Average price/liter)           -1.274∗∗∗    -1.264∗∗∗    -1.262∗∗∗     -1.244∗∗∗   -1.181∗∗∗
                                              (0.117)      (0.109)      (0.112)       (0.110)     (0.114)
           ln(Average price/liter) (t-1)       0.104         0.121       0.129         0.139
                                              (0.109)      (0.106)      (0.101)       (0.109)
           ln(Average price/liter) (t-2)       -0.014       -0.022       -0.013
                                              (0.099)      (0.097)      (0.103)
           ln(Average price/liter) (t-3)       -0.060       -0.012
                                              (0.100)      (0.104)
           ln(Average price/liter) (t-4)       0.091
                                              (0.121)
           ln(County income)                  0.193∗∗      0.193∗∗      0.189∗∗       0.184∗∗     0.188∗∗
                                              (0.087)      (0.086)      (0.085)       (0.085)     (0.086)
           N                                 1,240,214    1,240,214    1,240,214     1,240,214   1,240,214
           Akaike Information Criterion      2,851,069    2,845,622    2,843,791     2,836,042   2,819,778
           Bayesian Information Criterion    2,851,731    2,846,248    2,844,381     2,836,596   2,820,295

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (141), with L = 4, 3, 2, 1, 0 in columns 1-5, respectively. All
regressions include feature and display (and L lags thereof), quarter of sample indicators, and household-by-
county fixed effects. All regressions use a common sample: the set of observations in column 1. Observations
are weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically
significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                         90
Online Appendix                                                               Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


G        Income Elasticity Estimated with Household-Level Variation
When estimating the income elasticity in Equation (19), our specifications in the body of the paper
use county mean income. We think of Equation (19) as the reduced form of an instrumental variable
(IV) regression with time-varying household income as an endogenous variable and county mean
income as an instrument, where the first stage should have a coefficient of one.34
       In this appendix, we present alternative specifications using household income reported by
Homescan households on annual surveys. There are several benefits to using the household-level
instead of country-level income data. First, there is substantially more variation to exploit, so the
estimates can be more precise. Second, using county income can introduce other sources of bias,
including that county income changes may be correlated with unobserved prices (such as for other
grocery items and SSBs at restaurants) or other drivers of SSB preferences. Third, county average
income changes may accrue disproportionately to households with high vs. low SSB demand or
high vs. low incomes, which could bias the estimated income elasticity or the difference in income
elasticity at high vs. low incomes.
       These concerns notwithstanding, we use county income for our primary estimates because there
are three problems with the household-level income data. First, one might naturally expect more
measurement error in the household-level survey data, especially because we are exploiting within-
household variation. Second, using household-level income can generated additional endogeneity
problems. In particular, changes in household composition (for example, a divorce or a adult
moving in) can affect household income and the quantity of SSBs (and other groceries) purchased.
Third, there is some uncertainty over the year for which Homescan panelists are reporting their
income. The surveys reported for year t are taken in the fall of year t − 1. In the early years of the
sample, panelists were asked to report total annual income as of year-end of the previous calendar
year, i.e. year t − 2. Nielsen believes that panelists are actually reporting their annualized income
at the time of the survey, and as of 2011, the instructions for income no longer mention the previous
calendar year, but rather annualized income.
       Table A3 explores this third issue by regressing the natural log of household income in year t on
the natural log of current and lagged county mean income. The second lag of county income is most
predictive, suggesting that the modal Homescan household is reporting their income for that year.
However, other lags also have predictive power, suggesting that there will be some measurement
error. The low t-statistics on county income also highlight that county income variation is not very
predictive of reported household-level income variation.
       Table A4 presents estimates of Equation (19). Column 1 reproduces the primary estimate from
column 2 of Table 3. Columns 2–5 substitute household income and the first and second lead of
  34
     This approach would be biased if migration causes changes in county mean income that are correlated with
within-household SSB demand changes and with income changes for continuing residents. However, migration is
likely responsible for only a small share of year-to-year county income variation. Bias could also arise if county income
changes are correlated with unobserved within-household preference changes, for example if high-socioeconomic status
counties experience both faster income growth and faster declines in preferences for SSBs. However, Appendix Table
A9 shows that the estimated ξˆ is unaffected by controlling for a linear time trend in county sample average income.



                                                           91
Online Appendix                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


household income in place of county income. Across the various columns, the estimated income
elasticities ξˆ range from 0 to about 0.04. This is substantially smaller than the estimate of ξˆ ≈ 0.20
in the primary estimates reproduced in column 1. One natural explanation is that the difference is
attenuation bias driven by measurement error in household income. Even though the magnitudes
differ, we emphasize that all income elasticity estimates ξˆ are consistent in their key qualitative
implication: they all imply that the steeply declining consumption-income profile is not driven by
year-to-year causal income effects.
   To address the endogeneity concern introduced above, columns 2-5 all include the full set of
demographic controls used elsewhere in the paper: natural logs of education and age, race, an
indicator for the presence of children, household size in adult equivalents, employment status, and
weekly work hours. Column 6 demonstrates the endogeneity concern by omitting these variables.
The estimated income elasticity ξˆ becomes slightly negative.

              Table A3: Regressions of Household Income on County Income

                                            (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)
              ln(County income)            0.056    0.124∗∗∗
                                          (0.043)    (0.036)
              ln(County income) (t-1)      0.037               0.179∗∗∗
                                          (0.038)               (0.037)
              ln(County income) (t-2)    0.104∗∗∗                         0.215∗∗∗
                                          (0.036)                          (0.041)
              ln(County income) (t-3)    0.108∗∗∗                                    0.190∗∗∗
                                          (0.041)                                     (0.044)
              N                          653,554    653,554    653,554    653,554    653,554
Notes: This table presents regressions of the natural log of household income on county income and its lags,
using household-by-year Homescan data for 2006-2016. All regressions include year indicators and household-
by-county fixed effects. Observations are weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors,
clustered by county, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent
confidence, respectively.




                                                    92
Online Appendix                                                         Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Table A4: Estimating Income Elasticity Using Household Income Instead of County
Income

                                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
 ln(Average price/liter)               -1.373∗∗∗    -1.159∗∗∗   -1.342∗∗∗    -1.234∗∗∗    -1.156∗∗∗   -1.360∗∗∗
                                         (0.089)     (0.138)     (0.083)      (0.104)      (0.138)     (0.088)
 ln(County income)                      0.204∗∗∗
                                         (0.073)
 ln(Household income)                                 0.004      0.013∗                               -0.058∗∗∗
                                                     (0.008)     (0.007)                               (0.007)
 ln(Household income) (year+1)                      0.037∗∗∗                 0.036∗∗∗
                                                     (0.008)                  (0.007)
 ln(Household income) (year+2)                        -0.001                               0.008
                                                     (0.008)                              (0.008)
 Feature                               1.154∗∗∗     1.141∗∗∗    1.192∗∗∗     1.213∗∗∗    1.142∗∗∗     1.156∗∗∗
                                        (0.065)      (0.097)     (0.065)      (0.080)     (0.097)      (0.065)
 Display                               0.503∗∗∗     0.380∗∗∗    0.523∗∗∗     0.468∗∗∗    0.381∗∗∗     0.504∗∗∗
                                        (0.089)      (0.127)     (0.086)      (0.107)     (0.127)      (0.089)
 Other demographics                       No           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          No
 Kleibergen-Paap first stage F stat       272          112         275          166         112          275
 N                                     2,219,344    1,233,197   2,219,344    1,625,236   1,233,197    2,219,344

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (19). Column 1 presents base IV estimates, while columns
2-6 present estimates using natural log of household income instead of county mean income. All regressions
include quarter of sample indicators and household-by-county fixed effects. “Other demographics” are natural
logs of education and age, race, an indicator for the presence of children, household size in adult equivalents,
employment status, and weekly work hours. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.
Robust standard errors, clustered by county, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90,
95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.



H     Example of Uniform Pricing
The power of our instrument derives from two facts documented by DellaVigna and Gentzkow
(Forthcoming) and Hitsch, Hortacsu, and Lin (2017). First, chains vary their prices independently
of each other over time. Second, chains set prices in a nearly uniform fashion across all their stores.
    Figure A1 illustrates these patterns for a high-volume SSB UPC. Panel (a) presents the quarterly
average price (unweighted across stores and weeks) for each retail chain that sold this UPC over the
full sample, with darker shading indicating higher prices. Other than a nationwide price increase in
early 2008, there is no clear pattern, illustrating that chains vary their prices independently of each
other over time. Panel (b), by contrast, shows a clear pattern. This figure looks within one example
retail chain, presenting the quarterly average price (again unweighted across weeks) for each store
at that chain. The vertical patterns illustrate that this chain varies prices in a coordinated way
across all of its stores. In mid-2008, for example, prices at all stores were relatively high, whereas in
early 2007, prices at all stores were relatively low. The figure echoes a similar figure in DellaVigna
and Gentzkow (Forthcoming), who document that this within-chain, across-store price coordination
is not limited to the example chain we chose for this figure.



                                                      93
Online Appendix                                                                                Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


                                                       Figure A1: Intuition for the Price Instruments
                                                          (a) Relative Prices Vary Across Retail Chains


                                                                                                          5.80
                                                                                                          5.70
                                                                                                          5.60
                                                                                                          5.50
                     Chains, sorted by average price                                                      5.40
                                                                                                          5.30
                                                                                                          5.20
                                                                                                          5.10
                                                                                                          5.00
                                                                                                          4.90




                                                                                                                 Price ($)
                                                                                                          4.80
                                                                                                          4.70
                                                                                                          4.60
                                                                                                          4.50
                                                                                                          4.40
                                                                                                          4.30
                                                                                                          4.20
                                                                                                          4.10
                                                                                                          4.00
                                                                                                          3.90
                                                                                                          3.80
                                                                                                          3.70
                                                                                                          3.60
                                                                                                          3.50


                                          2006             2008    2010    2012     2014    2016


                                                       (b) Uniform Pricing Within an Example Retail Chain


                                                                                                          4.40
                                                                                                          4.35
                                                                                                          4.30
                                                                                                          4.25
                                                                                                          4.20
                     Stores, sorted by average price




                                                                                                          4.15
                                                                                                          4.10
                                                                                                          4.05
                                                                                                          4.00
                                                                                                          3.95
                                                                                                                 Price ($)

                                                                                                          3.90
                                                                                                          3.85
                                                                                                          3.80
                                                                                                          3.75
                                                                                                          3.70
                                                                                                          3.65
                                                                                                          3.60
                                                                                                          3.55
                                                                                                          3.50
                                                                                                          3.45
                                                                                                          3.40
                                                                                                          3.35
                                                                                                          3.30
                                                                                                          3.25


                                          2006             2008    2010    2012     2014    2016



Notes: This figure presents prices of an example high-volume sugar-sweetened beverage UPC. Panel (a)
presents the quarterly average price (unweighted across stores and weeks) for each retail chain that sold this
UPC over the full sample. Panel (b) presents the quarterly average price (again unweighted across weeks)
for each store at an example retail chain.




                                                                               94
Online Appendix                                                            Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


I         Measurement Error Correction for Bias Estimation
The variables bi and ai are measured imperfectly, for two reasons. First, household head average
biases and preferences are unobserved for two-head households in which only one head responded
to the survey. Second, the PanelViews survey delivers bias proxies that may contain measurement
error. This appendix details how we address these issues. For this appendix, we now distinguish
between bias, denoted bi , and the bias proxies measured in the PanelViews survey, denoted b̃i .
         The observed bias proxies are as follows. For two-head households, b̃1si is the average of the
primary shopper’s self-control assessments for herself and the other head, and in the 2,481 house-
holds where both heads responded, b̃2si is the analogous average constructed from the other head’s
responses.35 In one-head households, b̃1si is simply the household head’s self-control assessment
for herself. Similarly, b̃1ki and b̃2ki are the nutrition knowledge scores for the primary shopper and
other head, if observed, and b̃ki is the household head average nutrition knowledge score.
         We make two additional assumptions:

Assumption 9. Measurement error in self-control: For self-control, b̃1si = bsi + ν1si and b̃2si =
bsi + ν2si , with (ν1si , ν2si )⊥bsi and ν 1si ⊥ν 2si . Moreover, the distribution of ν 1si does not depend
on whether the household has one or two heads and on whether one or both heads responded to the
survey. We assume no measurement error in nutrition knowledge.

         The classical measurement error assumption for self-control could be violated in reality, for
example if spouses are both unaware of biases, or if one spouse’s preferences (e.g. that the other
spouse would lose weight) both cause them to respond that the other spouse “should” drink fewer
SSBs and affect the household’s overall SSB purchases. It is reasonable to make the approximation
that nutrition knowledge is measured without error, because the General Nutrition Knowledge
Questionnaire is a many-question scale with high sensitivity to change and construct validity and
a high test-retest reliability of 0.89 (Kliemann et al., 2016).

Assumption 10. Missing at random: in two-head households, biases and preferences are not
correlated with whether both heads responded to the survey.

         To address non-response in two-head households where only one head responded, we impute
household average nutrition knowledge nutrition knowledge b̃ki and preferences ai based on the
observed head’s bias proxies and preferences.36 We use these imputations in the primary estimates
in the body of the paper as well. For this appendix, we denote household i’s observed or imputed
                                        ˆ
nutrition knowledge and preferences as b̃ki and âi . To address measurement error in self-control,
we use two-sample two-stage least squares (2SLS). In the first stage, we regress b̃2si on b̃1si and
    35
     We follow Bronnenberg et al. (2015) in defining each household’s “primary shopper” by selecting the survey
respondent who makes the majority of the grocery purchase decisions, then the female, then the older person, until
we arrive at a single primary shopper in each household.
  36
     Specifically, for each variable v in b̃ki and ai , we impute with the predictions from a regression of household
average v on xi , µc , and the primary shopper’s b̃ki and ai , in the sample of two-head households where both heads
responded. Appendix Table A5 presents these regressions. There is little uncertainty in these imputations: the
adjusted R2 ’s are around 0.7 to 0.8.


                                                         95
Online Appendix                                                          Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


the other covariates from Equation (24) in the subset of households with two survey respondents,
                               ˆ
and we construct fitted values b̃2si for all households. Appendix Table A6 presents this first stage
                                                                    ˆ           ˆ
regression. For the second stage, we estimate Equation (24) using b̃i = [b̃ki , b̃2si ] and âi in place
of bi and ai . We calculate standard errors using the procedure of Chodorow-Reich and Wieland
(2016), which accounts for heteroskedasticity and the interdependence between the first- and second-
stage samples. Assumptions (9) and (10) guarantee that the imputation and measurement error
correction procedures yield consistent estimates of τ in Equation (24).
   Our paper is one of only a small number to correct for measurement error when estimating the
relation between experimental or survey measures and outcomes; see Gillen, Snowberg, and Yariv
(2015) for evidence on the importance of this type of correction.

Table A5: Example Regressions Used to Impute Nutrition Knowledge and Preferences

                                                    (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                Nutrition       Taste        Health
                                                knowledge     for soda     importance
                       Nutrition knowledge       0.826∗∗∗       0.052         -0.023
                                                  (0.019)      (0.041)       (0.022)
                       Self-control              0.029∗∗∗    -0.186∗∗∗      0.042∗∗∗
                                                  (0.007)      (0.023)       (0.011)
                       Taste for soda              0.006      0.630∗∗∗      0.024∗∗∗
                                                  (0.006)      (0.017)       (0.008)
                       Health importance           0.022         0.002      0.727∗∗∗
                                                  (0.015)      (0.036)       (0.024)
                       ln(Household income)        0.000        -0.015         0.000
                                                  (0.004)      (0.010)       (0.005)
                       ln(Years education)       0.057∗∗∗       -0.002         0.007
                                                  (0.016)      (0.046)       (0.021)
                       Other beverage tastes        Yes           Yes           Yes
                       Other demographics           Yes           Yes           Yes
                       County indicators            Yes           Yes           Yes
                       R2                          0.883        0.838          0.814
                       Adjusted R2                 0.811        0.732          0.701
                       N                           2,809         2,576         2,809
Notes: In our primary estimates of Equation 24, nutrition knowledge and preference variables are missing
for two-head households where only one head responded to the PanelViews survey. This table presents
regressions used to impute nutrition knowledge, taste for soda, and health importance, using the sample of
two-head households where both heads responded. The dependent variable in each column is the household
average of the variable reported in the column header. The bias proxies and preference controls used as
independent variables use only the primary shopper’s survey responses. Observations are weighted for
national representativeness. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant
with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                     96
Online Appendix                                                      Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Table A6: First Stage of Two-Sample 2SLS Self-Control Measurement Error Correction

                                                                 (1)
                                    Nutrition knowledge       0.138∗∗∗
                                                               (0.045)
                                    Self-control              0.586∗∗∗
                                                               (0.026)
                                    Taste for soda           -0.120∗∗∗
                                                               (0.023)
                                    Health importance           0.053
                                                               (0.040)
                                    ln(Household income)        0.015
                                                               (0.010)
                                    ln(Years education)         0.019
                                                               (0.047)
                                    Other beverage tastes        Yes
                                    Other demographics           Yes
                                    County indicators            Yes
                                    R2                          0.757
                                    N                           2,812
Notes: This table presents the first stage of the two-sample 2SLS procedure used to correct for measurement
error in self-control, using the sample of households where both heads responded to the PanelViews survey.
Observations are weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **,
***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.



J       Bias Estimation Using PanelViews SSB Consumption Data
As introduced in Section III, the Homescan grocery purchase data are imperfect measures of SSB
consumption, both because they do not measure away-from-home SSB consumption and because
the Homescan data are at the household level, while the bias proxies from PanelViews are at the
individual level. For a comprehensive measure of individual-level SSB consumption, we therefore
delivered a beverage intake frequency questionnaire as part of the PanelViews survey. In this
appendix, we describe these SSB consumption data and use them to estimate average marginal
bias.
    We used a modified version of the BEVQ-15, a validated questionnaire that is standard in
the public health literature (Hedrick et al., 2012). We asked, “For each of the following types of
drinks, please tell us how many 12-ounce servings you drink in an average week,” for five types
of SSBs (sweetened juice drinks, regular soft drinks, pre-packaged tea or coffee, sports drinks, and
caffeinated energy drinks) and two non-SSBs (100% fruit juice and diet soft drinks).
    How does Homescan consumption compare to the self-reports? Because average SSB consump-
tion is declining over time in the U.S., we make this comparison using only the most recent year of
Homescan data (2016) for closest comparability with the 2017 PanelViews survey. In 2016, Home-
scan purchases average 63 liters per adult equivalent, while annualized PanelViews self-reported
intake averages 88 liters, or 39 percent larger. As a benchmark, Kit et al. (2013, Table 2) report
that away from home SSB intake is 86 percent larger than intake at home for adults over our sample


                                                     97
Online Appendix                                                          Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


period, although away from home vs. at home intake is not the only difference between our two
consumption measures. Up to some sampling error in the smaller PanelViews sample, Figure A2
shows that the two data sources are both consistent in showing a similar slope of consumption with
respect to income.
       At the individual household level, however, the two sources are not always consistent. The
relationship between natural log of SSB purchases per adult equivalent in the most recent year of
Homescan purchases and natural log of average self-reported SSB consumption per adult in the
PanelViews survey has only R2 ≈ 0.17.37 This relatively low value underscores the importance of
having both consumption measures. Because each measure has different strengths (the PanelViews
surveys are at the individual level, measure intake, and include consumption away from home, but
they suffer from the noise and possible biases of self-reported data), readers may disagree over
which measure should be prioritized, so we present optimal tax calculations in the introduction
and in Section IV based on both.
       Table A7 presents estimates of Equation (24) using PanelViews respondent-level data. This
parallels Table 5, except that i indexes PanelViews respondents instead of Homescan Households, si ,
bki , bsi , and ai are the SSB consumption, nutrition knowledge, self-control, and preference measures
for respondent i, b2si is the self-control of respondent i as rated by the other household head, and
xi are the household-level characteristics for respondent i’s household. We cluster standard errors
at the household level. Figures A3 and A4 present the predicted quantity effect of bias and average
marginal bias by income, re-creating Figures 7 and 8 in the body of the paper but adding the
PanelViews estimates. The patterns of results are very similar to those from the Homescan data,
except that the τ̂ estimates, and the resulting bias estimates, are materially larger.
  37
    Only some of this low R2 is from not having self-reports from the full household: when limiting to one-person
households, the relationship has R2 ≈ 0.21. Some of the low R2 is from variation within households over time.
The PanelViews self-reports are from October 2017, whereas the most recent year of Homescan data is 2016, and a
regression of household-level Homescan SSB purchases on its one year lag has only R2 ≈ 0.62.




                                                       98
Online Appendix                                                                                                    Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


                 Figure A2: Homescan Purchases vs. Self-Reported Intake




                                                                140
                    Liters purchased per adult equivalent per year
                   40        60      80      100       120




                                                                      0      25             50            75         100          125
                                                                                        Household income ($000s)

                                                                          PanelViews self-reports          Homescan purchases (2016)



Notes: This figure presents the average purchases of sugar-sweetened beverages for each household’s most
recent year in the Nielsen Homescan data and the average annualized self-reported SSB consumption from
the PanelViews survey, by income group. Homescan purchases are measured in liters per “adult equivalent,”
where household members other than the household heads are rescaled into adult equivalents using the
recommended average daily consumption for their age and gender group. Observations are weighted for
national representativeness.




                                                                                                99
Online Appendix                                                       Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Table A7: Regressions of Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption on Bias Proxies
Using PanelViews Self-Reported Consumption

                                    (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)
       Nutrition knowledge      -0.941∗∗∗   -1.430∗∗∗   -1.028∗∗∗   -0.937∗∗∗   -1.338∗∗∗   -0.412∗∗∗
                                  (0.122)    (0.129)      (0.122)    (0.118)     (0.127)      (0.123)
       Self-control             -1.973∗∗∗   -2.665∗∗∗   -1.965∗∗∗   -2.018∗∗∗               -3.207∗∗∗
                                  (0.058)    (0.056)      (0.057)    (0.055)                  (0.096)
       Taste for soda            1.122∗∗∗                1.123∗∗∗   1.106∗∗∗    1.817∗∗∗     0.741∗∗∗
                                  (0.059)                 (0.060)    (0.057)     (0.056)      (0.065)
       Health importance        -0.406∗∗∗               -0.307∗∗∗   -0.412∗∗∗   -0.751∗∗∗      -0.048
                                  (0.104)                 (0.103)    (0.101)     (0.108)      (0.105)
       ln(Household income)     -0.096∗∗∗               -0.079∗∗∗   -0.113∗∗∗   -0.134∗∗∗   -0.109∗∗∗
                                  (0.028)                 (0.024)    (0.025)     (0.028)      (0.027)
       ln(Years education)      -0.391∗∗∗               -0.491∗∗∗   -0.409∗∗∗   -0.419∗∗∗    -0.272∗
                                  (0.150)                 (0.143)    (0.138)     (0.158)      (0.147)
       Other beverage tastes        Yes        No           Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
       Other demographics           Yes        Yes          No         Yes         Yes           Yes
       County indicators            Yes        Yes          Yes        No          Yes           Yes
       Self-control 2SLS            No         No           No         No          No            Yes
       R2                          0.414      0.307        0.411      0.324       0.359         0.414
       N                          20,640     20,640       20,640     20,640      20,640       20,640

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (24). Data are at the PanelViews respondent level, and
the dependent variable is the natural log of PanelViews self-reported SSB consumption. bki , bsi , and ai are
the knowledge, self-control, and preference measures for respondent i, b2si is the self-control of respondent
i as rated by the other household head, and xi are the household-level characteristics for respondent i’s
household. Column 6 corrects for measurement error in self-control using two-sample 2SLS, with standard
errors calculated per Chodorow-Reich and Wieland (2016). Taste for soda is the response to the question,
“Leaving aside any health or nutrition considerations, how much would you say you like the taste and
generally enjoy drinking [Regular soft drinks (soda pop)]?” “Other beverage tastes” are the responses to
parallel questions for other beverages. Health importance is the response to the question, “In general, how
important is it to you to stay healthy, for example by maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes and
heart disease, etc.?” Responses to each question were originally on a scale from 0 to 10, which we rescale
to between 0 and 1. “Other demographics” are natural log of age, race, an indicator for the presence of
children, household size in adult equivalents, employment status, and weekly work hours. Observations are
weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by household, are in parentheses.
*, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                      100
Online Appendix                                                                                             Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Figure A3: Share of Consumption Attributable to Bias by Income Using PanelViews
and Homescan




                                                             .5
                   Share of consumption attributable to bias
                        .3      .35      .4
                                          .25      .45




                                                                  0    25            50            75         100       125
                                                                                 Household income ($000s)

                                                                      PanelViews self-reports    Homescan purchases



Notes: This figure presents the share of sugar-sweetened beverage consumption attributable to bias, i.e.
                           s −ŝV
the unweighted average of i si i , by income, using both PanelViews and Homescan data. Observations are
weighted for national representativeness.


    Figure A4: Average Marginal Bias by Income Using PanelViews and Homescan
                                                           3
                   Average marginal bias (cents per ounce)
                             1            0  2




                                                                  0    25            50            75         100       125
                                                                                 Household income ($000s)

                                                                      PanelViews self-reports    Homescan purchases



Notes: This figure presents the demand slope-weighted average marginal bias by income, using both Pan-
elViews and Homescan data. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.




                                                                                        101
Online Appendix                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


K     Additional Empirical Results
K.A     Price and Income Elasticities

Table A8: Estimates of Price and Income Elasticities to Address Censoring at Zero
Consumption

                                             (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)
                                          Primary     Reduced form        Full
                                              IV      in IV sample      sample       Tobit
                ln(Average price/liter)   -21.71∗∗∗
                                            (2.12)
                Local price IV                          -26.27∗∗∗      -21.16∗∗∗   -25.90∗∗∗
                                                          (2.94)         (2.33)       (2.64)
                ln(County income)            2.35          -0.14          -0.26        -0.48
                                            (1.59)        (1.40)         (1.24)       (1.38)
                Feature                   14.73∗∗∗      20.47∗∗∗       18.57∗∗∗     24.98∗∗∗
                                            (2.03)        (1.90)         (1.50)       (1.70)
                Display                    7.35∗∗∗       8.00∗∗∗        7.26∗∗∗      9.54∗∗∗
                                            (2.26)        (2.29)         (1.95)       (2.20)
                Price elasticity             1.37          1.65           1.33          1.63
                SE(Price elasticity)        0.134         0.185          0.146        0.166
                N                         2,219,344     2,219,344      2,614,216   2,614,216

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (19). All regressions include quarter of sample indicators
and a household-by-county fixed effect. Column 1 presents the primary instrumental variables estimates,
except with quantity purchased in levels instead of natural logs. Observations are weighted for national
representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by county, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically
significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                      102
Online Appendix                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


             Table A9: Alternative Estimates of Price and Income Elasticities

                                          (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                   Employment         Drop        Drop       Income
                                       Primary       controls        feature     display     control        OLS
 ln(Average price/liter)               -1.373∗∗∗    -1.372∗∗∗      -1.645∗∗∗    -1.390∗∗∗   -1.372∗∗∗    -0.714∗∗∗
                                         (0.089)      (0.089)        (0.089)     (0.089)     (0.089)       (0.004)
 ln(County income)                      0.204∗∗∗     0.206∗∗∗       0.223∗∗∗    0.205∗∗∗    0.205∗∗∗       0.121∗
                                         (0.073)      (0.073)        (0.078)     (0.073)     (0.073)       (0.066)
 Feature                                1.154∗∗∗     1.154∗∗∗                   1.180∗∗∗    1.157∗∗∗      1.399∗∗∗
                                         (0.065)      (0.065)                    (0.065)     (0.064)       (0.060)
 Display                                0.503∗∗∗     0.504∗∗∗       0.668∗∗∗                0.500∗∗∗      0.547∗∗∗
                                         (0.089)      (0.089)        (0.094)                 (0.089)       (0.084)
 1(Employed)                                           0.001
                                                      (0.032)
 Weekly work hours                                     -0.001
                                                      (0.001)
 Year × ln(County mean income)                                                               -0.009∗
                                                                                             (0.005)
 Kleibergen-Paap first stage F stat      272.3         271.7         313.6        272.3       271.5
 N                                     2,219,344     2,219,344     2,219,344    2,219,344   2,219,344   2,219,344

Notes: Column 1 reproduces the primary instrumental variables estimates of Equation (19) from column 2
of Table 3, while the other columns present alternative estimates. All regressions include quarter of sample
indicators and household-by-county fixed effects. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.
Robust standard errors, clustered by county, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90,
95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                     103
Online Appendix                                                                                                     Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


K.B     Measuring Bias

      Figure A5: Linearity of Relationship Between Consumption and Bias Proxies

                                             Homescan: Nutrition Knowledge                                  Homescan: Self-Control


                                3.7




                                                                                              4
                                                                                        3.4 3.6 3.8
                     3.4 3.5 3.6
                        ln(Liters)




                                                                                          ln(Liters)
                                                                                              3.2
                                3.3




                                             .4    .5        .6      .7       .8   .9                  .2     .4    .6       .8    1   1.2
                                                        Nutrition knowledge                                         Self-control


                                             PanelViews: Nutrition Knowledge                                PanelViews: Self-Control




                                                                                              4
                     2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3




                                                                                        2.5 3 3.5
                             ln(Liters)




                                                                                         ln(Liters)
                                                                                              2
                                             .4    .5        .6      .7       .8   .9                  .2     .4     .6       .8   1   1.2
                                                        Nutrition knowledge                                         Self-control




Notes: This figure presents binned scatterplots of the relationship between natural log of SSB consumption
and bias proxies, residual of the other variables in Equation (24). In the top two panels, the dependent
variable is the natural log of purchases per adult equivalent in the most recent year that the household was
in Homescan. In the bottom two panels, the dependent variable is natural log of PanelViews self-reported
consumption.




                                                                                    104
Online Appendix                                                      Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Table A10: Regressions of Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption on Bias Proxies
and Their Interaction

                                                                (1)          (2)
                                                           Homescan     PanelViews
                      Nutrition knowledge                     -0.167       0.400∗
                                                             (0.221)       (0.241)
                      Self-control                            -0.186     -0.738∗∗∗
                                                             (0.195)       (0.216)
                      Nutrition knowledge × self-control   -0.940∗∗∗     -1.815∗∗∗
                                                             (0.279)       (0.306)
                      Taste for soda                        0.558∗∗∗     1.117∗∗∗
                                                             (0.044)       (0.059)
                      Health importance                    -0.257∗∗∗     -0.405∗∗∗
                                                             (0.075)       (0.104)
                      ln(Household income)                  -0.046∗∗     -0.097∗∗∗
                                                             (0.018)       (0.027)
                      ln(Years education)                  -0.702∗∗∗      -0.374∗∗
                                                             (0.101)       (0.149)
                      Other beverage tastes                     Yes          Yes
                      Other demographics                        Yes          Yes
                      County indicators                         Yes          Yes
                      Self-control 2SLS                         No           No
                      R2                                       0.285        0.415
                      N                                      18,568        20,640

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (24). The estimates replicate column 1 of Tables 5 and A7,
adding the interaction between nutrition knowledge and self-control. Observations are weighted for national
representativeness. Robust standard errors are in parentheses, clustered by household in column 2. *, **,
***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.




                                                   105
Online Appendix                                                         Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Table A11: Regressions of Sugar-Sweetened Beverage Consumption on Primary Shop-
per’s Bias Proxies

                                     (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)
       Nutrition knowledge       -0.755∗∗∗   -1.055∗∗∗   -0.814∗∗∗   -0.747∗∗∗   -0.900∗∗∗    -0.575∗∗∗
                                   (0.079)    (0.076)      (0.079)    (0.072)     (0.080)       (0.076)
       Self-control              -0.682∗∗∗   -0.925∗∗∗   -0.657∗∗∗   -0.687∗∗∗                -1.160∗∗∗
                                   (0.037)    (0.035)      (0.037)    (0.035)                   (0.060)
       Taste for soda             0.424∗∗∗                0.421∗∗∗   0.422∗∗∗    0.652∗∗∗      0.316∗∗∗
                                   (0.036)                 (0.037)    (0.035)     (0.034)       (0.037)
       Health importance         -0.234∗∗∗                -0.147∗∗   -0.225∗∗∗   -0.345∗∗∗     -0.133∗∗
                                   (0.065)                 (0.066)    (0.063)     (0.066)       (0.063)
       ln(Household income)       -0.040∗∗               -0.065∗∗∗   -0.065∗∗∗   -0.053∗∗∗    -0.049∗∗∗
                                   (0.019)                 (0.017)    (0.018)     (0.019)       (0.018)
       ln(Years education)       -0.863∗∗∗               -0.860∗∗∗   -1.022∗∗∗   -0.878∗∗∗    -0.810∗∗∗
                                   (0.102)                 (0.102)    (0.099)     (0.103)       (0.097)
       Other beverage tastes         Yes        No           Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
       Other demographics            Yes        Yes          No         Yes         Yes           Yes
       County indicators             Yes        Yes          Yes        No          Yes           Yes
       Self-control 2SLS             No         No           No         No          No            Yes
       R2                           0.270      0.235        0.260      0.144       0.250         0.270
       N                           18,568     18,568       18,568     18,568      18,568        18,568

Notes: This table presents estimates of Equation (24). Data are at the household level, and the dependent
variable is the natural log of SSB purchases per adult equivalent in the most recent year that the household
was in Homescan. This table parallels Table 5, except using the bias proxies and preferences for the primary
shopper, instead of the average across all household heads. Column 6 corrects for measurement error in self-
control using two-sample 2SLS, with standard errors calculated per Chodorow-Reich and Wieland (2016).
Taste for soda is the response to the question, “Leaving aside any health or nutrition considerations, how
much would you say you like the taste and generally enjoy drinking [Regular soft drinks (soda pop)]?”
“Other beverage tastes” are the responses to parallel questions for other beverages. Health importance
is the response to the question, “In general, how important is it to you to stay healthy, for example by
maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes and heart disease, etc.?” Responses to each question were
originally on a scale from 0 to 10, which we rescale to between 0 and 1. “Other demographics” are natural log
of age, race, an indicator for the presence of children, household size in adult equivalents, employment status,
and weekly work hours. Observations are weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 90, 95, and 99 percent confidence, respectively.


L     Equivalent Variation and Welfare Calculations
We can use the sufficient statistics discussed in Section II to approximate the change in welfare
from the introduction of a sin tax. The net change in welfare is equal to the equivalent variation
(measured under normative utility) of the sin tax, weighted by each consumer’s welfare weight,
plus the increase in tax revenues and externality reductions, measured in terms of public funds.
We consider each in turn.
    Equivalent variation (EV) for a consumer of type θ is defined as the change in wealth which
would alter normative utility by the same amount as the introduction of a given tax t. For a
small tax, this is equal to decision utility EV (the wealth change such that the consumer would
express indifference between it and the introduction of the tax t) plus the change in welfare due



                                                       106
Online Appendix                                                           Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


to internalities. We log-linearize demand around the (observed) no-tax equilibrium t = 0, so the
                                                                                 −ζ̄ c (z)
demand for s from z-earners under a tax t is approximated by ŝ(z, t) = s̄(z) p+t p          , and
                                                 1
decision utility EV is approximated by        1−ζ c (θ)   ((p + t)ŝ(z, t) − ps̄(z)). The welfare change due to
internalities is equal to γ(θ) · (ŝ(z, t) − s̄(z)). The sum of these two figures gives the money-metric
change in welfare for consumers earning z. Weighting this money-metric change by social marginal
welfare weights (net of income effects, i.e., ĝ(z)), these welfare changes can be aggregated with the
value of resulting tax revenues and reduced externalities (both measured in units of public funds)
to approximate the total change in welfare from the tax, accounting for distributional concerns.
       We can compute these gains for the case of the SSB tax using the estimates presented in Section
IV. Our baseline optimal tax generates an estimated increase in social welfare of $7.86 per adult
equivalent consumer per year, or about $2.4 billion in aggregate across the U.S. .38 Figure 9 plots
the decomposition of these gains into the four component parts, for each of the income bins reported
in Nielsen, assuming that tax revenues and externality reductions are distributed evenly across the
population. Figure A6 plots analogous results using the specification based on self-reported SSB
consumption from PanelViews, for which we estimate an annual increase in social welfare of $21.86
per person, or about $6.8 billion across population. Finally, if one did not believe consumers were
biased (i.e., if internalities were zero, as in the “No internality” specification in Table 7), then the
lower optimal tax would generate an increase in social welfare of $0.8 per person year, or $247
million nationally. (This decomposition is displayed in Figure A7.)
       One may also be interested in the welfare gains which would be realized under various suboptimal
SSB tax policies. We consider two in particular. First, consider the modal policy among U.S. cities
which have passed SSB taxes: a tax of one cent per ounce. Under our baseline parameter estimates,
this lower-than-optimal tax would generate a welfare gain of $7.4 per person, or $2.3 billion across
the population—implying that the loss from this sub-optimal policy rather than the optimum is
approximately $100 million annually. Second, consider a policy maker who mistakenly believes
consumers are unbiased and who therefore implements the “No internality” optimal tax estimate
from Table 7, when in fact our estimates of bias are accurate. The resulting welfare gains from this
suboptimal tax are only $4.52 per person per year, or $1.4 billion across the population, implying a
loss of nearly $1 billion per year relative to the optimal tax. These results emphasize the importance
of accounting for behavioral biases when designing the optimal policy.
  38
    This calculation assumes 311 million adult equivalents in the U.S., based on a U.S. population of 326 million,
22.8% of whom are under 18, with an average recommended caloric intake equal to 80% of that for adults.




                                                          107
Online Appendix                                                              Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


    Figure A6: Welfare Consequences of Optimal SSB Tax Using PanelViews Data


                                      150



                                      100
       Dollars per capita, annually




                                       50



                                        0



                                      -50


                                                                                Externality correction
                                      -100                                      Redistributed Revenues
                                                                                Internality Correction
                                                                                Decision utility EV
                                                                                Total
                                      -150
                                             $5k   $15k $25k $35k $45k $55k $65k $85k $125k
                                                               Income bin

Notes: This figure is identical to Figure 9, except the optimal tax is computed using self-reported SSB
consumption from the PanelViews survey, rather than Homescan data. The figure plots the decomposition
of welfare changes resulting from the baseline optimal sugar-sweetened beverage tax, across income bins.
“Redistributed revenues” and “Externality correction” are money-metric values, assumed to be distributed
equally across the income distribution. “Internality correction” is the increase in (money-metric) welfare
due to the change in consumption resulting from the tax, at each income level. “Decision utility EV” is the
value dy such that consumers are indifferent between a change in net income dy and the introduction of the
optimal SSB tax.




                                                                 108
Online Appendix                                                              Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


  Figure A7: Welfare Consequences of Optimal SSB Tax if Consumers Are Unbiased


                                       15



                                       10
        Dollars per capita, annually




                                         5



                                         0



                                        -5


                                                                                Externality correction
                                       -10                                      Redistributed Revenues
                                                                                Internality Correction
                                                                                Decision utility EV
                                                                                Total
                                       -15
                                             $5k   $15k $25k $35k $45k $55k $65k $85k $125k
                                                               Income bin

Notes: This figure is identical to Figure 9, except the optimal tax and welfare changes are computed assuming
consumers are unbiased (i.e., internalities are zero). The figure plots the decomposition of welfare changes
resulting from the baseline optimal sugar-sweetened beverage tax, across income bins. “Redistributed rev-
enues” and “Externality correction” are money-metric values, assumed to be distributed equally across the
income distribution. “Internality correction” is the increase in (money-metric) welfare due to the change in
consumption resulting from the tax, at each income level. “Decision utility EV” is the value dy such that
consumers are indifferent between a change in net income dy and the introduction of the optimal SSB tax.



M      Structural Simulations of Optimal SSB Tax
This appendix presents the optimal estimated SSB tax using structural models calibrated to the
parameters estimated in Section III. This also provides a robustness test of the stability of the
sufficient statistic policy estimates reported in Table 7.




                                                                 109
Online Appendix                                                                     Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


M.A      Functional Form Specifications
For the simulations to follow, we employ the following functional form for utility:
                                                  SSB subutility        Effort cost
                                                    z }| {       z }| {
                               U (c, s, z; θ) = c + v(s, c, θ) − Ψ (z/w(θ))                                             (142)
                               V (c, s, z; θ) = c + v(s, c, θ) − Ψ (z/w(θ)) − γ̃(θ)s                                    (143)

We consider two different specifications for v(s, c, θ), to explore the robustness of these results to
particular assumptions about functional forms. The first is

                                                                     s1−k(θ)
                                                                               
                                       v(s, c, θ) = a(c)b(θ)                        .                                   (144)
                                                                    1 − k(θ)

An attractive feature of this functional form is that there is type-specific constant compensated price elasticity
of demand, equal to ζ c (θ) = 1/k(θ). (This may vary across types.) However a disadvantage of it is that
it doesn’t technically accommodate a strict present bias interpretation, since the bias γ̃ cannot be mapped
into a specific value of β. To allow for this possibility, we employ a different functional form for our second
specification:

                                                                s1−k(θ)
                                                                         
                                   v(s, c, θ) = a(c)b(θ)                      − ι(θ)s.                                  (145)
                                                               1 − k(θ)
Then ι(θ) + γ̃(θ) can be interpreted as the long run money-metric health costs of SSB consumption, of which
                                                                                  ι(θ)
the present biased agent internalizes ι(θ), accounting for only a share β(θ) = ι(θ)+γ̃(θ) , when making consump-
tion decisions. (This second functional form does not feature constant compensated elasticities—instead,
the elasticity rises with price.)
    In both specifications, the product a(c)b(θ) controls the level of soda consumption, and can
be calibrated nonparametrically using the observed cross-income profile of SSB consumption. The
components a(c) and b(θ) control whether that cross-sectional variation is driven by income effects
or preference heterogeneity, respectively. We can nonparametrically calibrate a(c) to generate
the income elasticity estimated from our data, and we attribute the residual cross-sectional SSB
variation to preference heterogeneity.
    The term γ̃(θ) controls the marginal internality from SSB consumption. If some SSB variation is
due to income effects (non-constant a(c)), then normative utility in Equation (143) is not quasilinear
                                                                                Us0         0
in numeraire consumption, and so γ̃(θ) is not exactly equal to                  Uc0     − VVs0 . Therefore we use the “tilde”
                                                                                           c
notation to distinguish this structural internality parameter from the equilibrium money metric
internality, which we will continue to denote γ.
    We assume isoelastic disutility of labor effort, Ψ(`) =                     1      (1+1/ζzc ) ,   where ζzc is the Frisch
                                                                              1+1/ζzc `
elasticity of labor supply, which is assumed to be homogeneous conditional on income.
    To compute the optimal SSB tax, we first calibrate the parameters in Equations (142) and (143)
to match the patterns of SSB consumption documented in Section III, and other data from the
U.S. economy described below. We then use a numerical solver to compute the optimal tax policies
under those parameter values.



                                                       110
Online Appendix                                                           Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


M.B       Calibration Procedure and Data Sources
We draw from Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018) to calibrate the pre- and post-tax income distribu-
tions for the United States. We use their reported distribution for 2014, which includes percentiles
1 to 99, and much finer partitions within the 99th percentile. Each of these points in the income
distribution is treated as an individual point in a discretized ability grid for the purposes of simula-
tion.39 Thus in the simulations there is a one-to-one mapping between type θ and ability w(θ). We
also use these distributions to calibrate effective marginal tax rates in the U.S. status quo, computed
         dyus
as 1 −   dzus ,   where zus and yus represent the reported pre- and post-tax income distributions.40
    To encode a preference for redistribution, we assume type-specific Pareto weights given by
α(θ) = yus (θ)−ν , where ν controls the degree of inequality aversion. Following Saez (2002b), we
use a baseline value of ν = 1, approximately corresponding to the weights which would arise under
logarithmic utility from consumption, and we report alternative specifications with ν = 0.25 and
ν = 4. We compute these weights using the status quo U.S. net income distribution, and they are
held fixed during simulations in order to isolate the effects of other model parameters on optimal
taxes without endogenously changing distributional motives.
    We calibrate the status quo level of SSB consumption using the consumption estimates across
incomes, as shown in Figure A2.41 To interpolate consumption across the full ability distribution in
our simulations, we find the percentile in our income grid which corresponds to each income point
in Figure A2, and we then interpolate (and extrapolate) SSB consumption linearly across income
percentiles in our ability grid.
    The price elasticity of SSB demand, ζ c (θ), is calibrated to match the estimates described in
Section III.B. We calibrate the uncompensated SSB elasticity and the SSB income effect as a linear
functions of net income, using the interaction terms for elasticity and income effects with household
reported in Column (5) of Table A4. Since the interaction terms are estimated to be negative in
our data, we place floors on these values (0.5 for the uncompensated elasticity, and 0 for the income
effect) to avoid values inconsistent with theory at high incomes. We then use these calibrated values
to compute the compensated elasticity ζ c (θ) at each income using the Slutsky equation.
    In the second structural specification, we must also calibrate the health costs ι(θ) to which
the present-biased agent does attend. We calibrate those costs using estimates of the expected
health costs from SSB consumption. Long et al. (2015) estimate the impact of SSB consumption
on quality-adjusted life years (QALY) by tracing its impact on the likelihood of suffering a stroke,
ischemic heart disease, hypertensive heart disease, diabetes mellitus, osteoarthritis, postmenopausal
breast cancer, colon cancer, endometrial cancer, and kidney cancer. That paper estimates that a
permanent 20% reduction in SSB consumption generates an average increase of 0.00278 QALYs per
   39
      We drop the bottom four percentiles of the distribution, which have reported incomes below $500, often due to
reported business or farm losses, since this is inconsistent with the calibrated profile of soda consumption.
   40
      An alternative approach would be to use estimated effective marginal tax reported, for example from the NBER
TAXSIM model or as computed by CBO. However since these estimates often omit some types of taxes, and fail
to include many types of benefits, we have chosen to use the more comprehensive notion of taxes and benefits from
Piketty, Saez, and Zucman (2018).
   41
      We use Homescan consumption as our baseline, though we also report results using self-reported consumption
from our PanelViews survey below.


                                                       111
Online Appendix                                                              Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


person in the first ten years. A “back of the envelope” calculation suggests this equates to a total
increase of 0.0021 QALYs per person from a one-year SSB reduction of 20%.42 This translates to
$105 per person using the commonly used conservative estimate of $50,000 for the value of a QALY
(Hirth et al., 2000), corresponding to a marginal health cost of $0.10 per ounce of SSB consumed.43
Although these marginal health costs are likely to be heterogeneous in practice, for purposes of this
calibration we assume they are constant across the population, so that ι(θ) + γ̃(θ) = $0.10 per ounce
for all consumers. Using our estimates of bias from Section III.D, this implies that 5% to 15% of health costs
are uninternalized due to present bias and/or incorrect beliefs.
       We jointly calibrate the functions a(c) and b(θ) nonparametrically to match both the level of
SSB consumption (across the income distribution) and the estimated SSB income elasticity, using
the following procedure. We first assume a0 (c) = 0, and we calibrate the product a(c)b(θ) at each
point in the income distribution—without yet worrying about the decomposition into separate
terms—to match the observed schedule of SSB consumption via the first-order condition for SSB
consumption. We then compute a path of a0 (c) which is consistent with our estimated SSB income
elasticities, and we numerically integrate to find a(c), which in turn identifies b(θ) at each ability
gridpoint. Finally, we compute the implied ability distribution w(θ) which generates the observed
income distribution. We then repeat this procedure with the new a0 (c) (which affects the FOC for
SSB demand) and we iterate to convergence. In this manner, we find a non-parametric schedule of
a(c) and b(θ) which is consistent with both the level of estimated soda consumption at each income,
and with the estimated SSB income elasticities in our data. During simulations, we compute the
nonparametric function a(c) using linear interpolation (extrapolation) over log(c).
       For estimates which assume an externality cost from SSB consumption, we use a value of 0.85
cents per ounce, as calculated in Section III.E.

M.C        Simulation Results
Our structural model estimates for the optimal SSB tax are presented in Table A12. As in Table
7, for each specification we report the optimal SSB tax under two income tax regimes. First, we
compute the optimal SSB tax holding fixed the income tax at the current status quo, under the
assumption that SSB tax revenues are distributed equally across all consumers as a lump-sum
payment. Second, we jointly solve for the optimal income tax, which may be quite different from
the U.S. status quo. The former exercise is most relevant if the SSB tax is viewed as an isolated
policy over which policymakers much make choices, independent of overall income tax reforms. The
  42
      The simulated experiment in Long et al. (2015) is a 20% permanent reduction of SSB consumption, whereas we
are interested in the QALY cost of each SSB consumed. To reach this, we first compute the approximate total QALYs
gained from reducing SSB consumption for a single year. If the 10-year total of 0.00278 QALYs were composed of 10
years of exposure to the effects of a 20% reduction during year 1, 9 years of exposure from the reduction during year
2, etc., then the first year’s reduction would account for 10/55 = 0.18 of the 10 year total, or 0.00051 QALYs. This
accounts only for the QALY difference in the first 10 years. If the per-year effect were the same in the ensuing years
(a conservative assumption, given that health costs typically compound later in life), then this ten-year effect should
be multiplied by four, given a median US age of 38 and life expectancy of 78. This yields a total approximate effect
of 0.0021 QALYs for a one-year 20% SSB reduction.
   43
      Long et al.’s (2015) estimates imply that on average, people consume 5475 oz of SSBs per year which implies
that a 20% reduction would reduce consumption by 1095 oz.


                                                         112
Online Appendix                                                     Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


latter is more relevant as an illustration of the theoretical results in Section II, which follow the
tradition in the optimal taxation literature of jointly characterizing optimal income and commodity
taxes. To illustrate the difference between these two regimes, Figure A8 plots the mapping between
pre- vs. post-tax income in the U.S. status quo and under the simulated optimal income tax.

M.C.1     The Optimal Sweetened Beverage Tax

Table A12 computes estimates for each of the specifications from Table 7 using this structural model.
The values in the first column (under the prevailing income tax) are quantitatively very close to the
sufficient statistics computations from Table 7. The values in the second column (computed under
the optimal income tax) generate the same qualitative patterns, but they are generally lower than
the values in Table 7 under the optimal income tax. This is driven primarily by the endogenous
change in SSB consumption generated by the income tax reform in the structural model. Recall
that the sufficient statistics formula (under the optimal income tax) is computed using the observed
profile of soda consumption, whereas in the structural model, the tax is computed accounting to
the change in consumption due to the income tax reform. The optimal income tax substantially
raises the net income of the lowest earning households (see Figure A8) and, since SSB income
effects are positive, this raises the amount of SSB consumption among low earners. Therefore, the
                            ds
demand response to a tax,   dt ,   is substantially larger in magnitude at low incomes in the structural
model than is accounted for in the sufficient statistics calculation, and as a result, bias correction
progressivity σ is accordingly higher in the structural model, implying a larger corrective motive
and hence a higher optimal tax.

M.C.2     How the Optimal Internality-Correcting Tax Varies with Elasticity and Bias

The rows in Table A12 are intended to represent realistic alternative specifications for the purpose
of understanding the robustness of our estimates. However, one might also wish to understand
how more extreme variations in parameters affect the optimal sin tax. In particular, the analytic
formulas in Section II emphasize the role of bias and elasticity of demand in determining the optimal
tax. In order to illustrate those insights quantitatively, Figure A9 plots the optimal sin tax across
a range of values of bias and elasticities of demand. To isolate the role of the bias and elasticity of
demand, the simulations in this figure assume constant values of each parameter across the income
distribution (akin to row 10 in Table A12), and zero externality cost. As a result, the optimal tax
in the absence of distributional concerns (i.e., the optimal Pigouvian tax) lies on the 45-degree line,
and departures from that line illustrate the effect of redistributive concerns on the optimal sin tax.
The baseline (average) value of bias is represented in the figure by the vertical dashed line, and the
baseline (average) demand elasticity is plotted by the red line. All values are computed holding
fixed the status quo U.S. income tax.
   Figure A9 illustrates an important theoretical insight from Section II. In particular, the regres-
sivity costs term (which reduces the optimal SSB tax) rises with the demand elasticity. Quantita-
tively, these costs are modest for elasticities in the range estimated in our data, and the optimal SSB

                                                    113
Online Appendix                                                 Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


tax lies close to (although distinctly below) the 45 degree line representing the optimal Pigouvian
tax. However at lower elasticity values, regressivity costs become large. Indeed at a low elasticity
value of 0.25, the optimal SSB tax is in fact a subsidy for the average bias computed in our data.
The Optimal SSB Tax Under Constrained Targeted Revenue Recycling




                                                114
Online Appendix                                                        Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


           Table A12: Simulation Results: Optimal SSB Tax (Cents Per Ounce)


                                                               Existing income tax    Optimal income tax
  1. Baseline                                                          1.37                  0.93
  2. Pigouvian (no redistributive motive)                              1.73                    -
  3. Weaker redistributive preferences                                 1.63                  1.52
  4. Stronger redistributive preferences                               0.98                 -0.10
  5. Redistributive preferences rationalize U.S. income tax            1.70                  1.71
  6. Higher demand elasticity (ζ c (θ) = 2)                            1.53                  1.23
  7. Lower demand elasticity (ζ c (θ) = 1)                             1.15                  0.50
  8. Constant bias and elasticity                                      1.30                  0.85
  9. Pure preference heterogeneity                                     1.33                  1.33
  10. Pure income effects                                              1.38                  1.79
  11. Measurement error correction for self control                    1.66                  1.23
  12. Internality from knowledge only                                  0.96                  0.51
  13. Self control bias set to 50% of estimated value                  1.12                  0.67
  14. Self control bias set to 200% of estimated value                 1.89                  1.46
  15. No internality                                                   0.37                 -0.09
  16. No corrective motive                                            -0.39                 -0.77
  17. Self-reported SSB consumption                                    2.05                  1.64
                                 (a) Specification 1 (Constant Elasticity)

                                                               Existing income tax    Optimal income tax
  1. Baseline                                                          1.50                  1.11
  2. Pigouvian (no redistributive motive)                              1.75                    -
  3. Weaker redistributive preferences                                 1.68                  1.60
  4. Stronger redistributive preferences                               1.18                 -0.12
  5. Redistributive preferences rationalize U.S. income tax            1.73                  1.74
  6. Higher demand elasticity (ζ c (θ) = 2)                            1.62                  1.39
  7. Lower demand elasticity (ζ c (θ) = 1)                             1.22                  0.58
  8. Constant bias and elasticity                                      1.42                  1.01
  9. Pure preference heterogeneity                                     1.44                  1.44
  10. Pure income effects                                              1.48                  1.80
  11. Measurement error correction for self control                    1.80                  1.45
  12. Internality from knowledge only                                  1.05                  0.61
  13. Self control bias set to 50% of estimated value                  1.22                  0.80
  14. Self control bias set to 200% of estimated value                 2.05                  1.72
  15. No internality                                                   0.41                 -0.10
  16. No corrective motive                                            -0.42                 -0.91
  17. Self-reported SSB consumption                                    2.22                  1.92
                    (b) Specification 2 (Partially Internalized Linear Health Costs)
Notes: This table reports the optimal tax estimates using the calibrated structural models. Panel (a) uses a
structural model with constant compensated elasticity of demand for SSBs. Panel (b) uses a specification in
which a portion of linear health costs are internalized. In both panels, the first column displays the optimal
SSB tax when the income tax is held fixed at the U.S. status quo; the second column displays the optimal
SSB tax when the simulations also solve for the optimal income tax.




                                                     115
Online Appendix                                                                          Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Figure A8: Simulations: Status Quo Income Tax and Optimal Income Tax in Baseline
Specification


                                   150
                                             US status quo (Piketty et al. 2018)
                                             Optimal income tax when allowed to adjust
        Post-tax income ($1000s)




                                   100




                                    50




                                     0
                                         0                  50                      100                     150
                                                            Pre-tax income ($1000s)

Notes: This figure compares the simulated optimal income tax to the status quo income tax in the U.S.




                                                                       116
Online Appendix                                                                                     Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Figure A9: Optimal Internality-Correcting Tax Across Values of Bias and Elasticities


                                              5
                                                       data1
                                                       data2
                                              4        No redistributive motives (45° line)
          Optimal SSB tax (cents per ounce)



                                                       SSB demand elasticity = 3
                                                       SSB demand elasticity = 1.22 (avg in data)
                                              3        SSB demand elasticity = 0.5
                                                       SSB demand elasticity = 0.25

                                              2


                                              1


                                              0


                                              -1                     Average estimated internality


                                              -2
                                                   0   0.5       1        1.5       2        2.5       3       3.5      4
                                                              Uninternalized harm (cents per ounce)

Notes: This figure plots the simulated optimal SSB tax in cents per ounce across values of internality bias
(in cents per ounce) for different values of the SSB price elasticity of demand. To illustrate the effects
parameters on the optimal internality-correcting tax, these simulations assume zero externality.




                                                                                 117
Online Appendix                                                                                         Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky


Figure A10: Optimal SSB Tax for Different Marginal Social Values of SSB Tax Revenues




                                              7


                                              6
          Optimal SSB tax (cents per ounce)




                                              5


                                              4
                                                                           revenues targeted to poorest 10%

                                              3


                                              2

                                                               revenues distributed lump-sum
                                              1


                                              0
                                                  0        1       2        3       4          5    6         7      8      9
                                                      Social value of SSB tax revenues (relative to lump-sum grant)

Notes: This figure shows how the optimal SSB tax varies depending on the social usefulness of SSB tax
revenues. A value of one on the horizontal axis implies that SSB tax revenues are valued the same as
marginal funds raised via the income tax.




                                                                                      118
