                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 REPUTATION INFLATION

                                      Apostolos Filippas
                                        John J. Horton
                                      Joseph M. Golden

                                      Working Paper 25857
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25857


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2019




Author contact information and code are currently or will be available at http://www.john-
josephhorton.com. Thanks to Richard Zeckhauser, Foster Provost, Andrey Fradkin, David Holtz,
Ramesh Johari, Nico Lacetra, Xiao Ma, and Aaron Sojourner for very helpful comments and
suggestions. We have not received any funding for this work. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Apostolos Filippas, John J. Horton, and Joseph M. Golden. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reputation Inflation
Apostolos Filippas, John J. Horton, and Joseph M. Golden
NBER Working Paper No. 25857
May 2019
JEL No. D02,D47

                                           ABSTRACT

A solution to marketplace information asymmetries is to have trading partners publicly rate each
other post-transaction. Many have shown that these ratings are effective; we show that their
effectiveness deteriorates over time. The problem is that ratings are prone to inflation, with raters
feeling pressure to leave “above average” ratings, which in turn pushes the average higher. This
pressure stems from raters’ desire to not harm the rated seller. As the potential to harm is what
makes ratings effective, reputation systems, as currently designed, sow the seeds of their own
irrelevance.

Apostolos Filippas                                Joseph M. Golden
Gabelli School of Business                        Collage.com
Fordham University                                jgolden9@gmail.com
140 W 62nd Street
New York, NY 10023
apostolosfilippas@gmail.com

John J. Horton
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
john.joseph.horton@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Scores of various kinds—credit scores, school grades, restaurant and film “star” reviews,
restaurant hygiene scores, Better Business Bureau ratings—have long been important sources
of information for market participants. A large literature documents the economic impor-
tance of such scores (Resnick et al., 2000; Jin and Leslie, 2003; Resnick et al., 2006; Mayzlin
et al., 2014; Ghose et al., 2014; Luca, 2016; Luca and Zervas, 2016). As more of economic and
social life has become computer-mediated, opportunities to generate and apply new kinds
of scores—particularly in marketplace contexts—have proliferated (Dellarocas, 2003), as has
the number of individuals and businesses subject to these “reputation systems” (Levin, 2011;
Farrell and Greig, 2016; Hall and Krueger, Forthcoming; Katz and Krueger, 2016).1 Design-
ing effective reputation systems and understanding their implications for online marketplaces
has become a first-order question in the digital economy.
    In online marketplaces, “reputations” are typically calculated from the numerical feed-
back scores left by past trading partners. As many have noted, the distribution of feedback
scores in various online marketplaces seems implausibly rosy.2 For example, the median seller
on eBay has a score of 100% positive feedback ratings, and the tenth percentile is 98.21%
positive feedback ratings (Nosko and Tadelis, 2015). On Uber and Lyft, it is widely known
that anything less than 5 stars is considered “bad” feedback: Athey et al. (2018) find that
nearly 90% of UberX Chicago trips in early 2017 had a perfect 5 star rating.
    Of course, there is no ground truth that tells us what the distribution of scores in some
market “should” look like at a moment in time. However, if we look at how the distribu-
tion of scores changes over time, we can potentially learn more about what the reputation
system is measuring. If feedback scores are rising, there are at least two distinct—but not
mutually exclusive—reasons: (1) raters are becoming more satisfied, or (2) raters are low-
ering their standards. This second possibility—giving higher scores despite not being more
satisfied—can be thought of as a kind of inflation.3 This “reputation inflation” erodes the
    1
     These kinds of online marketplaces are becoming increasingly consequential as they grow rapidly, making
their shortcomings consequential as well. Katz and Krueger (2016) find that the share of workers whose
main job is an alternative work arrangement—defined to include independent contractors and freelancers—
has increased from 10.7 percent in 2005, to almost 16 percent in 2015. A large part of this increase can
be attributed to employment in online platforms; Farrell and Greig (2016) show that participation in the
online platform economy among adults has risen from less than 0.2 percent in 2012, to 4.3 percent in 2016.
The same authors also find that the annual growth rate of workers receiving income from online platforms
exceeds 100 percent. Hall and Krueger (Forthcoming) report that more than 460,000 drivers were actively
participating on the Uber platform by the end of 2015.
   2
     A survey conducted by the PEW research center finds that while more than 80% of U.S. adults read
online reviews before purchasing an item, almost 50% believe that it is hard to assess the truthfulness of
these reviews (see http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/12/19/online-reviews).
   3
     This kind of inflation is similar to the conjecture about the increase in college grades—namely that stu-



                                                      2
comparability of feedback scores over time and reduces the informativeness of reputation
system—potentially making it completely uninformative.
    In this paper, we examine the reputation system of a large online labor market, focusing
on the evolution of average feedback scores over time and the causes for the dynamics
we observe. Mirroring findings from other marketplaces, we find that the distribution of
recent employer feedback for workers is highly top-censored, with an overwhelming majority
receiving perfect feedback.4 However, the distribution has not always been this skewed—the
fraction of workers receiving the highest possible rating of 5 stars went from 33% to 85% in
just 6 years. Feedback scores in four other online marketplaces for which we could obtain
longitudinal data exhibit a similar increase over time.
    To disentangle whether the increase is caused by raters becoming more satisfied or by
raters lowering standards, we use longitudinal data that include both the feedback scores
and an alternative measure of rater satisfaction. The idea is that if rater satisfaction is also
captured by an alternative channel that does not inflate—or inflates at a lower rate—then
we can exploit this difference to produce an estimate of inflation in the measure of interest.
    As a first alternative measure of rater satisfaction, we use information obtained by the
introduction of a parallel and experimental reputation system that asked employers to rate
workers “privately.” The private feedback was not conveyed to the rated workers, nor made
public to future would-be employers. At the same time, raters were still asked to give the
status quo “public” feedback, both written and numerical. The conjecture motivating the
platform’s private feedback feature was that raters would be more candid in private, willing to
give “bad” feedback if not exposed to the reflected cost from angry workers, and/or because
a bad report would not harm the worker. We find that average private feedback scores were
decreasing at the same time that average public feedback scores for the same transactions
were increasing. This difference is evidence that raters were lowering their standards for
public feedback rather than becoming more satisfied.
    The private feedback feature provides us with evidence that inflation occurs, but it does
not span the entire life time of the platform’s operations—we observe both ratings for 10
months. As a second alternative measure of rater satisfaction, we use the sentiment raters ex-
press in the written feedback that accompanies numerical scores. To capture this sentiment,
we fit a model that predicts numerical feedback from the text of written feedback. Critically,
the model is fit using feedback from a narrow window of time early in our data, allowing us
to learn the relationship that prevailed between written sentiment and numerical score when
dents and work is not getting better but rather the same quality of work now earns a higher grade (Babcock,
2010; Butcher et al., 2014).
   4
     We use the terms “employer” and “worker” for consistency with the literature, and not as a comment
on the legal relationship of the transacting parties.


                                                    3
the training feedback was created. Using the predictions, we can then decompose the growth
in average feedback scores into a component due to improvements in market “fundamentals”
(e.g., improved marketplace features, better cohorts of workers, lower prices, less picky em-
ployers, and so on) that increased rater satisfaction and is reflected in feedback text, and
the residual component that cannot be explained by improvements in fundamentals, and is
hence due to inflation.
    We find that although predicted feedback scores based on written feedback have increased
over time, presumably due to improvements in fundamentals, they have not increased nearly
as much as the actual, numerical feedback scores. Our estimates are robust across different
specifications and training sets, and suggest that more than 50% of the increase in scores
during a 6 year period was due to inflation, i.e., raters lowering their standards. Further, to
the extent that written feedback is also subject to inflation, our approach understates the
role of lower standards in explaining the rise in average feedback scores.
    As a less model-dependent approach to quantifying inflation from textual feedback, we
also compare the numerical feedback scores associated with the same common sentences
appearing in written feedback in two different time periods. We show that the same sentences
systematically have higher associated numerical feedback scores in the latter period. To the
extent that the association between the same sentences and rater satisfaction has not changed
between these time periods, reputation inflation is the culprit.
    We next turn to understanding the cause of reputation inflation, or why raters lower
standards over time. We will argue that the key to understanding reputation inflation is
appreciating the role of costs, and how these costs affect raters. A starting point is the di-
vergence between public and private feedback scores: 28.4% of those employers that privately
report that they would definitely not hire the same worker in the future, publicly assign them
4 or more stars out of 5. The reverse essentially never happens—raters giving good private
feedback and bad public feedback. The likely reason is that bad public feedback is costly in a
way that bad private feedback is not. In surveys conducted by the platform, some employers
report they fear retaliation, while others claim to not want to harm the rated individual, as
public feedback is consequential. Although rated workers on this platform cannot retaliate
by giving the employer bad feedback because it is simultaneously revealed (Bolton et al.,
2013), they can still complain, bad-mouth the rater, withhold future cooperation, and so on.
These “reflected” costs make giving “bad” feedback costlier to the rater than giving “good”
feedback.
    The cost of giving “bad” feedback could provide an explanation for why feedback scores
are higher than they would be if more employers reported truthfully. However, it cannot
by itself explain the dynamics of ever-higher scores we observe. Inflation requires the cost


                                              4
of leaving a given “bad” score to increase over time. We hypothesize this is precisely what
happens, with the same nominal feedback score (e.g., 2 “stars”) becoming costlier to the rated
worker over time, and hence costlier for the rater to give. In other words, the cause of inflation
is that what constitutes “bad” feedback—feedback that causes worse market outcome for
raters receiving that score—is endogenous, depending on the current distribution of feedback
scores, which in turn determines what inferences future buyers make from a score.
    To formally illustrate how reputations can inflate, we present a simple model of a mar-
ketplace with a reputation system. We show that there exists a unique, stable equilibrium
in which sellers only report “good” feedback, regardless of actual performance, and reputa-
tions are universally inflated, even when raters derive some benefit from telling the truth.5
While our observed data is consistent with our model, we report evidence from a platform
intervention that allows us to test the predictions of our model directly.
    After collecting private feedback for 10 months, the platform began releasing batched
aggregates of this private feedback score to would-be employers. With this aggregation,
private feedback remained quasi-anonymous, as the worker would not know ex post which
particular employer gave which feedback, unless every rater in the batch gave the lowest or
highest possible rating. However, with this private feedback now being publicly reported, the
private scores became consequential to workers, who now had incentives to try to encourage
good private feedback from employers. Further, to the extent that employers care about the
fate of workers and do not want to harm their future prospects—or believe that it could get
“back” to them—giving “bad” feedback suddenly had a cost, whereas before it had none.
    This private feedback quasi-experiment is useful for our purposes because it allows us
to test our model’s predictions, and assess its assumptions about the causes of reputation
inflation, namely that (1) the rater’s choice of what score to give is “strategic”—in the sense
that employers consider the likely costs and benefits to what they report—and as such, are
more candid in private because there are no reflected costs, and (2) when costs are introduced
by the switch to public revelation, inflation occurs. Of course, introducing a new, potentially
more informative feedback measure may have caused improvements in fundamentals, and
hence we still need to disentangle the effect of improvements in fundamentals and inflation
on the observed changes.
    We find that when the platform suddenly made private feedback scores public, private
feedback scores began increasing immediately but there was limited change in the sentiment
   5
    In our model, the degree of reputation inflation depends on how much cost the rated entity can impose
on the rater for “bad” feedback. This could explain why in less personal settings—such as consumers rating
products on Amazon or restaurants on Yelp—ratings are more spread out. In contrast, inflation is likely
more acute in highly “personal” settings, such as on peer-to-peer platforms (Sundararajan, 2013; Horton
and Zeckhauser, 2017).



                                                    5
of written feedback—the no-longer-private feedback became inflated, mirroring what we ob-
served with public feedback. Importantly, the fact that the sentiment of written feedback
remained more or less constant provides us with direct evidence that written feedback sen-
timent is an estimate of satisfaction that is less prone to inflation that numerical feedback.
Further, the results implicate the role of the reflected cost of “bad” feedback: when getting
“bad” feedback became costly to workers, it also became costly to give, and there was less
“bad” feedback. As “bad” feedback became scarce, what was mildly negative before became
very negative, starting the inflation process described in our model. Projecting forwards,
if the current rate of inflation persists, the average feedback would be the highest possible
score on the private feedback scale in about 7 years after the switch to publicly revealing
feedback.
    Our paper makes several contributions. Our key contribution is documenting the extent
of reputation inflation in a large online marketplace and identifying the likely cause of that
inflation. Our long-run, whole-system perspective is possible because we use data spanning
over a decade of the operations of the marketplace. We suspect the reputation inflation
problem is widespread, given that many online marketplaces share the same features as the
one we study in depth, and nearly all have those features that we show lead to inflation. Our
collection of longitudinal data from other platforms supports this view—in every marketplace
for which we could obtain data, we observe average feedback scores increasing, even though
each of these marketplaces do not allow “tit-for-tat” rating behavior (Bolton et al., 2013).
    While our paper is not the first to explain how reputations can be biased (Dellarocas
and Wood, 2008; Li and Hitt, 2008; Hu et al., 2017), we believe it is the first to show how
individually rational choices about what feedback to leave can push the market towards a
less informative equilibrium, and in the extreme, put the reputation system on an inexorable
path towards uninformativeness. Our analysis of the effects of public revelation of private
feedback shows the key role of costs to raters, but also shows that this cost is not so easily
diminished. The quasi-experimental revelation of private feedback demonstrates that simply
making feedback anonymous is not sufficient to counteract inflation. In our case, as long
as the feedback was consequential to workers, and employers know this, they find it costly
to give “bad” feedback, even if the rated individual cannot retaliate. This suggests an
inherent tension between ratings being consequential and ratings being informative. Whether
reputation systems can be designed that are less prone to inflation remains an open research
question.
    Our paper also makes a methodological contribution, showing how to quantify reputation
inflation in any marketplace where there are multiple measures of rater satisfaction. This
methodology may also complement recent approaches to measuring monetary inflation using


                                              6
online data (Cavallo and Rigobon, 2016), particularly when prices are paired with product
reviews—disentangling fundamentals and inflation in our context is conceptually similar to
addressing the quality bias in monetary inflation measures (Council et al., 2002; Diewert,
1998; Cavallo et al., 2018).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our empirical setting,
and documents that average feedback scores increase over time across a number of online
platforms. Section 3 shows that this increase is largely due to inflation, by employing private
and textual feedback information as alternative measures of rater satisfaction. A model for
reputation inflation is presented in Section 4, and its predictions are tested in Section 5
by employing the quasi-experimental revelation of private feedback data information. We
conclude in Section 6.


2    Empirical context
The primary setting for our study is a large online labor market. In online labor markets,
firms and individuals hire workers to perform tasks that can be done remotely, such as
computer programming, graphic design, data entry, and writing. Markets differ in their scope
and focus, but common services provided by the platform include maintaining job listings,
hosting user profile pages, arbitrating disputes, certifying worker skills and, importantly,
maintaining reputation systems (Horton, 2010).
    Online labor markets have offered a convenient setting for research, due to the excellent
measurement afforded in an online setting, and the ease with which field experiments can be
conducted (Horton et al., 2011). Much of the research has focused on the role of information
in employer decision-making (Pallais, 2013; Stanton and Thomas, 2015; Agrawal et al., 2016;
Chan and Wang, Forthcoming; Horton, 2017; Barach and Horton, 2017). There is also a
growing literature on online labor markets as a phenomenon and as a domain to study
online marketplaces more generally. This literature explores topics such as the nature of
the economic relationship created (Chen and Horton, 2016), the role of preference signaling
(Horton and Johari, 2015; Horton, Forthcoming), and the bidding process (Zheng et al.,
2016).
    One particular focus of the online marketplace literature has been reputation systems.
Cabral and Hortaçsu (2010) also find that eBay sellers condition their behavior on their
current reputations. Moreno and Terwiesch (2014) show how employers use reputation
information—and subsequently how workers adjust their bidding strategies in light of this
employer conditioning. The same authors also use written feedback as an alternative measure
of rater satisfaction, though they extract the sentiment using unsupervised learning tech-

                                              7
niques, in contrast to our supervised learning where the label is the associated numerical
feedback score. Dimoka et al. (2012) show that reputation is more important in labor than
in product markets, as a bad seller may by chance offer a great product, but a bad worker
almost certainly produces bad work. Reputation matters when hiring workers for fixed-price
contracts, while its role is diminished for contracts with hourly payments, presumably due
to the greater ease of monitoring for hourly contracts (Lin et al., Forthcoming). Kokkodis
and Ipeirotis (2015) explore the “transferability” of reputations, showing that reputation
scores can become more predictive of future performance when job category information is
incorporated.


2.1     Status quo reputation system
On the platform used in our study, when one party ends a contract—typically the employer—
both parties are prompted to give feedback.6 Employers are asked to give both written feed-
back, e.g., “Paul did excellent work—I’d work with him again” or “Ada is a great person
to work for—her instructions were always very clear,” and numerical feedback. The numer-
ical feedback is given on several weighted dimensions: “Skills” (20%), “Quality of Work”
(20%), “Availability” (15%), “Adherence to Schedule” (15%), “Communication” (15%) and
“Cooperation” (15%). On each dimension, the rater gives a score on a 1-5 scale.
    The scores are aggregated according to the dimension weights. A worker’s reputation
at a moment in time is the average of her scores on completed projects, weighted by the
dollar value of each project. On the worker profile, a lifetime score is shown as well as
a “last 6 months” score, which is more prominently displayed. Showing recent feedback
is presumably the platform’s response to the opportunism that becomes possible once a
employer or worker has obtained a high, hard-to-lower reputation (Aperjis and Johari, 2010;
Liu, 2011). Despite the aggregation of individual scores into a reputation, the entire feedback
“history” is available to interested parties for inspection. Workers can view the feedback
given to previous workers rated by that employer and the feedback received by an employer
from that same worker.
    The reputation system could be characterized as state-of-the-art for a bilateral system,
in the sense that direct tit-for-tat conditioning is not possible (Dellarocas, 2005; Bolton
et al., 2013; Fradkin et al., 2015). Both the employer and the worker have an initial 14
day “feedback period” in which to leave feedback. The platform does not reveal public
feedback immediately. Rather, the platform uses a “double-blind” process. If both parties
leave feedback during the feedback period, then the platform reveals both sets of feedback
   6
     We use the present tense here to describe the reputation system before the introduction of private
feedback.


                                                  8
simultaneously. If, instead, only one party leaves feedback, then the platform reveals it at
the end of the feedback period. Thus, neither party learns its own rating before leaving a
rating for the other party.
    Despite the reputation system features designed to prevent tit-for-tat feedback, there
is nothing to stop parties from engaging in “pre-play” communication about their inten-
tions. We have seen some evidence that feedback manipulation occurs, from forum and blog
postings, communication between employers and workers, and complaints directly to the
platform. It is generally difficult to directly assess the severity of this problem, partially
because communication about manipulation between the two parties may occur entirely in
private, such as via email. However, a survey of platform employers found that 20% had felt
pressure to leave more positive public feedback. Leaving feedback is not compulsory, though
it is strongly encouraged. These encouragements seem effective, in that over the history of
the platform, 81.8% of employers eligible to leave feedback have chosen to do so.


2.2       Feedback now and in the past
The distribution of employer-on-worker feedback scores in the market is highly right-skewed,
but has not always been that way—scores have increased sharply over time. Most of the
increase is explained by an increasing share of contracts receiving perfect feedback. These
features of the data can be seen in the three panels of Figure 1.
    Figure 1a depicts the histogram of public feedback scores for completed assignments
that received a feedback score from the employer, from January 1, 2014 to May 11, 2016,
for contracts worth more than $10.7 Public feedback scores are between 1 and 5 stars,
inclusive, and with increments of 0.25 stars. Each bar is labeled with the percentage of total
observations falling in that bin, and the red dashed line shows the cumulative number of
assignments with feedback less than or equal to the right limit of the bin it is above. We
observe that more than 80% of the evaluations fall in the 4.75 to 5.00 star bin (1, 339, 071
observations). The ratings distribution is slightly J-shaped (Hu et al., 2009), with some
weight in the lowest bin of observations rated with exactly 1 star. The average feedback
pooled over the whole sample shown in Figure 1a is 4.77.




  7
      We use this $10 restriction throughout the paper to remove mistaken, trial, and erroneous transactions.


                                                      9
                          Figure 1: Employer-on-worker feedback characteristics in an online marketplace
                           (a) Distribution of feedback scores for the period January 1, 2014 to May 11, 2016.

                     100%                                                                                                                 82.8%
Percentage




                         75%

                         50%

                         25%
                                0.9% 0.1% 0.2% 0.2% 0.3% 0.3% 0.3% 0.4% 1.1% 0.6% 0.7% 0.9% 2.8% 1.8% 2.5% 4.3%
                         0%
                                       1]

                                       5]

                                      5]

                                      5]

                                       2]

                                       5]

                                      5]

                                      5]

                                       3]

                                       5]

                                       5]

                                       5]

                                       4]

                                       5]

                                       5]

                                       5]

                                       5]
                                    5,

                                    .2

                                   1.

                                   .7

                                    5,

                                    .2

                                   2.

                                   .7

                                    5,

                                    .2

                                    3.

                                    .7

                                    5,

                                    .2

                                    4.

                                    .7

                                    5,
                                 .7

                                 ,1

                                5,

                                ,1

                                 .7

                                 ,2

                                5,

                                ,2

                                 .7

                                 ,3

                                 5,

                                 ,3

                                 .7

                                 ,4

                                 5,

                                 ,4

                                 .7
                             (0

                             (1

                             .2

                             .5

                             (1

                             (2

                              .2

                              .5

                             (2

                             (3

                              .2

                              .5

                             (3

                             (4

                              .2

                              .5

                             (4
                           (1

                           (1




                           (2

                           (2




                           (3

                           (3




                           (4

                           (4
                                                           Public employer−to−worker feedback scores

                                  (b) Monthly average public feedback scores assigned on completed projects.
  worker feedback scores
   Public employer−to−




                           4.8

                           4.5                                                                                     Distribution for this
                                                                                                                    period shown in
                           4.2
                                                                                                                        Figure 1a
                           3.9


                                    2007      2008         2009     2010       2011      2012      2013       2014        2015      2016
                                                                                       Year

                                 (c) Percentage of completed projects receiving different star ratings over time.
 Percentage of workers




                                           [1,3)                       [3,4)                      [4,4.99)                     [4.99,5]
                         100%

                         75%

                         50%

                         25%

                          0%
                                2007 2009 2011 2013 2015    2007 2009 2011 2013 2015    2007 2009 2011 2013 2015     2007 2009 2011 2013 2015

                                                                                       Year

Notes: The top panel shows the histogram of public numerical ratings assigned by employers to workers,
discretized by 0.25 star interval bins. The scale for feedback is 1 to 5 stars. The value of each bin is shown
above it, and the red line depicts the empirical cumulative density function. The sample we use consists of all
contracts from January 1, 2014 to May 11, 2016, for which the employer provided feedback. See Section 2.2
for the description of the sample. The middle panel plots the average public feedback scores assigned by
employers to workers on completed contracts by month. The average scores are computed for every month,
and a 95% interval is depicted for every point estimate. The shaded area denotes the data that was used
in Figure 1a. This bottom panel plots the fraction of public feedback scores assigned in a given month into
four bins, [1, 3), [3, 4), [4, 4.99), and 5 stars, over time.
                                                                                10
    In Figure 1b we plot the average monthly feedback over time, for contracts ending within
that month, and hence approximately the month when that feedback was given. There is a
clear increase in the feedback scores awarded on the platform: the numerical feedback score
average has increased by more than one star over the ten years of operation of the platform,
from 3.74 in the beginning of 2007, to 4.85 in May 2016. The strongest period of increase
was 2007, when average feedback scores increased by about 0.53 stars.
    The increase in average feedback could be the outcome of raters giving less “bad” feed-
back, more “good” feedback, or some combination thereof. For example, we could see a
decrease in the proportion of workers that receive 1-star ratings, and an increase in the
percentage of workers receiving 3 stars. Figure 1c shows the fraction of contracts having a
rating within different ranges, over time. We can see in the leftmost panel of Figure 1c that
completed contracts regularly received ratings in the (0, 3] range in the early days of the
platform. Further, early on the ratings assignments were reasonably dispersed, with every
bin containing at least 15% of the employers’ ratings. Near the end of our data, completed
contracts essentially never receive a rating in the (0, 3] star bin, despite nearly 30% of such
contracts getting this rating originally. Instead, there has been a dramatic increase in the
fraction of contracts getting exactly 5 stars: 33% of contracts received a 5-star rating at the
start of sample, compared to 85% at the end of the sample.


2.3    Evidence from other online marketplaces
Before exploring the causes for the pattern observed in Figure 1b, we turn to the question of
whether the observed increase is something specific to this particular platform or a general
feature of reputation systems. Although there is substantial evidence of right-skewed distri-
butions of ratings at a moment in time (Nosko and Tadelis, 2015; Athey et al., 2018), we are
unaware of other research showing that this right-skewness arises over time rather than being
present at launch. For this reason, we obtained data from four other online marketplaces,
two of which contain city-level data.
    The average feedback scores for the various marketplaces are shown in Figure 2. Panel
(a) shows longitudinal data in a competing online labor market. Panel (b) plots longitudinal
ratings data from four major cities in the United States and Europe in a large home-sharing
platform. Home-sharing platforms are peer-to-peer marketplaces that facilitate short-term
rentals for lodging (Filippas and Horton, 2017). Panel (c) plots numerical feedback data from
an online marketplace that facilitates the short-term rental of a durable asset (Sundararajan,
2013; Horton and Zeckhauser, 2017). Panel (d) plots longitudinal ratings data from six major
cities in the United States in a large online marketplace for services.


                                              11
Figure 2: Longitudinal buyer-on-seller feedback scores for a collection of online marketplaces

                                                             (a) Competing Online Labor Market                       (b) Home−sharing Market
 Public numerical user−to−user feedback score


                                                                                                      4.75
                                                4.8                                                   4.70

                                                                                                      4.65
                                                4.7
                                                                                                      4.60

                                                4.6                                                   4.55

                                                      2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                         2016           2017

                                                      (c) Durable Asset Short−term Rentals Market             (d) Geo−segmented Online Service Market
                                                                                                       0.3
                                                4.9

                                                                                                       0.2
                                                4.8

                                                                                                       0.1
                                                4.7
                                                                                                       0.0

                                                      2013                           2014                    2014        2015        2016         2017
                                                                                                    Year

Notes: This figure plots the average public feedback scores assigned in four online peer-to-peer marketplaces.
Scores are assigned by employers to workers in panels (a), by guests (users renting properties) to hosts (users
renting out properties) in panel (b), by renters (those renting the durable asset) to providers (those renting
out the durable asset) in panel (c), and by customers to providers of a service in panel (d). The panel
(d) scores are demeaned by the grand mean for all observations. Scores are assigned upon the completion
of each transaction, and the scale for feedback is 1 to 5 stars. For each observation, average scores are
computed for every time period, and a 95% interval is depicted for every point estimate.


    The goods and services that are transacted in these marketplaces differ. In panel (a)
ratings are assigned by employers to workers, in panel (b) by guests (those who are renting
properties) to hosts (those who are renting out properties), in panel (c) by users (renters
of the asset) to users (providers of the asset) after the transaction has taken place, and in
panel (d) by consumers of the service to providers of the service. Further, these platforms
greatly differ in the marketplace mechanisms they employ. For example, in the home-sharing
marketplace renters choose the provider, but in the service marketplace the platform assigns
a provider to the consumer. However, the reputation system mechanisms of interest are
more or less identical: transactions are personal (peer-to-peer), ratings are given after the
transaction has taken place and are consequential for the rated party, and the platforms all
utilize mechanisms that prevent “tit-for-tat” rating behavior.
    Despite the differences in what is being transacted, we observe an increase in ratings
over time that mirrors the pattern that we found in our focal marketplace. This provides
us with evidence that increasing feedback scores are likely common in online marketplaces

                                                                                                 12
with similar reputation system characteristics, even when other marketplace characteristics
vary, irrespective of the transacted goods and services. We now turn our attention to the
first online marketplace, where we have access to longitudinal transaction-level data, which
enables a richer analysis.


3       Reputation Inflation
The previous section documents a substantial increase in feedback scores over time across
several online platforms. There are two broad sets of reasons that may have led to this
increase: (1) rater satisfaction has increased, and (2) raters are lowering their standards.
    There are many reasons that rater satisfaction could change across time, even if standards
remained fixed. The platform may have implemented better search and recommendation fea-
tures that can lead to more effective matching of employers with sellers, or improvements in
the way tasks are posted on the platform may have resulted in better transmission of infor-
mation and setting of expectations. Further, workers may be getting better at performing
the task, better at conducting online work, or even exerting more effort. Cohorts of work-
ers and employers of systematically higher quality may be joining the platform over time,
or fewer alternative options for the same task may be becoming available at a lower price.
Other endogenous reasons include employers identifying and continuously transacting with
a subset of desirable workers, thereby minimizing screening, transaction, and uncertainty
costs. While all these reasons imply that transaction quality is improving, we can think of
similar reasons that may have led to lower quality.
    We cannot hope to account for all of the potential fundamental changes—and thereby
detect the increase due to changes in standards.8 Instead, we can side-step this issue by
using an alternative measure of rater satisfaction. Suppose during some period of time,
employers form matches and complete projects, getting some value at some price. Let a given
employer i obtain utility ui from some transaction. This utility is unobservable, and may be
affected by both fundamentals-related and idiosyncratic factors, such as the worker’s quality,
platform features, match-specific characteristics, environmental factors, the employer’s past
experience, the existence of alternative options, or even the employer’s mood. Such factors
are also unobservable and may vary over time.
    The employer leaves feedback si = s(ui ) + σi , where s(·) is common among employers,
while σi is idiosyncratic. In words, the component σi captures differences in how employers
translate their utility to the measure of satisfaction. The employer also leaves alternative
    8
    That said, in Appendix A, we directly show that the most plausible selection and/or composition stories
cannot explain the rise of average feedback scores.


                                                    13
feedback ai . Similarly, we assume that this alternative measure of satisfaction has a common
component and an idiosyncratic component, that is, ai = a(ui )+αi . Let U denote a collection
of data points, such that we observe s(u) and a(u) for every u ∈ U . We assume that we can
estimate a function ŝ on U such that

                                    ŝ(ai (ui )) = s(ui ) + ǫ + η,

where we decompose the error introduced from estimating function ŝ to an idiosyncratic
error ǫ, and an employer-specific error η, with E[ǫ] = 0 and E[η] = 0. As such, we get
E[ŝ(ai )|U ] = E[s|U ]. Intuitively, the function ŝ maps the alternative measure, a, to the same
scale as the primary measure, s.
    Now suppose we have a new collection of observations U ′ at some later date, and we
suspect that the primary satisfaction measure has changed to s(ui ) + g(ui ), while the alter-
native measure, a, remains constant. We can then apply the function ŝ on the new set of
observations U ′ , and compute the difference in expectation as

                             ∆s = E[si − ŝ(ai )|U ′ ]
                                 = E[g(ui )|U ′ ] − E[ǫ|U ′ ] − E[η|U ′ ].                    (1)

The three terms ∆s is decomposed to in Equation 1 are important. The term E[g(ui )|U ′ ]
is what we label the inflation component: the change in the primary feedback that cannot
be explained by changes in fundamentals. The term E[ǫ|U ′ ] is the component due to any
differential selection of latent utilities for which ŝ over—or under—predicts in expectation.
The E[η|U ′ ] term is the component due to any differential selection of raters, e.g., raters
who systematically differ in how they translate their utilities to the primary and alternative
feedback measures.
    It is critical to note that this method does not lead to bias simply because average
transaction utility has gotten better or worse for all the potential reasons we identified in the
beginning of Section 3. Essentially, this approach circumvents the problem of estimating the
underlying utilities, and gives us a new, albeit more tractable problem of verifying that the
estimated function ŝ does not introduce systematic bias when applied on U ′ , i.e., E[ǫ|U ′ ] = 0
and E[η|U ′ ] = 0.
    A second important observation worth noting is that if the alternative feedback measure
inflates as well, then our method provides a lower bound for the inflation term. More
specifically, if written feedback has also changed to a(ui )+h(ui ), then we get from Equation 1
that ∆s ≤ E[g(ui )|U ′ ]. Similarly, our method underestimates the degree of inflation if ŝ
introduces increasing systematic bias over time, that is, if the terms E[ǫ|U ′ ] and E[η|U ′ ] are

                                                 14
positive.9
    For our analysis of the focal market, we will employ two alternative measures of employer
satisfaction. One is a “private” feedback measure collected on completed contracts; the other
is the written feedback left by raters, from which we will extract the sentiment. For reasons
we will explain, we believe both measures are less prone to inflationary pressures. For both
measures, we will find a substantial gap when we compute Equation 1, and we will present
a variety of evidence that the gap is not due to selection with respect to either E[ǫ|U ′ ] and
E[η|U ′ ].
    Our decomposition task is conceptually similar to estimating monetary inflation in the
presence of quality changes (Sidrauski, 1967; Lucas Jr and Rapping, 1969; Friedman, 1977;
Galı and Gertler, 1999; Mishkin, 2000; Berentsen et al., 2011). Although quality changes
are acknowledged, they are typically sidestepped by a “basket-of-goods” approach (Diewert,
1998). The implicit assumption underlying such methods is that consumers derive the same
satisfaction from some “basic” goods and services, irrespective of the time period.10 In the
context of online marketplaces, however, there is no “basic” or “standard” transaction, that
is, a transaction with an immutable associated rater satisfaction.


3.1     Private feedback as an alternative measure
Our first alternative measure of rater satisfaction comes from a platform experiment that
asked for an additional “private” feedback measure of feedback. The platform introduced
this new experimental feature in April, 2013. With this system, on the completion of a
contract, employers were asked to generate private feedback in addition to public feedback.
Employers were initially asked the private feedback question, “Would you hire this freelancer
[worker] again, if you had a similar project?” There were four response options: “Definitely
yes,” “Probably yes,” “Probably not,” and “Definitely not.” Starting at the beginning of
June 2014, the employers were instead asked to rate the worker on a numerical scale of 0
to 10. Critically, the platform let the employers know that private feedback would not be
shared with the rated worker or future would-be employers, and would only be collected by
the platform for internal evaluation purposes.
   9
     The results of this section hold under the more general assumption E[ǫ|U ]+E[η|U ] = c, for some arbitrary
constant c, and E[ǫ|U ′ ] + E[η|U ′ ] ≥ E[ǫ|U ] + E[η|U ].
  10
     A consumer derives equal utility from a loaf of bread in 2000, as she will in 2020 (approximately, and,
of course, not from the same loaf of bread). Issues with such measures of monetary inflation mostly arise
when aggregate consumer utility from “basic” goods and services changes and is hard to measure, such as
for goods including phones, computers, and even cars.




                                                      15
3.1.1                            Comparing private and public feedback

Employers assigned both public and private feedback for the same contract. Figure 3 shows
the distribution of public feedback, conditioned on the private feedback. The percentage of
employers giving that feedback score is shown in parenthesis in each panel. Although the
most common response was “Definitely Yes,” about 15% of the employers gave unambigu-
ously bad private feedback (“Definitely Not” and “Probably Not”). In contrast, during the
same period less than 4% of the employers gave a numerical score of 3 stars or less. Given
this gap, we might suspect that some employers expressing a negative private sentiment are
less candid in public.

  Figure 3: Distribution of publicly given feedback to workers, by response to the private
  feedback question: “Would you hire this freelancer [worker] again, if you had a similar
  project?”

                                                  Response: Definitely Not (6.6% reporting this tier)
                               100%
                                75%
                                50% 29.1%
                                25%                                                                                  15.7%
                                          1.5% 4.1% 4.2% 5.4% 4.3% 4.0% 4.0% 5.6% 3.4% 3.1% 3.0% 4.5% 3.4% 2.1% 2.7%
                                 0%
                                                  Response: Probably Not (8.3% reporting this tier)
  Percentage of observations




                               100%
                                75%
                                50%                                                                                  34.3%
                                25% 1.8% 0.2% 0.5% 0.7% 1.9% 1.5% 1.8% 2.6% 6.1% 4.1% 4.6% 5.1% 10.0% 8.8% 7.0% 9.2%
                                 0%
                                                 Response: Probably Yes (19.4% reporting this tier)
                               100%                                                                                   71.3%
                                75%
                                50%
                                25% 0.1%       0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.1% 0.7% 0.3% 0.8% 1.3% 5.2% 3.8% 5.7% 10.4%
                                 0%
                                                 Response: Definitely Yes (65.7% reporting this tier)
                                                                                                                      95.7%
                               100%
                                75%
                                50%
                                25% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.5% 0.4% 1.0% 2.4%
                                 0%
                                       (1 ,1]
                                       .2 5]
                                       .5 5]
                                       (1 75]
                                       (2 ,2]
                                       .2 5]
                                       .5 5]
                                       (2 75]
                                       (3 ,3]
                                       .2 5]
                                       .5 5]
                                       (3 75]
                                       (4 ,4]
                                       .2 5]
                                       .5 5]
                                       (4 75]
                                               5]
                                     (1 1.2
                                     (1 ,1.




                                     (2 2.2
                                     (2 ,2.




                                     (3 3.2
                                     (3 ,3.




                                     (4 4.2
                                     (4 ,4.


                                            5,
                                           5




                                            5




                                            5




                                            5
                                            .




                                            .




                                            .




                                            .
                                  .7




                                         ,1
                                         .7




                                         ,2
                                         .7




                                         ,3
                                         .7




                                         ,4
                                         .7
                                         5




                                         5




                                         5




                                         5
                                         ,




                                         ,




                                         ,




                                         ,
                                (0




                                                               Public feedback scores
  Notes: This figure plots the distribution of public feedback scores, computed separately for every set
  of users that gave the same answer to the private feedback question. The red dotted line plots the
  cumulative distribution function.



                                                                          16
    Employers who leave more negative private feedback do assign lower public feedback
scores: among those employers that selected the “Definitely No” answer to the private
feedback question, 29.1% assigned a 1-star rating publicly. Surprisingly, however, the second
most common choice for these employers at 15.7% was in the 4.75 to 5.00 bin, and 28.4%
publicly assigned more than 4 stars. In short, many privately dissatisfied employers publicly
claimed to be satisfied. We can see that the reverse—privately satisfied employers giving
bad public feedback—essentially never happens. Employers who selected “Definitely yes”
left very positive public feedback, with more than 95% of these observations falling into the
highest bin.

3.1.2    Private feedback over time

The platform began eliciting numerical private feedback by employers on workers in June
2014. In Figure 4 we plot the average monthly feedback over time, for the numerical public
and private feedback during the period that both were collected. To make the two scores
comparable, we normalize them by the first observed mean. In the language of Section 3, we
use ŝ(at ) = (at − a0 )/a0 , which has the advantage of simplicity.11 A 95% interval is plotted
around each observation. Public feedback scores exhibit a small increase during the period
of interest (as we saw in Figure 1b). For the same period of time, Figure 4 shows that private
feedback scores exhibit a strong decreasing trend.
    It is critical to note that the average feedback scores shown in Figure 4 are being assigned
by the same employers on the same contracts. The decrease in private feedback scores
suggests a decline in rater satisfaction, and yet public feedback increased. In short, it is hard
to rationalize some change in fundamentals alone that could generate this pattern. What
seems more probable is that public feedback scores are subject to inflation, whereas the
private scores are not because of their private nature. And at least during this period of
time, the private feedback suggests that there was some reduction in rater satisfaction. In
Appendix B we conduct a series of robustness checks for the above result. We rule out other
assumptions about the private feedback assignment behavior of employers—such as that
private standards are getting harsher even though the quality of transactions is increasing—
that could rationalize the divergent trends. Later, we will use a change in how the public
feedback score works to more directly explore its tendency towards inflation, or lack thereof.
  11
    We opt for a simple ŝ in this section for exposition purposes. We use a more intricate mapping function
in Section 3.2.




                                                    17
  Figure 4: Monthly average public and private feedback scores assigned to workers by
  employers.
   Feedback score differences

                                                                                                                 avg. public
                                 0.01
                                                                                                                  feedback
         (normalized)



                                 0.00

                                −0.01

                                −0.02                                                                            avg. private
                                                                                                                  feedback
                                −0.03
                                        14


                                               14


                                                       14


                                                                 14


                                                                          14


                                                                                   14


                                                                                            14


                                                                                                    15


                                                                                                            15
                                       n


                                                l


                                                       g


                                                             p


                                                                      ct


                                                                                ov


                                                                                        ec


                                                                                                    n


                                                                                                            b
                                             Ju
                                    Ju




                                                    Au


                                                            Se




                                                                                                 Ja


                                                                                                         Fe
                                                                      O


                                                                               N


                                                                                        D
                                                                               Month

  Notes: This figure plots the evolution of the average public feedback scores (dotted line) versus the
  average private feedback scores (solid line) assigned by employers to workers. The average scores are
  computed for every month, and are normalized by the value of their respective first observation (June
  2014). A 95% confidence interval is shown for each mean.


3.2                    Written feedback as an alternative measure
Although private feedback scores offer an alternative measure of rater satisfaction during the
period where both types of feedback were elicited by the platform, they only cover a fairly
short period of time. Recall from Figure 1b that most of the increase happened back in
2007. In contrast to the private feedback, we have written feedback over the entire platform
history. Using written feedback as an alternative measure has the advantage that many
other platforms also collect this data, and hence our method could be used in more cases.
    To make the two kinds of feedback comparable, we fit a predictive model, ŝ(·) that
predicts numerical feedback scores from the feedback text. The predictive model is fit on a
narrow time window, and the fitted model is then used to estimate out-of-sample feedback
scores of the written feedback for the entire sample.
    Words used in written feedback can certainly become “inflated,” with work that would
have elicited a “good” now garnering a “great.”12 However, some words found in written
feedback, such as “unresponsive,” are less subjective and are likely to be associated with the
same degree of satisfaction, more or less, over time. We also suspect that written feedback
is inherently less subject to inflationary pressures. The reason is that the nature of written
feedback and how it is used on the platform makes it less costly for raters to be candid, and
  12
    For example, an employer’s written feedback in our data reads: “This is the most impressive piece of
coding in the history of software development!”


                                                                          18
these costs are central to explaining reputation inflation (as we will show in Section 4).
    There are several reasons that the costs to the rater for giving “negative” written feedback
are lower than for numerical feedback. First, it is harder for workers to complain about
textual “tone” than it is to complain about a non-perfect star rating. Another reason is
that the platform does not aggregate written feedback or put it on a scale. Furthermore,
the platform does not present the written feedback to the employer during the initial worker
screening phase—only average numerical feedback scores are presented, and written feedback
is harder to access. Many would-be employers would also likely not bother to read the
often voluminous collection of written feedback, making any particular written feedback less
consequential. As such, written feedback cannot be used for cross-worker comparisons by
future employers as easily as numerical feedback does; these comparisons are precisely what
makes the feedback consequential for workers.
    To the extent that written feedback offers a more or less unchanging measure of rater
satisfaction, that is, the rater satisfaction measure a remains constant, it is useful for disen-
tangling changes in rater satisfaction from changes in rater standards. Importantly, to the
extent that written feedback is also subject to inflation, our approach will underestimate
the magnitude of the inflation in scores. We have some evidence that written feedback does
inflate, in that the private feedback score (pre-public revelation) was declining while the
sentiment of written feedback was increasing.

3.2.1   Predicting numerical feedback from written feedback

To extract the sentiment of the written feedback, we employ a standard machine learning
approach. We use a sample of our written feedback corpus as the training set, with the
associated numerical scores as the set of labels. We fit a model that predicts the public
feedback score, given the text of the written feedback. We use a standard natural language
preprocessing pipeline: our data is stripped of accents and special characters, is lowercased,
stopwords are removed, a matrix of token counts (up to 3-grams) is created, and is weighed
using the TFIDF method. We then perform an extensive grid search over a set of different
learning algorithms and their corresponding hyperparameters, evaluating each configuration
using a 5-fold cross validation. The algorithms we use are linear regression, lasso regression,
ridge regression, gradient boosting regression, and random forest regression. We then keep
the best performing model in terms of average squared error.13
    The average quarterly feedback scores over time, for both the numerical public feedback,
  13
    Our analysis is performed using the Python scikit-learn package implementation. The package’s
webpage provides a detailed description of the implementations of each model (see http://www.scikit-
learn.org/stable/user guide.html).



                                                19
and the feedback predicted from the written feedback, are plotted in the top panel of Figure 5.
The predictive model is trained with a written feedback corpus from the earliest quarter in
our data (indicated with a dashed red line), and consists of 1,492 feedback samples. As
expected, the predicted and actual scores match up during the training period. Going
forward, both scores increase, but the predicted feedback score increases at a much slower
rate. On average, numerical feedback goes from 3.96 in the beginning of 2006 to 4.86 stars
at the beginning of 2016. In contrast, the average score predicted from the written feedback
only goes to 4.25 stars.
    In the bottom panel of Figure 5 we again plot the average quarterly feedback over time,
for both the numerical public feedback and the feedback predicted from the written feedback.
However, our training sample now comes from a longer time period indicated by the two
vertical red lines, and is larger, consisting of 10,555 feedback samples. As expected, the
predicted and actual scores closely match up during the training period. However, in the
period before, the predicted score is higher than the numerical score, and the opposite holds
after the training period. We adjust the second score by a constant, so that the predicted
score matches the actual feedback score in the beginning of our data. With this adjustment,
the average predicted feedback score at the end of the data “should” have only been 4.35
stars. Reassuringly, the two corpuses give similar results.
    The divergence between written sentiment and numerical feedback implies that a sub-
stantial amount of the increase in numerical feedback scores is due to lower rater standards.
Our approach allows us to quantify the contribution of lower rater standards to the increase.
Using the first quarter sample, the point estimate is that 67.7% of the increase in feedback
scores is due to inflation, whereas the larger sample from the middle of the data implies
56.6% of the increase is due to inflation. However, this approach does require the assump-
tion that there is no selection with respect to bias in the model or the rater, i.e., that E[ǫ|U ′ ]
and E[η|U ′ ] are constant. Although this assumption is not directly testable, in Appendix C
we report a number of tests looking for evidence of selection bias with respect to the written
measure, finding no evidence against our assumption. It is essential to note that to the
extent written feedback is also subject to inflation (“good” work now garners a “great”), our
method understates the extent of reputation inflation taking place on the platform, and so
we view our approach as providing a lower bound estimate.

3.2.2   Average feedback scores of sentences over time

A potential shortcoming with the approach of Section 3.2.1 is that the lexical composition of
reviews could presumably change over time. In the language of our model, a(ui ) has shifted
to a(ui )+h(ui ). While we have no evidence that supports this hypothesis, in what follows we

                                                20
  Figure 5: Numerical public feedback and predicted score from textual feedback using
  the first quarter as the training period.

                                                    Training data from earliest quarter
                                                                              Actual avg. score             4.86
                    4.75   Training set

                    4.50


                    4.25                                                                                    4.25
                                                                              Predicted avg. score
                    4.00
   Feedback score




                                                    Training data from later quarters
                                                                              Actual avg. score             4.86
                    4.75             Training set                                                           4.71

                    4.50
                                                                              Predicted avg. score

                                                                                                            4.35
                    4.25
                                                                              Adjusted predicted avg. score

                    4.00



                              2007    2008   2009      2010   2011     2012    2013   2014   2015    2016
                                                                     Year

  Notes: This figure plots the evolution of average public feedback scores (solid line) versus the average
  predicted score of textual feedback (dashed line) assigned by employers to workers. A 95% interval is
  depicted for every point estimate. The shaded area indicates the quarters from which training data was
  obtained for the corresponding predictive model. The training sets consist of 1,492 samples (top panel)
  and 10,555 samples (bottom panel). Adjusted predicted scores (dotted line in the bottom panel) are
  calculated by subtracting the constant from the predicted scores that allows the left endpoints of the
  adjusted and actual score lines to coincide.


take an alternative approach: as a more direct measure of inflation, we examine whether the
same sentences found in written feedback correspond to different feedback scores at different
points in time. We select written feedback from 2008 and 2015, we find all lexically identical
sentences generated in these periods, and then compare average feedback by sentence, across
the two periods. To find candidate sentences, we split reviews into sentences, detect named

                                                                21
entities, such as names and locations, and replace them by tokens, and keep pairs of identical
sentences used across the two years, and the corresponding assigned numerical rating. Our
procedure allows us to extract 7,300 pairs of lexically identical sentences from the two periods.
    To illustrate our approach, Figure 6 shows the average numerical feedback scores for a set
of example short sentences that are commonly used on employer written feedback, by period.
We selected sentences spanning both “good” and “bad” feedback, and which most frequently
occurred in the corresponding written feedback in our data, such as “highly recommended,”
“would hire again,” “terrible,” and “would not recommend.” We can see across terms that
the numerical feedback scores associated with identical sentences have increased considerably
over time, and this increase has affected both positive and negative sentences.

Figure 6: Difference over time in the average employer feedback score associated with a set
of example sentences.

                                   good job            highly recommended                thank you          would hire again
                       5.0
                                                                    ●
                                                         ●                                                               ●
 Mean feedback score




                                                 ●
                                                                                                     ●
                       4.9
                                                                                                             ●
                       4.8
                                                                                     ●
                       4.7     ●

                       4.6
                              2008              2015    2008       2015             2008         2015      2008        2015
                                                                            Year

                                     terrible             unresponsive             would not hire again   would not recommend

                       2.5
 Mean feedback score




                                                 ●                  ●
                                                                                                     ●
                       2.0                               ●
                                                                                                                         ●
                                                                                                             ●
                       1.5                                                           ●
                               ●


                       1.0
                              2008              2015    2008       2015             2008         2015      2008        2015
                                                                            Year

Notes: This figure shows the average numerical feedback associated with exact sentences found in the text
of numerical reviews, in 2008 and 2015. A 95% confidence interval is shown for each mean.


                       Using the whole collection of identified sentences, we find that the average difference

                                                                          22
in numerical feedback scores is 0.11 stars, with a 95% confidence interval of [0.096, 0.124].
As the increase in average numerical feedback scores between the 2008 and 2015 period is
0.21 stars, a back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests about 52.3% of the overall increase is
due to inflation, which is close to our lower bound estimate from our predictive modeling
approach from Section 3.2.1.


4      A model of reputation dynamics
To help explain the implications of our empirical findings and understand why inflation
occurs, we develop a model of a reputation system in a competitive market. Though our
framing here is a labor market, the same framework can be applied to the more general case
of buyers and sellers giving feedback.
    Motivated by the strategic reporting we observed in Section 3.1—reviewers choosing to
leave “good” public feedback despite an unsatisfactory experience (at least as stated in
private)—we develop a model where raters decide whether to be candid following a bad
experience. As we never observe strategic misreporting of good private experience—i.e.,
good private feedback but bad public feedback—we assume that the choice in our model is
restricted to whether a bad private experience should be publicly reported.
    Employers in our model have an incentive to truthfully assign “bad” feedback after a
bad experience, captured as a positive benefit from truth-telling. This benefit includes
idiosyncratic reasons to report truthfully as well as platform-specific benefits, such as awards
by other users for being an accurate reviewer.14 At the same time, employers incur a cost
when they assign “bad” feedback, which is increasing in the cost of the workers from receiving
this bad feedback. This “reflected” disutility includes the employer’s aversion to harming
the worker’s future prospects, the cost of the worker complaining or withholding future
cooperation, and even the cost from other workers being unwilling to work for the employer
in the future if the employer has a reputation as a “strict” rater.
    Our model gives reflected costs a large role. This feature was motivated by the differ-
ences we observed between public and private feedback scores revealed by the divergence we
observed in Figure 4. Private feedback scores are not observable by other employers when
they are making hiring decisions, and hence receiving “bad” private feedback is less costly for
workers. As a result, employers are more truthful in private, i.e., they assign lower private
feedback scores, suggesting a link between the cost of receiving “bad” feedback and the cost
  14
    Abeler et al. (2016) find strong evidence about individuals’ preferences for truth-telling, both in 72
previous studies and in their experiments. Surprisingly, the propensity for truth-telling persists even in
one-shot games.



                                                   23
of assigning “bad” feedback.


4.1    Setup
Consider an online labor market composed of workers and employers. Workers are matched
at random with employers, after which workers produce output y ∈ {0, 1}. The worker
produces output y = 1 with probability Pr(y = 1|q) = q, from which the employer obtains
utility equal to 1, by selling the output on some product market. The employer obtains zero
utility in the case that output y = 0 is produced.
    Workers are characterized by their quality q ∈ {qL , qH }, with qL < qH . Employers know
the fraction of high quality workers in the marketplace, which we denote by θ. After the
employer observes the worker’s realized output y, she generates a signal to the marketplace
in the form of feedback s ∈ {0, 1}, where s = 1 denotes “good” feedback, and s = 0 “bad”
feedback. In the next “round,” employers observe the most recent feedback assigned to the
worker, and form Bayesian beliefs about the worker’s quality. We assume that both sides
are price-takers, and hence workers are paid their expected marginal product, which is

                       ws = Pr(q = qH |s)qH + (1 − Pr(q = qH |s))qL .

The worker’s cost of bad feedback, realized in the next round, is the difference in compen-
sation between receiving good feedback, ws=1 , and bad feedback, ws=0 , that is

                                     ∆w = ws=1 − ws=0 .

Whenever the employer tells the truth, that is when s = y, she obtains a benefit b > 0. If
the worker’s output is good (y = 1), then the employer has no incentive to lie and always
assigns good feedback (s = 1) to the worker. However, in the case that the worker produces
bad output (y = 0) and the employer truthfully reports s = 0, the worker incurs a cost
∆w, which is the wage penalty in the next round. We assume that some fraction of this
cost is “reflected” back on the employer. Employers differ in how much of this cost is
reflected: let ci be the employer-specific fraction of this cost that is reflected back on the
rating employer. The employer thus incurs a cost of ci ∆w, where ci is drawn from some
distribution F : [c, c̄] → [0, 1], with c ≥ 0.
                  ¯                     ¯
    In light of these reflected costs, some employers might give positive feedback even if the
worker’s output was bad, thereby avoiding the cost of giving bad feedback. This decision




                                             24
will depend on ci , and so employer i will not report truthful feedback if

                                          b ≤ ci ∆w.                                     (2)

Let p denote the fraction of employers that generate truthful feedback in the most recent
round, and assume that p is common knowledge. When considering a particular worker that
received bad feedback in the previous round, i.e., s = 0, the Bayesian employer infers that

                                          Pr(s = 0|q = qH ; p)Pr(q = qH )
                    Pr(q = qH |s = 0; p) =
                                                    Pr(s = 0; p)
                                                   (1 − qH )θ
                                        =                               .
                                          (1 − qH )θ + (1 − qL )(1 − θ)

Note that the p term divides out as s = 0 always implies truthful reporting. In contrast, if
the worker received good feedback, i.e., s = 1, the Bayesian employer infers that

                            Pr(s = 1|q = qH ; p)Pr(q = qH )
      Pr(q = qH |s = 1; p) =
                                     Pr(s = 1; p)
                                                                   
                                              qH + (1 − qH )(1 − p) θ
                          =                                                        .
                             qH + (1 − qH )(1 − p) θ + qL + (1 − qL )(1 − p) (1 − θ)

The cost of bad feedback to a worker is then

                                                   θ(1 − θ)(qH − qL )2
                       ∆w(p) = ws=1;p − ws=0;p =                       ,                 (3)
                                                        k − pk 2

where k = θ(1 − qH ) + (1 − θ)(1 − qL ), which is the probability that a randomly chosen
worker will produce bad output.
    We see from Equation 3 that ∆w(p) > 0 for all p, implying that as long as ci > 0,
there is always a cost to the employer of giving bad feedback, which they must compare
to their benefit b from telling the truth. Further, when p is large, i.e., when most of the
employers truthfully report, feedback is a more accurate measure of quality, and hence the
value of positive feedback increases, along with the wage penalty ∆w(p). In contrast, when
the majority of firms lie, the signal from good feedback is less informative, and the wage
penalty narrows, as many workers receiving “good” feedback actually did not produce the
output. We note that this relationship between the wage penalty p makes which feedback
is “good” and “bad” endogenous in our model—the characterization depends on p, which in
turn depends on the choices of all other employers, who are reacting to that wage penalty.
    We now consider what an equilibrium of this market would be. Let pE denote the
fraction of firms that truthfully assign negative feedback when the market equilibrium has


                                              25
been attained. The equilibrium fraction is found by solving the equation
                                                              !
                                                        b
                                          pE = F                ,                                         (4)
                                                      ∆w(pE )

to which a solution always exists for any continuous distribution function, and is unique for
distributions with increasing hazard rate. Importantly, the two extreme cases where
                                            (
                                                1, if b ≥ c̄∆w(1)
                                     pE =
                                                0, if b ≤ c∆w(0)
                                                          ¯
correspond to an all-truthful and an all-lying equilibrium. If the benefit to assigning truthful
feedback is higher than the cost for every employer, then no employer has incentive to lie
(pE = 1), while if the costs are too high, all employers lie (pE = 0).15 To the extent that we
think of employers as both strategic and narrowly self-interested, the all-lying equilibrium
is the likely equilibrium, as the benefit b is likely small or sometimes even zero, while the
employer-specific costs ci could be substantial.


4.2     Convergence and the evolution of average feedback
We now consider the marketplace’s convergence to the equilibrium prediction. Consider a
marketplace where every employer starts off truthfully reporting feedback, that is, p0 = 1.
To avoid cases where the convergence process is trivial, we also assume that the equilibrium
truth-telling fraction is not the all-truthful equilibrium.
    In every period, employers randomly match with workers, workers produce outputs, and
employers subsequently report feedback. Among the employers, a fraction θB = (1 − θ)(1 −
qL )+θ(1−qH ) receives a bad output, i.e., y = 0. These employers then compare their benefit
from truth-telling with the cost of truthfully reporting bad feedback. Employers whose cost
from truth-telling is lower than the benefit give bad feedback to the workers. Therefore, a
                            b
fraction l0 = θB [1 − F ( ∆w(p 0)
                                  )] begins to lie after the first period, and hence p1 = p0 − l0 .
    We now examine the convergence of this process. Let T (x) = F (b/x) be the proportion
of sellers that are better off truthfully reporting if the cost of bad feedback is x. From
Equation 4 we obtain T (pE ) = pE . Since F is a cumulative distribution function, and ∆w is
decreasing in its argument, T is a decreasing but non-negative function. As a result, p2 < p1 ,
but l1 < l0 , and hence p1 − p2 < p0 − p1 . Following the same argument, we can inductively
show that the dynamics of the marketplace result in convergence to the equilibrium truth-
  15
    In the case where all employers have the same cost, pE can be interpreted as the probability of truthfully
generating public negative feedback in the resulting mixed strategy equilibrium.


                                                     26
telling fraction pE , and that the rate of convergence decreases as the market approaches the
equilibrium point. This is precisely the pattern we observed empirically in all marketplaces
we have data on spanning their entire operations, i.e., in Figure 1b and in panels (a) and
(c) of Figure 2: reputation initially inflates fast, but then flattens out as the equilibrium
fraction is approached.


5    Effects of making feedback consequential
Our model in Section 4 proposes a process by which reputation inflates. A key feature of our
model is Equation 2, which posits that an employer misreports following a bad experience
if b ≤ ci ∆w. If the cost of bad feedback to the workers is zero, then employers should be
truthful for any positive value of b, and thus would generate more “bad” feedback. If the
cost of “bad” feedback to the workers changes, then the fraction of truthful employers should
also change. Further, as the cost of “bad” feedback is endogenous, our model also predicts
a convergence to new equilibrium following a change in costs. As such, in the event that
the costs of assigning “bad” feedback change, we do not expect to see a “jump” to the new
equilibrium, but rather a gradual convergence to some new equilibrium.
    Recall from Section 3.1 that employers were more candidate about bad performance in
private than they were in public. Our interpretation of private versus public feedback is
that for “bad” public feedback, the cost to the worker, ∆w, was positive, whereas for “bad”
private feedback the same cost was zero. As a result, private feedback was more candid, i.e.,
more employers were more likely to report s = 0 when y = 0, as the employers’ costs were
increasing in the workers’ cost of negative feedback. We now consider what happened when
the platform made a change that raised the cost ∆w from zero to some positive amount, by
changing how that private feedback was used on the platform.
    The change was the platform’s announcement in March 2015 that the private feedback
ratings would be used to compute a new aggregate feedback score for workers. The aggregate
score on a worker’s profile was only updated after the worker received five new feedback
scores, to prevent workers from identifying which employer gave them which feedback. This
score would be shown on the profile of each worker and therefore be publicly available, but
anonymous in the sense that one could not associate individual scores with employers.
    To the extent that employers used this new score in their hiring decisions, the workers’
cost of bad private feedback went from zero to some positive number. In the logic of our
model, the platform’s hope was that by not allowing workers to know which employer gave
feedback, the distribution of c would remain unaffected and close to zero, even though ∆w
increased from zero to some positive value. However, if many employers simply do not want

                                             27
to hurt the worker or fear some other kind of generalized ex post retaliation, then even the
batched release of private feedback scores would keep the weight of the distribution of c
above 0, which should cause the private feedback measure to inflate from the all-truthful
equilibrium to some new equilibrium.
    Of course, simply observing that the time series of numerical private feedback rises after
the platform change does not prove inflation. The new feedback system was intended to
improve matches, and so the same concern from our earlier analysis applies—namely that any
increase in the private feedback score following revelation reflects changes in fundamentals.
For example, if employers could now form better matches because of their access to the
private feedback score measure, then we would expect higher future private feedback scores.
As before, we address that concern by using written comments to construct an alternative
measure of employer utility.
    Figure 7 plots the monthly average private feedback and the monthly average predicted
private feedback, using the same modeling method we used earlier in Section 3.2. In each
panel, the monthly averages are shown by type, as well as the fitted values under different
regression specifications. The predicted private feedback is the prediction of a model trained
during a period before the revelation, which is indicated with a shaded region. The day the
platform switched to batched public revelation is indicated with vertical dashed line. The
figure shows that prior to public revelation, the actual and predicted private feedback are
quite similar, but that after public revelation, the actual numerical rating increases while
the predicted rating does not.
    To quantify the effect of revelation, we switch to a regression framework. However, as
we have some choice over the regression specification, the different panels of Figure 7 show
various alternatives. In the top panel, we report the simplest specification, which is for
the treatment to simply have a level effect and to allow the two feedback-types to differ
by a fixed amount before the change. We can see that this specification clearly fails to
capture the underlying time trend in both series, and especially for the numerical feedback
in the post period. In the next panel down, the specification maintains the assumption of
a level feedback, but includes a week-specific effect. This specification better captures the
underlying trend in both measures that caused the previous specification to perform poorly,
but it still performs inconsistently in the post-period, over-estimating the actual feedback
early in the period, and then under-estimating it later, and vice versa for the predicted
feedback. This is consistent with the simple level-change specification not capturing some of
the dynamics of the effects of the treatment e.g., a change in slopes.
    In the third panel from the top, we give both types of feedback a common linear time
trend, but then allow that trend to change in the post-period for the actual feedback. With


                                             28
  Figure 7: Monthly average private feedback scores and average predicted private feed-
  back scores

                                                  Treatment effect is a level change, FB−type specific intercepts, no slope
                    9.4
                                                                                                                                  Actual
                                Training period
                    9.3
                                                                                                                                           Predicted
                    9.2


                    9.1


                                                       Treatment effect is a level change, with week−specific effects
                    9.4
                                                                                                                                            Actual
                                Training period
                    9.3
                                                                                                                                           Predicted
                    9.2
   Feedback score




                    9.1


                                                       Treatment effect is slope change, FB−type specific intercepts
                    9.4
                                                                                                                                            Actual
                                Training period
                    9.3


                    9.2
                                                                                                                               Predicted

                    9.1


                                                           Treatment effect is a level change and a slope change
                    9.4
                                                                                                                                            Actual
                                Training period
                    9.3
                                                                                                                                           Predicted
                    9.2


                    9.1


                          −10                     −5                      0                        5                      10                   15
                                                                Months relative to public revelation


  Notes: This figure shows the average monthly private feedback (on a 1 - 10 point scale) given by
  employers to workers, both actual and predicted. Predicted scores are derived from the employer’s
  written textual public feedback, with the predictive model fit using data from the shaded region. The
  vertical line indicates the point in time in which employer private feedback scores were aggregated
  and added to worker profiles. These aggregate scores were changed after the worker received five new
  feedback scores, to prevent workers from identifying which employer gave them which feedback. Prior
  to this point, scores were only collected by the platform and not used publicly in any way. The red lines
  in the lower panels correspond to predictions from various difference-in-differences model specifications.


a common slope, the fit in the pre-period is much better than when we forced the two types
to only differ by a level (in the top panel). However, we can see that earlier in the pre-period,

                                                                                29
only allowing a linear change in slopes under-predicts the actual feedback score, suggesting
some immediate effect and not just a change in slopes.
   In the bottom panel, the specification allows for both a level treatment effect and a
change in slopes. This specification seems to work the best, with the predicted series closely
matching the realized value. We will make use of this insight when we switch to estimating
the effects of public revelation at the level of the individual contract rather than at the level
of monthly averages. This has the advantage of allowing us to directly control for employer-
specific effects and thus directly control for some of the potential sources of bias described
by Equation 1.
   As our interest is in the divergence between the public and private feedback scores,
we switch our outcome to ∆si , which is the numerical private feedback rating minus the
predicted private rating based on the sentiment of the written text. By taking this difference,
we eliminate the need (or the possibility) of including time-based fixed effects.
   Table 1, Column (1) reports an estimate of the effects of public revelation on the gap
between the actual and predicted feedback scores. We can see that after the switch to
revelation, the gap increased. The effect size of 0.13 is about 8% of the population standard
deviation in ∆s. All standard errors in this table are clustered at the level of the individual
employer.

Table 1: Effects of “private feedback” public revelation on aggregate private feedback scores


                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                  ∆s, (Actual - Predicted) Private FB Ratings
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
      Post-revelation                             0.134∗∗∗      0.168∗∗∗     0.137∗∗∗      0.068∗∗∗
                                                  (0.007)       (0.007)      (0.013)       (0.018)
      Post × Month                                                                         0.011∗∗∗
                                                                                           (0.002)
      Constant                                    −0.003       −0.095∗∗∗
                                                  (0.007)       (0.006)
      Less than 25 contracts for C and E             N             Y             Y            Y
      Employer FE                                    N             N             Y            Y
      Observations                                899,842       537,640       537,640      537,640
      R2                                           0.001         0.002         0.497        0.497
      Adjusted R2                                  0.001         0.002         0.183        0.183
  Notes: This table reports regressions where the outcome is the monthly aggregate feedback and the
  predictor is an indicator variable for the private feedback revelation. Both specifications control for
  month-specific effects, with Column (1) utilizing a fixed effects model, and Column (2) a random effects
  model. Significance indicators: p ≤ 0.05 : ∗, p ≤ 0.01 : ∗∗, and p ≤ .001 : ∗ ∗ ∗.



                                                     30
    One limitation of including all assignments as the unit of analysis is that it over-weights
employers and workers with many contracts. In Column (2), we restrict the sample to
employers and workers with fewer than 25 completed contracts in total. We can see that the
effect size is somewhat larger with this restricted sample, but is broadly similar in magnitude.
    As we noted in Section 3, one reason why a gap might emerge between some measure and
an alternative measure is that in the post-period is selection of raters with idiosyncratically
large or small gaps—recall the E[η|U ′ ] term from Equation 1. To assess this possibility, in
Column (3) we add an employer-specific fixed effect to the regression. The effect size is
somewhat smaller when the fixed effects are included, but the coefficient implies that the
increase in the gap between the private numerical rating within employers is quite close to
the average effect.
    As we saw in Figure 7, there was visual evidence for a change in the trend and not just
a level difference. As such, for our preferred specification, in Column (4), we include both a
post-indicator and a linear time trend for the post period and continue using the restricted
sample and the employer-specific fixed effect. We can see that some of the treatment effect
detected in Columns (1)-(3) was the accumulation of a trend of an increasing gap in the
post-period.
    Column (3) shows that average scores kept rising after public revelation. Although the
trend appears to be linear, if private feedback follows the same pattern as the public feedback,
we might expect the growth to slow, particularly as it nears the top value. If we project
the Column (3) estimated trend of a 0.011 per-month increase in the numerical score into
the future, the average numerical feedback would be equal to the top value in the scale
(10 − 9.1)/(0.011)/12 ≈ 7 years. In short, in the long-run of about 7 years, we would expect
very little information to be left in the new reputation system.


6    Discussion and conclusion
This paper documents that the reputation system in an online marketplace was subject to
inflation—we observe systematically higher scores over time, which cannot be fully explained
by overall improvements in fundamentals. Data from four other marketplaces with similar
characteristics exhibit the same trend, suggesting that the reputation inflation problem is
widespread. We propose and evaluate an approach to quantify inflation based on using alter-
native measures of rater satisfaction. A theoretical model is developed which hypothesizes
that the root of inflation is the costs that raters incur when leaving negative feedback. A
market intervention where the costs of negative feedback were increased—namely by mak-
ing previously private feedback public—yielded data consistent with the predictions of our

                                              31
model.
    Reputation inflation is likely most acute in peer-to-peer platforms, such as online labor
markets and sharing economy marketplaces, where both wage penalties for workers and em-
ployers’ reflected cost coefficients are high. Reasons for the high worker cost of bad feedback
include that workers are often highly substitutable, but each worker has few transactions,
and hence each rating is more consequential. Further, feedback scores are often the only
signal of quality. On the employer side, as transactions are more personal, the reflected costs
are likely higher. In contrast, when individuals assign feedback to products (e.g. movie re-
views) there is likely no reflected cost, and our model predicts that there will be no inflation.
Indeed, numerical scores on such platforms exhibit no inflation, but are rather character-
ized by lower averages, a much higher spread, and, in some cases, a decreasing temporal
pattern (Li and Hitt, 2008; Cabral and Hortaçsu, 2010; Moe and Schweidel, 2012; Godes
and Silva, 2012; Hu et al., 2017). However, the underlying importance of rater costs seems
to persist even when reviews are much more impersonal. In a recent study, Proserpio and
Zervas (Forthcoming) find that after hotels started replying to bad reviews on a travel review
website, the number of users who leave bad feedback decreases, despite no change in hotel
quality. It seems probable that raters might find the hotel’s response embarrassing, and/or
it becomes clear that an actual person is “harmed” by the negative review.
    Reputation inflation is seemingly also present in the non-digital world. For example, there
is widespread concern about grade inflation, and some schools have taken steps to counter
it (Butcher et al., 2014). The debate found in this literature mirrors many of the issues we
examine in this paper, namely whether the increase in grades is due to fundamentals, such
as better student cohorts, or due to different standards, and whether information is lost.
    The grade inflation literature considers the effects of this inflation, with Babcock (2010)
finding evidence that inflated grades seemingly reduce student effort. In this paper, we do
not explore the consequences of reputation inflation, though doing so would be an interesting
next step. We do present some evidence that reputation scores have become less informative
over time in our focal marketplace in Appendix D.
    For would-be marketplace designers, our paper illustrates a core market design problem,
and elucidates its root cause. Whether there are effective platform design responses to this
phenomenon is an open question. Our model suggests some approaches, such as raising the
benefit b to truthfully reporting feedback or lowering the reflected cost coefficient c. Lowering
the penalty from bad feedback also would “work,” though doing so would likely undermine
the purpose of the reputation system.
    To raise b, the platform could provide monetary incentives for users who generate feed-
back, as dissatisfied users often choose not to leave any feedback (Dellarocas and Wood,


                                               32
2008; Nosko and Tadelis, 2015). This approach would be costly to implement, as the total
compensation would have to be analogous to the size of the platform. Platforms could also
emphasize reviewers as performing a service for fellow consumers. Our evidence suggests
that raters have somewhat altruistic motivations in giving ratings, which the platform could
try to tap, emphasizing the assistance reviews provide to other parties or the necessity of
negative feedback to workers in learning how to improve. Platforms could also give other in-
centives for having a reputation for good, “honest” reviews. Local business reviewing website
Yelp employs mechanisms such as badges for top reviewers, as well as making the feedback
score distribution of each reviewer publicly accessible, and casual inspection suggests far
more centered ratings distributions. Mandatory grading curves often found in non-digital
reputation systems are a policy that raises b, though for settings where buyers evaluate sellers
as a “flow” forcing a distribution is challenging.16
    Platforms already take steps to lower c. These steps, such as simultaneously-revealed rat-
ings (in place since the start of the platform) and anonymizing ratings through aggregation
(as was the case with the private feedback change), did not prevent inflation from occurring
in our data. Recent research from other domains suggests that the aggregate effect of retal-
iation concerns is not the primary source of reflected costs; Fradkin et al. (2017) find that
introducing a simultaneous reveal feature in Airbnb reviews only reduced the percentage of
5-star ratings by 1.5 percentage points. An alternative explanation is that reflected costs are
due to raters incurring a greater personal cost—or guilt—the greater the harm they impose
on the rated worker. Our analysis of the private feedback revelation supports this “guilt”
view, as we find that feedback began to inflate following public revelation, even though it
would be hard for workers to retaliate.




  16
     Officer evaluation reports in the US Army limit senior raters to indicating only 50% or less of the officers
they rate as “most qualified.”


                                                       33
References
Abeler, Johannes, Daniele Nosenzo, and Collin Raymond, “Preferences for truth-
 telling,” 2016.

Agrawal, Ajay, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth Lyons, “Does standardized infor-
 mation in online markets disproportionately benefit job applicants from less developed
 countries?,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 103, 1–12.

Aperjis, Christina and Ramesh Johari, “Optimal windows for aggregating ratings in
 electronic marketplaces,” Management Science, 2010, 56 (5), 864–880.

Athey, Susan, Juan Camilo Castillo, and Dan Knoepfle, “Service quality in the gig
 economy,” 2018.

Babcock, Philip, “Real costs of nominal grade inflation? New evidence from student course
 evaluations,” Economic Inquiry, 2010, 48 (4), 983–996.

Barach, Moshe and John J Horton, “How do employers use compensation history?:
 Evidence from a field experiment,” 2017.

Berentsen, Aleksander, Guido Menzio, and Randall Wright, “Inflation and unem-
 ployment in the long run,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (1), 371–98.

Bolton, Gary, Ben Greiner, and Axel Ockenfels, “Engineering trust: Reciprocity in
 the production of reputation information,” Management Science, 2013, 59 (2), 265–285.

Butcher, Kristin F, Patrick J McEwan, and Akila Weerapana, “The effects of an
 anti-grade-inflation policy at Wellesley College,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 2014, 28 (3), 189–204.

Cabral, Luis and Ali Hortaçsu, “The dynamics of seller reputation: Evidence from
 eBay,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2010, 58 (1), 54–78.

Cavallo, Alberto and Roberto Rigobon, “The billion prices project: Using online prices
 for measurement and research,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2016, 30 (2), 151–78.

  , W Erwin Diewert, Robert C Feenstra, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P Timmer,
  “Using online prices for measuring real consumption across countries,” Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.




                                           34
Chan, Jason and Jing Wang, “Hiring preferences in online labor markets: Evidence of a
 female hiring bias,” Management Science, Forthcoming.

Chen, Daniel L and John J Horton, “Are online labor markets spot markets for tasks? A
 field experiment on the behavioral response to wage cuts,” Information Systems Research,
 2016, 27 (2), 403–423.

Council, National Research et al., At what price?: conceptualizing and measuring cost-
 of-living and price indexes, National Academies Press, 2002.

Dellarocas, Chrysanthos, “The digitization of word of mouth: Promise and challenges of
 online feedback mechanisms,” Management Science, 2003, 49 (10), 1407–1424.

  , “Reputation mechanism design in online trading environments with pure moral hazard,”
  Information Systems Research, 2005, 16 (2), 209–230.

   and Charles A Wood, “The sound of silence in online feedback: Estimating trading
  risks in the presence of reporting bias,” Management Science, 2008, 54 (3), 460–476.

Diewert, W Erwin, “Index number issues in the consumer price index,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, 1998, 12 (1), 47–58.

Dimoka, Angelika, Yili Hong, and Paul A Pavlou, “On product uncertainty in online
 markets: Theory and evidence,” MIS Quarterly, 2012, 36 (2), 395–426.

Farrell, Diana and Fiona Greig, “The online platform economy: Has growth peaked?,”
  2016.

Filippas, Apostolos and John J Horton, “The tragedy of your upstairs neighbors: When
  is the home-sharing externality internalized?,” 2017.

Fradkin, Andrey, Elena Grewal, and David Holtz, “The determinants of online review
  informativeness: Evidence from field experiments on Airbnb,” Working paper, 2017.

  , , Dave Holtz, and Matthew Pearson, “Bias and reciprocity in online reviews:
  Evidence from field experiments on Airbnb,” in “Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Con-
  ference on Economics and Computation” ACM 2015, pp. 641–641.

Friedman, Milton, “Nobel lecture: inflation and unemployment,” Journal of political econ-
  omy, 1977, 85 (3), 451–472.

Galı, Jordi and Mark Gertler, “Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis,”
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 1999, 44 (2), 195–222.

                                           35
Gelman, Andrew, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, David B Dunson, Aki Vehtari,
 and Donald B Rubin, Bayesian data analysis, Vol. 2, CRC press Boca Raton, FL, 2014.

Ghose, Anindya, Panagiotis G Ipeirotis, and Beibei Li, “Examining the impact of
 ranking on consumer behavior and search engine revenue,” Management Science, 2014, 60
 (7), 1632–1654.

Godes, David and José C Silva, “Sequential and temporal dynamics of online opinion,”
 Marketing Science, 2012, 31 (3), 448–473.

Hall, Jonathan V and Alan B Krueger, “An analysis of the labor market for Ubers
 driver-partners in the United States,” ILR Review, Forthcoming.

Horton, John J, “Online labor markets,” Internet and network economics, 2010, pp. 515–
 522.

  , “The effects of algorithmic labor market recommendations: Evidence from a field exper-
  iment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2017, 35 (2), 345–385.

  , “Buyer uncertainty about seller capacity; Causes, Consequences and a Partial Solution,”
  Management Science, Forthcoming.

   and Ramesh Johari, “At what quality and what price?: Eliciting buyer preferences as a
  market design problem,” in “Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics
  and Computation” ACM 2015, pp. 507–507.

   and Richard J Zeckhauser, “Owning, using and renting: Some simple economics of
  the “Sharing Economy”,” Working paper, 2017.

  , David G Rand, and Richard J Zeckhauser, “The online laboratory: Conducting
  experiments in a real labor market,” Experimental Economics, 2011, 14 (3), 399–425.

Hu, Nan, Jie Zhang, and Paul A Pavlou, “Overcoming the J-shaped distribution of
 product reviews,” Communications of the ACM, 2009, 52 (10), 144–147.

  , Paul A Pavlou, and Jie Zhang, “On self-selection biases in online product reviews,”
  MIS Quarterly, 2017, 41 (2).

Jin, Ginger Zhe and Phillip Leslie, “The effect of information on product quality:
  Evidence from restaurant hygiene grade cards,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2003, 118 (2), 409–451.


                                            36
Jr, Robert E Lucas and Leonard A Rapping, “Real wages, employment, and inflation,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 1969, 77 (5), 721–754.

Katz, Lawrence F and Alan B Krueger, “The rise and nature of alternative work
 arrangements in the United States, 1995-2015,” 2016.

Kokkodis, Marios and Panagiotis G Ipeirotis, “Reputation transferability in online
 labor markets,” Management Science, 2015, 62 (6), 1687–1706.

Levin, Jonathan D, “The Economics of Internet Markets,” Technical Report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research 2011.

Li, Xinxin and Lorin M Hitt, “Self-selection and information role of online product
  reviews,” Information Systems Research, 2008, 19 (4), 456–474.

Lin, Mingfeng, Yong Liu, and Siva Viswanathan, “Effectiveness of reputation in
  contracting for customized production: Evidence from online labor markets,” Management
  Science, Forthcoming.

Liu, Qingmin, “Information acquisition and reputation dynamics,” The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, 2011, 78 (4), 1400–1425.

Luca, Michael, “Reviews, reputation, and revenue: The case of Yelp.com,” Working Paper,
 2016.

   and Georgios Zervas, “Fake it till you make it: Reputation, competition, and Yelp
  review fraud,” Management Science, 2016, 62 (12), 3412–3427.

Mayzlin, Dina, Yaniv Dover, and Judith Chevalier, “Promotional reviews: An empir-
 ical investigation of online review manipulation,” The American Economic Review, 2014,
 104 (8), 2421–55.

Mishkin, Frederic S, “Inflation targeting in emerging-market countries,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2000, 90 (2), 105–109.

Moe, Wendy W and David A Schweidel, “Online product opinions: Incidence, evalu-
 ation, and evolution,” Marketing Science, 2012, 31 (3), 372–386.

Moreno, Antonio and Christian Terwiesch, “Doing business with strangers: Reputa-
 tion in online service marketplaces,” Information Systems Research, 2014, 25 (4), 865–886.

Nosko, Chris and Steven Tadelis, “The limits of reputation in platform markets: An
 empirical analysis and field experiment,” 2015.

                                            37
Pallais, Amanda, “Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets,” The American Economic
 Review, March 2013, 104 (11).

Proserpio, Davide and Georgios Zervas, “Online reputation management: Estimating
 the impact of management responses on consumer reviews,” Marketing Science, Forth-
 coming.

Resnick, Paul, Ko Kuwabara, Richard Zeckhauser, and Eric Friedman, “Reputa-
 tion systems,” Communications of the ACM, 2000, 43 (12), 45–48.

  , Richard Zeckhauser, John Swanson, and Kate Lockwood, “The value of reputa-
  tion on eBay: A controlled experiment,” Experimental Economics, 2006, 9 (2), 79–101.

Sidrauski, Miguel, “Inflation and economic growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 1967,
  75 (6), 796–810.

Stanton, Christopher T and Catherine Thomas, “Landing the first job: The value of
  intermediaries in online hiring,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 83 (2), 810–854.

Sundararajan, Arun, “From Zipcar to the sharing economy,” Harvard Business Review,
  2013, 1.

Zheng, Alvin, Yili Hong, and Paul A Pavlou, “Matching in two-sided platforms for
 IT services: Evidence from online labor markets,” Working paper, 2016.




                                           38
A      Other reasons for the feedback score increase
The increase in numerical scores we observed in Figure 1b and 2 may be the outcome
of changes related to employer/worker composition, experience, and selection, as well as
changes in the composition of work types transacted on the platform. Though we address
such concerns through the alternative measures approach in Section 3, we believe it is useful
to also offer direct supplementary evidence that the observed pattern persists regardless of
these factors.
    Toward that end, we plot average feedback scores for various subsets of the focal market-
place data in Figure 8. In panel (a) and (b) we plot the average employer feedback scores for
the first transactions of employers and workers respectively. The same increase in feedback
scores holds for both of these cases, suggesting that the observed increase is not a function of
experience: inexperienced employers give higher ratings over time, and inexperienced work-
ers also receive higher ratings. Panels (c) and (d) depict the average feedback scores only for
transactions in which employers and workers respectively are experienced—workers and em-
ployers with more than four previous transactions in the platform. Average scores are only
slightly higher than those of first-time users, but exhibit the same over-time increase. Panel
(e) plots only feedback scores from first time transactions between a pair of employer and
worker, where we observe the same pattern. In panel (f) we plot average feedback scores for
transactions where the employer and worker have transacted in the past. As the employer
chose to transact with the same worker, we expect that the employer was more satisfied.
Indeed, we observe that average scores start higher, yet we see a similar over-time increase
in average numerical scores. Together, panels (e) and (f) indicate that selection can not
explain the observed increase.17 Panel (g) plots average scores for transactions worth less
than 100 US dollars, panel (h) plots average scores for transactions worth more than 1000
dollars, and panels (i) and (j) plot average scores for the two most frequent types of tasks.
We see that the composition of types of transaction in the platform also can not explain the
observed increase.
    Reasons related to selection and composition do not explain the observed trend: in
Section 3 we develop an alternative measures approach that accounts for such reasons, and
show that the observed increase is largely inflationary.
  17
     Further, this reconfirms the findings of panels (b) and (d) in Figure 2. In the home-sharing marketplace,
it is unlikely that selection is a major factor since users are unlikely to repeatedly travel to the same
destination for leisure, while in the service marketplace the platform matches providers with consumers.
Further, supplier capacity is highly constrained in these platforms, and it is hence unlikely that the same
provider will be available in the future.




                                                     39
Figure 8: Monthly average feedback scores assigned by employers to workers for various
subsets of the online labor market data.

                                                                     (a) first transaction for employer                               (b) first transaction for worker
                                                      5.0                                                            5.0
                                                      4.5                                                            4.5
                                                      4.0                                                            4.0
                                                      3.5                                                            3.5
                                                            2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
 Public numerical employer−to−worker feedback score




                                                                        (c) experienced employers                                       (d) experienced workers
                                                      5.0                                                            5.0
                                                      4.5                                                            4.5
                                                      4.0                                                            4.0
                                                      3.5                                                            3.5
                                                            2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                                                               (e) first transaction for employer−worker pair               (f) followup transactions for employer−worker pair
                                                      5.0                                                            5.0
                                                      4.5                                                            4.5
                                                      4.0                                                            4.0
                                                      3.5                                                            3.5
                                                            2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                                                                          (g) cheap transactions                                       (h) expensive transactions
                                                      5.0                                                            5.0
                                                      4.5                                                            4.5
                                                      4.0                                                            4.0
                                                      3.5                                                            3.5
                                                            2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016          2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016

                                                                           (i) most popular task                                      (j) second most popular task
                                                      5.0                                                            5.0
                                                      4.5                                                            4.5
                                                      4.0                                                            4.0
                                                      3.5                                                            3.5
                                                            2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
                                                                                                                 Year

Notes: This figure plots the average public feedback scores assigned in the focal online labor market. Scores
are assigned by employers to workers upon the completion of each transaction, and the scale for feedback is
1 to 5 stars. For each observation, average scores are computed for every time period, and a 95% interval is
depicted for every point estimate. Panels (a) and (b) plot average scores for the first employers’ and workers’
transactions respectively. Panels (c) and (d) plot transactions where employers and workers respectively,
had more than 4 previous transactions on the platform. Panels (e) and (f) plot average scores for each
employer-worker pair’s first, and followup transactions respectively. Panels (g) and (h) plot average scores
for transactions with cost of less than 100 and more than 1000 U.S. dollars respectively. Panels (i) and (j)
plot average scores for the two most common freelancing tasks.


B                                                           Robustness tests for private feedback
B.1                                                          Misinterpreting private feedback
One concern with any new feedback feature is that raters might simply not understand
the new ratings. However, we have evidence that employers, at least collectively, understood

                                                                                                                40
quite well what the scale meant. When asked for private feedback, the platform also displayed
a set of reasons that the employer could optionally select to indicate the reason for their score.
Positive reasons were shown when the assigned feedback was above 5, while negative reasons
were shown otherwise (during the 0 to 10 scale period). We use this “reason” information
to verify that employers did not misinterpret the private feedback question. The fractions of
private feedback reports citing these different reasons against the assigned private feedback
score (1 to 10 scale) are plotted in Figure 9. We can see that there is a clear trend in the
“correct” direction for both scores, indicating that private feedback scores were correctly
assigned, at least on average.

        Figure 9: Fraction of users citing a given reason when giving private feedback, by score.
 Fraction of respondents citing that reason




                                                      poor work quality     missed deadlines        poor communication      padded hours       mistaken identity

                                              0.75
                                              0.50
                                              0.25
                                              0.00
                                                     something else bad      high work quality       made deadlines      good communication   something else good

                                              0.75
                                              0.50
                                              0.25
                                              0.00
                                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 910
                                                                                                 Private feedback score


Notes: This figure plots the fraction of feedback reports that cited each reason as the basis of the feedback
being positive or negative, against the private feedback score given. Across every case, we notice that
employers that assigned more extreme feedback scores tend to cite reasons of the same sentiment more
frequently.




B.2                                                  Selection issues
Another plausible concern is that employers could be self-selecting into when they will leave
private feedback, and that changes in private feedback scores reflect changes in the selection
process. Figure 10 plots the evolution of numerical public feedback for all contracts (solid
line), and contracts for which private feedback was also assigned (dashed line). We observe
that contracts in which private feedback is also assigned receive higher average public ratings,
implying that employer who publicly indicate higher satisfaction are more likely to also assign
private feedback. The two lines closely resemble each other throughout the period where we


                                                                                                       41
collect both types of feedback, indicating no systematic change over time.

       Figure 10: Average public numerical scores for all contracts, and for contracts
       to which private feedback was assigned.

                                  5.0
        Average Numerical Score




                                  4.9

                                  4.8

                                  4.7

                                  4.6

                                  4.5
                                        2015                                     2016
                                                     Month

       Notes: This figure plots the monthly average feedback scores for all contracts (solid line),
       and the monthly average feedback scores for contracts for which private feedback was also
       assigned. A 95% interval is depicted for every observation. Scores are assigned upon the
       completion of each transaction, and the scale for numerical feedback is 1 to 5 stars.

    Another concern is that employers decision to leave private feedback when they leave
public feedback could change over time. Figure 11 plots the percentage of contracts that
received private feedback amongst these contracts that received public feedback. We observe
that there is no systematic change over time in employers’ decisions to assign private feedback
when they assign public feedback. Further, the percentage of employers that chooses to leave
private feedback is high, with an average of 81.4% of employers deciding to also assign private
feedback.


C     Robustness tests for written feedback
C.1     Selection issues
A concern about the use of written feedback as an alternative measure of rater satisfaction
is that employers’ assignment behavior changes over time. In what follows we conduct
robustness tests to identify potential sources of bias for our analysis.
     As with private feedback, a plausible concern is that employers may be more or less sat-
isfied when deciding to assign written feedback in addition to numerical feedback. Figure 12
plots the evolution of numerical feedback for all contracts (solid line), and all contracts for

                                                   42
       Figure 11: Percentage of employers leaving private feedback in addition to
       public numerical feedback.

                                   1.0
        Percentage feedback left


                                   0.9

                                   0.8

                                   0.7

                                   0.6

                                   0.5
                                         2015                                2016
                                                    Month

       Notes: This figure plots the monthly percentage of contracts for which employers assigned
       private feedback, amongst those contracts for which employers also assigned numerical feed-
       back.


which written feedback was also assigned (dashed line). We observe that contracts in which
written feedback is also assigned receive higher ratings, implying that more satisfied employ-
ers assign written feedback. However, the degree to which this bias occurs does not change
throughout our data. Further, since written feedback is positively biased, comparing the
predicted scores from text versus the evolution of all scores gives us a lower bound for the
degree of inflation.
    Similarly to private feedback, a concern is that employers decision to leave written feed-
back when they leave public feedback could change over time. Figure 13 plots the percentage
of contracts that received written feedback for those contracts that also received public feed-
back. We observe that there is no systematic change over time in employers’ decisions to
assign private feedback when they assign public feedback. The percentage of employers that
chooses to leave written feedback is also high, with an average of 79.2% of employers deciding
to also assign written feedback.


C.2      Composition of raters
Shifts in the composition of raters could potentially introduce bias in using written feed-
back as an alternative measure of satisfaction. More specifically, the widening gap between
numerical scores and scores predicted from written feedback could be the outcome of em-
ployers with this rating behavior—employers who assign higher scores for the same written

                                                   43
      Figure 12: Monthly average numerical scores, and monthly average numerical
      scores when written feedback was assigned.
       Average Numerical Score



                                  4.5




                                  4.0



                                        2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
                                                               Month

      Notes: This figure plots the monthly average feedback scores for all contracts (solid line),
      and the monthly average feedback scores for contracts to which written feedback was also
      assigned. Scores are assigned upon the completion of each transaction, and the scale for
      feedback is 1 to 5 stars. For each observation, average scores are computed for every time
      period, and a 95% interval is depicted for every point estimate.

      Figure 13: Percentage of employers leaving written feedback in addition to
      public numerical feedback.

                                  1.0
       Percentage feedback left




                                  0.9

                                  0.8

                                  0.7

                                  0.6

                                  0.5
                                        2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
                                                               Month

      Notes: This figure plots the monthly percentage of contracts for which employers assigned
      written feedback, amongst those contracts for which employers also assigned numerical feed-
      back.


feedback—joining the platform over time, or, equivalently, employers with the opposite rat-
ing behavior dropping out. In the language introduced in Section 3, this issue can be thought

                                                              44
of as a systematic changes in E[ǫ|U ′ ].
    We test against this hypothesis as follows. For a period of time T , we compute the average
residual error ri for each employer i that left feedback during T , defined as the divergence
between the numerical scores and the predicted scores from the associated written feedback
                                                                                     P
employer i assigned. The employer average residual error is then rT =                    i left feedback in T ri .
We then test whether, amongst these employers, there is a systematic drop-out behavior
that has led to employers with wider gaps remaining in the platform in the post period (and,
respectively, whether only employers with narrower gaps were present in the pre-period).
                                           P
We can do so by simply computing rt =         i left feedback in T and t ri , for any t 6= T . If for t > T
the quantities rt show a systematic increase, then this composition shift in rater types may
bias our estimates.
    Figure 14 carries out this analysis for employers who left feedback in January and Febru-
ary of 2009. For the predicted scores, we employ the predictions of the model in the lower
panel of Figure 5. We find no evidence of a systematic trend in neither the pre-period, nor
the post-period, suggesting that our inflation estimates are not subject to this source of bias.
Conducting the analysis for other periods in our data or for other predictive models, yields
qualitatively identical results.

        Figure 14: Employer average residual error in for employers who left feedback
        during January and February 2009.
         Monthly average residual error




                                                               Test period
                                           0.2




                                           0.0




                                          −0.2




                                                 2007   2008      2009   2010   2011     2012   2013   2014   2015   2016
                                                                                       Year

        Notes: This figure plots the employer average residual error over time for the set of employers
        who left feedback during the period indicated by the shaded area. The average residual errors
        are computed for every month, and a 95% interval is depicted for every point estimate.



                                                                                 45
C.3      Predictive algorithm performance
We present more details about the performance of the algorithms used to extract the written
feedback sentiment in Section 3.2.1.
    Figure 15a plots the scatterplot of numerical scores versus predicted scores from written
feedback for the algorithm trained on data coming from the earliest quarter. Figure 15b
plots the same scatterplot for the algorithm trained on data coming from the later quarters.
Since the training data is skewed towards higher scores in both cases, the algorithms are
expected to over-predict, but both predictive models attain good performance, with the mass
of their predictions being close to the 45 degree line. Further, note that this performance is
attained despite the fact that we should expect somewhat large variance between scores and
written feedback amongst different employers. The appropriateness and good performance
of our models is further verified by the fact that the estimates we obtain closely match the
performance of our model-free approach in Section 3.2.2.


D      Examining the informational implications of repu-
       tation inflation
The impact of reputation inflation could be minimal if market participants “know” about
the rate of inflation and adjust accordingly; even if individuals are not well-informed, the
platform could implement statistical adjustments in its design of the reputation system to
uncover the “true” (non-inflated) scores. However, if the pooling in the highest feedback
“bin” becomes acute, statistical corrections cannot recover the lost information. This is
partially due to the fact that, by design, numerical scale systems are prone to top-censoring;
for the question “rate on a scale from 1 to X,” the value of X must be pre-specified.18 Changes
in the reputation system, such as adding a higher ceiling in the feedback scores or additional
dimensions of reputation, may temporarily mitigate—but do not solve—the problem.19
    To see the problem created by top-censoring, consider the information conveyed by the
observation of a binary variable X, as it is captured by the information-theoretic entropy
H(X) = p log(p) + (1 − p) log(1 − p), where p is the probability of one outcome. As p goes to
either 1 or 0, the information conveyed by the variable—in our case, the observed feedback
score—goes to zero. However, this binary characterization of the reputation system is a
simplification that could elide an important way in which rising—and even more compressed
  18
    This is why reputation inflation differs from monetary inflation; a sandwich that used to cost $0.50 and
may now cost $12. However, this could not happen if price was mechanically restricted to be below $1.
 19
    See also https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KOO5S4vxi0o.



                                                    46
                         Figure 15: Numerical score versus predicted score from text scatterplot.
                                    (a) Performance on training set from earliest quarter.

                         5


                         4
       Predicted Score




                         3


                         2


                         1
                             1                2                  3                        4                       5
                                                               Score

                                     (b) Performance on training set from later quarter

                         5


                         4
       Predicted Score




                         3


                         2


                         1
                             1                2                  3                        4                       5
                                                               Score


Notes: The top panel plots the scatterplot of numerical scores assigned to contracts versus numerical scores predicted from the
associated written feedback for the algorithm trained on data from the earliest quarter, while the bottom panel plots the same
scatterplot for the algorithm trained on data from the later quarter. The scale for feedback is 1 to 5 stars. The 45 degree line
represent the performance of a “perfect” prediction algorithm.



scores—could convey just as much (or even more) information. Consider increasing all
nominal scores by some fixed amount and then “shrinking” all scores toward some new
higher mean. This transformation would have no informational implications. To assess


                                                              47
informativeness, we need to take an empirical approach.
    To assess the informativeness of the feedback scores about worker quality over time,
we conduct a variance decomposition, showing how the fraction of unexplained variance in
feedback scores changes over time. Suppose that the data generating process of a worker’s
feedback is
                                  scoreit = ait + ct + ǫit ,                        (A1)

where ait is the worker’s true quality, ct is a baseline time effect, and ǫit is some noise term
such that E[ǫit ] = 0.20 If, over time, more of the variation in feedback scores can be explained
by the variation in the noise term rather than by variation in the quality of individuals, then
a feedback score is becoming less informative of the worker’s true quality.
    Consider a Bayesian employer trying to infer the quality of a worker from a score: the
more the feedback score is attributable to noise, the lesser its impact on the employer’s
posterior belief of worker’s quality after observing this score. To wit, let Pr(a) ∼ N (a0 , σ02 )
be the employer’s prior distribution for worker quality, and let ǫ ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) be the noise
term with known variance σ 2 , and a be the worker’s true quality, which the employer forms
a posterior about after observing a feedback score. After observing the worker’s feedback
score score, the employer’s posterior is
                                                   1
                                                      score + σ12 a0
                                                                                      !
                                                   σ2                       1
                          Pr(a|score) = N               1     1
                                                                 0
                                                                     , 1         1        .
                                                        σ2
                                                           + σ02       σ2
                                                                            +   σ02


From the above equation, as σ 2 → ∞, Pr(a|score) → Pr(a), or in words, as the noise
component of the score explains more of the variance, the observed feedback becomes less
informative, and at the limit, has no effect on the employer’s beliefs.21
    To explore the informativeness of feedback scores empirically, we make two assumptions.
First, for a suitably small window of time (i.e., a quarter), we assume that the baseline time
effect, ct , is fixed. Second, we assume that the population distribution of ait can have a
changing mean, reflecting shifts in worker quality, but its variance is constant; workers could
be getting systematically better or worse, but their abilities are not getting more or less
spread out.
    The fraction of variance due to noise is the quantity

                                      V ar(ǫ)         V ar(a)
                                               =1−             .                                          (A2)
                                   V ar(score)     V ar(score)
  20
     For simplicity, we are treating the feedback score as continuous. The logic is identical in the dichotomous
case.
  21
     Gelman et al. (2014) provide a derivation of this result, which can also be found in most standard
Bayesian analysis textbooks.


                                                      48
If this ratio increases over time, feedback scores are becoming less informative. We can
easily compute this fraction for a time period t by performing the regression implied by
Equation A1—the quantity of Equation A2 is 1 − Rt2 , where Rt2 is the coefficient of determi-
nation from the period t regression.

  Figure 16: Feedback score variance not explained by worker quality over time. Scores are
  reported as percentage differences with respect to the minimum unexplained variance.
   Unexplained Variance




                          0.9
       (normalized)




                          0.6


                          0.3


                          0.0
                                2007   2008   2009   2010   2011     2012   2013   2014   2015   2016
                                                                   Year

  Notes: Unexplained variance is reported the percentage difference with respect to the minimum un-
  explained variance of the time series, which is attained at the first period of this figure. The data of
  each quarter consists of workers with at least 2 jobs in that quarter, as otherwise the fixed effect ait
  would perfectly predict their feedback score. Utilizing different cutoffs does not quantitatively change
  our results.

    We fit the regression described in Equation A1 on the feedback scores generated in every
quarter of our data separately. On each of these regressions, we are using fixed worker effects
to estimate ait , thereby allowing worker quality to evolve in time, even “within” a worker.
Figure 16 plots the percentage difference of 1 − Rt2 from the minimum unexplained variance,
which is found at the first period in our data. The increase in unexplained variance from
2007 to 2016 is about 118% (from 0.32 to 0.70). This strong positive trend in the explained
variance implies that the relative importance of noise in explaining feedback grows over
time, which in turn implies that the informativeness of feedback about worker quality has
deteriorated.




                                                             49
