                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        A THEORY OF STOCK EXCHANGE COMPETITION AND INNOVATION:
                    WILL THE MARKET FIX THE MARKET?

                                            Eric Budish
                                           Robin S. Lee
                                           John J. Shim

                                       Working Paper 25855
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25855


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              May 2019
An early version of this research was presented in the 2017 AEA/AFA joint luncheon address.
We are extremely grateful to the colleagues, policymakers, and industry participants with whom
we have discussed this research over the last several years. Special thanks to Larry Glosten, Terry
Hendershott and Jakub Kastl for providing valuable feedback as conference discussants, and to
Jason Abaluck, Nikhil Agarwal, Susan Athey, John Campbell, Dennis Carlton, Judy Chevalier,
John Cochrane, Christopher Conlon, Shane Corwin, Peter Cramton, Doug Diamond, David
Easley, Alex Frankel, Joel Hasbrouck, Kate Ho, Anil Kashyap, Pete Kyle, Donald Mackenzie,
Neale Mahoney, Paul Milgrom, Joshua Mollner, Ariel Pakes, Al Roth, Fiona Scott Morton,
Sophie Shive, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Mike Whinston, Heidi Williams and Luigi Zingales
for valuable discussions and suggestions. We are also very grateful to seminar audiences at
Chicago, Yale, Northwestern, NYU, Berkeley, Harvard, MIT, UPenn, Columbia, HKUST, KER,
the Economics of Platforms Workshop, NBER IO, and SEC DERA. Paul Kim, Cameron Taylor,
Matthew O’Keefe, Natalia Drozdoff, and Ethan Che provided excellent research assistance.
Budish acknowledges financial support from the Fama-Miller Center, the Stigler Center, and the
University of Chicago Booth School of Business. Disclosure: the authors declare that they have
no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. John
Shim worked at Jump Trading, a high-frequency trading firm, from 2006-2011. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Eric Budish, Robin S. Lee, and John J. Shim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Stock Exchange Competition and Innovation: Will the Market Fix the Market?
Eric Budish, Robin S. Lee, and John J. Shim
NBER Working Paper No. 25855
May 2019, Revised July 2020
JEL No. D02,D44,D47,D53,D82,G1,G2,G23,L1,L13,L5,L89

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper builds a new model of financial exchange competition, tailored to the institutional
details of the modern US stock market. In equilibrium, exchange trading fees are competitive but
exchanges are able to earn economic profits from the sale of speed technology. We document
stylized facts consistent with these results. We then use the model to analyze incentives for
market design innovation. The novel tension between private and social innovation incentives is
incumbents’ rents from speed technology in the status quo. This creates a disincentive to adopt
new market designs that eliminate latency arbitrage and the high-frequency trading arms race.


Eric Budish                                    John J. Shim
Booth School of Business                       Booth School of Business
University of Chicago                          University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                     5807 S Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                       jshim2@nd.edu
eric.budish@chicagobooth.edu

Robin S. Lee
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 120
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robinlee@fas.harvard.edu




A Data Appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25855
1    Introduction
      “We must consider, for example, whether the increasingly expensive search for speed has
      passed the point of diminishing returns. I am personally wary of prescriptive regulation
      that attempts to identify an optimal trading speed, but I am receptive to more flexible,
      competitive solutions that could be adopted by trading venues. These could include fre-
      quent batch auctions or other mechanisms designed to minimize speed advantages. . . . A
      key question is whether trading venues have sufficient opportunity and flexibility to inno-
      vate successfully with initiatives that seek to deemphasize speed as a key to trading success
      in order to further serve the interests of investors. If not, we must reconsider the SEC rules
      and market practices that stand in the way.” (Securities and Exchange Commission Chair
      Mary Jo White, June 2014)

As of 2020, all 13 stock exchanges in the United States use a market design called the continuous
limit order book. Academic research has shown that this market design gives rise to a phenomenon
called “latency arbitrage” (Budish, Cramton and Shim, 2015), defined formally as arbitrage rents
from symmetrically observed public information, as distinct from the rents from asymmetric private
information that are at the heart of classic models of market microstructure (Kyle, 1985; Glosten and
Milgrom, 1985). Latency arbitrage rents, in turn, lead to a socially wasteful arms race for trading
speed. The race for trading speed is currently measured in microseconds (millionths of a second) and
even nanoseconds (billionths). The “size of the prize” in the arms race for speed has recently been
estimated at $5 billion per year in global equities markets (Aquilina, Budish and O’Neill, 2020). This
same study estimates that eliminating latency arbitrage would reduce the cost of liquidity in equities
markets by 17%.
    This paper studies the incentives of stock exchanges to innovate to address latency arbitrage and
the arms race for speed. Researchers and practitioners have identified two market design innovations
that could, in theory, address the problem: asymmetric speed bumps and frequent batch auctions.
Asymmetric speed bumps slow down orders that may potentially “snipe” stale quotes, thus giving a
tiny head start to firms providing liquidity in the event of a race to respond to public information
(Baldauf and Mollner, 2020). Frequent batch auctions slow down all orders, and then batch process
them in discrete time using a uniform-price auction. The discrete-time interval gives firms providing
liquidity time to cancel their stale quotes (like in the asymmetric delay mechanism) and the auction
ensures that any trades that do occur are at a price that reflects the new public information, as
opposed to a price that just became stale (Budish, Cramton and Shim, 2015).
    Implicit in the quote at the top of the paper, delivered in a speech by then SEC Chair Mary Jo
White, is the view that private and social incentives for market design innovation are aligned: if there
is a market design innovation that is efficiency enhancing, then private market forces will naturally
evolve towards realizing the efficiency if allowed to do so. In this view, “prescriptive regulation”
of a specific market design is not necessary, and regulators should instead ensure that they do not

                                                    1
inadvertently “stand in the way” of “competitive solutions.” This is a natural instinct — the standard
case in economics is that if there is a large inefficiency in a market, there will be private incentive to fix
the inefficiency (e.g., Griliches, 1957). However, as is well known, there are numerous economic settings
where private and social incentives for innovation diverge (Arrow, 1962; Nordhaus, 1969; Hirshleifer,
1971).
   This paper’s main insight is that incumbent stock exchanges’ private incentives to innovate their
market designs are misaligned with social interests because they earn economic rents from the arms
race for speed. That is, even though there are many exchanges with little differentiation that appear to
compete fiercely with one another for trading volume, they capture and maintain a significant share of
the economic rents from latency arbitrage. We emphasize that in this paper’s theory the disincentive
to adopt is not due to liquidity externalities, multiple equilibria due to coordination failure, chicken-
and-egg, etc., as is central in the literature on network effects and platform competition (e.g., Farrell
and Saloner, 1985; Katz and Shapiro, 1986; Rochet and Tirole, 2003; Farrell and Klemperer, 2007) and
past market microstructure literature on financial exchange competition (see surveys by Madhavan,
2000 and Cantillon and Yin, 2011). Rather, our theory in the end is ultimately a more traditional
economic one of incumbents protecting rents and missing incentives for innovation.
   The first part of the paper builds a new theoretical model of financial exchange competition,
tailored to the institutional and regulatory details of the modern U.S. stock market. The goal of the
model is both to better understand the economics of stock exchange competition under the status
quo, in which all exchanges employ the continuous limit order book market design, and to be able
to analyze exchanges’ incentives for market design innovation. There are four types of players in
our model, all strategic: exchanges, trading firms, investors, and informed traders. Exchanges are
modeled as undifferentiated and they strategically set two prices: per-share trading fees, and fees for
speed technology that enables trading firms to receive information about and respond more quickly
to trading opportunities on a given exchange. In practice, speed technology includes co-location (the
right to locate one’s own servers right next to the exchange’s servers) and proprietary data feeds
(which enable trading firms to receive updates from the exchange faster than from non-proprietary
data feeds). Trading firms choose the set of exchanges to buy speed technology from. They then
choose whether and how to provide liquidity by choosing the exchange(s) on which to offer liquidity,
the quantity to offer on each exchange, and a bid-ask spread on each exchange. The bid-ask spread
trades off the benefits of providing liquidity to investors (thereby collecting the spread) versus the cost
of either being adversely selected against by an informed trader (as in Glosten and Milgrom, 1985) or
being on the losing end of a latency arbitrage race with other trading firms — i.e., being “sniped” (as
in Budish, Cramton and Shim, 2015).
   Our analysis of the status quo delivers three main results. First, as in Glosten (1994), although
the market can be fragmented in the sense that trading activity is split across several exchanges, eco-




                                                      2
nomically many aspects of trading activity behave as if there is just a single “synthesized” exchange.1
Specifically: all liquidity is at the same prices and bid-ask spreads regardless of the exchange on which
it is offered, with the marginal unit of liquidity indifferent across exchanges due to a one-for-one re-
lationship between the quantity of liquidity on an exchange (i.e., market depth) and the quantity of
trade on that exchange (i.e., volume); and aggregate depth and volume are both invariant to how
trading activity is allocated across exchanges. This behavior is brought about by two key sets of regu-
lations in the U.S.: Unlisted Trading Privileges (UTP) and Regulation National Market System (Reg
NMS).2 UTP essentially implies that stocks are perfectly fungible across exchanges: i.e., a stock that
is technically listed on exchange X can be bought on any exchange Y and then sold on any exchange
Z. Reg NMS ensures that searching among exchanges, and then transacting across (“accessing”) them,
are both frictionless. This frictionless search and access allows market participants to costlessly “stitch
together” the order books across the various exchanges, and yields investor demand that is perfectly
responsive to price differences across exchanges. This behavior also leads to our second result: due
to the same frictionless search and access, investor demand is perfectly elastic with respect to trad-
ing fees as well; hence, fierce Bertrand-style competition yields competitive (zero) trading fees on all
exchanges.
    Our third result is that exchanges can both capture and maintain substantial rents from the sale of
speed technology. This may appear surprising as exchanges are modeled as undifferentiated and search
and access is frictionless; as we have mentioned, these same features lead to competitive trading fees.
There are two reasons why exchanges earn supra-competitive rents for speed technology in equilibrium.
First, even though stocks are fungible across exchanges, latency-sensitive trading opportunities are not:
if there is a sniping opportunity that involves a stale quote on Exchange X, only trading firms that
have purchased Exchange X speed technology will be able to effectively compete in the sniping race.
As long as trading firms multi-home and purchase speed technology from all exchanges (which they
do in equilibrium), exchanges can charge positive fees for speed technology without incentives to
undercut each other. Second, in contrast to basic models of add-on pricing whereby profits from add-
on goods are dissipated by firms selling the primary good below cost (cf. Ellison, 2005; Gabaix and
Laibson, 2006), exchange rents earned from the sale of speed technology are not dissipated via further
competition on trading fees. The reason is that trading fees are already at zero, and cannot become
negative without creating a “money-pump” wherein trading firms execute infinite volume to extract
the negative fee.
    We also prove that although exchanges are modeled as price setters who post take-it-or-leave-it
offers to trading firms for speed technology, exchanges nevertheless cannot extract all of the industry
rents from latency arbitrage. Taking our bound literally, and using realistic parameters for the numbers
   1
     Glosten (1994) presciently foresaw that frictionless search and order-splitting across electronic markets (see his
Assumption 4) could generate what we refer to as the single synthesized exchange (see his Proposition 8), well over a
decade before the passage of Reg NMS. Please see Section 3.3 for discussion of the relationship between Glosten (1994)
and this aspect of our analysis.
   2
     These regulations are described in detail in Section 2 and Appendix A.



                                                          3
of fast trading firms and exchanges, our model suggests that exchanges in aggregate can extract at
most 30% of the total latency arbitrage prize. The reason is that trading firms are able to influence
where volume is transacted, and this allows them to discipline exchanges that attempt to take too
much of the pie.
       This model of the status quo is of course stylized, and in particular abstracts from many impor-
tant aspects of real-world equity markets including agency frictions, tick-size constraints, asymmetric
trading fees, the opening and closing auctions, and strategic trading over time as in Kyle-style models.
Nonetheless, we establish that the model does reasonably well empirically, by documenting a series
of stylized facts that relate to each of the model’s three main results. This work utilizes both the
well-known trades-and-quotes (TAQ) dataset as well as information gleaned from various exchange-
company financial documents (e.g., 10-K’s, S-1’s, merger proxies, fee schedules). The goal of the
empirics is not to persuade the reader that the model is “correct” (no model is), but rather simply to
suggest that our parsimonious model of a complicated industry is sensible.
       The first set of stylized facts relates to our result that the market behaves as if trading activity
occurred on a single synthesized exchange. Specifically, using a sample of highly traded stocks, we
show that (Stylized Fact #1) all major exchanges typically have displayed liquidity at the same best
bids and asks, and (SF#2) there is a one-to-one relationship between the quantity of liquidity on
an exchange and its trading volume, which is what makes the marginal unit of liquidity indifferent
across exchanges in our model. We also show (SF#3) that exchange market shares are interior and
relatively stable (i.e., no tipping), both overall and at the level of individual stocks; this pattern is
not a prediction of our model per se but arguably makes the single synthesized exchange aspect of
equilibrium more plausible. The second set of stylized facts relates to our results about trading fees.
Trading fees are quite complicated, but using a variety of data sources to cut through this complexity,
we compute that (SF#4) the average fee for regular-hours trading, across the three largest stock
exchange families, is around $0.0001 per share per side — or about 0.0001% per side for a $100 stock.
This is not zero, as the theory predicts, but is small.3 We also show (SF#5) that fees do in fact
bump up against the money-pump constraint, as suggested by the theory. The last set of stylized facts
relates to our results about exchange-specific speed technology. We document (SF#6) that exchanges
earn significant revenues from the sale of co-location services and proprietary data feeds. We also
document (SF#7) significant growth in these revenue sources during the Reg NMS era. We estimate
that 2018 proprietary data and co-location revenues are on the order of $1 billion, or about five times
regular-hours trading fee revenues.
       The last part of the paper uses the model to study exchanges’ private incentives to adopt new
market designs that address latency arbitrage. How do exchanges’ private innovation incentives relate
to social incentives, for both incumbents and de novo entrants? To conduct this analysis, we extend our
   3
    The $0.0001 per share per side implies that across the approximately 1 trillion shares traded during regular hours
each year, exchanges earn approximately $200 million in trading fees. While not zero, $200 million is small relative to
both exchange operating expenses and overall exchange revenues (see Section 4.2).



                                                          4
theoretical model to allow for exchanges to operate one of two market designs: either the continuous-
time limit order book (Continuous), or discrete-time frequent batch auctions (Discrete). Importantly,
in the context of competition with the Continuous market, we consider frequent batch auctions with
a very short batch interval: long enough to effectively batch process if multiple trading firms react
to the same public signal at the same time, but otherwise essentially as short as possible.4 Formally,
we assume that the alternative market design eliminates latency arbitrage but does not have any
additional benefits or costs for the market.5 All of this analysis applies equally to the asymmetric
delay design with a very short delay interval.
       We first study a market in which one exchange employs Discrete while all others employ Continuous.
A natural prior is that there will be multiple equilibria, including an equilibrium in which the new
exchange fails to take off. In many models of platform competition, there exist equilibria where a new
platform fails to take off even if in principle it is better designed, if that is what market participants
expect to happen. Instead, we find that there is a unique equilibrium in which the Discrete exchange
attracts all trading volume. The reason is the frictionless search. Intuitively, eliminating latency
arbitrage eliminates a tax on liquidity, and the fact that market participants can frictionlessly access
and search across exchanges ensures that if there are two markets operating in parallel, one with a
tax and one without, the one without the tax will take off.6 The Discrete exchange earns rents in this
equilibrium by charging trading fees that are positive but less than the latency arbitrage tax that it
eliminates.
       We next study a market in which multiple exchanges employ Discrete. Unfortunately for the
innovator, the frictionless search that enables an initial Discrete exchange to get off the ground is a
double-edged sword. We show that in any equilibrium with multiple Discrete exchanges trading fees
are competed down to zero, and trading volume is split among Discrete exchanges with zero fees. That
is, we have the same Bertrand competition on trading fees as in the Continuous status quo, but now
without the industry rents from the speed race.
       Together, these two results imply that the market design adoption game among incumbent ex-
changes can be interpreted as a prisoner’s dilemma: while any one exchange has incentive to unilater-
   4
      In practice, given advances in speed technology over the last several years, 500 microseconds to 1 millisecond would
likely be more than sufficient to effectively batch process; some industry participants have argued to us that as little
as 50 microseconds (i.e., 0.000050 seconds) might suffice. A short batch interval would also allow the frequent batch
auction exchange to satisfy the SEC’s de minimis delay standard and have protected quotes under Reg NMS, which is
significant. Please see Section 5 for the full details of how we model frequent batch auctions, including the important
details regarding information policy which, following Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015), is analogous to information
policy in the continuous market but with the same information (about trades, cancels, the state of the order book, etc.)
disseminated in discrete time, at the end of each interval.
    5
      See Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015) for discussion of potential benefits and costs of frequent batch auctions besides
the elimination of latency arbitrage. In particular, if the batch interval is longer, this may introduce the kinds of benefits
and costs that emerge in models such as Vayanos (1999) and Du and Zhu (2017) and that was discussed in earlier work
on batch auctions by Schwartz (2001).
    6
      This result may seem to contradict the result in Glosten (1994), Proposition 9, that finds that the electronic limit
order book is in a certain sense “competition proof.” The explanation is that the Glosten (1994) model implicitly precludes
the possibility of latency arbitrage. The reason Discrete wins against Continuous in our model is precisely because it
eliminates latency arbitrage. Please see Section 5.2.



                                                              5
ally adopt Discrete, all incumbents prefer the Continuous status quo, in which they share in latency
arbitrage rents, to the counterfactual in which all exchanges are Discrete, and these rents are gone.
This in turn implies that if an incumbent considering whether to adopt Discrete anticipates that imita-
tion by other incumbents would be sufficiently rapid, it would prefer to remain Continuous. A de novo
entrant weighing whether to enter as a Discrete exchange faces a similar tradeoff, except that they
must overcome fixed costs of entry, rather than opportunity costs of losing latency arbitrage rents.
       We emphasize that while this analysis identifies an important wedge between private and social
incentives to innovate, it does not imply that the private incentives to innovate are strictly negative.
This depends on parameters such as the cost of adoption, speed of imitation, and the magnitude of the
latency arbitrage prize. That said, as of this writing, there has been just one proposal for an exchange
design that eliminates latency arbitrage in a displayed, Reg NMS protected market. This proposal
came from the smallest incumbent exchange (the Chicago Stock Exchange, with just 0.5% share at
the time), which had perhaps uniquely low costs of adoption: as an incumbent it did not have to pay
fixed costs of entry, while given its small market share it did not face significant opportunity costs
from the loss of speed-technology rents. CHX’s entry attempt thus suggests that if adoption costs are
low enough, there could indeed be market design innovation that addresses latency arbitrage, which
is consistent with our model. However, CHX ultimately withdrew its proposal after being acquired by
the New York Stock Exchange group.7
       Our analysis also yields a clear, and perhaps surprising, insight about the potential role for policy.
A reasonable prior coming into this analysis is that the relevant question for policy is whether (i)
there will be a private-market solution to latency arbitrage and the arms race, or (ii) would some
sort of market-design mandate be required to fix the problem — which of course raises all of the
usual concerns about regulatory mandates as discussed by Chair White. Our results suggest a third
possibility to consider: a regulatory “push.” By “push” we mean any policy that tips the balance of
incentives sufficiently to get a de novo exchange to enter or an incumbent to adopt. Our analysis shows
that such an initial entrant will gain share, which would not necessarily be the case in a coordination
game environment.
       We discuss two such pushes. First, reducing the costs of adoption, either by direct subsidy or by
finding ways to lower the costs of launching a new stock exchange with a novel market design (e.g.,
   7
    There have been two other exchange design proposals in the US that relate to latency arbitrage but outside of the
displayed, Reg NMS protected market. The Investors’ Exchange (IEX), whose design was approved by the SEC in June
2016, uses a symmetric speed bump (of 350 microseconds), and thus does not address latency arbitrage for displayed limit
orders. For displayed limit orders, its market design is a standard continuous limit order book but with 350 microseconds
of additional artificial distance from participants. IEX’s market design does address latency arbitrage for non-displayed
pegged orders and such orders are currently the source of most of IEX’s trading volume (in the period Jan-June 2020,
displayed orders are 13.4% IEX’s trading volume and non-displayed orders are 86.6% of IEX’s trading volume). Cboe’s
EDGA exchange proposed an asymmetric speed bump in 2019, but proposed for the exchange to not have Reg NMS
quote protection, and proposed a delay amount (4 milliseconds) that was longer than the “de minimis” delay threshold
of 1 millisecond adopted by the SEC in June 2016. EDGA’s proposal was rejected by the SEC in Feb 2020, in part
on grounds that the choice of 4 milliseconds was not adequately justified (“the Commission does not believe that the
Exchange has supported its assertions and demonstrated that the [proposed] delay mechanism is appropriately tailored
to address latency arbitrage and not permit unfair discrimination.” U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2020b)



                                                           6
reducing the costs of the regulatory approval process). Second, a market design exclusivity period
for the innovator, roughly analogous to FDA exclusivity periods for non-patentable drugs. Back-
of-envelope calculations suggest that the magnitude of either push could be modest relative to the
stakes.


Contributions and Related Literature. Our paper makes three sets of contributions to the
literature. First is our theoretical industrial organization model of the stock exchange industry, an
industry which is both economically important per se and of symbolic importance. We depart from
much of the previous literature on financial exchange competition in both our focus — the source of
economic profits for U.S. stock exchanges and their incentives to adopt new market designs — and in
our modeling approach. Most centrally, most other papers in this literature have some sort of single-
homing, either by market participants choosing which one exchange to trade on (e.g., Pagano, 1989;
Santos and Scheinkman, 2001; Ellison and Fudenberg, 2003; Pagnotta and Philippon, 2018; Baldauf
and Mollner, 2019), or by financial instruments that are specific to a single exchange (as in Cantillon
and Yin, 2008). This single-homing is often (though not always) accompanied by some meaningful
differentiation across exchanges, either horizontally or vertically. By contrast in our model, motivated
by the regulatory environment for modern electronic U.S. stock trading, stocks are fungible across
exchanges, market participants can frictionlessly multi-home across exchanges, and exchanges are
undifferentiated. This modeling approach also leads to economics of the status quo that are different
from many platform or two-sided competition frameworks where, typically, platforms earn rents from
platform-specific network effects by charging supra-competitive access or transaction fees (Caillaud
and Jullien, 2003; Rochet and Tirole, 2003; Armstrong, 2006; Farrell and Klemperer, 2007). Here,
since exchanges are modeled as undifferentiated and exchange-specific network effects are nullified due
to frictionless search and access, trading fees are competitive — zero in our model, and very small in
the data — and exchanges are only able to earn rents from the sale of an optional “add-on” service
(speed technology). A related insight of our model that may be of interest to the platforms literature
is that, while the market may appear to be fragmented across multiple exchanges, the market behaves
in some respects as if there were a single “synthesized” exchange.
   There are also two technical features of our theoretical analysis worth highlighting. First, we
develop and motivate an equilibrium solution concept, order-book equilibrium, to address Nash equi-
librium existence issues that arise in Glosten and Milgrom (1985), Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015)
and related models. This solution concept is closely related to alternative solution concepts employed
in the insurance market literature (e.g., Wilson, 1977; Riley, 1979), which also has to deal with exis-
tence issues arising due to adverse selection. Second, our model generates an interior split of latency
arbitrage rents between exchanges and trading firms without relying on an explicit bargaining model;
this arises as a result of exchanges being able to post prices for speed technology (which they do in
reality), and trading firms being able to steer trading volume via the provision of liquidity (which they
can in reality).

                                                   7
       Our paper’s second contribution is the seven stylized empirical facts. In particular, the facts on
trading fees and speed technology revenue are directly applicable to current policy debates, which
have also attracted attention from Jones (2018), Spatt (2019) and Glosten (2020). With respect
to trading fees, while our results do not speak to the agency concerns at the heart of the policy
debate (see Battalio, Corwin and Jennings, 2016), our results do show that, once one cuts through the
complexity of modern fee schedules, the average fees are economically small. With respect to speed
technology fees, in October 2018 for the first time in recent history the SEC rejected proposed data
fee increases by NYSE and Nasdaq (Clayton, 2018), and in February 2020 the SEC proposed reforms
to rules concerning proprietary market data. This paper was cited in a policy address on this topic
by Commissioner Robert J. Jackson Jr. and in the market data reform proposal itself (U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission, 2020a; Jackson, 2020).
       Last is our analysis of the incentives for market design innovation. To be precise, the theoretical
contribution is characterizing unique aspects of equilibrium when there is a single adopter of a novel
market design that eliminates latency arbitrage, and unique aspects of equilibrium when there are
multiple such adopters. These analyses, paired with the earlier analysis of the status quo, enable us
to fill in the cells of the payoff matrix corresponding to a market design adoption game. Once we
understand that the adoption game payoffs constitute a prisoner’s dilemma, as opposed to, e.g., a
coordination game, the rest of the theoretical analysis follows standard ideas from the innovation and
intellectual property literature. We then use this analysis to identify modest potential policy responses
— a “push” as opposed to the “prescriptive regulation” of which the SEC Chair expressed wariness.
We view this contribution as in the spirit of economic engineering (Roth, 2002), working with the
real-world constraints of the specific market design setting, rather than assuming the ability to design
institutions from scratch.8


Roadmap.         The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional
and regulatory details that inform the theoretical model. Section 3 presents and analyzes the theoret-
ical model focusing on exchange competition under the status quo market design. Section 4 presents
the seven stylized facts. Section 5 uses the model to analyze exchange competition when there are
competing market designs. Section 6 discusses policy implications. Section 7 concludes.
   8
     In this spirit our work is related in approach, if not subject matter, to research in market design on topics such as
spectrum auctions (Ausubel, Cramton and Milgrom, 2006; Levin and Skrzypacz, 2016; Milgrom and Segal, 2019), school
choice (Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez, 2003; Abdulkadiroğlu, Agarwal and Pathak, 2017; Kapor, Neilson and Zimmerman,
2020), kidney exchange (Roth, Sönmez and Ünver, 2004; Agarwal et al., 2019; Akbarpour et al., 2019), course allocation
(Sönmez and Ünver, 2010; Budish, 2011; Budish et al., 2017), online advertising (Edelman, Ostrovsky and Schwarz, 2007;
Athey and Ellison, 2011), and transportation (Hall, 2018; Ostrovsky and Schwarz, 2018). There is also a burgeoning
literature specifically on market design issues in financial markets. Recent examples include Allen et al. (2020), Antill
and Duffie (2018), Asquith et al. (2013), Asquith, Covert and Pathak (2019), Bhattacharya, Illanes and Padi (2020),
Brogaard, Hendershott and Riordan (2017), Bulow and Klemperer (2013), Bulow and Klemperer (2015), Du and Zhu
(2017), Duffie and Dworczak (2018), Duffie and Zhu (2016), Hendershott and Madhavan (2015), Hortaçsu, Kastl and
Zhang (2018), Kastl (2017), Kyle and Lee (2017), and Kyle, Obizhaeva and Wang (2018).




                                                            8
2        Institutional Background
Readers of this paper — especially researchers who are less familiar with financial market microstruc-
ture — may have in mind, when thinking of stock exchanges and how they compete, the old New
York Stock Exchange floor. As recently as the 1990s, if a stock was listed on the New York Stock
Exchange, the large majority of its trading volume (65% in 1992) transacted on the New York Stock
Exchange floor. Similarly, if a stock was listed on Nasdaq, a large majority of its volume transacted
on the Nasdaq exchange (86% in 1993).9 In this earlier era, stock exchanges enjoyed valuable network
effects and supra-competitive fees. The seminal model of Pagano (1989) — in which traders single-
home, and there are liquidity externalities that can cause traders to agglomerate on an exchange with
supra-competitive fees — was a reasonable benchmark for thinking about the industrial organization
of the industry.
        This model, however, is less applicable for the modern era of stock trading.10 In our data, from
2015, there are 12 exchanges, all stocks trade essentially everywhere, and market shares are both stable
and interior (i.e., no tipping). There are 5 exchanges with greater than 10% market share each (83%
in total), and the next 3 exchanges together have another 15% share. Please see our discussion of
Stylized Fact #3 in Section 4.1 for further details. Trading fees, while complex and somewhat opaque,
are ultimately quite small, as we will document as Stylized Fact #4 in Section 4.2.
        There are two key sets of regulations that together shape the industrial organization of modern
electronic stock exchanges. We describe them briefly here, and provide further details in Appendix A.
        The first set of regulations, related to Unlisted Trading Privileges (UTP), has its roots in the 1934
Exchange Act and in its modern incarnation enables all stocks to trade on all exchanges, essentially
independently of where the stock is technically listed, with the exception of the opening and closing
auctions which are proprietary to the listing exchange. For the purposes of our theoretical model, we
incorporate UTP in its current form by assuming that the security in the model is perfectly fungible
across exchanges. This captures that regardless of where a security is listed, was last traded, etc., it
can be bought or sold on any exchange.
        The second, Regulation National Market System (Reg NMS), is a long and complicated piece of
regulation implemented in 2007. For the purpose of the present paper, however, there are two core
features to highlight. The first is the Order Protection Rule, or Rule 611. The Order Protection Rule
prohibits an exchange from executing a trade at a price that is inferior to that of a “protected quote” on
another exchange.11 Sophisticated market participants can take on responsibility for compliance with
    9
      Technically, stocks could not be “listed” on Nasdaq until it became an exchange in 2006, but the 1975 Exchange Act
Amendments enabled stocks to trade over-the-counter via Nasdaq achieving something economically similar. For the
NYSE market share claim, see the SEC study “Market 2000”, Exhibit 18 (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
1994). For the Nasdaq market share claim, see the SEC Market 2000 study, Exhibit 12.
   10
      For surveys of modern electronic trading, focusing on a broader set of issues than stock exchanges per se, good
starting points are Jones (2013), Fox, Glosten and Rauterberg (2015, 2019), O’Hara (2015) and Menkveld (2016).
   11
      A quote on a particular exchange is considered protected if (i) it is at that exchange’s current best bid or offer, and
(ii) it is “immediately and automatically accessible” by other exchanges. Reg NMS does not provide a precise definition
of “immediately and automatically accessible,” but the phrase certainly included automated electronic continuous limit


                                                             9
the Order Protection Rule themselves, absolving exchanges of the responsibility for checking quotes on
other exchanges, by using an order type denoted “intermarket sweep order” (ISO). The second is the
Access Rule, or Rule 610. Intuitively, in order to comply with the Order Protection Rule, exchanges
and market participants must be able to efficiently obtain the necessary information about quotes on
other exchanges and efficiently trade against them. The Access Rule ensures that such efficient “search
and access” is feasible — i.e., the Access Rule (and related rules that affect information provision, such
as those governing slower, non-proprietary market data feeds)12 enables market participants to both
search available quotes and then “access” them, i.e., trade against them, with the only marginal costs
of accessing a particular quote on a particular exchange being that exchange’s per-share trading fees.
For our theoretical model, we capture these key provisions of Reg NMS by assuming what we will
call frictionless search and access, on an order-by-order basis. That is, there is zero marginal cost of
search across all exchanges, and there are zero additional marginal costs (beyond per-share trading
fees) of accessing liquidity on a particular exchange or exchanges.13


3     Theory of the Status Quo
We now introduce our model of stock exchange competition. Section 3.1 presents the setup and timing
of the model. Section 3.2 analyzes the model’s equilibria. Section 3.3 discusses the key economic
aspects of equilibria. For this Section, we restrict all exchanges to employ the continuous limit order
book market design. In Section 5 we extend the model and allow exchanges to be strategic with
respect to their market design choice.


3.1    Model

Our model adapts and extends the framework introduced in Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015) (here-
after, BCS). We depart from it in the following ways. First and foremost, whereas BCS examined
order book markets and certainly excluded the NYSE floor system with human brokers. A June 2016 rules clarification
issued by the SEC indicated that exchanges can use market designs that impose delays on the processing of orders and
still qualify as “immediate and automatic” so long as (i) the delay is of a de minimis level of 1 millisecond or less, and
(ii) the purpose of the delay is consistent with the efficiency and fairness goals of the 1934 Exchange Act (U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission, 2016b).
   12
      Investors and brokers who do not utilize proprietary data feeds from exchanges instead use a non-proprietary data
feed called the SIP (Securities Information Processor). The SIP feed provides data on the best bid and offer across
all exchanges, and is relatively cheap, with fees set by a regulatory process and revenues allocated across exchanges
according to a regulatory formula. However, the SIP feed is slower than proprietary data feeds, primarily because of
the time it takes to aggregate and disseminate data from geographically disparate exchanges. The SIP feed also lacks
some additional data that is available from proprietary feeds, specifically data on depth beyond the best bid and offer,
and data on trades of odd lots. One way to think about the SIP feed is that is appropriate for smaller, non-latency
sensitive traders, but not latency-sensitive market participants. For the purpose of the model, we model the SIP as
cheaper (modeled as free) but slower than proprietary feeds. We discuss exchange revenues from the SIP feed briefly in
Section 4.3; we net these revenues out from our estimate of total exchange-specific speed technology revenues.
   13
      Note that “dark pools,” or Alternative Trading Systems, are not governed by Reg NMS. Instead, dark pools typically
facilitate trade at prices that reference the best available quotes from exchanges (e.g., at the midpoint). This of course
raises its own interesting economic issues, specifically that dark pools may “free ride” off of prices discovered by the
exchanges. See, for instance, Hendershott and Mendelson (2000), Zhu (2014), and Antill and Duffie (2018).



                                                            10
trading on a single non-strategic exchange, our model has multiple exchanges who strategically choose
trading fees and speed technology fees in an environment shaped by UTP and Reg NMS. Second, we
introduce a stylized version of informed trading in the spirit of Copeland and Galai (1983) and Glosten
and Milgrom (1985), in order to parsimoniously incorporate traditional adverse selection from informed
trading alongside latency arbitrage. Third, rather than working with a continuous-time model in which
events occur according to exogenous Poisson processes, we instead work with an infinitely repeated
two-period trading game where, in each play of the trading game, either 0 or 1 exogenous events
occur. We view each trading game as lasting a sufficiently short amount of time — e.g., 1 millisecond
or potentially even shorter — that the 0 or 1 exogenous events assumption reasonably approximates
reality.14 This approach will retain the economic interpretability of the continuous-time Poisson model
used in BCS while providing tractability when modeling trading behavior across multiple exchanges.
Last, we develop and employ an alternative equilibrium solution concept for our trading game, order-
book equilibrium. It is well known that Nash equilibria can fail to exist in environments with adverse
selection, such as insurance markets (Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976) and limit order book markets with
private information (Glosten and Milgrom, 1985). Our alternative concept guarantees that an equi-
librium exists for our trading game in a manner similar to alternative equilibrium notions developed
to analyze insurance markets (Wilson, 1977; Riley, 1979).


3.1.1    Setup

There is a single security, x, and a signal of the value of the security, y. We make the purposefully
strong assumption that the signal y is equal to the fundamental value of x, and that x can always be
costlessly liquidated at this fundamental value. The signal y evolves as a discrete-time jump process,
where jumps occur with some positive probability per trading game and the value of the jumps is drawn
from a symmetric distribution with bounded support and zero mean. What will matter economically
is the absolute value of jumps, represented by random variable J. We refer to the distribution of J as
the jump size distribution.
    There are M exchanges, exogenously present in the market, across which security x can be bought
or sold. Our main analysis will focus on the case of M ≥ 2 exchanges but we include the case M = 1
in the model so that the BCS environment is a special case. Exchanges all use the continuous limit
order book market design and are ex ante undifferentiated. The asset x is completely fungible across
exchanges, that is, it can be bought or sold on any exchange and its value does not depend on the
exchange on which it is traded. This fungibility captures the economics of Unlisted Trading Privileges
as discussed in Section 2. We assume that prices are continuous and that shares are perfectly divisible.
  14
     Even for the highest activity symbol in all of US equity markets, SPY, on its highest-volume day of 2018 (February
6th), 95.2% of milliseconds have neither any trade nor change in the national best bid or offer (price or quantity). On an
average day for SPY, 97.6% of milliseconds have neither a trade nor change in the national best bid or offer, and 99.4%
of milliseconds have no trades. On an average day for GOOG, 99.6% of milliseconds have neither a trade nor change
in the national best bid or offer, and >99.9% of milliseconds have no trade. These averages are computed based on a
sample of 12 randomly selected trading days in 2018.



                                                           11
Assuming continuous prices allows us to abstract from the queueing dynamics that are present in
markets with binding tick-size constraints. Assuming that shares are perfectly divisible allows for
any agent to split his desired order, regardless of size, across multiple exchanges. It is substantively
important for the analysis, and also realistic, that agents can split orders across multiple exchanges.
       There are four types of players: Investors, Informed Traders, Trading Firms, and Exchanges. We
refer to the first three types of players as market participants. All players are risk-neutral.
       An Investor arrives stochastically with probability λinvest in each trading game, and has an inelastic
need to buy or sell one unit of x, with buying or selling equally likely. An investor can trade a single
time across multiple exchanges using marketable limit orders (i.e., an investor is restricted to being a
“taker,” and not a “maker,” of liquidity), and then exits the game. Formally, if an investor arrives to
market needing to buy one unit of x, buys a unit at price p, and the fundamental value is y, then her
payoff is v + (y − p), where v is a large positive constant that represents her inelastic need to trade. If
she needs to sell a unit and does so at p when the fundamental value is y, her payoff is v + (p − y).15 As
in BCS (pg. 1583-1586) it is possible to generalize the model to investors with varying-sized demands
(e.g., some require “one” unit, some require multiple units) as long as all investors trade a single time
upon arrival, but the model does not accommodate strategic trading over time as in Kyle (1985) or
Vayanos (1999).
       An Informed Trader with private information about the fundamental value of x also arrives stochas-
tically to the market. In BCS, all jumps in y were public information. Here, we assume that jumps in
y can be either public information, seen by all players at the same time, or private information, seen
only by a single informed trader. Specifically, in each trading game, the probability that there is a
jump in y that is public information is λpublic , and the probability that there is a jump in y seen by
an informed trader is λprivate . Both public and private jumps have the same jump size distribution,
with positive and negative changes being equally likely. If an informed trader observes a jump in
y, he can trade on that information in the current trading game; regardless of the informed trader’s
actions, at the conclusion of the trading game the informed trader exits and any privately observed
information becomes public. The informed trader’s payoff, if he buys a unit of x at price p and the
(new) fundamental value is y, is y − p; similarly, his payoff if he sells a unit of x at price p is p − y.16
       Trading Firms, abbreviated as TFs and present throughout all iterations of the trading game, have
no intrinsic demand to buy or sell x; rather they seek to buy x at prices lower than y and vice versa. If
they buy (or sell) a unit of x at price p, and the fundamental value is y at the end of the trading game,
their payoff is y − p (or p − y). Their objective is to maximize per-trading game profits. We assume
that there are N “fast” trading firms that possess a general-purpose speed technology that enables
their orders to be processed ahead of those without such technology. There is also a continuum of
“slow” trading firms that do not possess such technology. Note, practically, that what we mean by a
  15
     If an investor transacts strictly less than one unit, she receives v times her quantity traded; if an investor transacts
strictly more than one unit, she receives v only for the first unit. In equilibrium, investors transact exactly one unit.
  16
     Our assumption that informed traders act immediately if profitable to do so is in the spirit of Copeland and Galai
(1983) and Glosten and Milgrom (1985); we abstract away from more sophisticated informed trading as in Kyle (1985).


                                                             12
slow trading firm is best interpreted as a sophisticated algorithmic trading firm not at the very cutting
edge of speed, but still fast by non-high-frequency trading standards.
       Exchanges, indexed by j, simultaneously set two prices prior to play of the infinitely-repeated
trading game: (i) a per-share trading fee denoted by fj , and (ii) an exchange-specific speed technology
fee denoted by Fj . The trading fee fj is assessed per share traded and is paid symmetrically by both
sides of any executed trade.17 The exchange-specific speed technology (abbreviated ESST) fee Fj
represents the price of co-location (the right to locate one’s servers next to an exchange’s servers),
access to fast exchange-specific proprietary data feeds, and connectivity/bandwidth fees.18 In reality,
such technology allows trading firms to receive information about and respond more quickly to trading
opportunities on a given exchange. In our model, we treat speed technology as a tie-breaker (as in
Baldauf and Mollner, 2020), meaning that if multiple firms submit messages to an exchange in the
same period of a trading game, the messages that are processed first are those from fast TFs with
ESST on that exchange; next are messages from fast TFs without ESST on that exchange; and last are
messages from slow TFs.19 We assume that the processing order on an exchange is uniformly random
among firms in each of these speed groups. ESST fees are modeled as a rental cost per trading game
charged to TFs, capturing that in practice exchanges typically assess these fees on a rental basis.
       We also require that each exchange sell ESST to at least 2 trading firms or not sell ESST at all.
In the case that only a single TF purchases ESST from a given exchange j, we assume that the TF is
not allowed to use the speed technology on that exchange and both the TF and the exchange incur a
strictly positive non-compliance cost. We believe that this modest fair access requirement — which in
essence prevents an exchange from auctioning off exclusive access to ESST — is consistent with the
statutory requirement under the Exchange Act that fees are “fair and reasonable and not unreasonably
discriminatory” (see Clayton, 2018). For this reason, we also assume that the number of TFs endowed
with general-purpose speed technology is at least N ≥ 3: with only two fast TFs, either one would be
able to unilaterally deny usage of ESST on any exchange to the other one by not purchasing.

       The following objects are primitives of the game: (i) the arrival rates of investors (λinvest ), and of
publicly (λpublic ) and privately (λprivate ) observed jumps in y; (ii) the jump size distribution; (iii) the
number of fast TFs (N ); and (iv) the number of exchanges (M ).
  17
      In practice exchanges often charge different fees for “making” liquidity as opposed to “taking” liquidity; see Section
4.2. However, the assumption of symmetric fees is without loss of generality in our model: since prices are continuous,
only the net trading fee matters for determining equilibrium behavior.
   18
      In practice the dividing line between exchange-specific technology and general-purpose technology is not sharp — for
example, latency sensitive code might be adapted to a particular exchange’s data protocol, and some communications
links are specific to a particular exchange’s data center. The important thing to capture is that each exchange controls
some but not all of the technology that is necessary to be fastest on their own exchange.
   19
      For simplicity we do not allow slow TFs to purchase ESST. In the equilibria we characterize they would not want to
if allowed.




                                                            13
3.1.2      Timing

There are three stages to our game. In Stage One, exchanges simultaneously choose trading and
ESST fees. In Stage Two, trading firms simultaneously decide which exchanges to purchase ESST
from. Finally, in Stage Three, a trading game is repeated infinitely often. Formally:

  1. Stage One (Exchange Price Setting): All M exchanges simultaneously choose per-share trading
        fees f = (f1 , . . . , fM ) and per-trading game ESST rental fees F = (F1 , . . . , FM ).

  2. Stage Two (Speed Technology Adoption): All N TFs with general speed technology simultane-
        ously decide which exchanges to purchase ESST from.

  3. Stage Three (Infinitely Repeated Trading Game): At the beginning of each trading game, there is
        a publicly observed state, which consists of the current fundamental value of the security (y), and
        the current outstanding bids and asks in each exchange’s limit order book (ω = (ω1 , . . . , ωM ),
        where ωj is also referred to as the state of exchange j’s order book). If it is the first play of the
        trading game, the initial fundamental value is y0 , and each exchange’s order book is initially
        empty. Otherwise, the state is determined at the conclusion of the previous trading game and
        ωj for each exchange j contains all limit orders that remain outstanding on that exchange. Each
        trading game is divided into two periods.

         (a) Period 1: Trading firms simultaneously submit orders to any subset of exchanges after
              observing the state (y, ω) at the beginning of the trading game. An order for TF i submitted
              to exchange j is a set of messages denoted by oij ∈ O, where O is the set of all potential
              combinations of messages. We allow for three types of messages: standard limit orders,
              cancellations of existing limit orders, and immediate-or-cancel orders. Standard limit orders
              sent to an exchange take the form (qi , pi ), where such an order indicates that the firm is
              willing to buy (if qi > 0) or sell (if qi < 0) up to |qi | units at price pi . An immediate-or-
              cancel order (abbreviated IOC) behaves similarly to a standard limit order, but with proxy
              instructions to cancel the limit order at the end of the period if it is not executed (or to
              cancel whatever portion is not immediately executed). A TF is also allowed to send no
              messages to a particular exchange j, in which case the TF simply maintains its existing
              limit orders in ωj , if any exist. For each exchange j, all orders sent to exchange j in this
              period are serially processed by the exchange in a random sequence, with the speed of
              the TF sending the order serving as a tie-breaker: first, orders from fast TFs who have
              purchased ESST from the exchange are processed in a uniformly random sequence; then
              orders from fast TFs who have not purchased ESST from the exchange are processed in a
              uniformly random sequence; and last, orders from slow TFs are processed in a uniformly
              random sequence.20
 20
      We assume that market participants can only send at most a single order (set of messages) to an exchange each



                                                         14
        (b) Period 2: After period-1 orders have been processed by each exchange and incorporated
             into each exchange’s order book, nature moves and selects one of four possibilities:
              i. With probability λinvest : an investor arrives, equally likely to need to buy or sell one
                 unit of x. The investor has a single opportunity to send IOCs to all exchanges. The
                 investor’s activity may affect ω; y is unchanged.
              ii. With probability λprivate : an informed trader privately observes a jump in y. The
                 informed trader has a single opportunity to send IOCs to all exchanges. The informed
                 trader’s activity may affect ω; the jump in y is then publicly observed.
             iii. With probability λpublic : there is a publicly observable jump in y. All TFs have a single
                 opportunity to submit an order consisting of IOCs and cancellation messages to each
                 exchange. For each exchange j, orders sent to exchange j in this period are serially
                 processed in a random sequence by the exchange, with speed serving as a tie-breaker
                 as in Period 1. Orders sent in this period may affect ω.
             iv. With probability 1 − λinvest − λprivate − λpublic ≥ 0: there is no event; y and ω are both
                 unchanged.

        The state (y, ω) at the end of the trading game remains the state for the beginning of the next
        trading game.


3.1.3     Discussion of Institutional Details

Unlisted Trading Privileges (UTP). As noted before, we incorporate UTP into the model by
having the same asset trade on all exchanges, and by having the value of the asset be completely
independent of the exchange on which it is bought or sold. We emphasize that the model is not
designed to study the interesting and important role of the opening and closing auctions, which are
proprietary to the exchange on which the stock is listed, and which are not subject to the market
design criticism in BCS. Rather, our model is of regular-hours stock exchange trading (about 90% of
exchange volume), for which UTP makes the listing exchange irrelevant.


Regulation National Market System (Reg NMS). The Stage 3 trading game implicitly as-
sumes that all market participants face, on an order-by-order basis, what we call frictionless search
and access. More specifically, by frictionless search we refer to the fact that all market participants
observe the current state of the order book on all exchanges, ω, at zero cost prior to taking any action
in any period of a trading game. By frictionless access we refer to the fact that the marginal cost of
sending any message to any exchange is zero; equivalently, the only per-order cost of transacting on
any exchange is the per-share trading fee.
period, and that exchanges process all messages within an order before processing any other order. This implies that
market participants cannot improve the chances of their messages being processed faster by sending additional messages.




                                                          15
Synchronizing Trades Across Exchanges.              The Stage 3 trading game implicitly assumes that
investors and informed traders, upon arrival to the market, can synchronize their orders across ex-
changes such that they can execute trades across multiple exchanges before other market participants
can react. That is, an investor or informed trader can send trades to exchanges j and j 0 such that their
arrival times are sufficiently synchronized that it is not possible for a TF to observe the activity on
exchange j and respond on exchange j 0 , before the investor or informed trader’s own order reaches j 0 .
This is captured in the model by allowing the investor or informed trader to trade on all exchanges in
Period 2 before TFs see the updated state and can react in Period 1 of the subsequent trading game.
   Our impression, both from discussions with industry practitioners and our understanding of the
relevant engineering details, is that while the ability to synchronize orders in this manner was pretty
variable in the early days of Reg NMS, it is now widespread and commodified. Difficulty with such
synchronization was at the heart of the narrative in Michael Lewis’s book Flash Boys (Lewis, 2014),
and is modeled carefully in Baldauf and Mollner (2020).


3.2     Equilibrium Analysis

3.2.1    Stage Three Trading Game in the BCS Environment

We begin our equilibrium analysis by analyzing the Stage 3 trading game in the subgame of our model
that corresponds most closely to the environment in BCS: there is only a single exchange (M = 1),
this exchange sets trading fees of zero (f1 = 0), and all N trading firms with general speed technology
also have exchange-specific speed technology on this exchange, and hence are equally fast. The level
of the ESST fee F1 is not important for this exercise, only the assumption that we are in the subgame
where all N fast TFs are equally fast on the one exchange.
   The analysis of this subgame will be a helpful input into the analysis of the full model for two
reasons. First, it is the most intuitive environment in which to introduce and motivate the solution
concept of order book equilibrium. Second, the economics in this environment will be a helpful guide
to the economics of the full model. In particular, in our analysis of the full model, we will confirm
that there are equilibria in which all active exchanges set trading fees of zero and all N trading firms
purchase ESST on all active exchanges, and that in these equilibria the effect of sniping on the market’s
cost of liquidity carries through from this special case.
   For Stage 3 (both here and later with multiple exchanges), we restrict attention to pure Markov
strategies: market participants play pure strategies that may only condition on the publicly observable
state, and not on the history of play in previous trading games. In period 1 of a trading game, the
state consists of the public value of y and the state of the order book ω that carries over from the end
of the previous trading game. In period 2 the state consists of the updated state of the order book ω
based on play in period 1, and the updated value of y if nature selected a public or private jump.
   Even though the trading game is infinitely repeated, we will first analyze each trading game in
isolation, thereby ignoring the possibility that actions in one trading game may affect continuation


                                                   16
payoffs in subsequent games. We then check and show that repeated play of the equilibrium that we
construct for a single trading game remains an equilibrium for the infinitely repeated trading game
when such interactions are accounted for.

Period 2: Optimal Play.            Working backwards, note that regardless of which outcome nature
chooses in period 2 of a given trading game, market participants’ optimal strategies in period 2 are
straightforward to characterize:

  • Investor or Informed Trader Arrival. If either an investor arrives or an informed trader arrives
     in Period 2, they have essentially unique optimal strategies given the state. An investor sends
     an IOC order to trade up to one unit in their desired direction; additionally, if there are any
     remaining orders that are profitable to trade against based on the publicly observed state y the
     investor trades against those as well (this latter case will not occur on the equilibrium path).
     An informed trader sends an IOC order to trade against any orders that are profitable to trade
     against based on their privately observed y.

  • Publicly Observed Jump. If there is a publicly observed jump in y, there are two cases to
     consider. First, if y jumps to a value at which it is not profitable to trade given the state of
     the order book (i.e., y increases to a price lower than the best ask or decreases to a price higher
     than the best bid), then no trades occur. Any TF providing liquidity that wishes to replace an
     order is indifferent between canceling that order immediately and waiting until the beginning
     of the following trading game to do so. Second, if y jumps to a value at which it is profitable
     to trade given the outstanding bids and asks in the exchange’s order book, there is a sniping
     race as described in BCS: any fast TFs that are providing liquidity at unprofitable prices send
     cancellation messages to the exchange to try to cancel these stale quotes, while at the same time
     all other fast TFs send IOCs to the exchange to try to trade against (“snipe”) these stale quotes.
     Note that fast TFs may simultaneously try to cancel their own quotes and snipe others’ quotes.
     Since the processing order among the N fast TFs is random, fast TFs providing liquidity will
     get sniped with probability      N .
                                     N −1
                                            If a slow TF is providing liquidity, all N fast TFs try to snipe
     them and the slow TF is sniped with probability 1. Either way, fast TFs attempting to snipe
     succeed with probability   N.
                                1


We assume that market participants follow these essentially unique optimal (i.e., dominant) strategies
in period 2, conditional on the stochastic decision by nature. The analysis of each trading game then
simplifies to understanding TF behavior in period 1.

Period 1: Bid-Ask Spread Indifference Condition. Consider a fast TF choosing to provide
liquidity via non-marketable limit orders at the beginning of period 1. Since investors are equally
likely to arrive needing to buy or sell one unit of x and the distribution of jumps in y is symmetric
about zero, it is convenient to focus on the provision of liquidity via two limit orders: for a given

                                                      17
quantity q and fundamental value y, the TF submits an order to buy x at y − s/2, and an order to
sell x at y + s/2 for some bid-ask spread s ≥ 0. In traditional models of adverse selection (Copeland
and Galai, 1983; Glosten and Milgrom, 1985), the benefit of offering to either buy or sell 1 unit of x
at a spread of s (when there is no additional liquidity offered in the order book) is earning the bid-ask
spread if an investor arrives and trades, which in a single play of our trading game yields benefit
equal to λinvest · 2s per-unit in expectation; and the cost of such liquidity provision is the cost of being
adversely selected if the informed trader sees private information and trades, which in a single play
of our trading game equals λprivate · L(s) per-unit, where L(s) ≡ Pr(J > 2s ) · E(J − 2s |J > 2s ) is the
expected adverse selection loss to a liquidity provider upon arrival of a privately observed jump in y.
      The continuous limit order book market design imposes an additional cost of liquidity provision,
namely sniping: with probability λpublic · NN−1 a fast liquidity provider is sniped, and the loss if sniped is
also L(s) per-unit. For a fast TF to be indifferent between providing 1 unit of liquidity at some bid-ask
spread and sniping a rival TF offering that same amount of liquidity at the same spread (succeeding
with probability      N ),
                      1
                             the spread s∗continuous must satisfy:21

                                           s∗continuous
                               λinvest ·                = (λpublic + λprivate ) · L(s∗continuous ).                             (3.1)
                                                 2

Note that the cost of getting sniped on the right-hand side of (3.1), λpublic · L(s∗continuous ), reflects both
the   N −1
       N     probability that a fast liquidity provider loses the race to respond to public information, as
well as a    1
             N   factor that captures a fast liquidity provider’s opportunity cost of not themselves sniping.
For this reason equation (3.1) also reflects the bid-ask spread at which a slow TF is indifferent between
providing liquidity and not. A slow TF who provides liquidity at (3.1) gets sniped with probability
1 in the event of a public jump as opposed to probability                      N −1
                                                                                N     for a fast TF, but the slow TF does
not need to be compensated in equilibrium for the opportunity cost of not sniping.22 Equation (3.1)
has a unique solution since the left-hand side is strictly increasing and the right-hand size is strictly
decreasing in s∗continuous , and the left-hand side is less than the right-hand side when the spread is 0.


Order Book Equilibrium. Given optimal period-2 play as described above and our restriction to
pure Markov strategies, a natural solution concept for period-1 behavior in the infinitely repeated
Stage 3 trading game would be pure-strategy Markov perfect equilibrium (MPE). For a single play
of the Stage 3 trading game, MPE is equivalent to Nash equilibrium. However, neither a MPE of
the repeated trading game, nor a Nash equilibrium of a single play of the trading game, exists. This
existence issue has been known to the literature since Glosten and Milgrom (1985). The key intuition
   21
      If public and private information had different jump distributions, denoted Jpublic and Jprivate , the right-hand side of
(3.1) would be λpublic ·Pr(Jpublic > 2s )·E(Jpublic − 2s |Jpublic > 2s )+λprivate ·Pr(Jprivate > 2s )·E(Jprivate − 2s |Jprivate > 2s ).
Since assuming that public and private information have the same jump distribution simplifies the expression considerably
without loss of economic meaning, we adopt that assumption, even though in practice the two distributions could of
course be different.
   22
      Evidence in Aquilina, Budish and O’Neill (2020) suggests that both cases, i.e., both fast and slow TFs providing
liquidity that sometimes gets sniped, are empirically relevant.



                                                                 18
is that if in period 1 there is some TF providing a single unit of liquidity at a hypothesized equilibrium
spread, then, on the one hand, other TFs do not have incentive to offer additional liquidity at this
spread (because they would suffer adverse selection and sniping without adequate compensation), but
on the other hand, this leaves the TF who is providing liquidity incentive to deviate by widening their
spread.23
    This non-existence result arises because of adverse selection. In the standard model of undifferen-
tiated Bertrand competition without adverse selection, a Nash equilibrium exists with marginal-cost
pricing: “excess liquidity provision” by any firm willing to sell as much as the market demands at
marginal cost is riskless and constrains the price that other firms can charge. In contrast, in our
environment the expected cost of providing liquidity depends on the mix of trading counterparties,
which in turn depends on the liquidity provided by rivals. Hence, TFs are not willing to provide excess
liquidity in the order book to constrain others’ spreads, as they would be exposed to adverse selection
and sniping risk without the full benefit of being filled by uninformed investors.
    To address this non-existence issue, we introduce an alternative equilibrium solution concept, order
book equilibrium, which strictly weakens MPE (or, in a single play of the Stage 3 trading game, strictly
weakens Nash equilibrium). Whereas MPE requires that no players have profitable deviations, OBE
allows for strictly profitable deviations to exist as long as they are rendered unprofitable by one of two
specific reactions from rivals.
    The first type of reaction allows for TFs to provide additional liquidity at a better price if profitable
to do so (a “profitable price improvement”). This means that if a TF that is providing liquidity
unilaterally deviates by widening their spread, another TF could undercut and provide additional
liquidity in response; hence, TFs are able to discipline equilibrium price levels without having to
put excess liquidity in the order book. This captures the spirit of competitive liquidity provision, as
discussed and assumed in Glosten and Milgrom (1985), but in our setting where fast TFs earn strictly
positive profits.
    The second type of reaction allows for TFs to withdraw liquidity in response to deviations if
profitable to do so. This reaction addresses a profitable deviation that we call “have your cake and
eat it too,” in which one TF adds liquidity at a slightly lower spread to both earn revenues from
liquidity provision and earn rents from sniping the liquidity it just undercut. If a TF engaged in such
a deviation, any rival TF whose quotes are undercut is able to withdraw if it would like to do so (e.g.,
if its liquidity would no longer be filled by an investor).
   23
      Here is a short proof of the non-existence claim for a single play of the trading game. Consider any set of TF strategies
where, at the end of period 1, exactly one unit of liquidity is offered, for instance at spread s∗continuous as defined in
(3.1). This cannot be a Nash equilibrium because any TF that is providing liquidity strictly prefers to deviate and widen
their spread: this strictly increases the TF’s profits if an investor arrives, and strictly reduces the TF’s expected adverse
selection and latency arbitrage costs. If instead strictly greater than one unit of liquidity is offered, then any liquidity
that would not be filled by an investor with certainty (either because there is at least one unit of liquidity that is more
attractively priced, or because it is tied and would only get filled with some probability less than one) has a strictly
profitable deviation as well, either to be withdrawn or to be offered at a slightly narrower price (jumping the queue if
tied). Last, if there is strictly less than one unit of liquidity offered, there is a strictly profitable deviation to add the
missing amount at a high spread, in case an investor arrives. Hence, there is no Nash equilibrium.


                                                              19
       By using anticipated reactions to counter otherwise profitable deviations, OBE captures the idea
that each exchange’s limit order book settles into a rest point in which no trading firm wishes to add
or remove any liquidity from any exchange’s order book, until the next arrival of an investor, informed
trader, or public information. We provide the formal definition of OBE, as well as a detailed example
that provides intuition for why it helps to restore equilibrium existence, in Appendix B.2.
       Similar restrictions on the set of allowable deviations have been employed by alternative solution
concepts in insurance markets. Our particular concept is closest in spirit to and borrows inspiration
from the E2 equilibrium in Wilson (1977) and the reactive equilibrium in Riley (1979) (see also dis-
cussion in Engers and Fernandez, 1987; Handel, Hendel and Whinston, 2015).24 Our relation to this
literature is not accidental: both financial and insurance markets feature adverse selection, and in
both settings firms that are “undercut” by a rival (who offers a better price, or who offers a product
that attracts less adversely selected consumers) may wish to withdraw from the market rather than
face an adversely selected set of trading partners.


Equilibrium in the BCS Environment. We can now formally characterize equilibrium of the
Stage 3 trading game in the BCS environment. Our solution concept is order book equilibrium for
period 1 in anticipation of optimal play in period 2. Several aspects of equilibrium are unique:

Proposition 3.1. Consider the infinitely repeated Stage 3 subgame with a single exchange (M = 1),
charging zero trading fees (f1 = 0), and with all N fast trading firms having purchased exchange-
specific speed technology from this exchange. Any equilibrium has the following properties. In period
1 of each trading game: a single unit of liquidity is provided at bid-ask spread s∗continuous (defined in
(3.1)) around the current value of y. In period 2 of each trading game: an investor, upon arrival,
immediately transacts one unit at the best bid or offer; an informed trader, upon arrival, immediately
                                                                                                            s∗continuous
transacts one unit at the best bid or offer if their privately-observed jump in y exceeds                         2      ;   and
                                                                  s∗continuous
if there is a publicly-observed jump in y that exceeds                  2      ,   there is a sniping race in which all fast
trading firms attempt to trade against stale quotes provided by any trading firm other than themselves,
and all fast trading firms providing liquidity attempt to cancel their stale quotes. Such an equilibrium
exists.

       (All proofs in appendix.) The proof confirms that repeated play of any order book equilibrium in
which period-1 TF strategies condition only on the publicly observable state (y, ω) comprises an order
book equilibrium of the infinitely repeated trading game. Since the bid-ask spread is s∗continuous in any
  24
     Both Wilson (1977) and Riley (1979) examine equilibria among firms providing insurance policies, and introduce
solution concepts that admit dynamic responses to deviations in order to address related equilibrium existence issues.
A set of policies comprises an E2 equilibrium (Wilson, 1977) if there are no strictly profitable unilateral deviations that
remain profitable even if policies, rendered unprofitable by the deviation, are withdrawn. A set of policies comprises a
reactive equilibrium (Riley, 1979) if there are no strictly profitable unilateral deviations that remain profitable even if a
rival reacted by offering additional policies, and such a reaction would not generate losses for the rival even if additional
policies were offered. To counter profitable deviations, our order book equilibrium solution concept allows for two types
of reactions: the withdrawal of unprofitable liquidity (similar to Wilson), and the addition of liquidity that must remain
profitable even if others’ liquidity could then be withdrawn (similar to Riley).


                                                             20
order book equilibrium of an individual trading game, beginning at any publicly observable state, each
fast TF earns the same amount in expectation,            1
                                                         N λpublic   · L(s∗continuous ), whether it provides liquidity
or snipes stale quotes, and slow TFs earn zero in expectation whether they provide liquidity or do
nothing. As a result, as long as other TFs play strategies prescribed by an order book equilibrium, no
individual TF has a profitable deviation even when future play is accounted for.


3.2.2    Equilibrium of the Full Exchange Competition Game

We now turn to equilibrium of the full exchange competition game. Recall that in Stage 1, the M
exchanges simultaneously choose trading fees and exchange-specific speed technology (ESST) fees; in
Stage 2, the N fast TFs make their ESST purchase decisions; in Stage 3, the infinitely repeated trading
game is played, only now with multiple exchanges. Our equilibrium concept is subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium for Stages 1 and 2, order book equilibrium for Stage 3 period 1, and that participants play
their essentially unique optimal strategies in Stage 3 period 2.
    The main result of this Section is Proposition 3.2 (below), which states that there exist equilibria
of the exchange competition game with the following key properties. First, all exchanges charge zero
trading fees — i.e., trading fees are competitive. Second, exchanges charge positive ESST fees, and
all fast TFs purchase ESST from all exchanges with positive market shares. These ESST fees are
bounded above meaning that exchanges cannot fully extract all latency arbitrage rents from fast TFs.
Last, in each trading game, a single-unit of liquidity is provided at spread s∗continuous as in the BCS
environment studied above, but now this liquidity is spread across multiple exchanges according to
a vector of market shares, denoted σ ∗ . Investors and informed traders, when they arrive, split their
orders across exchanges according to σ ∗ . In the event of a sniping race, it plays out in parallel across
all M exchanges, with all N fast TFs racing on all M exchanges. In essence, market participants
use frictionless search to “synthesize” a single exchange from the M parallel exchanges, and then act
economically the same way as in the single exchange case. The main difference here is that exchanges
and fast TFs now split the rents generated from sniping.

Proposition 3.2. Consider the full exchange competition game with M ≥ 2 exchanges. For any
vector of market shares σ ∗ = (σ1∗ , . . . , σM
                                              ∗ :       σj∗ = 1), and for any vector of exchange-specific speed
                                                    P
                                                    j
technology (ESST) fees F ∗ = (F1∗ , . . . , FM
                                             ∗ ) that satisfies the condition given by (3.2) below, there

exists an equilibrium where:
    (Stage 1): Each exchange j charges Fj∗ for ESST, and charges zero trading fees (fj∗ = 0);
    (Stage 2): All N fast trading firms purchase ESST from every exchange j where σj∗ > 0;
    (Stage 3): The following occurs in every iteration of the trading game given state (y, ω). At the
end of period 1, σj∗ quantity of liquidity is provided on each exchange j at spread s∗continuous (defined
in (3.1)) around y. In period 2: an investor, upon arrival, immediately transacts σj∗ at the best bid or
offer on each exchange j; an informed trader, upon arrival, immediately transacts σj∗ at the best bid
                                                                                        s∗continuous
or offer on each exchange j if their privately-observed jump in y exceeds                     2      ;   and if there is a


                                                          21
                                          s∗continuous
publicly-observed jump that exceeds             2      ,   a sniping race occurs on all exchanges, in which all fast
trading firms attempt to trade against all stale quotes provided by trading firms other than themselves,
and all fast trading firms providing any liquidity on any exchange attempt to cancel their stale quotes.


   The condition on ESST fees is:

                           Π∗continuous                          lone−wolf
                                                   Fj∗ ≥ max(0, πN         − min Fj∗ ),                        (3.2)
                                            X
                                        −
                                N         j:σ ∗ >0
                                                                              j
                                                j


                                                                                       lone−wolf
where Π∗continuous ≡ λpublic ·L(s∗continuous ) denotes the total “sniping prize,” and πN         is a constant
discussed below and defined in Appendix B.3.2, equation (B.3).

   The proof of this result is constructive. We first examine behavior in the multi-exchange version
of our trading game in Stage 3, and show that if all N fast trading firms purchase ESST from every
exchange and all exchanges set zero trading fees, then any order book equilibrium of the multi-exchange
trading game replicates the outcome of the single exchange trading game described in Proposition 3.1
across multiple exchanges (Lemma B.1). In the equilibria that we construct, investors’ routing table
strategies, i.e., how they break ties if indifferent across exchanges, serve to coordinate TFs’ liquidity-
provision decisions with investors’ trade-routing decisions. Economically, the key feature of equilibrium
of Stage 3 is that the marginal unit of liquidity is equally profitable across all exchanges, because each
exchange’s share of liquidity provided (“depth”) matches its share of volume from investors. How
trading activity is ultimately split across exchanges, however, is not pinned down: indeed, for any
arbitrary split of market shares σ ∗ = (σ1∗ , . . . , σM
                                                       ∗ ), there is an equilibrium in which each exchange j’s

share of depth and volume are each exactly σj∗ .
   We next examine behavior in Stage 2, and prove that if each exchange j charges Fj∗ for ESST fees
and zero for trading fees, it is an equilibrium for all fast TFs to purchase ESST from all exchanges as
long as condition (3.2) is satisfied. If all fast TFs purchase ESST from all exchanges, in any order book
equilibrium of the subsequent trading game, each fast TF obtains (in expectation, gross of ESST fees)
                                      Π∗continuous
their share of the sniping prize,          N       .   We analyze a specific deviation for fast TFs, the lone-wolf
deviation, and show that it is the most attractive deviation to consider, hence ruling it out is sufficient.
In the lone-wolf deviation, instead of purchasing ESST from all exchanges, a fast TF deviates and
purchases ESST from just a single exchange in Stage 2, and then provides a single unit of liquidity in
each Stage 3 trading game on this single exchange at a spread that is strictly narrower than s∗continuous
(which we prove to be an equilibrium of the Stage 3 subgame; Lemma B.2). In doing so, the deviating
TF attracts all trading volume to the one exchange on which they are fast. Since the deviating TF
provides liquidity at a spread narrower than s∗continuous they earn an amount per trading game of
                   Π∗continuous
strictly less than      N       ; Appendix B.3.2, equation         (B.3) derives the amount earned explicitly, and
              lone−wolf             Π∗continuous Π∗continuous
shows that   πN          ∈ (N   −2
                             N −1 ×      N      ,     N       ).   Condition (3.2) in the statement of Proposition
3.2 ensures that this lone wolf deviation is not profitable, as each fast TF earns more in expectation by

                                                              22
                                                    Π∗continuous
purchasing ESST from all exchanges and earning           N       per trading   game than purchasing ESST
                                           lone−wolf
from just a single exchange and earning   πN         per trading game.
   Proposition 3.3 in Section 3.3 will use condition (3.2) to characterize an upper bound on exchanges’
total rents from ESST. Intuitively, the bound requires that exchanges leave enough rent for fast TFs
so as not to tempt them to deviate. It is worth emphasizing that if there were only a single exchange,
the fast TFs could not leverage the lone-wolf deviation to play exchanges off against each other, and
the single exchange would be able to extract the entire sniping prize Π∗continuous via ESST fees.
   Last, we examine Stage 1 and show that there is an equilibrium of the full game in which exchanges
all charge zero trading fees and charge ESST fees that satisfy condition (3.2). Given equilibrium
strategies in Stages 2 and 3, any exchange that raises its trading fee from zero gets zero share.


3.3   Discussion

We now discuss the three main features of the equilibria described in Proposition 3.2. In Section 4,
we show that these features are consistent with patterns that we observe in the data.


Single Synthesized Exchange. Regulatory features of the U.S. equities market, specifically Reg
NMS and UTP, support an environment where market participants can “stitch” together multiple
exchanges into what we refer to as a single synthesized exchange. Specifically, all equilibria described
in Proposition 3.2 share the following three features. First, in every trading game, all exchanges with
positive depth have the same bid-ask spread s∗continuous , resulting in a common market-wide best bid
and offer. Second, each exchange’s share of market depth at this spread is equal to its equilibrium
share of market volume. Last, multiple exchanges are able to maintain positive market shares without
the market tipping to any one exchange. Indeed, as proven in Proposition 3.2, there exists a continuum
of equilibria that supports any arbitrary vector of market shares.
   The key intuition behind these results is that, as long as depth and volume are equivalent across all
exchanges, equation (3.1) which characterizes the equilibrium benefits and costs of providing liquidity,
and hence the equilibrium bid-ask spread, applies equally to all liquidity on all exchanges. Liquidity
on an exchange with 20% volume share and 20% depth share enjoys 20% of the market’s total benefit
from providing liquidity to investors on the left-hand-side of (3.1), while incurring 20% of the market’s
total adverse selection and sniping cost on the right-hand-side of (3.1). An exchange with 10% volume
and depth share enjoys 10% of the total benefit and 10% of the total cost. As long as the depth to
volume ratio is the same across all exchanges, the marginal unit of liquidity is equally well off across
all exchanges. If some exchange has too much depth relative to its volume, liquidity providers will
suffer too much adverse selection and sniping relative to the benefits of liquidity provision. If some
exchange has too little depth relative to its volume, the reverse is true.
   These results are closely related to Glosten (1994) and Ellison and Fudenberg (2003). Glosten
(1994) considers a model with multiple limit order book exchanges under the assumption that “an



                                                   23
investor can costlessly and simultaneously send separate orders to each exchange” (pg. 1146), i.e.,
frictionless search and access. He shows that multiple exchanges can coexist in equilibrium if their
liquidity schedules add up to what would have been provided on a single exchange. Ellison and
Fudenberg (2003) study a model of platform competition for single-homing buyers and sellers that
encompasses elements of the classic Pagano (1989) exchange competition model. Ellison and Fudenberg
(2003) show there can exist a “plateau” of equilibria with interior market shares, where all platforms
with positive market share in these equilibria have the same seller-buyer ratio.25
       Similar to these other models, our model does not yield much insight into the determination
of equilibrium exchange market shares. That said, our model does provide some insight into why
they might be interior and relatively stable over time. In the equilibria described in Proposition 3.2,
investors break ties when indifferent across exchanges using routing table strategies (see Appendix
B.3.4). Such strategies, in turn, coordinate where TFs provide liquidity. Thus, if investor routing
tables are relatively stable over time then exchange market shares will be relatively stable over time
as well.


Competitive Trading Fees. In the equilibria described in Proposition 3.2, trading fees are com-
petitive and equal to zero on all exchanges. Any exchange j, given that all other exchanges set zero
trading fees, cannot charge a positive trading fee and attract positive trading volume due to frictionless
search by market participants. This is true even if investors broke ties in j’s favor (all else equal), and
even if j charged lower ESST fees than other exchanges. In a supporting Lemma for Proposition 3.2,
we prove that in any equilibrium of a Stage 3 subgame where trading fees are zero for some exchanges
and strictly positive elsewhere (and where all TFs purchase ESST from the same set of exchanges), no
trading volume occurs on any exchange with positive trading fees (see Lemma B.1 in Appendix B.3).


Money-Pump Constraint. In our model, exchanges may appear to lack an obvious source of
market power: they are symmetric and undifferentiated, search is frictionless, and market participants
can costlessly participate on any exchange. Since add-on rents in competitive pricing models are often
dissipated in competition to sell the pre-add-on good (cf. Ellison, 2005; Gabaix and Laibson, 2006),
one might expect that exchanges would compete away any rents earned from the sale of ESST (an
add-on service that is only valuable if an exchange has positive trading volume) by charging lower
trading fees in competition for transaction volume. However, this is not the case here. In the equilibria
constructed in Proposition 3.2, exchanges are able to earn and maintain positive profits due to a binding
money-pump constraint. Trading fees are zero across all exchanges. Any dissipation of ESST rents via
trading fees in order to attract trading volume would require such fees to be negative, which in turn
would create an incentive for market participants to execute an unlimited number of trades and make
  25
    The “plateau” refers to an interval of market shares that can be sustained in equilibrium among platforms with the
same seller-buyer ratio; outside of this interval, the only equilibria are those with complete tipping. This difference versus
our model derives from the single-homing assumption in the Ellison and Fudenberg (2003) model (versus multi-homing
in ours) and the way their model deals with integer issues (versus perfectly divisible shares in our model).


                                                             24
unlimited profits — i.e., a money-pump.26 In Appendix B.3.3, we show that an exchange’s losses from
negative trading fees can be arbitrarily large without TFs engaging in any self-dealing.


ESST Fees and the Division of Latency Arbitrage Rents. Even though exchanges are able
to “post prices” and make take-it-or-leave-it offers to TFs, they cannot capture all latency arbitrage
rents: fast TFs have bargaining leverage with exchanges because they can steer liquidity provision,
and hence trading volume, to rival exchanges. This gives rise to the condition on ESST fees given
by (3.2). Using the analysis behind the lone-wolf bound, we are able to show that the proportion of
sniping rents that exchanges must leave for TFs is economically significant:

Proposition 3.3. In the equilibria described by Proposition 3.2, exchanges’ total rents from ESST
                                                        (M −1)(N −1) Πcontinuous .
fees, N ×
             P           ∗                                   M        ∗
               j:σj∗ >0 Fj ,   are strictly less than

       In our empirical setting there are 12 exchanges in total, of which 8 have significant market share
and are owned by 3 exchange families (see Stylized Fact #3 in Section 4.1). Aquilina, Budish and
O’Neill (2020) found that the top 6 trading firms win over 80% of latency arbitrage races in the UK
equities market in data from 2015; this number is consistent with our anecdotal understanding of the
rough magnitude for N in U.S. equities.27 Proposition 3.3 implies that if M ≥ 3 and N ≥ 6, then
exchanges in total are able to extract at most 30% of sniping rents, with the remainder accruing to
fast trading firms.
       We emphasize that while this particular division of latency arbitrage rents is specific to our model,
what will ultimately matter for the analysis of market design innovation considered in Section 5 is
simply that exchanges are able to capture and maintain some share of the rents generated from latency
arbitrage activity in the status quo.28 A strength of our approach is that it highlights that even if
exchanges can post prices — which, in many bargaining models, is akin to maximum bargaining power
— they cannot extract all of the surplus.


Sources of Deadweight Loss.                 In our model, there are N trading firms exogenously endowed with
general-purpose speed technology, and M exchanges exogenously present in the market and able to sell
exchange-specific speed technology to TFs. TFs’ payments to the exchanges for this speed technology,
represented by the Fj∗ ’s in our model, are transfers as opposed to deadweight loss.
       We emphasize that, outside of the model, there is significant deadweight loss associated with the de-
velopment of both general-purpose and exchange-specific speed technology. This includes investments
  26
      Although exchanges theoretically could dissipate rents via fixed payments to investors or broker-dealers for trading
volume, our understanding is that this would not be legal.
   27
      For example, the CEO of one of the largest high-frequency traders in the U.S. described in a conversation with two
of the authors that there are 7 firms in the “lead lap” of the speed race in the U.S. equities market.
   28
      Other potential modeling frameworks for understanding the division of rents between TFs and exchanges include
non-cooperative bargaining games and cooperative solution concepts for rent-splitting such as the Shapley value. Roth
and Wilson (2019) discuss the complementary role non-cooperative and cooperative game theory can play in applied
market design research. Potential non-cooperative bargaining games include the “Nash-in-Nash” solution for bilateral
oligopoly in industrial organization settings (Collard-Wexler, Gowrisankaran and Lee, 2019).


                                                              25
in communications links between exchanges, proprietary speed-optimized hardware and software, and
significant high-skilled human capital.
    Standard excess entry and business stealing incentives (Mankiw and Whinston, 1986) also may
be present in our environment. Specifically, if a potential entrant exchange has a way to obtain
positive market share, then it has incentive to enter to capture ESST rents, even if it is completely
undifferentiated from incumbent exchanges, including using the same market design.


4     Stylized Empirical Facts
In this section we document a series of seven stylized facts regarding modern U.S. stock exchange
competition. These facts relate to each of the three main results of Section 3’s model of the status
quo. Section 4.1 presents facts that relate to the model’s equilibrium characterization of the Stage
3 trading game. Section 4.2 presents facts that relate to the model’s equilibrium characterization of
exchange trading fees. Section 4.3 presents facts that relate to the model’s equilibrium characterization
of exchange-specific speed technology fees. Section 4.4 provides discussion of the stylized facts taken
in total, with reference both to our model which focuses on modern U.S. stock exchanges and to other
previous models of financial exchange competition.


4.1   Evidence on the Stage 3 Trading Game

There are three main features of the multi-exchange trading game equilibria, characterized in Propo-
sition 3.2 and discussed in Section 3.3, that we will assess empirically. First, all active exchanges have
the same equilibrium bid and offer, i.e., quoted prices are identical across exchanges. Second, each
exchange’s share of market depth (i.e., its share of liquidity) at this common best bid and offer equals
its share of market volume. Third, these exchange depth and volume shares can be interior and stable,
i.e., there need not be tipping.
    Before proceeding, we wish to acknowledge that none of the results in this section will be partic-
ularly surprising to a researcher familiar with modern U.S. equity market microstructure. However,
we think they are useful to document carefully both because they provide empirical support for our
stylized model of trading and because they rule out some other potential models of financial exchange
competition.


Data. We use the Daily NYSE Trade and Quote (“TAQ”) dataset accessed via Wharton Research
Data Services. The data contain every trade and every top-of-book quote update for every exchange,
for all U.S. listed stocks and exchange-traded funds (ETFs), timestamped to the millisecond. The key
advantage of this data, for our purposes, is that it is comprehensive across exchanges and labels every
trade and quote update by exchange.
    For the results presented in this section, we make three types of sample restrictions. First, we



                                                   26
use data from all trading days in 2015.29 Second, we focus primarily on the top 5 exchanges by
market share which together constitute 83% of trading volume. The top 5 exchanges all utilize what
is commonly referred to as the “maker-taker” pricing model in which the taker of liquidity is charged
a fee and the provider of liquidity is paid a rebate. The next 3 exchanges, which together constitute
15% of trading volume, all use the “inverted” (or “taker-maker”) pricing model in which the taker
is paid a rebate and the maker pays a fee, and this difference in fee structure relative to the larger
exchanges raises some subtleties for the analysis that we discuss in Appendix C.30 Third, we restrict
attention to the 100 most heavily traded stocks and ETFs.31 In 2015, there were 9,175 symbols that
traded at least once; however, most trade relatively infrequently. We also require that the symbols in
our sample satisfy a set of data-cleaning filters: trading continuously throughout the year under the
same ticker, having a share price of at least $1, not having a listing change, and having at least $10
million in average daily volume. These 100 symbols constitute about one-third of daily volume.32


Stylized Fact #1: Many Exchanges Simultaneously at the Best Bid and Best Offer. For
each symbol i, exchange j, millisecond k, and date t, we compute the exchange’s best bid and best offer
(ask), denoted BBijkt and BOijkt . In case there are multiple quote updates in the symbol-exchange-
millisecond, we use the last one. We then compute, for each symbol-millisecond-date, the number of
exchanges at the overall best bid and best offer, i.e., we compute:

                                                                     offer
               =       1{BBijkt = max                     and              =         1{BOijkt = min
                   X                                                           X
           bid
          Nikt                     0
                                      BBij 0 kt }                   Nikt                        0
                                                                                                    BOij 0 kt },
                                     j ∈J                                                         j ∈J
                   j                                                             j


where J is the set of all exchanges.
                                                  bid and N offer are virtually identical, so we combine
       As one might expect, the distributions of Nikt      ikt
the data into a single distribution and present it as Figure 4.1. We present the results separately for
NYSE-listed symbols and non-NYSE listed symbols. The reason for this difference is that non-NYSE
listed symbols do not trade on NYSE (but do trade everywhere else), whereas NYSE listed symbols
trade everywhere.33 Hence, for NYSE listed symbols the maximum number of exchanges out of the
Top 5 that could be at the best bid or offer is 5, whereas for non-NYSE listed symbols (typically,
listed on Nasdaq) the maximum is 4. As can be seen, the modal answer to the question “how many
exchanges are at the best price?” is “all of them.” For NYSE-listed symbols, all Top 5 exchanges
  29
      2015 was the most-recently available full year of data when we began presenting early versions of this research
publicly. 2015 is also the best year in terms of data availability for the analysis of ESST revenues as will be described in
Section 4.3.
   30
      The remaining 4 exchanges active during 2015, sometimes called the “regional” exchanges, together had about 2%
market share. Anecdotally, industry participants regard them as vestiges of an earlier era of stock exchange competition.
   31
      We use the phrase “symbols” to include both stocks and ETFs. When clear from the context we will sometimes use
the phrase “stocks” to mean both stocks and ETFs.
   32
      We have also conducted robustness tests in which we look at the top 1000 symbols by share volume that satisfy these
filters except for the $10 million average daily volume filter, which constitutes roughly three-quarters of total volume.
Results are qualitatively similar but with more noise.
   33
      NYSE changed this practice as of April 2018 and began allowing non-NYSE listed stocks and ETFs to trade on
NYSE. That is, NYSE recently exercised its right to extend Unlisted Trading Privileges to non-NYSE listed stocks.


                                                            27
                            Figure 4.1: Multiple Exchanges at the Same Best Price
                              NYSE-Listed Symbols                             Non-NYSE-Listed Symbols




     Notes: The data is from NYSE TAQ. Percent of time indicates the percent of symbol-side-milliseconds (e.g. SPY-
     Bid-10:00:00.001) for which the number of exchanges at the best bid or offer was equal to N. An exchange was at the
     best price for a symbol-side-millisecond if the best displayed quote on that exchange was equal to the best displayed
     quote on any of the Top 5 exchanges, all measured at the end of the millisecond. The best bid or offer on the Top 5
     exchanges was also the best bid or offer across the Top 8 exchanges in over 99.9% of milliseconds; see Appendix C for
     details. Sample is 100 highest volume symbols that satisfy data-cleaning filters (see text for description) on all dates
     in 2015.


are at the best bid (similarly, best offer) in 86.1% of milliseconds, and for non-NYSE symbols all 4
exchanges are at the best bid or offer in 84.6% of milliseconds.
   Stylized Fact 1. At any given moment in time, for highly traded stocks and ETFs, the modal
number of exchanges at the best bid and best offer is “all of them.” Of the Top 5 exchanges, in about
85% of milliseconds all exchanges are at the best bid (similarly, best offer). It is rare (about 1% of
milliseconds for NYSE-listed symbols and 3% for non-NYSE) for there to be just one exchange at the
best bid or best offer.


Stylized Fact #2: Depth Equals Volume. For each symbol i, exchange j, and date t, we
compute the exchange’s “depth share” and “volume share” for regular-hours trading in that symbol
on that date. Volume share, V olumeShareijt , is calculated as the regular-hours volume in shares for
symbol i on exchange j on date t divided by total regular-hours volume in symbol i on date t. We
calculate depth share, DepthShareijt , by first computing depth for symbol i on exchange j at each
millisecond k within the regular-hours trading period of day t, defined as

                          bid · 1{BB                                 offer
                         qijtk       ijtk = maxj 0 ∈J BBij 0 kt } + qijtk · 1{BOijtk = minj 0 ∈J BOij 0 kt }
        Depthijtk =                                                                                                     ,
                                                                        2

       bid and q offer denote the quantity at exchange j’s best bid and offer for symbol i at millisecond
where qijtk     ijtk
k, and the indicator function requires that j’s best bid or offer equals the national best at that mil-




                                                               28
                                Figure 4.2: 2015 Daily Volume Share vs. Depth Share




        Notes: The data is from NYSE TAQ. The dark line depicts the 45-degree line which is the depth share to volume
        share relationship predicted by the theory. The results are presented for the Top 5 maker-taker exchanges, and includes
        the 100 highest volume symbols that satisfy data-cleaning filters on all dates in 2015. Observations are symbol-date-
        exchange shares, with shares calculated among the Top 5 exchanges. Since both depth and volume shares turn out to
        be relatively stable over time and across symbols (see Stylized Fact #3), we color code by exchange and label each
        exchange’s cluster of dots. For details of share calculations and details of data-cleaning filters, see the text.



lisecond.34 We then compute the average depth for each symbol-exchange-date by averaging Depthijtk
over all milliseconds, then calculate DepthShareijt as this average depth divided by the sum of the
average depth for each symbol-exchange-date across exchanges. Figure 4.2 presents a scatterplot of
V olumeShareijt against DepthShareijt , wherein each dot represents a symbol-exchange-date tuple.
We color code by exchange and label each exchange’s cluster of dots.
       The figure shows that the depth-volume data falls along the 45 degree line for the Top 5 exchanges.
The slope of a regression of volume share on depth share is 0.991 (s.e. 0.020), and the R2 of the
relationship is 0.865.35 In robustness tests, we found that the depth-volume relationship along the 45
degree line obtains at significantly higher frequencies than a day, such as 5 minutes (albeit with more
noise), but that at frequencies such as 1 second or 1 millisecond the relationship is not meaningful.36
This stems from the fact that, at the level of an individual trade, exchange volume shares are often
0% or 100%, so the depth-volume relationship is only meaningful with some aggregation.37
  34
      We use all milliseconds between a symbol’s first quote at or after 9:30 and 16:00 (13:00 on half-days), dropping any
milliseconds where the NBBO is locked or crossed.
   35
      As a robustness test we looked at the depth-volume relationship for each symbol in our data, running 100 regressions
of daily exchange market shares on daily exchange depth shares, one for each symbol. The regression coefficients are very
close to one (mean 0.991, st. dev. 0.026) and the R2 of the relationship is high (mean 0.840, st. dev. 0.136), suggesting
that the depth-volume relationship holds at the individual symbol level.
   36
      The R2 of the regression of volume share on depth share is 0.531 at 5 minutes, 0.635 at 10 minutes, 0.745 at 30 minutes,
and 0.788 at 1 hour. The regression coefficients are 0.951, 0.957, 0.963 and 0.965 (each statistically indistinguishable
from 1).
   37
      Our model assumes all investors demand exactly “1” unit of perfectly-divisible liquidity and in equilibrium exactly 1


                                                                    29
                           Figure 4.3: Weekly Exchange Market Shares: 2011 - 2015




      Notes: The data is from NYSE TAQ and covers January 2011 to Dec 2015 for the Top 8 exchanges. The market
      shares are based on all on-exchange trading volume in shares.



    Stylized Fact 2. Among the Top 5 exchanges, all of which use the same maker-taker fee structure,
there is a one-for-one relationship between depth share and volume share at the daily level. The
coefficient from regressing volume share on depth share is 0.99 (statistically indistinguishable from 1)
and the R2 is 0.87.


Stylized Fact #3: Exchange Market Shares are Interior and Relatively Stable. Figure
4.3 presents aggregate weekly exchange market shares from January 2011 to December 2015 for the
Top 8 exchanges. We start the time period in 2011 since that is the first full year of data after
the original BATS exchanges (BZX and BYX) and Direct Edge exchanges (EDGX and EDGA) were
approved as exchanges (prior to that they operated Alternative Trading Systems, or ATS’s). Figure
C.3 in Appendix C presents exchange market shares from October 2007, the start of the Reg NMS
era, through the end of 2015.
    As can be seen in the figure, aggregate exchange market shares are certainly interior, with no
exchange’s market share ever rising above 30%. Aggregate exchange market shares are also relatively
stable in the sense that in the 2011-2015 period, if we regress sjt , the market share of exchange j on
date t, on a set of exchange fixed effects but nothing else, the R2 is 0.967. Appendix C (see Figure C.4)
presents related results at the individual-symbol level; as at the exchange level, shares are certainly
unit of liquidity is offered across exchanges so investors must spread their demand across multiple exchanges. In reality,
investors of course demand varying amounts of liquidity. Investors who only wish to trade a small amount (e.g., 100
shares) often do so with a single small trade on a single exchange. Investors who wish to trade a larger amount often
break their total desired quantity into smaller individual orders spread out over time. So, volume shares at the trade-
by-trade level are often 100% for a single exchange and 0% for all others, which we know from Stylized Fact #1 will not
be consistent with depth shares. However, the logic of our model suggests that, at a higher level of aggregation, volume
shares should match depth shares — else, the marginal unit of liquidity will be too adversely selected on some exchanges
and too favorable on others.




                                                              30
interior and are relatively stable.38
       Stylized Fact 3.       Exchange market shares are interior at both the aggregate level and the
individual-symbol level. Exchange market shares are also relatively stable in the sense that sim-
ple exchange fixed effects explain about 97% of the aggregate-level variation and about 76% of the
individual-symbol level variation.


4.2      Evidence on Exchange Trading Fees

We now examine the two predictions of our theoretical model regarding exchange trading fees. First,
trading fees are competed down to zero (i.e., fees are perfectly competitive), and second, fees are
bounded below by a money-pump constraint.


Data. We use two types of data sources for our analysis of exchange trading fees. First, we use
historical fee schedules from exchange websites retrieved using the Internet Archive. All fee schedules
are from 2015 for consistency with the other analyses; the specific months range from Feb to Sept
depending on the Internet Archive’s coverage.39
       Second, we use exchange company financial filings that cover 2015; specifically the BATS April
2016 S-1 filing, Nasdaq’s fiscal year 2015 10-K report, Intercontinental Exchange’s (NYSE’s parent)
fiscal year 2015 10-K report, and NYSE’s fiscal year 2012 10-K filing (2012 was its last full fiscal
year as a stand-alone company). It is important to clarify that exchange companies each control
several exchanges, and while the fee schedules mentioned above are at the exchange level, most of the
financial data in the annual report is at the exchange company level. For example, in 2015 the exchange
company BATS, Inc., controlled four exchanges, two maker-taker exchanges (BZX and EDGX) and
two taker-maker exchanges (BYX and EDGA).


Stylized Fact #4: Trading Fees are Economically Small. Our theoretical model says that
exchange trading fees, denoted f in the model, will be perfectly competitive and bounded below by
a money-pump constraint. In practice, however, there is no single number to look up that represents
“f ” for a given exchange. For example, for BATS’s maker-taker exchange BZX, takers of liquidity
(i.e., the submitter of an order that trades against a resting bid or offer) pay a fee of $0.0030, while
makers of liquidity (i.e., the resting bid or offer) earn a rebate of between $0.0020 – $0.0032, where the
exact rebate is determined by the maker’s volume on BZX (higher volume participants receive larger
  38
     Among all symbols in our sample, the single highest average exchange market share in 2015 is less than 40%.
Additionally, average daily symbol-exchange market shares are also relatively stable in the sense that if we regress sijt ,
the market-share of symbol i on exchange j on date t, on a set of exchange fixed effects and control for whether or not
the symbol is listed on NYSE but nothing else, the R2 is 0.76. Overall, the results at the individual stock level tell the
same story of interior and relatively stable shares as the aggregate results, just with more noise.
  39
     Typically, current exchange fee schedules are posted on exchanges’ websites, while changes to exchange fee schedules
are filed with the SEC and accessible via the SEC’s website. Since the fee schedules can be so complicated, it can be
difficult to build out the full fee schedule from the fee-change filings posted permanently on the SEC website; therefore
we use fee schedules accessed directly from exchange websites via the Internet Archive.



                                                            31
rebates). BZX’s net fee per-share per-side therefore ranges, based on the participants in a trade, from
-$0.0001 to +$0.0005, or “-1 to +5 mills” in the industry jargon (1 mill = $0.0001); this can be thought
of as the observed range for what our model calls f .40
       Table 4.1 Panel A presents the observed range for per-share per-side trading fees for the top 8
exchanges. The table focuses on each exchange’s most representative fee schedule, with additional
details for special fee programs like the NYSE Supplemental Liquidity Provider program presented
in Appendix Table D.1. As can be seen, many of the exchanges have minimum fees on a per-share
per-side basis that are actually slightly negative. The complete table in the Appendix shows that 7
of the 8 exchanges have a minimum per-share per-side fee that is negative, with 4 having a negative
minimum fee based on a pure volume threshold and an additional 3 with negative minimum fees based
on participation in a special fee program. The maximum fee per-side is always strictly positive and
typically about 5 mills, though it is noticeably lower for the two BATS taker-maker exchanges (1 mill
for BYX, 1.5 mills for EDGA) and higher for the Nasdaq taker-maker exchange (8 mills).
       To get a more precise estimate for average per-share per-side trading fees — that is, average f —
we use the major exchange families’ annual financial filings. The advantage of using annual financial
filings is that we can estimate the average regular-hours trading fee, not just the potential range. There
are two disadvantages. First, we have to conduct this analysis at the level of the exchange family,
not the individual exchange. Second, we have to make some assumptions about fees from non-regular
trading (e.g., opening and closing auctions, routed volume) to get to an estimate for regular hours
per-share per-side trading fees. These disadvantages in mind, the results are presented in Table 4.1
Panel B; supporting details are provided in Appendix D.2.
       As can be seen, the average trading fee across the 3 major exchange families is about $0.0001
per-share per-side, or 1 mill. While not zero, this figure is arguably economically small. Across the
approximately 1 trillion shares traded during regular hours each year, this adds up to about $200M.
As a point of comparison, the operating expenses for BATS’s U.S. equities business alone were $110M
in 2015 — and BATS is generally viewed as more cost-effectively run than Nasdaq or NYSE (each have
about a third of regular-hours volume). NYSE’s operating expenses for its equities business in 2012,
its last full-year of operation before the ICE acquisition, were $718M. In other words, regular-hours
trading revenues do not nearly cover exchange operating expenses.
       Stylized Fact 4. Exchange trading fees are economically small. While there is no single number
for what our model calls f , the observed range of regular hours trading fees is, on a per-share per-side
basis, -$0.00015 to +$0.00080 on the Top 8 exchanges. The average per-share per-side fee paid for
regular hours trading is about +$0.0001. For a $100 share of stock, the fee in percentage terms is
0.0001%.
  40
    In addition to these fees for standard regular-hours trading, there are also dozens of other fees for orders that are
routed to other exchanges, executed in the opening or closing auctions, etc. Both NYSE and Nasdaq have fee schedules
that differ slightly based on whether the stock being traded is listed on NYSE or Nasdaq.




                                                           32
                             Table 4.1: U.S. Equity Exchange Trading Fees (“f ”)

                                              Panel A: Range of Fees Per Share

                                              Taker Fee                    Maker Fee             Total fee per share per side
   Exchange         Fee Type               Min        Max               Min        Max                Min           Max
    NASDAQ        Maker-Taker             0.00300     0.00300         -0.00325   -0.00150          -0.00013        0.00075
   BATS BZX       Maker-Taker             0.00300     0.00300         -0.00320   -0.00200          -0.00010        0.00050
     EDGX         Maker-Taker             0.00300     0.00300         -0.00320   -0.00200          -0.00010        0.00050
     NYSE         Maker-Taker            0.00270      0.00270         -0.00220   -0.00140           0.00025        0.00065
   NYSE Arca      Maker-Taker             0.00280     0.00300         -0.00270   -0.00200           0.00005        0.00050
   BATS BYX       Taker-Maker            -0.00160    -0.00160          0.00140    0.00180          -0.00010        0.00010
     EDGA         Taker-Maker            -0.00020    -0.00020          0.00030    0.00050           0.00005        0.00015
  NASDAQ BX       Taker-Maker            -0.00150    -0.00040          0.00165    0.00200           0.00008        0.00080


                                         Panel B: Estimate of Average Trading Fees


                                              Exchange Group              f
                                                     BATS            $0.000089
                                                    NASDAQ           $0.000105
                                                     NYSE            $0.000128


  Notes: Panel A summarizes the fee schedules for the top 8 exchanges retrieved from the Internet Archive (Wayback Machine)
  dated from February 28, 2015 to September 1, 2015 . In general, we determine the max rebates based on what a trading firm
  that satisfies the exchange’s highest volume tier would pay or receive, and the min rebates and fees tend to be the baseline
  for adding or taking liquidity. We omit fees associated with special programs or differences based on tape plans. Please see
  Appendix D.1 for a complete table of estimated fees for both regular and special programs and for tape A, B, and C stocks.
  Panel B shows the average trading fee for each of the three major exchange families estimated from financial filings. Please
  see Appendix D.2 and the associated spreadsheet for supporting details for these calculations.




Stylized Fact #5: Money-Pump Constraint Binds. In the language of our model, exchanges
are in principle willing to lose money on f (trading fees) in order to make more money from F (speed
technology). However, trading fees are bounded below by a money-pump constraint: if f < 0 on some
exchange, trading firms would engage in infinite volume and extract infinite dollars. In practice, the
money-pump boundary is below zero, because of SEC Section 31 fees and FINRA fees. At the time
of our data, the SEC fee was $21.80 per $1M traded and the FINRA fee was $0.000119 per share
traded. Both fees are assessed on sales but not purchases, i.e., they are assessed on one side of each
transaction. Because the SEC fee is assessed based on dollar volume, the sum of SEC and FINRA
fees on a per-share basis increases with the nominal share price.
   For the purpose of calculating the money-pump boundary, we should look at the SEC + FINRA
fees on a per-share per-side basis, because an exploiter of a money pump would need to both buy and
sell. For a $5 stock this would be 1.14 mills, i.e., per-share per-side fees could go to -1.14 mills without
creating a money pump. This may help explain why exchange trading fees are able to go slightly
negative, as exhibited in Table 4.1 and in Appendix Table D.1, without creating a money pump.

                                                                33
   Stylized Fact 5. Exchange trading fees for high-volume traders are often slightly negative on
a per-share per-side basis. For 4 of the top 8 exchanges the fee is negative for the highest volume
tier, with the lowest observed fee being -$0.00015 per-share per-side (Nasdaq, BZX, EDGX, BYX).
For another 3 of the 8 exchanges, the fee is negative for traders with high-enough volume who satisfy
additional requirements, with the lowest observed such fee being -$0.00040 per-share per-side (NYSE,
NYSE Arca, Nasdaq BX). These negative fees are consistent with exchanges being willing to lose money
on trading fees (f ) to make money on exchange-specific speed technology fees (F ). However, trading
fees do not get negative enough to create a money pump once we account for SEC + FINRA fees, with
the possible exception of very-low priced stocks.


4.3    Evidence on Exchange-Specific Speed Technology Revenue

The last series of stylized facts is related to our theoretical prediction about exchange-specific speed
technology (ESST) revenues. Our model shows that exchanges can earn supra-competitive rents from
ESST in equilibrium. The intuition is that exchanges have market power over speed technology that
is specific to their exchange, e.g., only Nasdaq can sell the right to co-locate one’s own servers next to
Nasdaq’s servers. Notably, our model does not pin down the exact level of ESST, but does indicate
that, in aggregate across exchanges and trading firms, ESST revenue cannot be too large of a fraction
of the total sniping pie (see Proposition 3.3).


Data. Our evidence on the magnitude and growth of ESST revenues comes from exchange company
financial filings (10-K’s, S-1’s, and merger proxies). We also use a Consolidated Tape Association fee
filing to get an estimate for the aggregate tape revenues (revenues that come from a data feed not used
by latency sensitive traders), which we subtract for our main estimate of ESST revenues in Stylized
Fact #6. We discuss specific details of the data in the text below and in Appendix E.


Stylized Fact #6: Exchanges Earn Significant Revenues from Co-Location/Connectivity
and Proprietary Market Data. For estimating the overall magnitude of ESST revenues we focus
on 2015. In its April 2016 S-1 filing (i.e., IPO prospectus), BATS directly reports financials for its
U.S. equities business as a separate financial reporting segment, and within that reporting segment
separately breaks out revenue from market data and co-location/connectivity. BATS was acquired by
CBOE later in 2016 and following that acquisition no longer reported U.S. equities revenue with such
granularity. Neither Nasdaq nor NYSE report U.S. equities revenue with the granularity of BATS in
2015, so for those exchanges we make some assumptions (described below) and we report a range.
   BATS’s 2015 market data revenues were $114.1M and its co-location/connectivity revenues were
$64.3M, for a total of $178.4M. For context, its net transactions revenues were $81.0M and its operating
expenses were $110.2M.41 This means that the BATS U.S. Equities business is profitable with market
  41
     Net transactions revenues are computed as Transaction Fees ($938.8M) less Liquidity Payments (i.e., rebates,
$814.1M) less Routing and Clearing Fees ($43.7M).


                                                       34
data and co-location/connectivity revenues (profits before tax of $149.2M) but loss-making on the
basis of trading revenues alone (loss of $29.2M).
       For both Nasdaq and NYSE our exercise is less straightforward because neither firm breaks out
its U.S. equities business as its own reporting segment. For NYSE a further complication is its Nov
2013 acquisition by Intercontinental Exchange (ICE). Our approach for Nasdaq utilizes market data
and connectivity revenue figures for its global securities business, and information on the proportion
of U.S. to global revenue, and information about the breakdown of U.S. revenue between equities and
options. Our approach for NYSE utilizes information about NYSE’s market data and connectivity
revenue contained in ICE’s 2014 10-K filing (i.e., the first fiscal year after the acquisition closed) plus
additional information from ICE’s 2015 filing. We provide a detailed description of our calculations
for Nasdaq and NYSE in Appendix E.
       Table 4.2 summarizes our analysis. Across all three major exchange families, we estimate $555.4-
$623.0M for market data revenue and $436.8-$484.8M for co-location/connectivity revenue. The mar-
ket data revenue figures include revenue from exchanges’ proprietary data feeds as well as from market-
wide “Tape Plans,” sometimes known as the SIP feed (see footnote 12). Proprietary data feeds are
utilized by latency-sensitive market participants, whereas the market-wide SIP feed is not as fast, and
therefore should be deducted from our estimate of overall ESST revenues. The Consolidated Tape
Authority reports that in the 12 month period through March 2014, total tape revenues across all
U.S. equities exchanges were $317M.42 If we subtract this $317M from the total we have proprietary
market data revenue of $238.4-306.0M, and total ESST revenue of $675.2-790.8M.43
       For context, note that our estimate of 2015 ESST revenue is roughly 3 to 4 times larger than the
estimated revenue from regular-hours trading fees of $200M as reported in Stylized Fact 4 above. If
we take the lone-wolf bound from the theory seriously, and assume that exchanges extract at most
30% of latency arbitrage rents (see Section 3.3), our estimated range of ESST revenues yields a lower
bound on the total size of the latency-arbitrage pie of $2.25 billion in 2015.
       Stylized Fact 6. Exchanges earn significant revenue from exchange-specific speed technology.
While the data reported in exchange parent company financial filings are not perfect, sensible assump-
tions applied to that data suggest that in 2015 total ESST revenue was between $675-790M. This is
  42
      The prices for consolidated feed data are set by a consortium, and then the revenues are allocated to exchanges based
on a formula that relates to their volume share and NBBO depth share. Whereas proprietary data revenues appear to have
grown significantly in the past decade or so, tape revenue growth appears to be much flatter. For example, Nasdaq’s
revenue from proprietary data increased more than 100% from 2006-2012 (the last year they reported it separately),
whereas its tape revenues declined by about 10% during this same period. For this reason, we are comfortable using the
March 2014 tape revenue number as part of our 2015 ESST revenue analysis. See the appendix for more details.
   43
      For related empirical evidence, see also a recent paper of Jones (2018) commissioned by the New York Stock Exchange.
While our interpretation is different, our numbers are mostly consistent with those documented in Jones (2018). One
important exception is that Jones (2018) considers exchange trading revenues gross of exchange rebates rather than net
of exchange rebates. For example, if an exchange’s average take fee is 30 mills and its average make rebate is 28 mills,
we think of the fee revenue per share as 30-28=2 mills whereas Jones (2018)’s analysis of exchange revenues treats the
fee per share as 30 mills, and implicitly treats the 28 mills rebate as a cost. Under this latter interpretation, revenues
from trading fees are considerably larger than revenues from data, co-location, and connectivity. Additionally, revenues
from data, co-location, and connectivity appear small as a fraction of total exchange revenues.



                                                            35
   Table 4.2: Estimated Market Data and Co-Location Revenues for U.S. Equities Market in 2015
                                      (Millions of Dollars)

                                                                BATS        NASDAQ              NYSE              Total
        Market Data Revenue                                      114.1    222.4 – 267.3     218.9 – 241.5    555.4 – 623.0
        Co-Location/Connectivity Revenue                          64.3    121.0 – 139.0     251.6 – 281.5    436.8 – 484.8
        Market Data + Co-Location Revenue                        178.4    343.3 – 406.4     470.5 – 523.0    992.2 – 1107.8

        CTA/UTP Tape Revenue                                                                                      317.0
        Market Data + Co-Lo Revenue net of Tape Revenue                                                       675.2 – 790.8

Notes: BATS data is from its April 2016 S-1 filing, which contains data up through the end of 2015. Nasdaq data is from its 2015
10-K filing. NYSE data uses both ICE’s 2014 and 2015 10-K filings, because the 2014 filing had more granular information on the
contribution of the NYSE business to ICE’s overall business, following its acquisition in Nov 2013. BATS directly reports a U.S.
equities revenue breakdown including market data and co-location/connectivity revenue. For Nasdaq and NYSE some assumptions
are needed to estimate U.S. equities revenue from the market data and co-location/connectivity revenue items they report; therefore
we report a range of estimates. For full details please consult the text and Appendix E.1. The CTA/UTP tape revenue number
is obtained from a CTA fee-change filing to the SEC, in which they report the total CTA/UTP market data revenue (allocated to
exchanges) annualized through March of 2014. Refer to SEC Release No. 34-73278.



several times larger than regular-hours trading revenues.

Stylized Fact #7: Exchange Revenue from Co-Location/Connectivity and Proprietary
Market Data Appears to have Grown Significantly in the Reg NMS Era.                                           While exchange
companies do not directly report U.S. equities ESST revenue (as evident from the work involved in
Stylized Fact #6), we can get a sense of magnitudes for U.S. equities ESST revenue growth over
time by looking at revenue growth in the financial reporting categories that contain U.S. equities
ESST. We are able to build meaningful time-series for Nasdaq co-location and connectivity revenues
and proprietary market data revenues from 2006 to 2017 and for BATS co-location and connectivity
revenues from 2010 to 2017, using various financial filings which are outlined in detail in Appendix
E.2.44 BATS only began charging for the proprietary market data that we think of as part of ESST
relatively recently (Q3 2014) and we discuss the limited data that is available in the appendix.45
NYSE’s financial reporting segments unfortunately changed too frequently in the Reg NMS era for
the exercise to be instructive.46
       Figure 4.4 presents growth for the three series we construct. For Nasdaq co-location and connec-
  44
     For Nasdaq, 2006 was both the year before Reg NMS was implemented and was the first year the word “co-location”
appears in a Nasdaq annual financial filing (it has appeared every year since). For BATS, 2010 was the first full year
that BATS started charging for co-location/connectivity.
  45
     BATS reports that it only began charging for proprietary market data on the two original BATS exchanges, BZX
and BYX, in the 3rd quarter of 2014. Triangulating between the various data sources, it appears that BATS proprietary
market data revenue has been growing rapidly since it began charging for it, but that the overall revenues are still much
smaller than BATS’s co-location/connectivity revenue, which has been growing rapidly for five additional years.
  46
     This was due to NYSE’s merger with Euronext in 2007, its acquisition by ICE in 2013, and some financial segment
reporting changes in the period in between. This caveat in mind, the category “Technology Services Revenues” which
includes co-location/connectivity grew from $137M to $341M over the period 2006-2012, and the category “Market Data
Revenues” grew from $223M to $348M over this time period.


                                                                36
       Figure 4.4: Co-Location/Connectivity and Proprietary Market Data Revenue: 2006-2017




Notes: Nasdaq data come from 2006-2017 10-K filings. BATS co-location/connectivity revenue data come from the 2012 S-1 filing
(years 2010–2011), the 2016 S-1 filing (2012–2015), the 2016 CBOE/BATS Merger Proxy and the CBOE 2017 10-K. We omit BATS
proprietary market data revenue from the figure because BATS only started charging for proprietary data in Q3 2014. Please see
the text and Appendix E.2 for further discussion of all of these data.



tivity, revenue in the reporting category quadrupled in the 2006-12 period (growth of 26.7% per year),
was roughly flat in the 2012-2015 period which contained some minor reporting category changes, and
then in 2015-2017 growth was 10.3% per year. For Nasdaq proprietary market data, revenue growth
was 13.7% annually for the period 2006-2012. Starting in 2013, Nasdaq made some changes to the
reporting category containing market data: U.S. proprietary data revenue was directly reported from
2006-2012, but was then combined with U.S. tape plan revenue starting in 2013, then combined with
U.S. tape revenue and global data revenue starting in 2014. We deduct estimates of U.S. tape plan
revenue and global data revenue to make the revenue estimates from the 2013-2017 comparable with
the figures in filings from 2006-2012. We estimate that Nasdaq proprietary market data growth was
6.8% for the period 2012-2017, with the caveat that this 2012-2017 growth rate is based on some
assumptions whereas the 2006-2012 growth rate is based off of numbers directly in Nasdaq filings (see
Appendix E.2 for details). For BATS co-location and connectivity, revenue more than quadrupled
(growth of 64.0% per year) from 2010 through 2013, the last full year before BATS’s acquisition of Di-
rect Edge (which combined EDGX and EDGA under the same exchange company as BZX and BYX).
Revenue then doubled from 2013 to 2015, but likely in large part due to the Direct Edge acquisition
in 2014, and then grew 11.7% per year from 2015 to 2017. Please see Appendix E.2 for full details on
the data and growth figures.
    Overall the data, while imperfect, are suggestive of exchanges “discovering a new pot of gold” in
the Reg NMS era — that is, discovering that they could charge significant money for something they
used to not charge for. If we use 10% as a conservative overall growth rate for ESST revenue since



                                                             37
2015, and apply this growth rate to our estimates from Stylized Fact #6, this implies that 2018 ESST
revenues are between $899M-$1,053M. If, as in Stylized Fact #6 above, we take the lone-wolf bound
from the theory seriously and assume that exchanges extract at most 30% of latency arbitrage rents,
this range suggests a lower bound on the total size of the latency-arbitrage pie for U.S. equities of $3.0
billion in 2018.
       Stylized Fact 7. Exchanges’ revenues from exchange-specific speed technology appear to have
grown significantly in the Reg NMS era. With the caveat that the data are imperfect, we compute
overall annual growth rates of: 15.9% for Nasdaq co-location/connectivity (2006-2017), 10.5% for
Nasdaq proprietary market data (2006-2017), and 40.4% for BATS co-location/connectivity (2010-
2017). If we utilize 10% as a conservative overall growth rate since the 2015 ESST figures reported in
Stylized Fact 6, this implies annual ESST revenue in 2018 on the order of $1 billion per year.


4.4      Discussion of Model Fit and Alternative Models

We now discuss other potential models of exchange competition which are inconsistent with aspects
of the data. It is important to note that many of these models are designed to study other significant
aspects of exchange competition and not specifically the modern U.S. stock market.
       The first class of models are those in which some market participants “single home,” thereby
generating exchange-specific network effects. One example is the classic model by Pagano (1989), who
when motivating his single-homing model, insightfully noted that if traders could frictionlessly multi-
home and arbitrage across markets, “the two markets would collapse into a single one, and the choice
between the two would be vacuous” (pg. 260). A modern example of a single-homing model is that
of Pagnotta and Philippon (2018), who allow for exchanges to compete on the overall technological
sophistication of their exchange — modeled as the frequency of trading opportunities, which they call
“competing on speed” — in an effort to attract traders to single-home on their exchange as opposed
to the competition. In contrast, the speed in our model enables some market participants to be
faster than other market participants on the same exchange.47 Relatedly, Cantillon and Yin (2008)
consider a model in which participants can multi-home but the financial instruments (in their case,
futures contracts) are specific to a single exchange — i.e., assets are not fungible across exchanges
— which also generates exchange-specific network effects. In all of these models, exchanges charge
supra-competitive fees in equilibrium (exploiting network effects), which stands in contrast to Stylized
Facts #4-#5. Furthermore, in many of these models, these exchange-specific network effects often
lead to tipping which stands in contrast to Stylized Facts #1-#3. For example, in Pagano (1989)
tipping is the only equilibrium if transactions fees are the same across exchanges, and Cantillon and
Yin (2008) are motivated by the “Battle of the Bund,” a famous real-world example of market tipping.
  47
    See also Cespa and Vives (2019) who model speed in a similar fashion to Pagnotta and Philippon (2018) by allowing
exchanges to sell technology which allows market participants to trade in both periods of a two-period Walrasian trading
game as opposed to just one. Cespa and Vives (2019) then study the Cournot equilibria of a game among exchanges in
which they strategically choose their technological capacity for such two-period participants.



                                                          38
         Another class of models are those in which exchanges are meaningfully differentiated. This includes
Pagnotta and Philippon (2018), discussed above, in which exchanges are vertically differentiated, as
well as Baldauf and Mollner (2019), in which exchanges are horizontally differentiated. Baldauf and
Mollner (2019) consider a model in which exchanges are located on a Salop circle (to capture horizontal
differentiation), the size of the latency arbitrage pie increases with the number of exchanges, and the
social planner trades off the benefits of increased competition from more exchanges (i.e., lower trading
fees) against the cost of increased latency arbitrage.48 Such differentiation allows exchanges to charge
supra-competitive trading fees, which is inconsistent with Stylized Facts #4-#5. Also, such models
suggest segmentation of market participants and securities across venues, which is at odds with Stylized
Facts #1-#3.
         Third, Chao, Yao and Ye (2019) provide a model in which tick-size frictions are central to un-
derstanding exchange fragmentation and competition. Their key point is that exchanges can use
differential fee structures to enable trading firms to provide liquidity at slightly different net-of-fee
prices across exchanges, which both “fills in the penny” for the market (i.e., makes tick-size con-
straints less binding) and gives exchanges market power. However, while the model helps explain the
coexistence of the maker-taker fee model and the taker-maker fee model, the model is inconsistent
with the fact that the Top 5 exchanges, which control 83% of volume, all use essentially the same fee
structure, as we showed in Stylized Fact #4, Table 4.1 — in the Chao, Yao and Ye (2019) model,
the way to maximize economic profits is to have as different a fee structure as possible from all other
exchanges, and exchanges do not have a source of economic profits beyond trading fees.


5         Incentives for Market Design Innovation: Will the Market Fix the
          Market?
In Section 3, we introduced a theoretical model of competition among multiple continuous limit order
book exchanges (the status quo) and proved that there exist equilibria with the following key features:
many exchanges maintain positive market shares (i.e., interior as opposed to tipping), with liquidity at
the same bid-ask spread and with trading firms indifferent at the margin across exchanges due to the
depth-volume relationship; exchange trading fees are competitive and bounded below by the money-
pump constraint; and exchanges capture and maintain economic rents via supra-competitive fees for
exchange-specific speed technology (ESST), which trading firms need to purchase to participate in
speed-sensitive trading. In Section 4, we established that this model does a reasonable job empirically,
documenting stylized facts that correspond to each of the model’s main results.
    48
    In our model, the size of the latency arbitrage pie does not grow with the number of exchanges but in principle it
could if either (i) aggregate market depth increases with the number of exchanges (as in Baldauf and Mollner, 2019);
or (ii) some investors are unable to synchronize their trading across exchanges, allowing for the possibility that high-
frequency trading firms, detecting an investor’s trade on one exchange, may be able to “front run” on other exchanges
(as in Baldauf and Mollner, 2020). If the latency-arbitrage pie grows with the number of exchanges, that should only
strengthen the arguments we make in Section 5.



                                                          39
       In this section, we use our theoretical model to examine exchanges’ incentives for market design
innovation. Our discussion will focus on frequent batch auctions with a very short batch interval as
the specific market design alternative to the continuous limit order book, though our analysis applies
equally to the asymmetric delay market design with a very short delay interval.49 Formally, for our
theoretical analysis, we assume that the alternative market design eliminates latency arbitrage but
does not have any additional benefits or costs.
       Section 5.1 presents modeling details. Section 5.2 analyzes equilibrium of our exchange competition
model if there is a single frequent batch auction exchange and one or more continuous limit order book
exchanges. Section 5.3 analyzes equilibrium if there are multiple frequent batch auction exchanges
and one or more continuous exchanges. Sections 5.4-5.5 analyze what the equilibria for these different
configurations of market designs implies about exchanges’ private innovation incentives. We discuss
the policy implications of our analysis in Section 6.


5.1      Model Details

We first briefly describe the frequent batch auction (FBA) market design proposed and analyzed in
Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015), and then discuss how we incorporate it formally into our model
of exchange competition introduced in Section 3.


Brief Description of Frequent Batch Auctions. The FBA market design is similar to the
continuous limit order book market design in many key respects. In both market designs: (i) orders
consist of a price, side, and quantity; (ii) orders can be submitted, modified or canceled at any moment
in time; (iii) orders remain outstanding until either executed or canceled; (iv) priority, if necessary
to break ties, is based on price then time; and (v) information policy is that orders are received
by the exchange, economically processed by the exchange, and then the updated economic state is
disseminated publicly.
       There are two key differences. First, FBAs divide the trading day into frequent pre-specified
discrete-time intervals, and treat all orders received in the same interval as having been received at
the same time. A way to think about this is that time is treated as a discrete variable rather than as a
continuous variable. Second, orders are batch processed at the end of each discrete-time interval, using
  49
    In “asymmetric speed bump” or “asymmetric delay” market designs, an exchange processes cancellations immediately
upon receipt but processes marketable orders only after a fixed small delay. This market design also eliminates latency
arbitrage in the BCS model, and captures one aspect of FBAs in that orders can be canceled at any time while executions
can only occur with some delay (i.e., at the end of the batch interval), but it does have some weaknesses relative to FBAs
that are outside the model. Specifically, because it serially processes new orders, there still is a race to the top of the
book, and there still can be sniping races if there are stale limit orders provided by market participants who are not fast
enough to update within the delay window. Recent evidence in Aquilina, Budish and O’Neill (2020) suggests that stale
quotes taken in races are supplied by firms outside of the fastest HFTs more than 50% of the time. Such orders would
be vulnerable to sniping in an asymmetric delay market if not cancelled within the delay window, but would trade at a
price that reflects new public information in a FBA market. Please see Section VIII.C-D of Budish, Cramton and Shim
(2015) for a discussion of asymmetric speed bumps, and please see Baldauf and Mollner (2020) for a detailed theoretical
analysis.




                                                            40
a uniform-price auction, rather than being serially processed upon receipt as in a limit order book.
More specifically, at the end of each time interval, the exchange aggregates all outstanding orders to
buy and sell — both new orders submitted in that interval and orders that remain outstanding from
previous intervals (i.e., neither executed nor canceled) — into demand and supply curves, respectively.
If demand and supply cross, then trades are executed at the market-clearing price.50 If necessary to
break ties on either side of the market, priority is based first on price, then discrete time (i.e., orders
that have been present in the book for strictly more intervals have higher priority if at the same price),
with any remaining ties broken randomly. The exchange then publicly announces (i) any trades that
occurred (quantities and prices, just as in the continuous market), and (ii) the updated state of the
order book, i.e., any orders that remain outstanding (just as in the continuous market).


Formal Model Details. We modify the Stage 3 trading game of our model of exchange competition
introduced in Section 3 as follows. We assume that an FBA exchange, which we call “Discrete” in
the formal analysis, first processes all cancelations received in a period of the trading game (reflecting
that in an FBA orders can be canceled at any moment in time), and then processes any new limit
or IOC orders received in that period, along with outstanding orders from previous periods, using
a uniform-price auction as described above, with price then discrete-time priority used to break any
ties. Note that, unlike the Continuous case, TF speed does not affect the order in which messages are
processed. Everything else about the Stage 3 trading game is the same as in Section 3. In particular,
in Period 1 of the trading game, TFs have an opportunity to submit limit orders, IOC orders, and
cancel messages to all exchanges; after these orders are processed, the resulting order book on each
exchange is displayed publicly as part of the state ω. In Period 2, if an investor or informed trader
arrives, they have a single opportunity to send IOC orders to all exchanges. If in Period 2 there
is public information, TFs can respond as before by sending IOC orders and cancel messages to all
exchanges, but because of the market design there will not be any latency arbitrage rents.
    The only additional modification we make to our model is that Discrete exchanges do not sell
exchange-specific speed technology in Stage 1. Practically, we have in mind that an FBA exchange
would allow market participants to co-locate their servers and subscribe to proprietary market data,
but would not be able to charge prices commensurate with their role, on continuous exchanges, in
extracting sniping rents.51
    To summarize, in Stage 1, Continuous exchanges set both trading and ESST fees, while Discrete
exchanges only set trading fees; in Stage 2, fast TFs make ESST adoption decisions for Continuous
exchanges; and in Stage 3, the infinitely repeated trading game is played with the modifications
  50
     In case there is an interval of market-clearing prices the midpoint of this interval is utilized; this case is not relevant
for our analysis.
  51
     For example, as of a few years ago Nasdaq offered four different levels of co-location services, with the most expensive
version about 2 microseconds (0.000002 seconds) faster than the least expensive version, and about 10 times the price
(IEX, 2015). An FBA exchange might be able to sell something akin to the cheapest version, but would not be able to
extract rents from latency arbitrage by selling an ever-so-slightly faster connection.




                                                              41
described above. As before, our equilibrium concept is subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for Stages
1 and 2, and order book equilibrium for Stage 3 period 1. In Stage 3 period 2, investors and informed
traders have essentially unique optimal strategies, as before. In the event of public information in
Stage 3 period 2, TFs no longer have weakly dominant strategies as they did in a sniping race. We
prove that in any Nash equilibrium of the subgame that arises when there is new public information,
either all stale quotes are canceled or any trade that does occur is at the new value of y, i.e., the
price reflects the new public information. Hence, there are no latency arbitrage rents. We assume
that investors and informed traders play their optimal strategies and that TFs, in the event of public
information, play Nash equilibrium.
    Before proceeding, we emphasize that the way in which we model competition between FBA
exchanges and the continuous market is only appropriate for sufficiently fast batch intervals, and
would become more practically strained with a longer batch interval.52 One reason is that for an FBA
exchange to have protected quotes under Reg NMS, the batch interval must be less than 1 millisecond
in order to satisfy the SEC’s de minimis delay standard (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission,
2016c; see Appendix A for further discussion). With a longer batch interval, the frictionless search
and access assumption in our trading game may thus be inappropriate. A second reason is that with
a longer batch interval, our assumption that at most one event happens per trading game (i.e., an
investor arrival, informed trader arrival, or public news) becomes less realistic.53


5.2    A Discrete and a Continuous Exchange

We first examine a single Discrete exchange competing against a single Continuous exchange; the case
of a single Discrete exchange competing against multiple Continuous exchanges will be economically
equivalent.54 Recall that if there was only a single Continuous exchange in operation charging zero
trading fees (see Section 3.2.1), a single unit of liquidity would be provided in equilibrium each trading
                                                                                       s∗continuous
game by fast trading firms at a spread s∗continuous given by (3.1): λinvest                  2        = (λpublic + λprivate ) ·
L(s∗continuous ). In contrast, if there was only a single Discrete exchange also charging zero trading fees,
  52
     Practically, we think of the batch interval in this model as long enough for an exchange computer to effectively
batch process in the event that there is public news and multiple TFs respond, but then otherwise essentially as fast as
possible. Some industry participants have suggested to us that as little as 50 microseconds (i.e., 0.000050 seconds) would
be sufficient for this purpose, and our sense from aggregating many similar conversations is that 500 microseconds to 1
millisecond would be more than sufficient. Recent empirical evidence in Aquilina, Budish and O’Neill (2020) is consistent
with these magnitudes being enough to eliminate most latency arbitrage.
  53
     As noted above in footnote 14, even for the highest activity symbols in the market, nearly all milliseconds have neither
any trade nor change in the national best bid or offer. It is thus empirically reasonable for an investor or informed trader
to assume that nothing else will happen in the millisecond that they are trading, unless their trading is itself responding
to public news. Even at intervals like 1 second, which will sound very fast to an economist relative to the speed at
which fundamentals evolve, this is no longer the case. Whereas at 1 millisecond, more than 97.6% of milliseconds have
no trades or best bid or offer changes for SPY and more than 99.6% of milliseconds have no such activity for GOOG,
at 1 second the figures are just 3.5% for SPY and 37.1% for GOOG. These numbers are based on 12 randomly selected
trading days in 2018.
  54
     As discussed in Section 3.1, our theoretical analysis has shown that frictionless search and access enable multiple
Continuous exchanges to operate as if they were a single synthesized exchange. It will become clear from the equilibrium
that it makes no difference whether there is a single Continuous exchange or multiple Continuous exchanges that operate
as a single synthesized exchange.


                                                             42
arguments developed in BCS imply that a single unit of liquidity would be provided in equilibrium at
the spread s∗discrete which solves:

                                                    s∗discrete
                                          λinvest              = λprivate · L(s∗discrete ) .                               (5.1)
                                                         2

The difference between (5.1) and (3.1) is the λpublic L(s∗ ) term — this reflects that Discrete eliminates
latency arbitrage rents, and hence the associated cost for liquidity providers. For this reason, s∗discrete <
s∗continuous . Intuitively, there are two reasons why Discrete eliminates latency arbitrage. First, the
discrete-time interval gives liquidity providers an opportunity to cancel stale orders in response to
public news before new orders are processed at the end of the batch interval. Second, competition
among trading firms in the batch auction ensures that transaction prices reflect public news, even if
there are stale quotes that are not canceled by the end of the batch interval.
       Now consider the multiple exchange trading game between a Continuous and a Discrete exchange.
Suppose initially that trading fees on both exchanges are zero, and all TFs have purchased ESST from
the Continuous exchange. A reasonable prior might be that there exist multiple equilibrium outcomes:
for example, there might be an equilibrium where all liquidity is provided and taken from Continuous,
and another where all liquidity is provided and taken from Discrete. However, this is not the case:

Proposition 5.1. Consider the infinitely repeated Stage 3 subgame with a single Continuous and a
single Discrete exchange, assuming that in Stage 1 both exchanges set trading fees to zero and in
Stage 2 all fast trading firms have purchased exchange-specific speed technology from Continuous. Any
equilibrium has the following properties. In period 1 of each trading game: exactly one unit of liquidity
is provided on Discrete at bid-ask spread s∗discrete (defined in (5.1)) around the current value of y, and
no liquidity is provided on the Continuous exchange. In period 2 of each trading game: an investor,
upon arrival, immediately transacts one unit at the best bid or offer; an informed trader, upon arrival,
immediately transacts one unit at the best bid or offer if their privately-observed jump in y exceeds
s∗discrete                                                                       s∗discrete
     2     ;   if there is a publicly-observed jump in y that exceeds                 2     ,   either all TFs with stale quotes
cancel their stale quotes, or if the auction results in trade the auction price is the new value of y. Such
an equilibrium of the trading game exists.

       To understand why liquidity cannot be offered on the Continuous exchange in equilibrium, first note
that a liquidity provider must charge at least the “zero-variable profit spread” on Continuous, denoted
s̄continuous and given by the solution to λinvest s̄continuous
                                                        2      − ( NN−1 λpublic + λprivate ) · L(s̄continuous ) = 0.55
This spread is strictly greater than s∗discrete . As a result, since investor demand is perfectly elastic
with respect to the bid-ask spread, if any liquidity provider on Continuous were (weakly) profitably
offering liquidity at some spread s ≥ s̄continuous , that provider could be (strictly) profitably undercut
on Discrete at a strictly smaller spread s0 ∈ (s∗discrete , s). Furthermore, any liquidity cannot be offered
at any spread other than s∗discrete in equilibrium on Discrete: any greater, and it could be profitably
  55
       This spread is smaller than s∗continuous given by (3.1) since it does not account for the opportunity cost of not sniping.


                                                                  43
undercut by another TF; any lower, and the liquidity provider would be losing money and be better off
withdrawing. We show that these arguments also imply that no liquidity can be offered on Continuous
in any Stage 3 trading game even if Discrete were to charge a strictly positive (but small enough)
trading fee f > 0.56
    Given these results, we establish the following:

Proposition 5.2. Consider the full exchange competition game with a single Continuous exchange and
single Discrete exchange. Any equilibrium has the following properties: (i) in period 1 of each Stage
3 trading game, exactly one unit of liquidity is provided on Discrete and no liquidity is provided on
Continuous; (ii) Continuous earns zero profits; and (iii) Discrete charges strictly positive trading fees
                                                                     N Πcontinuous .
                                                                    N −1 ∗
and earns expected per-trading-game profits that exceed                                 Such an equilibrium exists.

    In essence, Discrete is compensated for the elimination of the tax that latency arbitrage imposes
on trading. As long as Discrete charges a fee that is less than this tax, by enough to account for the
zero-variable profit deviation described above, it tips the market.
    Propositions 5.1-5.2 may at first seem in tension with Proposition 9 of Glosten (1994), who finds
that the limit order book is in a sense “competition proof.” The explanation for this apparent con-
tradiction is that the Glosten (1994) model precludes latency arbitrage — traders arrive to market
one-at-a-time, so it is not possible for there to be public information that multiple traders try to act
on at the same time. The reason Discrete “wins” against Continuous in our model is precisely that it
eliminates the latency arbitrage tax on liquidity.


5.3    Multiple Discrete Exchanges

Now consider the case of multiple Discrete exchanges. With at least two Discrete exchanges (and
potentially one or more Continuous exchanges), the resulting equilibrium has similar features to the
one derived in Proposition 3.2 with multiple Continuous exchanges:

Proposition 5.3. Consider the full exchange competition game with at least two Discrete exchanges.
Any equilibrium has the following properties: (i) at least one Discrete exchange charges zero trading
fees; (ii) in every iteration of the trading game, exactly one unit of liquidity is provided in aggregate
across only Discrete exchanges with zero trading fees at bid-ask spread s∗discrete around the current
value of y following Period 1; (iii) no liquidity is provided on Discrete exchanges with positive trading
fees or on Continuous exchanges; (iv) all exchanges earn zero profits. Such an equilibrium exists.

    Just as in the case with multiple continuous exchanges as studied in Section 3, in equilibrium
multiple Discrete exchanges also operate as a single synthesized exchange: a single unit of liquidity is
   56
      Let s̄discrete (f ) (defined formally in the Appendix in (B.5)) denote the zero-variable-profit spread for a liquidity
provider on Discrete when Discrete charges trading fee f , so that s∗discrete = s̄discrete (0). The proof of Proposition 5.1
establishes that if s̄discrete (f )/2 + f < s̄continuous /2 (so that an investor would prefer trading on Discrete at spread
s̄discrete (f ) and paying a trading fee f to trading on Continuous at spread s̄continuous ), any profitable provision of
liquidity on Continuous could always be profitably undercut by liquidity provision on Discrete, and hence cannot occur
in equilibrium.


                                                            44
always provided in each trading game, the depth-volume relationship ensures that the marginal unit of
liquidity is indifferent across exchanges, and equilibria differ from one another only in exchange market
shares. However, there are two key differences. First, the bid-ask spread is s∗discrete , not s∗continuous ,
which is better for investors and informed traders because s∗discrete < s∗continuous . Second, there are no
longer latency arbitrage rents for exchanges or trading firms.


5.4   Prisoner’s Dilemma

We have now analyzed equilibrium of the exchange competition game with multiple Continuous ex-
changes (Section 3), a single Discrete and one or more Continuous exchanges (Section 5.2), and multiple
Discrete exchanges (Section 5.3). It is straightforward to see that exchanges’ economic profits as a
function of their market designs constitute a prisoner’s dilemma:

  • If all exchanges are Continuous: each exchange j earns (per trading game) economic profits of
      N Fj∗ (Proposition 3.2).

  • If there is a single Discrete exchange and all other exchanges are Continuous: the Discrete
      exchange earns economic profits denoted ΠD , where ΠD ∈ ( NN−1 Π∗continuous , Π∗continuous ), and the
      Continuous exchanges earn zero economic profits (Proposition 5.2).

  • If there are multiple Discrete exchanges: all exchanges earn zero economic profits (Proposition
      5.3).

Proposition 3.3 places an upper bound on exchange ESST revenues in (all Continuous), while Propo-
sition 5.2 places a lower bound on the Discrete exchange’s profits in (a single Discrete, the remain-
der Continuous). These bounds and some simple algebra (Lemma B.4 in the appendix) yields that
ΠD > N Fj∗ for all exchanges j, for any equilibrium ESST revenues consistent with Proposition 3.3 and
for ΠD as characterized in Proposition 5.2. Discrete is thus a dominant strategy, but all exchanges
prefer (all Continuous), where they earn economic profits from speed technology, to (all Discrete)
where they do not. We summarize these results in the following Proposition.

Proposition 5.4. [Prisoner’s Dilemma] Add a Stage 0 to the exchange competition game in which
each of M exchanges simultaneously choose either to operate as a continuous limit order book exchange
(Continuous) or as a frequent batch auction exchange (Discrete). After these market design decisions,
Stages 1 through 3 of the exchange competition game are played as before, with equilibrium as charac-
terized by either Proposition 3.2 (all Continuous), Proposition 5.2 (a single Discrete, the remainder
Continuous), or Proposition 5.3 (multiple Discrete). Exchange profits as a function of their mar-
ket designs constitute a prisoner’s dilemma: Discrete is a dominant strategy, but all exchanges make
greater profits in the subgame in which all exchanges are Continuous than in the subgame in which all
exchanges are Discrete.



                                                    45
       In our analysis Discrete is a weakly dominant strategy, because an exchange’s profits are zero if
they are Continuous while there are one or more Discrete exchanges, and are also zero if they are one
of many Discrete exchanges. In practice, there are a few reasons incumbent exchanges might strictly
prefer positive share to zero share even at competitive trading fees; for example, there are the “Tape
Plan” data revenues discussed in Section 4.3, which are roughly proportional to market share.57 For
the purpose of our analysis of adoption incentives below we will assume that if there is an initial
adoption at least one incumbent will imitate.


5.5      Adoption Incentives

Given the prisoner’s dilemma payoff structure as summarized in Section 5.4, the analysis of exchange
adoption incentives is relatively standard.
       Let cadopt denote the fixed costs of being the first adopter of Discrete. In practice, adoption
costs would include the costs of winning regulatory approval from the SEC for a new market design,
engineering costs, the costs of explaining the new design to market participants, etc. If the first adopter
is a de novo entrant, we assume that the entrant also has to pay a cost centry associated with setting up
a new exchange company, being granted a new exchange license by the SEC, etc. If the first adopter
is an incumbent they do not pay centry , since they already have entered, but instead pay opportunity
costs of no longer being a Continuous exchange. Since our analysis is all on a per-trading-game basis,
we will interpret cadopt and centry as per-trading-game costs paid in perpetuity.
       We assume that if there is an initial adopter, whether a de novo or an incumbent, then incumbents
can imitate after T iterations of the trading game. Rather than formally modeling a dynamic entry
and adoption game, we directly assume that at least one incumbent does in fact imitate when able to
do so. As discussed above, this assumption represents that incumbents strictly prefer positive share
to zero share even at competitive trading fees.58


Adoption Incentives: A New Entrant Exchange. If a de novo entrant starts a new Discrete
exchange, the entrant earns revenues of ΠD per-trading game until it is imitated. Once imitated,
which occurs after T periods, the entrant earns zero profits. Let ρ ≡ (
                                                                                        PT         t )/(P∞ δ t )   denote the
                                                                                           t=0 δ         t=0
share of net present value represented by the first T iterations of an infinitely repeated series of trading
games, where δ < 1 denotes the per-trading game discount factor.59 The condition for a de novo to
  57
      For NYSE and Nasdaq specifically, another reason to strictly prefer positive share to zero share even at competitive
trading fees is the listings business. Listings are lucrative (both the listing fees per se and revenue from the opening and
closing auctions, which are hosted by the listings exchange), and seem to be reasonably sticky, but presumably it would
be difficult to maintain this business if regular-hours market share were too low.
   58
      In case helpful, this assumption can be formalized as follows. Let R denote the total revenue from non-latency-
sensitive data and assume R is split proportional to market share. Let cimitate denote the fixed cost of imitation. Then for
at least one incumbent j, their anticipated market share if they adopt Discrete, denoted σjD , satisfies σjD R − cimitate > 0.
   59
      In the terminology of Budish, Roin and Williams (2015) ρ is the ratio of an invention’s expected monopoly life to
its expected total life, or EM  L
                             ET L
                                  .




                                                             46
find entry profitable is thus:

                                           ρΠD ≥cadopt + centry .                                      (5.2)

      Profitable entry by a de novo thus depends not only on whether the profitability of a standalone
Discrete exchange ΠD is large relative to adoption and entry costs cadopt + centry , but also on the
term ρ which captures how quickly the entrant is imitated. Clearly, if ρ is small enough (5.2) will not
obtain, even if the magnitude of latency arbitrage, and hence ΠD , is large.


Adoption Incentives: An Incumbent Exchange.                   The condition for incumbent exchange j to
find it profitable to adopt Discrete, given that all other incumbents are still Continuous, is:

                                      ρΠD ≥cadopt +        N Fj∗           .                           (5.3)
                                                           | {z }
                                                      (status-quo rents)


The left-hand-side of (5.3) is the same as that for the de novo entrant, (5.2). The right-hand-side
differs in that an incumbent does not incur entry costs, centry , but instead includes the incumbent’s
opportunity cost of losing the exchange-specific speed technology rents it earns in the status quo,
N Fj∗ . Our empirical results in Section 4.3 indicate that annual ESST revenues are on the order of $1
billion per year, which, at a discount rate of between 5% and 10%, has a net present value of between
$10-$20 billion. In contrast, anecdotal evidence suggests that centry is on the order of $100 million
(see Section 6.1). Thus, the adoption condition for incumbent exchanges with ESST profits to protect
is likely an order of magnitude more restrictive than the adoption condition for de novo entrants.
      That incumbent exchanges continue to use the continuous limit order book market design is thus
consistent with them maintaining the “cooperative” all-Continuous outcome of the prisoner’s dilemma
summarized in Proposition 5.4. Does this sound reasonable? Consider the following quote from the
Chief Economist of Nasdaq at a publicly recorded academic event in November 2013 when asked about
adopting frequent batch auctions:

        “Technologically, we could do it. The big issue, one of the big issues for us, when I talked
        about cost, the cost we would bear, would be getting [the SEC] to approve it, which would
        take a lot of time and effort, and if we got it approved, it would immediately be copied
        by everybody else. . . . So we would have essentially no first-mover advantage if we put it
        in there, we would have no incentive to go through the lift of creating [the new market
        design].”60
 60
    The event was a Workshop of The Program in the Law and Economics of Capital Markets at
Columbia which featured a presentation of Budish, Cramton and Shim (2015) and an open dis-
cussion among the Program’s Fellows.            The video was available for 5 years at https://capital-
markets.law.columbia.edu/content/fellow-workshops. A copy of the video is available via the internet wayback
machine at https://web.archive.org/web/20170418174002/https://www.law.columbia.edu/capital-markets/previous-
workshops/2013 (accessed on Jan 8, 2019).


                                                    47
(Emphasis added.) The quote suggests that industry participants believe that adoption costs are
substantial, and — more importantly — if a new market design turns out to be successful, it would be
swiftly imitated without much benefit to the first-mover. The quote does not underscore the additional
disincentive for incumbents to adopt, namely the potential loss of rents from selling speed technology
in the continuous market.


6         Discussion of Policy Implications
The basic question for policy is whether there will be a private-market solution to latency arbitrage
and the arms race (i.e., “will the market fix the market”), or would some sort of regulatory intervention
be required, and if so, of what form.
         On the one hand, the analysis in Section 5 suggests that private-market incentives may not be suf-
ficient, even if the magnitude of latency arbitrage is large (equations (5.2)-(5.3)). On the other hand,
the analysis in Section 5 indicates that if there is an entrant, it will gain share in any equilibrium
(Propositions 5.1-5.2). This suggests that, in the event that private incentives continue to be insuffi-
cient to motivate innovation, a potential option for policy is to provide a “push”. By push we mean
any policy that tips the balance of incentives sufficiently to cause either condition (5.2) or (5.3) to
obtain.61 Sections 6.1-6.2 discuss two such potential pushes. Section 6.3 does rough back-of-envelope
math to give a sense of magnitudes for the policy interventions and the overall costs and benefits for
the market.


6.1        Policy Response 1: Reduce entry and adoption costs.

Examining equation (5.2), it is immediate that if policy could sufficiently lower entry and adoption
costs (i.e., centry +cadopt ), it could ensure that a de novo entrant would have incentive to enter, because
the left-hand side of (5.2) is strictly positive.
         The cost of starting a new stock exchange is significant, and the risk of a new stock exchange
design not getting approved is substantial as well. As evidence of the significant costs of entry, the
Investors’ Exchange (IEX) is estimated to have raised over $100M of venture capital in advance of its
approval as a stock exchange in June 2016 (Crunchbase, 2018); this figure would combine what we
call cadopt and centry . The Chicago Stock Exchange was purchased by NYSE for, reportedly, $70M,
and many industry observers speculated that the sole reason NYSE bought CHX was to acquire its
exchange license;62 that is, costs that are part of what we call centry . As evidence of the significant
    61
     In our model, both a “push” of the sort described in this section and a market-design mandate would accomplish the
same goal. Both would move the industry equilibrium from (all Continuous) to (all Discrete), and in doing so eliminate
latency arbitrage and the associated arms race. With realistic frictions we would not expect a push to move the market
to 100% adoption; see Section 6.3 and Appendix F for discussion. A mandate, by definition, would move the market to
100% adoption but raises other issues that are difficult to model. Understanding the full tradeoffs between these two
kinds of policy responses is beyond the scope of this paper.
  62
     The Wall Street Journal reported, of the merger, “Analysts say CHX’s most valuable asset is its license to run a
national securities exchange. Applying for a new exchange license from the SEC can take years” (Michaels and Osipovich,


                                                          48
risk of a new stock exchange design not getting approved, again consider IEX and CHX. IEX went
through a protracted fight over its exchange design, and ultimately made significant concessions to
gain approval. CHX, too, went through a protracted regulatory process over its proposed exchange
design (CHX, 2017, 2018; U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2017c), and ultimately withdrew
its proposal after being acquired by the NYSE Group (Michaels and Osipovich, 2018).
    One specific way the SEC could lower the risk-adjusted costs of entering as a new exchange with
a new market design would be to proactively clarify what kinds of exchange designs are and are not
allowed within the boundaries of Reg NMS (see Budish, 2016c). Such proactive clarification would
certainly reduce risk, and would likely also reduce costs per se (e.g., legal costs).
    In principle, if the social returns to a new market design are large but the private returns are
negative, this would also justify a direct entry subsidy. The subsidy could be provided either by the
government (with all the usual caveats) or by investors if they could find a way to act collectively.
The subsidy would need to be large enough to get inequality (5.2) to obtain.
    We can bound the maximum necessary subsidy by centry +cadopt . The anecdotal evidence described
above suggests this is on the order of $100 million.


6.2    Policy Response 2: Modest exclusivity period.

Examining equations (5.2) and (5.3), a key parameter that determines whether the innovator has
sufficient incentive is ρ. The parameter ρ captures the speed with which the innovator is imitated.
The quote by the Nasdaq executive, “it would be immediately copied by everyone else,” is consistent
with ρ being small in practice. The speed with which IEX’s symmetric speed bump was imitated by
an exchange controlled by NYSE also speaks to ρ being small in practice.63
    Our impression is that the reasons ρ might be small in practice are that the “hard” parts of starting
an exchange with a novel market design (given that the design itself has already been invented) are
getting regulatory approval and educating the market as to how the novel exchange design works,
whereas the actual programming and implementing of an exchange with a novel design is relatively
cheap and fast. Therefore, once a first-mover has done the hard work of getting regulatory approval
and educating the market, a second-mover can rapidly and cheaply imitate if they would like.
    This economic issue — that a potential innovator would not have incentives to invest if their
innovation will be quickly imitated — is of course a familiar one. In many other contexts, the problem
is solved by patents or other legal forms of market exclusivity (see Williams, 2017). Such policies
2018). At an industry conference attended by one of the authors around that time, numerous industry participants
referred to CHX’s value to NYSE as coming entirely from its “medallion,” i.e., its license to run a stock exchange.
  63
     IEX’s exchange application was approved in June 2016. In Jan 2017 NYSE MKT LLC, subsequently renamed
NYSE American, filed for approval to incorporate an analogous speed bump into its exchange (“... the proposed Delay
Mechanism would function similarly to the intentional delay mechanism of IEX ...”) and explicitly cited IEX’s approval
as legal precedent for its approval (“The proposed rule text is based on Supplementary Material ... to IEX Rule 11.510
without any substantive differences”). The SEC approved the proposal in May 2017, citing the similarity to IEX (“... the
Commission does not find any legal basis to distinguish the Exchange’s proposed Delay Mechanism from the IEX access
delay.”) Please see NYSE MKT LLC (2017) and U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2017b), respectively for
details. Please see footnote 7 and Budish (2016b) regarding the strengths and limitations of IEX’s speed bump design.


                                                          49
explicitly trade off the static inefficiency of monopoly for the dynamic efficiency of eliciting useful
innovations.
       Here, patents do not seem to be a viable way to create market exclusivity for at least two reasons.
First, the specific market design of frequent batch auctions is in the public domain. Second, even if
frequent batch auctions were patented, to be effective the intellectual property protection would have
to cover all possible market designs that eliminate latency arbitrage. As evidence of the difficulty of
this, consider that the Chicago Mercantile Exchange filed for a patent (Hosman et al., 2017) in Jan
2016 for a market design idea that a close reader will recognize as, in essence, a form of batch auction,
without using the word “auction” a single time.64
       A potential alternative way to create market exclusivity would be to have the SEC grant a modest
period of exclusivity to the innovator, during which time other exchanges would not be allowed to
imitate the design (either identically or with designs judged by the SEC to be essentially similar). This
idea is somewhat analogous to a practice of the Food and Drug Administration, wherein it grants a
period of market exclusivity for certain kinds of drugs that, for various reasons, are not patentable (see
21 CFR § 314.108 2018 and Food and Drug Administration, 2015). The purpose of the FDA policy
is to induce drug companies to go through the effort and expense of the FDA clinical trials necessary
to bring a new drug to market. Analogously, the purpose of the SEC exclusivity period would be to
induce an exchange company to go through the effort and expense of the SEC approval process, and
the other costs associated with developing and implementing a new market design.


6.3      Rough Magnitudes

Recent empirical evidence in Aquilina, Budish and O’Neill (2020) finds that latency arbitrage profits
as a proportion of trading volume is about 0.4 basis points in UK equity markets (0.004%). This
number would imply annual latency arbitrage profits in U.S. equity markets on the order of $2 billion
per year, based on the approximately $50 trillion of annual regular-hours on-exchange trading volume,
or about $0.0020 per share, based on approximately 1 trillion shares traded. Exchange ESST revenues
combined with the bound from the theory (Proposition 3.3) also point to annual latency arbitrage
profits of roughly this magnitude; see the discussion in Section 4.3. A discount rate of between 5% and
10% applied to the $2 billion per year figure implies that the net present value of latency arbitrage
profits in U.S. equity markets is on the order of $20 to $40 billion. While admittedly rough, and based
on extrapolation from UK equities which may not be comparable to U.S. equities, this gives a sense
of magnitudes for the benefits of addressing latency arbitrage in the U.S. stock market.
  64
    Here is an excerpt of the text from the abstract of the CME patent application (emphasis added): “The disclosed
embodiments may mitigate such [latency] disparities by buffering or otherwise grouping temporally proximate competing
transactions together upon receipt, e.g. into a group, collection, set, bucket, etc., and subsequently arbitrating among
those grouped competing transactions, in a manner other than solely based on the order in which the competing transactions
in the group were received, to determine the order in which those competing transactions will be processed, thereby
equalizing priority of transactions received from participants having varying abilities to rapidly submit transactions or
otherwise capitalize on transactional opportunities” (Hosman et al., 2017).



                                                           50
         This magnitude suggests that an entry subsidy almost surely passes a cost-benefit test. Getting
a sense of magnitudes for the exclusivity period is more involved. In Appendix F, we provide details
for a back-of-the-envelope calculation that suggests an exclusivity period on the order of 1-2 years
might be sufficient. For this calculation, we use estimates of the magnitude of latency arbitrage from
Aquilina, Budish and O’Neill (2020) and, in a stylized manner, take account of frictions that are
outside of the analysis in Section 5. Specifically, we consider tick-size constraints, agency frictions
between investors and brokers trading on their behalf, and investors and liquidity providers not being
perfectly elastic with respect to prices net of fees. Though a richer model and a more direct estimate of
the magnitude of latency arbitrage in the U.S. stock market would be needed to get to a number with
more confidence, we hope this exercise at least gives a sense of magnitudes that a relatively modest
exclusivity period could be sufficient to induce entry.


7         Conclusion
In the quotation at the beginning of this paper, the SEC Chair asked “whether trading venues have
sufficient opportunity and flexibility to innovate successfully with initiatives that seek to deemphasize
speed as a key to trading success. . . ” We have put forth a theoretical model of stock exchange com-
petition that clarifies why, even if allowed, exchanges may not want to innovate: they profit from the
speed race generated by the existing market design. Our story is not about new markets failing to
gain traction if introduced (as may be the case in other settings with stronger network externalities
and potential for coordination failure), but rather one of incumbents protecting rents. The modest
policy proposals put forth in the last section are designed with this perspective in mind. Rather than
mandate a particular market design, these proposals, which borrow simple economic insights from the
innovation and intellectual property literature, attempt to alter the incentives for private innovation
in ways that better align private incentives with social interests, to encourage “the market to fix the
market.”
         The ideas in this paper are already having some modest policy impact. In October 2019, the
SEC issued a statement inviting market design proposals for the thinly-traded segment of the U.S.
stock market. In this proposal, the SEC explicitly points to batch auctions as a potential market
design alternative it encourages, and signals willingness to suspend Unlisted Trading Privileges for
stocks listed on exchanges that so innovate (see U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2019a,b).
Suspending UTP is a way of creating exclusivity for the innovator, analogous to our ideas in Section
6.2.65 In February 2020, the SEC issued a proposed reform to the market for exchange data (U.S.
    65
     Since suspending UTP would make trading exclusive to a single exchange per stock (the listing exchange) it would
be important to think carefully about the resulting trading fees. In our analysis of equilibrium with a single Discrete
exchange (Proposition 5.2), trading fees on the Discrete exchange are disciplined by competition from the Continuous
exchange. Without UTP, the discipline on trading fees could come either from competition among listing exchanges
(i.e., if a listing exchange raises its trading fee too much, listed companies can switch exchanges), competition from
off-exchange trading venues, or explicit fee caps.



                                                          51
Securities and Exchange Commission, 2020a). The proposed rule cited our theoretical finding that
each exchange has market power in the sale of proprietary market data and related speed technology
(pg. 366), as well as our empirical finding that exchanges earn significant revenue from selling these
products (pg. 365). In a policy address on the topic of market data and exchange governance at
around that time, Commissioner Robert J. Jackson Jr. cited our work and said “Without changing
[the] incentives, we cannot and should not expect the market to fix the market.”66 (Jackson, 2020)
       A standalone contribution of this paper, separable from our motivating question about market
design innovation, is the development of an industrial organization (IO) model of the modern U.S.
stock exchange industry. One natural direction for future research would be to use the model as a
starting point for analysis of the entry and merger incentives of stock exchanges.67 Another natural
direction for future research is to extend this style of analysis — at the intersection of market design,
IO and finance, with theory and empirical work guided by institutional and regulatory details —
to other asset classes and geographies with different regulatory frameworks. As emphasized in the
text, futures markets would be of particular interest, since the seemingly small difference that futures
contracts are not fungible across exchanges leads to large differences in industry structure.68 The U.S.
Treasury secondary market would be another natural subject, given both its size and importance per
se, and recent scrutiny regarding market design issues (Powell, 2015; Joint Staff Report, 2015).
  66
      The speech also specifically cited our theoretical finding that exchanges have market power in the sale of speed
technology: “Important recent research shows that, even when the market for trading is perfectly competitive, exchanges
can extract supra-competitive rents from selling speed technology in the form of proprietary data feeds.”
   67
      A recently announced entrant exchange, the Members’ Exchange (MEMX), is owned by a consortium of nine major
trading firms and broker-dealers. From reports to date, it appears that MEMX is not innovating on market design, but
rather seems motivated by concern over rising fees for proprietary data, co-location and connectivity, as we documented in
Stylized Fact #7 (Osipovich, 2019b; Levine, 2019). In this regard, MEMX’s entry might be interpretable as a combination
of business-stealing in the sense of Mankiw and Whinston (1986) and an attempt to gain bargaining leverage, rather than
innovation on welfare-enhancing dimensions. One industry analyst remarked “we’ve seen this playbook before—it’s BATS
2.0” (Stafford, 2019). BATS and Direct Edge, like MEMX, also entered as continuous exchanges owned by consortia
of market participants. In our model of the status quo, since exchanges earn positive profits from exchange-specific
speed technology, there is an incentive to enter as another continuous exchange if the entrant has a way of obtaining
market share. To analyze business-stealing entry more fully, a researcher would have to extend our model to study the
determination of equilibrium exchange market shares.
   68
      Interestingly, in early 2019, one of the world’s largest futures exchange operators, the Intercontinental Exchange,
filed for approval for a market design that would address latency arbitrage (Osipovich, 2019a), even while its subsidiary,
the New York Stock Exchange, has in the past opposed such innovations in equity markets.




                                                           52
References
21 CFR § 314.108. 2018. New Drug Product Exclusivity.

Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, and Tayfun Sönmez. 2003. “School Choice: A Mechanism Design Approach.”
 American Economic Review, 93(3): 729–747.

Abdulkadiroğlu, Atila, Nikhil Agarwal, and Parag A. Pathak. 2017. “The Welfare Effects of Coor-
 dinated Assignment: Evidence from the New York City High School Match.” American Economic Review,
 107(12): 3635–3689.

Agarwal, Nikhil, Itai Ashlagi, Eduardo Azevedo, Clayton R. Featherstone, and Ömer Karaduman.
 2019. “Market Failure in Kidney Exchange.” American Economic Review, 109(11): 4026–4070.

Akbarpour, Mohammad, Julien Combe, Yinghua He, Victor Hiller, Robert Shimer, and Olivier
 Tercieux. 2019. “Unpaired Kidney Exchange: Overcoming Double Coincidence of Wants without Money.”
 Working Paper.

Allen, Jason, Robert Clark, Brent Hickman, and Eric Richert. 2020. “Resolving Failed Banks: Uncer-
  tainty, Multiple Bidding & Auction Design.” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper 2019-30.

Antill, Samuel, and Darrell Duffie. 2018. “Augmenting Markets with Mechanisms.” NBER Working Paper
 No. 24146.

Aquilina, Matteo, Eric Budish, and Peter O’Neill. 2020. “Quantifying the High-Frequency Trading ‘Arms
 Race’: A New Methodology and Estimates.” Financial Conduct Authority Occasional Paper No. 50.

Armstrong, Mark. 2006. “Competition in Two-Sided Markets.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 37(3): 668–
 691.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources to Invention.” In The Rate and
 Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors, ed. A Conference of the Universities – National
 Bureau Committee for Economic Research and Committee on Economic Growth of the Social Science Research
 Council, 609-626. Princeton University Press.

Asquith, Paul, Andrea S. Au, Thomas Covert, and Parag A. Pathak. 2013. “The Market for Borrowing
 Corporate Bonds.” Journal of Financial Economics, 107(1): 155–182.

Asquith, Paul, Thomas Covert, and Parag A. Pathak. 2019. “The Effects of Mandatory Transparency
 in Financial Market Design: Evidence from the Corporate Bond Market.” NBER Working Paper No. 19417.

Athey, Susan, and Glenn Ellison. 2011. “Position Auctions with Consumer Search.” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 126(3): 1213–1270.

Ausubel, Lawrence M., Peter Cramton, and Paul R. Milgrom. 2006. “The Clock-Proxy Auction: A
 Practical Combinatorial Auction Design.” In Combinatorial Auctions. , ed. Peter Cramton, Yoav Shoham and
 Richard Steinberg, Chapter 5, 115–138. MIT Press.

Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner. 2019. “Trading in Fragmented Markets.” Journal of Financial and
 Quantitative Analysis. forthcoming.

Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner. 2020. “High-Frequency Trading and Market Performance.” The
 Journal of Finance, 75(3): 1495–1526.

Battalio, Robert, Shane A. Corwin, and Robert Jennings. 2016. “Can Brokers Have It All? On the
 Relation between Make-Take Fees and Limit Order Execution Quality.” Journal of Finance, 71(5): 2193–2238.

Bhattacharya, Vivek, Gaston Illanes, and Manisha Padi. 2020. “Fiduciary Duty and the Market for
 Financial Advice.” NBER Working Paper No. 25861.



                                                     53
Brogaard, Jonathan, Terrence Hendershott, and Ryan Riordan. 2017. “High Frequency Trading and
  the 2008 Short-Sale Ban.” Journal of Financial Economics, 124(1): 22–42.

Budish, Eric. 2011. “The Combinatorial Assignment Problem: Approximate Competitive Equilibrium from
 Equal Incomes.” Journal of Political Economy, 119(6): 1061–1103.

Budish, Eric. 2016b. “Re: Investors’ Exchange LLC Form 1 Application (Release No. 34-75925; File No.
 10-222).” Retrieved December 22, 2018 from https://www.sec.gov/comments/10-222/10222-371.pdf.

Budish, Eric. 2016c. “Re: Proposed Commission Interpretation Regarding Automated Quotations Under
 Regulation NMS (Release No. 34-77407; File No. S7-03-16).” Retrieved January 9, 2019 from https://www.
 sec.gov/comments/s7-03-16/s70316-12.pdf.

Budish, Eric, Benjamin N. Roin, and Heidi L. Williams. 2015. “Do Firms Underinvest in Long-Term
 Research? Evidence from Cancer Clinical Trials.” American Economic Review, 105(7): 2044–85.

Budish, Eric, Gérard P. Cachon, Judd B. Kessler, and Abraham Othman. 2017. “Course Match: A
 Large-Scale Implementation of Approximate Competitive Equilibrium from Equal Incomes for Combinatorial
 Allocation.” Operations Research, 65(2): 314–336.

Budish, Eric, Peter Cramton, and John Shim. 2015. “The High-Frequency Trading Arms Race: Frequent
 Batch Auctions as a Market Design Response.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1547–1621.

Bulow, Jeremy, and Paul Klemperer. 2013. “Market-Based Bank Capital Regulation.” Working Paper.

Bulow, Jeremy, and Paul Klemperer. 2015. “Equity Recourse Notes: Creating Countercyclical Bank
 Capital.” The Economic Journal, 125(586): 131–157.

Caillaud, Bernard, and Bruno Jullien. 2003. “Chicken & Egg: Competition Among Intermediation Service
 Providers.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 34(2): 309–328.

Cantillon, Estelle, and Pai-Ling Yin. 2008. “Competition between Exchanges: Lessons from the Battle of
 the Bund.” CEPR Discussion Papers No. 6923.

Cantillon, Estelle, and Pai-Ling Yin. 2011. “Competition between Exchanges: A Research Agenda.” Inter-
 national Journal of Industrial Organization, 29(3): 329–336.

Cespa, Giovanni, and Xavier Vives. 2019. “Exchange Competition, Entry, and Welfare.” Working Paper.

Chao, Yong, Chen Yao, and Mao Ye. 2019. “Why Discrete Price Fragments U.S. Stock Exchanges and
 Disperses Their Fee Structures.” The Review of Financial Studies, 32(3): 1068–1101.

CHX. 2017. “Re: File No. SR-CHX-2016-16; Self-Regulatory Organizations; Chicago Stock Exchange, Inc.;
 Notice of Filing of Proposed Rule Change to Adopt the CHX Liquidity Taking Access Delay (Release No.
 34-78860; File No. SR-CHX-2016-16).” Retrieved February 25, 2019 from https://www.sec.gov/comments/
 sr-chx-2016-16/chx201616-1559194-131519.pdf.

CHX. 2018. “Re: Release No. 34-82034; In the Matter of the Chicago Stock Exchange, Inc. (“Exchange”)
 - For an Order Granting the Approval of Proposed Rule Change to Adopt the CHX Liquidity Enhancing
 Access Delay (“LEAD”) on a Pilot Basis (File No. SR-CHX-2017-04).” Retrieved February 25, 2019 from
 https://www.sec.gov/comments/sr-chx-2017-04/chx201704-4118079-171622.pdf.

Clayton, Jay. 2018. “Statement on Market Data Fees and Market Structure.” October 16. Pub-
  lic Statement. Retrieved January 4, 2019 from https://www.sec.gov/news/public-statement/
  statement-chairman-clayton-2018-10-16.

Collard-Wexler, Allan, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Robin S. Lee. 2019. “‘Nash-in-Nash’ Bargaining:
 A Microfoundation for Applied Work.” Journal of Political Economy, 127(1): 163–195.




                                                  54
Copeland, Thomas E., and Dan Galai. 1983. “Information Effects on the Bid-Ask Spread.” The Journal
 of Finance, 38(5): 1457–1469.

Crunchbase. 2018. “IEX Group.” Retrieved December 22, 2018 from https://www.crunchbase.com/
  organization/iex.

Duffie, Darrell, and Haoxiang Zhu. 2016. “Size Discovery.” The Review of Financial Studies, 30(4): 1095–
 1150.

Duffie, Darrell, and Piotr Dworczak. 2018. “Robust Benchmark Design.” NBER Working Paper No. 20540.

Du, Songzi, and Haoxiang Zhu. 2017. “What Is the Optimal Trading Frequency in Financial Markets?”
 The Review of Economic Studies, 84(4): 1606–1651.

Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Ostrovsky, and Michael Schwarz. 2007. “Internet Advertising and the
  Generalized Second-Price Auction: Selling Billions of Dollars Worth of Keywords.” American Economic Re-
  view, 97(1): 242–259.

Ellison, Glenn. 2005. “A Model of Add-On Pricing.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2): 585–637.

Ellison, Glenn, and Drew Fudenberg. 2003. “Knife-Edge or Plateau: When Do Market Models Tip?” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1249–1278.

Engers, Maxim, and Luis Fernandez. 1987. “Market Equilibrium with Hidden Knowledge and Self-
  Selection.” Econometrica, 55(2): 425–439.

Farrell, Joseph, and Garth Saloner. 1985. “Standardization, Compatibility, and Innovation.” The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 16(1): 70–83.

Farrell, Joseph, and Paul Klemperer. 2007. “Coordination and Lock-In: Competition with Switching Costs
  and Network Effects.” In Handbook of Industrial Organization, vol. 3, ed. Mark Armstrong and Robert Porter.
  Elsevier B.V.

Food and Drug Administration. 2015. “Patents and Exclusivity.” Retrieved January 9, 2019 from
  https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/smallbusinessassistance/
  ucm447307.pdf.

Fox, Merritt B., Lawrence R. Glosten, and Gabriel V. Rauterberg. 2015. “The New Stock Market:
  Sense and Nonsense.” Duke Law Journal, 65(2): 191–277.

Fox, Merritt B., Lawrence R. Glosten, and Gabriel V. Rauterberg. 2019. The New Stock Market.
  Columbia University Press.

Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and Information
 Suppression in Competitive Markets.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 505–540.

Glosten, Lawrence R. 1994. “Is the Electronic Open Limit Order Book Inevitable?” The Journal of Finance,
  49(4): 1127–1161.

Glosten, Lawrence R. 2020. “Economics of the Stock Exchange Business: Proprietary Market Data.” SSRN.
  Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3533525.

Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom. 1985. “Bid, Ask, and Transaction Prices in a Specialist
  Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders.” Journal of Financial Economics, 14(1): 71–100.

Griliches, Zvi. 1957. “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change.” Econometrica,
 25(4): 501–522.

Hall, Jonathan D. 2018. “Pareto Improvements from Lexus Lanes: The Effects of Pricing a Portion of the
 Lanes on Congested Highways.” Journal of Public Economics, 158: 113–125.


                                                     55
Handel, Benjamin, Igal Hendel, and Michael D. Whinston. 2015. “Equilibria in Health Exchanges:
 Adverse Selection Versus Reclassification Risk.” Econometrica, 83(4): 1261–1313.

Hendershott, Terrence, and Ananth Madhavan. 2015. “Click or Call? Auction versus Search in the
 Over-the-Counter Market.” The Journal of Finance, 70(1): 419–447.

Hendershott, Terrence, and Haim Mendelson. 2000. “Crossing Networks and Dealer Markets: Competi-
 tion and Performance.” Journal of Finance, 55(5): 2071–2115.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1971. “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive Activity.”
  The American Economic Review, 61(4): 561–574.

Hortaçsu, Ali, Jakub Kastl, and Allen Zhang. 2018. “Bid Shading and Bidder Surplus in the US Treasury
 Auction System.” American Economic Review, 108(1): 147–169.

Hosman, Bernard, Sean Castette, Fred Malabre, Pearce Peck-Walden, and Ari Studnitzer. 2017.
 “Mitigation of Latency Disparity in a Transaction Processing System.” US Patent Application No. 14991654.
 Publication No. 20170046783A1.

IEX. 2015. “Re: Investors’ Exchange LLC Form 1 Application (Release No. 34-75925; File No. 10-222).”
  Retrieved January 5, 2019 from https://www.sec.gov/comments/10-222/10222-26.pdf.

Jackson, Robert J., Jr. 2020. “Statement on Reforming Stock Exchange Governance.” January
  8. Public statement. Retrieved June 30, 2020 from https://www.sec.gov/news/public-statement/
  statement-jackson-open-meeting-2020-01-08.

Joint Staff Report. 2015. “The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014.” U.S. Department of the
  Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S.
  Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Retrieved on
  May 6, 2019 from https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/Joint_Staff_
  Report_Treasury_10-15-2015.pdf.

Jones, Charles M. 2013. “What Do We Know About High-Frequency Trading?” Columbia Business School
  Research Paper No. 13-11.

Jones, Charles M. 2018. “Understanding the Market for U.S. Equity Market Data.” Working Paper.

Kapor, Adam J., Christopher A. Neilson, and Seth D. Zimmerman. 2020. “Heterogeneous Beliefs and
 School Choice Mechanisms.” American Economic Review, 110(5): 1274–1315.

Kastl, Jakub. 2017. “Recent Advances in Empirical Analysis of Financial Markets: Industrial Organization
 Meets Finance.” In Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Eleventh World Congress, vol. 2, ed. Bo Honoré
 and Ariel Pakes and Monika Piazzesi and Larry Samuelson, 231-270. Cambridge University Press.

Katz, Michael L., and Carl Shapiro. 1986. “Technology Adoption in the Presence of Network Externalities.”
 Journal of Political Economy, 94(4): 822–841.

Kyle, Albert S. 1985. “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading.” Econometrica, 53(6): 1315–1335.

Kyle, Albert S., and Jeongmin Lee. 2017. “Toward a Fully Continuous Exchange.” Oxford Review of
 Economic Policy, 33(4): 650–675.

Kyle, Albert S., Anna A. Obizhaeva, and Yajun Wang. 2018. “Smooth Trading with Overconfidence
 and Market Power.” The Review of Economic Studies, 85(1): 611–662.

Levine, Matt. 2019. “Traders Want Their Own Exchange Too.” Bloomberg Opinion, January
  7. Retrieved December 17, 2019 from https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-01-07/
  traders-want-their-own-exchange-too.




                                                    56
Levin, Jonathan, and Andrzej Skrzypacz. 2016. “Properties of the Combinatorial Clock Auction.” Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 106(9): 2528–51.

Lewis, Michael. 2014. Flash Boys. W. W. Norton and Company.

Madhavan, Ananth. 2000. “Market Microstructure: A Survey.” Journal of Financial Markets, 3(3): 205–208.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Michael D. Whinston. 1986. “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency.” The RAND
 Journal of Economics, 17(1): 48–58.

Menkveld, Albert J. 2016. “The Economics of High-Frequency Trading: Taking Stock.” Annual Review of
 Financial Economics, 8: 1–24.

Michaels, Dave, and Alexander Osipovich. 2018. “NYSE in Talks to Buy Chicago Stock Exchange.”
 Wall Street Journal, March 30. Retrieved December 17, 2019 from https://www.wsj.com/articles/
 nyse-in-talks-to-buy-chicago-stock-exchange-1522429813.

Milgrom, Paul R., and Ilya Segal. 2019. “Clock Auctions and Radio Spectrum Reallocation.” Journal of
 Political Economy. forthcoming.

Nordhaus, William D. 1969. Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of Technological
 Change. The MIT Press.

NYSE MKT LLC. 2017. “Proposal to amend Rules 7.29E and 1.1E to provide for a Delay Mechanism.”
 Retrieved December 16, 2019 from https://www.nyse.com/publicdocs/nyse/markets/nyse-american/
 rule-filings/filings/2017/NYSEMKT-2017-05.pdf.

O’Hara, Maureen. 2015. “High Frequency Market Microstructure.” Journal of Financial Economics,
  116(2): 257–270.

Osipovich, Alexander. 2019a. “ICE Wants to Bring First ‘Speed Bump’ to Futures Markets.” The
  Wall Street Journal, February 15. Retrieved December 17, 2019 from https://www.wsj.com/articles/
  ice-wants-to-bring-first-speed-bump-to-futures-markets-11550228400.

Osipovich, Alexander. 2019b. “Wall Street Firms Plan New Exchange to Challenge NYSE, Nas-
  daq.” The Wall Street Journal, January 7. Retrieved December 17, 2019 from https://www.wsj.com/
  articles/wall-street-firms-plan-new-exchange-to-challenge-nyse-nasdaq-11546866121?mod=
  searchresults&page=1&pos=1.

Ostrovsky, Michael, and Michael Schwarz. 2018. “Carpooling and the Economics of Self-Driving Cars.”
  NBER Working Paper No. 24349.

Pagano, Marco. 1989. “Trading Volume and Asset Liquidity.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  104(2): 255–274.

Pagnotta, Emiliano S., and Thomas Philippon. 2018. “Competing on Speed.” Econometrica, 86(3): 1067–
  1115.

Powell, Jerome H. 2015. “The Evolving Structure of U.S. Treasury Markets.” October 20. Speech at the
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Retrieved February 20, 2019 from https://www.federalreserve.gov/
  newsevents/speech/powell20151020a.htm.

Riley, John G. 1979. “Informational Equilibrium.” Econometrica, 47(2): 331–359.

Rochet, Jean-Charles, and Jean Tirole. 2003. “Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets.” Journal of
 the European Economic Association, 1(4): 990–1029.

Roth, Alvin E. 2002. “The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentation, and Computation as
 Tools for Design Economics.” Econometrica, 70(4): 1341–1378.



                                                   57
Roth, Alvin E., and Robert B. Wilson. 2019. “How Market Design Emerged from Game Theory: A Mutual
 Interview.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(3): 118–43.

Roth, Alvin E., Tayfun Sönmez, and M. Utku Ünver. 2004. “Kidney Exchange.” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 119(2): 457–488.

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
 on the Economics of Imperfect Information.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4): 629–649.

Santos, Tano, and Jose A. Scheinkman. 2001. “Competition among Exchanges.” The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 116(3): 1027–1061.

Schwartz, Robert A., ed. 2001. “The Electronic Call Auction: Market Mechanism and Trading: Building a
  Better Stock Market.” Springer.

Sönmez, Tayfun, and M. Utku Ünver. 2010. “Course Bidding at Business Schools.” International Economic
  Review, 51(1): 99–123.

Spatt, Chester S. 2019. “Is Equity Market Exchange Structure Anti-Competitive?” Working Paper.

Stafford, Philip. 2019. “MEMX turns up the heat on US stock exchanges.” Financial Times, January 9. Re-
  trieved December 17, 2019 from https://www.ft.com/content/4908c8b0-1418-11e9-a581-4ff78404524e.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 1994. “Market 2000: An Examination of Current Equity
  Market Developments.” Retrieved November 9, 2018 from https://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/
  market2000.pdf.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2016b. “SEC Approves IEX Proposal to Launch National
  Exchange, Issues Interpretation on Automated Securities Prices.” Retrieved November 9, 2018 from https:
  //www.sec.gov/news/pressrelease/2016-123.html.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2016c. “Staff Guidance on Automated Quotations un-
  der Regulation NMS.” Retrieved November 4, 2019 from https://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/
  automated-quotations-under-regulation-nms.htm.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2017b. “Order Approving Proposed Rule Change Amending
  Rules 7.29E and 1.1E to Provide for a Delay Mechanism.” Retrieved December 16, 2019 from https://www.
  sec.gov/rules/sro/nysemkt/2017/34-80700.pdf.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2017c. “Re: Notice of Filing of Amendments No. 1 and No.
  2 and Order Granting Accelerated Approval of a Proposed Rule Change, as Modified by Amendments No. 1
  and No. 2, to Adopt the CHX Liquidity Enhancing Access Delay on a Pilot Basis, Securities Exchange Act
  of 1934, Release No. 34-81913 (October 19, 2017).” Retrieved December 22, 2018 from https://www.sec.
  gov/rules/sro/chx/2017/34-81913-letter-from-secretary.pdf.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2019a. “Commission Statement on Market Structure In-
  novation for Thinly Traded Securities, Release No. 34-87327.” Retrieved December 6, 2019 from https:
  //www.sec.gov/rules/policy/2019/34-87327.pdf.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2019b. “Division of Trading and Markets: Background Paper
  on the Market Structure for Thinly Traded Securities.” Retrieved December 6, 2019 from https://www.sec.
  gov/rules/policy/2019/thinly-traded-securities-tm-background-paper.pdf.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2020a. “Market Data Infrastructure.” Proposed Rule. Retrieved
  June 30, 2020 from https://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/2020/34-88216.pdf.

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2020b. “Order Disapproving Proposed Rule Change to In-
  troduce a Liquidity Provider Protection Delay Mechanism on EDGA.” Retrieved June 30, 2020 from
  https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/cboeedga/2020/34-88261.pdf.


                                                   58
Vayanos, Dimitri. 1999. “Strategic Trading and Welfare in a Dynamic Market.” Review of Economic Studies,
  66(2): 219–254.

White, Mary Jo. 2014. “Enhancing Our Equity Market Structure.” June 5. Speech to Sandler O’Neill and
 Partners, L.P. Global Exchange and Brokerage Conference, New York, N.Y. Retrieved January 4, 2019 from
 https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/2014-spch060514mjw.

Williams, Heidi L. 2017. “How Do Patents Affect Research Investments?” Annual Review of Economics,
 9(1): 441–469.

Wilson, Charles. 1977. “A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information.” Journal of Economic
 Theory, 16(2): 167–207.

Zhu, Haoxiang. 2014. “Do Dark Pools Harm Price Discovery?” The Review of Financial Studies, 27(3): 747–
  789.




                                                  59
