                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CAN FINANCIAL PARTICIPANTS IMPROVE PRICE DISCOVERY AND EFFICIENCY IN
          MULTI-SETTLEMENT MARKETS WITH TRADING COSTS?

                                         Akshaya Jha
                                        Frank A. Wolak

                                      Working Paper 25851
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25851


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We would like to thank Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Lucas Davis, Meredith Fowlie, Bill
Hogan, Ali Hortacsu, Paul Joskow, Lynne Kiesling, Erin Mansur, Ignacia Mercadal, Steve Puller,
Mar Reguant, Peter Reiss, and Ali Yurukoglu for helpful comments on previous drafts. We would
also like to thank Andres Santos and Han Hong for helpful discussions of their hypothesis testing
procedures. No external financial support was provided to Akshaya Jha or Frank A. Wolak to
complete this research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Akshaya Jha and Frank A. Wolak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Financial Participants Improve Price Discovery and Efficiency in Multi-Settlement Markets
with Trading Costs?
Akshaya Jha and Frank A. Wolak
NBER Working Paper No. 25851
May 2019
JEL No. G13,G14,Q02,Q4

                                         ABSTRACT

The introduction of purely financial participants into commodity markets is thought to yield
forward prices that better reflect future spot prices, and ultimately, more efficient future
production and consumption decisions. However, there are sizable transaction costs associated
with trading in most commodity markets. This paper develops a statistical test of the null
hypothesis that expected forward/spot price spreads cannot be arbitraged even after accounting
for these transactions costs. We apply this test to hourly, location-specific day-ahead and real-
time prices from California's wholesale electricity market. The implied trading cost required to
reject the null hypothesis of no profitable arbitrage opportunities falls significantly after
California allowed purely financial participation. Moreover, variable input costs per MWh of
electricity produced fell by 3.6% in high demand hours after the introduction of purely financial
participants. Combined, our evidence supports the hypothesis that the introduction of purely
financial participants into the California wholesale electricity market decreased the average
difference and the volatility of the difference between day-ahead and real-time prices, which
ultimately lowered the total variable cost of serving demand


Akshaya Jha
Carnegie Mellon University
Hamburg Hall Office 2218
4800 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15232
Website: http://www.akshayajha.com
akshayaj@andrew.cmu.edu

Frank A. Wolak
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
wolak@zia.stanford.edu
1    Introduction

In multi-settlement markets, participants buy or sell delivery of a commodity at a pre-
specified future date in a forward market with the opportunity to close out that position
in a subsequent forward market or in the spot market. Each time the market for this
commodity and delivery date combination clears, settlement occurs, meaning that pur-
chases and sales of this product are made at a price that reflects the information available
to market participants at that time. Many commodities have multiple forward market
settlements before delivery ultimately takes place. For example, an airline might pur-
chase jet fuel for delivery on a pre-specified date in the future. It could close out this
position by selling it in any subsequent forward market before the delivery date or by
taking delivery of the jet fuel and selling it in the spot market.

    Forward markets provide both producers and consumers of a product with future
price certainty. This increased future spot price certainty can improve the efficiency of
the spot market for a commodity. Specifically, forward prices that are accurate estimates
of future spot prices provide valuable information to investors in productive capacity to
supply this commodity or investors in productive capacity that consumes this commodity.
For example, a potential investor in an oil refinery can use forward prices for gasoline
and oil to obtain a more accurate estimate of whether an investment in a facility that
comes on line in two years and produces for 20 years would be profitable.

    Liquid forward markets for a commodity thus have the potential to improve both
future spot price transparency and overall market efficiency. However, many commodity
markets have a small number of physical participants. Consequently, purely financial
market participants that neither produce nor consume the commodity, but simply take
financial positions in forward markets, can increase market liquidity. This logic im-
plies that allowing purely financial participants to trade in multi-settlement commodity
markets has the potential to improve both future spot price transparency and real-time
market performance.

    This paper uses the introduction of purely financial participants into California’s
wholesale electricity market to examine the validity of this logic. Electricity markets
are an ideal setting for this investigation. First, wholesale electricity markets are multi-
settlement: exactly the same product—electrical energy delivered to a specific location at


                                             1
a specific hour of the day—is bought and sold using the same market-clearing mechanism
in both the day-ahead and real-time markets. Second, participants are required to post
significant collateral with the market operator and pay non-trivial transaction costs in
order to trade in these markets. This can limit the number of market participants and
baseline level of liquidity in the forward market. Moreover, it is extremely costly to
store electrical energy and the time lag between buying/selling electricity in the day-
ahead market and subsequent sale/purchase in the real-time market is less than one day.
Relative to other commodities, this greatly limits the extent to which day-ahead/real-
time electricity price differences are due to either a hedging motive or inter-temporal
discounting.

    Finally, the market efficiency benefits from a more liquid forward market for grain,
gold, oil, jet fuel or other commodities are likely to be realized in a multi-year time frame.
In contrast, introducing purely financial participants in multi-settlement (day-ahead/real-
time) electricity markets has the potential to quickly reduce the cost of serving real-time
demand. This is because market/system operators are required to take the offers sub-
mitted by generation unit owners and dispatch of hundreds of electricity generation units
to meet real-time demand at thousands of locations in a transmission network. In doing
this, system operators are faced with a multitude of different operating constraints such
as transmission network capacity constraints as well as generation unit start-up, ramp-
ing, and minimum runtime constraints. Computing the market-clearing configuration of
generation unit output levels given the offers submitted by market participants requires
solving an extremely complex mixed-integer programming problem. Allowing purely fi-
nancial participants to supply or demand virtual energy in the day-ahead market could
help system operators find better solutions to this optimization problem and thereby
reduce the total cost of serving demand, particularly during high demand hours when
transmission, generation unit-level, and other system operating constraints are likely to
be most relevant.

    This paper has two parts. First, we develop a statistical test of arbitrage between
forward and spot markets and apply this test to data from California’s wholesale elec-
tricity market. The canonical principle of no arbitrage implies that the forward price of
                                                    f
a commodity at time t for delivery at time t + k (Pt,t+k ) is equal to the expected value
                                                          s
of the spot price for the same commodity at time t + k (Pt+k ) conditional on the infor-



                                              2
                                                           f            s
mation available to market participants at time t (i.e.: Pt,t+k = Et [Pt+k ]). Otherwise,
risk-neutral arbitrageurs can earn expected profits. Deviations from the no arbitrage con-
              f            s
dition that Pt,t+k = Et [Pt+k ] are typically attributed either to risk preferences or market
inefficiencies (Pindyck (2001); Kilian and Lee (2014); Kilian and Murphy (2014); Knittel
and Pindyck (2016)). Less explored are the substantial costs associated with trading
in many commodity markets (Williams (1987); Hirshleifer (1988); Frazzini, Israel and
Moskowitz (2018); Dávila and Parlatore (2019)). Our statistical framework accounts for
the non-trivial costs of trading in wholesale electricity markets and a number of other
commodity markets.

    Our statistical framework is based on a financial trader with access to 24 assets cor-
responding to the day-ahead/real-time price spreads for each hour of the day.1 This
financial participant maximizes expected profits by buying or selling the asset corre-
sponding to the hour of the day with the largest average price spread in absolute value.
However, the maximum operator is not differentiable, so standard asymptotic methods
such as the Delta Method do not apply. We instead use the directional derivative method
formulated by Fang and Santos (2018) in order to test two separate null hypotheses for
a given value of per-unit trading costs c: (1) that the maximum absolute price spread
is greater than c (i.e.: the null hypothesis that profitable arbitrage opportunities exist),
and (2) that the maximum absolute price spread is less than c (i.e.: the null hypothesis
that no profitable arbitrage opportunities exist).

    These statistical tests are applied to hourly, location-specific data on day-ahead and
real-time prices from California’s wholesale electricity market from 4/1/2009-12/31/2012.
We find that the trading costs required to reject the null hypothesis that arbitrage oppor-
tunities exist fell substantially after California introduced purely financial participation
in its market on February 1, 2011.2 Moreover, prior to the introduction of purely finan-
cial participation, electricity suppliers could arbitrage day-ahead/real-time price spreads
only at locations where they owned generation units by adjusting the day-ahead and real-
time offer curves of their generation units. There was no way for market participants to
   1
     This formulation is consistent with market rules; trading in wholesale electricity markets occurs daily
rather than hourly, with participants simultaneously having the opportunity to take financial positions
corresponding to the day-ahead/real-time price spreads at each location in the transmission network in
each of the 24 hours of the following day.
   2
     Consistent with our empirical results, a simulation study by Li, Svoboda and Oren (2015) finds that
the revenues generated by implementing their optimal trading strategy decrease significantly after the
introduction of purely financial participants in California.


                                                     3
arbitrage day-ahead/real-time price spreads at individual demand withdrawal locations
in the transmission network. Consistent with this intuition, we find that the reduction in
implied trading costs due to the introduction of purely financial participants is larger for
demand withdrawal locations relative to locations with generation units. Moreover, the
average values of the implied trading costs are not statistically different for generation
and load-withdrawal nodes after the introduction of purely financial participation.

    The second component of our paper is to quantify the physical efficiency gains from
the introduction of purely financial participants. As noted earlier, the market efficiency
gains from introducing purely financial participants are likely to be largest during high
demand hours when transmission and other operating constraints are increasingly rel-
evant. We therefore employ a difference-in-differences estimator that compares market
performance measures such as the hourly variable cost of thermal generation and the
hourly input fossil-fuel burned by thermal generation units in high demand versus low
demand hours before versus after the introduction purely financial participants.

    Our results indicate that, in hours with a system demand greater than the 90th
percentile of the distribution of demand, the introduction of financial trading resulted
in a 3.6% (4.2%) decrease in fuel costs (thermal input energy consumed) per MWh of
electricity produced from fossil-fuel fired sources. The implied annual fuel cost savings
and environmental benefits from financial trading in high demand hours are roughly 4.2
million dollars and 145,000 tons of CO2 , respectively. Finally, our results indicate that
there is no discernible increase after the introduction of purely financial participants in
either the number of high demand hours that at least one fossil-fuel unit was required
to start up or the ancillary services costs associated with maintaining real-time supply
and demand balance. These results are inconsistent with the argument that allowing
purely financial participants places undue stress on the physical constraints inherent to
electricity production and distribution.

    Combined, our results suggest that both the physical efficiency gains from allowing
purely financial trading as well as the costs of financial trading vary across both time
and space. Market operators can thus potentially increase the market efficiency benefits
from allowing purely financial participation by setting different transaction fees for dif-
ferent locations and hours. In particular, our estimates suggest that a 5 cents per MWh
reduction in implied trading costs in high demand hours could result in fuel cost savings


                                             4
ranging from 1-2 cents per MWh.

      Our results contribute to the ongoing policy debate surrounding the controversial
role played by financial traders in commodity markets. Specifically, many argue that
financial traders earn revenues primarily at the expense of suppliers and consumers of
the commodity.3 Particularly for wholesale electricity, some have argued that financial
participants submit bids intended to profit from the physical constraints inherent to elec-
tricity provision, either by taking advantage of rules pertaining to starting up or ramping
power plants (Parsons et al., 2015) or by inducing transmission congestion (Birge et al.,
2013). On the other hand, previous work documents a substantial day-ahead/real-time
price premium in electricity markets without financial participation, due either to mar-
ket power exercised by suppliers (Ito and Reguant, 2016) or risk preferences (Routledge,
Spatt and Seppi (2001); Bessembinder and Lemmon (2002); Longstaff and Wang (2004);
Bessembinder and Lemmon (2006)). The introduction of financial participants in whole-
sale electricity markets has also been linked to decreases in the exercise of unilateral
market power (Saravia (2003); Mercadal (2018)), decreases in the volatility of electric-
ity prices (Hadsell (2007)) and grid reliability benefits (Isemonger (2006)). Our results
provides empirical evidence from a large wholesale electricity market that financial par-
ticipants can improve price transparency and market efficiency without putting unduly
stress on the physical constraints inherent to electricity production and transmission.

      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes how
California and other U.S. wholesale electricity markets operate both before and after
the introduction of purely financial participants. Section 3 presents several examples of
how purely financial participants can reduce the cost of serving demand. We derive our
statistical tests of arbitrage and no arbitrage opportunities that accounts for transaction
costs in Section 4. The empirical results from applying this framework to California’s
wholesale electricity market are presented in Section 5. Section 6 presents our empir-
ical framework and findings pertaining to quantifying the market efficiency benefits of
introducing purely financial participants. Finally, we conclude in Section 7 by discussing
how our findings can inform the difficult problem of setting transaction fees in order to
maximize market efficiency.
  3
    See “Traders Profit as Power Grid Is Overworked,” New York Times, August 14, 2014 for the case
of wholesale electricity markets. See “U.S. Suit Sees Manipulation of Oil Trades,” New York Times,
May 24, 2011 for the case of oil. See “Did Goldman Sachs Rig Commodities Markets?” CNN Business,
November 20, 2014 for the case of aluminum.


                                                5
2       Wholesale Electricity Market Operations With
        Versus Without Financial Trading

In this section, we first describe how day-ahead and real-time markets operated in Cal-
ifornia and other U.S. wholesale electricity markets prior to the introduction of purely
financial participants through explicit virtual bidding. The next subsection describes
explicit virtual bidding (EVB), the mechanism by which purely financial participants
and other market participants can arbitrage day-ahead/real-time price differences. This
subsection also discusses how virtual bidding impacts day-ahead and real-time system
operation and the different transaction costs faced by purely financial participants. The
final subsection describes implicit virtual bidding (IVB), the only mechanism available
for market participants to arbitrage day-ahead/real-time price differences before the in-
troduction of EVB. This subsection compares IVB to EVB in order to clarify the mech-
anisms by which purely financial market participants can reduce the mean and variance
of day-ahead/real-time price spreads and the variance of real-time prices relative to IVB
as well as why the impact of introducing purely financial participants should be different
for generation unit locations versus demand withdrawal locations.


2.1     Locational Marginal Pricing in Multi-Settlement Markets

In most markets, products are shipped directly from seller to buyer. Wholesale elec-
tricity markets work differently. In these markets, generators inject electricity into the
transmission network and this electricity flows according to Kirchhoff’s laws.4 Thus,
commitments between buyers and sellers of electricity constitute a financial rather than
physical arrangement: the buyer does not withdraw the actual energy injected into the
transmission grid by the seller. The only things that can be measured are the amount
of energy injected by a generation unit and the amount of energy withdrawn by a load-
serving entity.5
    4
      Schweppe et al. (2013) provides an accessible discussion of Kirchhoff’s laws governing current flows
through an electrical circuit.
    5
      As discussed in Schweppe et al. (2013), Where the energy injected by a generation unit goes in the
transmission network and where the electricity withdrawn comes from depends on the level of demand at
all locations in the transmission network, the output levels of all of the generation units, the configuration
of the transmission network, as well as a number of other technical operating conditions.




                                                      6
      All electricity supply industries have transmission networks with finite transfer ca-
pacity between locations in the grid. This can often prevent the system operator from
accepting energy from low-cost generation units located distant from a load withdrawal
point and instead accepting energy from higher cost generation units that can meet this
demand. Specifically, transmission congestion limits the amount of low-cost energy that
can injected at a location on the transmission network to be transported and withdrawn
elsewhere on the grid. It has proven extremely difficult for system operators in the United
States (US) to predict which specific transmission links will be congested. As a result,
all wholesale markets in the US have adopted dispatch and pricing mechanisms that set
potentially different prices at all points of injection and withdrawal on the transmission
network.

      A dispatch and pricing mechanism called nodal pricing or locational marginal pric-
ing (LMP) sets spatial prices that reflect all relevant transmission network constraints,
transmission losses, generation unit start-up and ramping constraints, and other rele-
vant operating constraints on the transmission network. All formal wholesale markets
operating in the United States use variants of the LMP algorithm described by Bohn,
Caramanis and Schweppe (1984). To compute locational marginal prices in the day-
ahead market, suppliers submit 24 hourly generation unit-level offer curves by 10AM of
day t and electricity retailers and other load-serving entities submit locational demand
curves, typically at a significantly higher level of spatial aggregation than the nodal level.

      These offer curves have two parts: a start-up cost offer and an energy supply curve.
The start-up cost offer in the day-ahead market is a fixed dollar payment that must be
paid to the generation unit owner if the unit is not generating electricity at the start of
day t + 1 but is accepted to produce a positive output at some point during that day.
The energy offer curve for hour h indicates how much electricity the supplier is willing to
provide from the unit in hour h of day t+1 as a function of the market-clearing day-ahead
price at the unit’s location. This energy offer curve is a non-decreasing step function,
where each offer price-quantity step determines the minimum price the generation unit
owner must be paid in order to produce the quantity associated with that step.6 The
sum of the quantity increments for each energy offer curve is restricted to be less than
the capacity of the generation unit.
  6
      In California, generation unit-level offer curves are permitted to have up to ten price-quantity pairs.



                                                      7
    Load-serving entities (i.e.: demanders of electricity) similarly submit location-specific
willingness-to-purchase functions in the day-ahead market that are non-increasing in the
price at that location. This willingness-to-purchase function is composed of price-quantity
pairs ordered from highest to lowest price. A load-serving entity (LSE) is willing to in-
crease the amount of electricity it purchases by a given offer quantity increment provided
the market-clearing price is at or below the corresponding offer price increment. For the
case of California, these willingness-to-purchase functions are submitted by retailers at
the utility service territory level.7 The California Independent System Operator (ISO),
the market and system operator for California’s electricity supply industry, allocates
shares of these price and quantity offers to the hundreds to thousands of load-withdrawal
nodes in the utility’s service territory using the ISO’s estimates of the fraction of the
utility’s total demand at each node in its service territory.8

    For the day-ahead market, the California ISO minimizes the total as-offered cost, the
offer price times the offer quantity summed over all units accepted, of serving the demand
for energy and ancillary services at all locations in the transmission network during all 24
hours of the following day subject to the ISO’s best estimate of the configuration of the
transmission network the following day, generation unit runtime and ramping constraints,
as well as a number of other system operating constraints.9 The locational marginal price
(LMP) at each node in the transmission network is equal to the increase in the minimized
value of the objective function from the ISO’s as-offered cost minimization problem as a
result of increasing the amount of energy withdrawn at that location by 1 MWh. The
LMPs and resulting supply and demand schedules at each location in the transmission
network for all 24 hours of the following day are computed before the afternoon of the
day before the energy is scheduled to be delivered.

    All market participants are notified of these LMPs as well as their day-ahead supply
and demand obligations at 1PM on the day before the delivery date. These supply
and demand obligations are firm financial commitments to sell or buy the quantities of
energy that emerge from the day-ahead locational marginal pricing process. For example,
   7
     Appendix Figure A.1 presents a map of the territories served by each of California’s three investor-
owned utilities.
   8
     Pacific Gas and Electric has more than 1,500 load withdrawals point in its service territory, Southern
California Edison approximately 200, and San Diego Gas and Electric approximately 300.
   9
     Ancillary services are the collection of operating reserves required by the ISO to maintain a reliable
supply of electricity in real-time. Wolak (2019) describes the economic efficiency properties of co-
optimizing the procurement of energy and ancillary services.


                                                    8
suppose a supplier sold 50 MWh to be delivered to a given location in the 6PM to 7PM
hour of the following day at a price of 40 dollars per MWh. This supplier is guaranteed to
be paid $2,000 (= 50 MWh × $40/MWh) regardless of the actual production of energy
from its generation unit during that hour of the following day. This is the sense in which
settlement of the day-ahead market has occurred. Commitments to supply energy and
ancillary services are bought and sold at the relevant locational day-ahead price.

    Between the close of the day-ahead market and the start of real-time system oper-
ation, actual demand at each location on the transmission network is realized. Some
generation units must produce more or less than their day-ahead energy schedules in
order to meet this actual demand at all of the more than 4,000 load-withdrawal points
in California. At least 75 minutes in advance of each hour of real-time system opera-
tion, generation unit owners submit offer curves specifying their willingness to increase
or decrease their output relative to their day-ahead schedules. Starting with midnight
on the delivery date, these offer curves are used to clear the real-time market during
each 5-minute interval within the hour to meet actual demand at each location in the
transmission network given the real-time configuration of the transmission network and
real-time output levels of all generation units.

    It is important to emphasize that the configuration of the transmission network in
the real-time market and the set of available generation units in real-time can differ
significantly from the ISO operator’s best estimate of the configuration of the transmission
network and the set of available generation units used to determine day-ahead market
outcomes. The real-time LMP dispatch and pricing process yields real-time production
levels for all generation units that are accepted to supply additional energy or less energy
relative to their day-ahead schedules in the real-time market, as well as prices at all nodes
in the transmission network.

    The 5-minute real-time LMP at each location on the transmission network is equal to
the increase in the optimized value of the as-offered cost function as a result of increasing
the amount of energy withdrawn at that location by 1 MWh. The hourly real-time price
is the average of the twelve 5-minute real-time prices within that hour. Any electricity
demander that consumes more than its day-ahead schedule in a given hour pays for this
additional consumption at the hourly real-time price. Any electricity demander that
consumes less than its day-ahead schedule in a given hour receives the real-time price for


                                             9
any scheduled energy it does not consume. Similar logic applies to generation units that
do not produce the quantity they sold in the day-ahead market. Those that produce
more energy receive the real-time price at their location and those that produce less pay
the real-time price at their location.

    The combination of a day-ahead forward market and a real-time spot market is called
a “multi-settlement market” because only real-time deviations from participants’ day-
ahead schedules are settled at the hourly real-time price. Recall our previous example in
which a generation unit sold 50 MWhs of energy in the day-ahead market at a specific
location for the 6PM to 7PM hour on day t+1 at a price of 40 dollars per MWh. Suppose
that this unit actually only produced 30 MWhs of electricity between 6PM and 7PM on
day t + 1. In this case, the owner would have to purchase the remaining 20 MWhs
at the hourly time-weighted average real-time price corresponding to the same location
between 6PM and 7PM in order to meet its forward market commitment. If the unit
instead produced 55 MWhs, then the additional 5 MWhs beyond its 50 MWhs day-ahead
schedule is sold at the hourly real-time price for that location/hour-of-the-day.


2.2    Explicit Virtual Bidding

All US wholesale electricity markets currently allow for purely financial participation
through explicit virtual bidding. With explicit virtual bidding (EVB), every market
participant has access to the following purely financial instrument: buy (sell) one MWh
of electricity at a given location and hour-of-the day in the day-ahead market if the
day-ahead price is below (above) the offer price, with the obligation to sell (buy) back
one MWh at the same location and hour-of-the-day in the real-time market as a price-
taker (i.e.: accepting the prevailing real-time price for closing out this purely financial
position in the day-ahead market). These financial offer curves are termed “virtual bids”
or “convergence bids” because an expected profit-maximizing purely financial trader will
typically take positions at a location in the day-ahead market that reduce the magnitude
of the difference between day-ahead and real-time prices at that location.

    Although virtual bids and physical bids are separately identified to the system op-
erator, the California ISO treats physical and virtual bids the same when running the
day-ahead LMP pricing and dispatch process. However, the California ISO knows that



                                            10
any day-ahead “virtual energy” sale or “virtual energy” purchase must be reversed in
the real-time market. Recall that in the real-time market only physical generation units
that submit offers into the real-time market are dispatched to meet the actual demand
at each location on the transmission network.10 If a purely financial player sells 10 MWh
of virtual energy at a given location in the day-ahead market, she must purchase this 10
MWh back at the real-time price for that location because she cannot actually supply
any energy in real-time. Similarly, if a purely financial player buys 10 MWh of virtual
energy in the day-ahead market, she must sell 10 MWh at the real-time price at that
location because she cannot consume any energy in real-time.

       This logic implies that the actions of virtual bidders directly influence day-ahead and
real-time market outcomes, typically by closing the gap between day-ahead and real-time
prices. For example, submitting a virtual bid to sell (buy) one MWh in the day-ahead
(real-time) market earns positive revenues if and only if the day-ahead price is higher
than the real-time price. However, submitting this virtual bid increases supply (demand)
in the day-ahead market (real-time market), making it less likely that day-ahead prices
will be higher than real-time prices.

       There are three broad types of transaction costs associated with financial trading
in California’s wholesale electricity market: collateral, trading fees and uplift. Purely
financial participants must post collateral greater than the total value of virtual bids
they submit each day. The total value of virtual bids submitted each day is equal to the
sum of the product of the absolute value of megawatt-hours offered times the applicable
reference price for a virtual bid at that location.11 This collateral does not earn any rate
of return while it is held by the California ISO. Moreover, there can be a lag of more than
two weeks between when a market participant requests that some or all of its collateral
be returned and when this money is actually returned. Consequently, a purely financial
participant is foregoing non-trivial financial returns on any collateral posted with the
California ISO in order to engage in virtual bidding.12

       Purely financial participants have to pay roughly 0.5 cents for each price and quantity
pair associated with each incremental or decremental virtual bid they submit. They must
  10
      Generation units with energy schedules sold in the day-ahead market can either produce this energy
from their own unit or purchase the energy from the real-time market.
   11
      See the California ISO document, “Convergence bidding, participating in markets, credit policy
implications,” for a description of the process used to compute nodal reference prices.
   12
      See the California ISO document, “California ISO Credit Management,” for more background.


                                                  11
also pay 9 cents per MWh cleared in fees associated with “market services”. For example,
consider a virtual bidder that submits a demand curve with 10 price/quantity steps to
the day-ahead market. If 50 MWh of her demand bid clears, she must pay trading fees
of $0.09 × 50 + $0.005 × 10 = 4.55 dollars. Finally, all financial participants are required
to pay a monthly transaction fee of 1,000 dollars regardless of the volume of virtual bids
they submit or clear.13

    Purely financial participants are also required to pay “uplift” charges when system-
wide virtual demand is larger than system-wide virtual supply (i.e.: net virtual demand
is greater than zero). Uplift charges compensate suppliers that are forced to quickly start
up or ramp up their units in order to meet this excess virtual demand. System-wide uplift
charges are allocated to different market participants based on their individual levels of
net virtual demand cleared. Figure 1 shows the annual average uplift charge per MWh
of electricity demand for the five major Independent System Operators (ISOs) in the
United States for 2009-2013. This figure indicates that average uplift charges range from
roughly 40 to 60 cents per MWh. However, these annual average values conceal significant
volatility in the daily value of these uplift charges throughout the year that impact the
profitability of the daily virtual bidding actions of purely financial players.14 As noted in
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (2014), uplift payments are typically correlated
with demand levels, input fuel costs and the magnitude of the divergences between day-
ahead and real-time prices. Moreover, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (2014)
notes that the volatility of daily uplift costs have been increasing over time in California
and two other US markets. This logic implies that days with sizable day-ahead/real-
time price spreads are also likely to have large uplift charges, and a significant share
of these charges are paid by purely financial participants. This implies that sizable
day-ahead/real-time price differences can be rendered unprofitable by these uplift cost
allocations.

    This discussion demonstrates that, although the marginal cost of submitting a virtual
bid and having it clear is less than one dollar, the annual average cost per MWh of clearing
  13
     These transaction fees are listed in Session 7 of the Convergence Bidding tutorial published by
California’s independent system operator (CAISO (2015b)).
  14
     Uplift charges reflect payments made to resources whose commitment and dispatch result in a
shortfall between the resources offers and the revenue earned from the market. There are three main
reasons for market revenue shortfalls that require uplift payments: (1) some of the operating costs and
limits of a resource are not reflected in market prices; (2) unmodeled system constraints; and (3) the
dispatch and commitment of inflexible resources or the commitment of resources ineligible to set price.


                                                  12
                approximately $0.30/MWh and $1.40/MWh, a fraction of the energy market prices during
                these periods.

           Figure 1: Annual Uplift Charges for the 5 Major ISOs: 2009-2013
                                Figure 1: Total Annual Uplift Credit by RTO and ISO ($/MWh)




   Notes: This figure is taken Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (2014). Annual average uplift
   charges (in dollars per MWh) are calculated for each independent system operator (ISO) by dividing
   total annual uplift credits (in dollars) by total annual electricity demand (in MWhs). Total uplift
   charges and total electricity demand for CAISO for 2009 are based on the nine months of data after
   4/1/2009. FERC estimated the total charges and electricity demand for ISO-NE for 2012. Uplift
   charges for PJM for the years 2012 and 2013 exclude the credits associated with reactive services
   (these credits amount to approximately 45 million dollars per year).


virtual bids in the California ISO is likely be considerably higher because of the monthly
fixed charge to participate in the California ISO markets, the foregone revenues on the
collateral posted, and the realized uplift charges during the days that virtual bid MWhs
cleared during the year for this market participant. The hourly actual transaction cost
can be significantly higher than the annual average because of the volatility in uplift
                                                                                                       6
costs.


2.3      Profiting from Price Spreads With Versus Without EVB

Prior to the introduction of financial trading, only suppliers could profit from expected
day-ahead/real-time price spreads by selling more or less energy in the day-ahead market
than they expected to produce in real-time at the locations that they owned generation
units. Using physical bids rather than virtual bids to exploit expected day-ahead/real-
time price spreads is termed “implicit virtual bidding”. Prior to the introduction of
EVB, generation unit owners were only allowed to submit physical day-ahead offers at
locations where they inject electricity, their minimum offered quantity must be positive,
and their maximum offered quantity must be less than the unit’s capacity. Thus, prior to
EVB, a supplier that expects day-ahead prices to be far lower than real-time prices could


                                                            13
at best submit zero quantity into the day-ahead market and offer their entire capacity
into the real-time market. This supplier also faced no competition for exploiting day-
ahead/real-time price spreads at locations where it alone owned generation units. This
is different from the case of EVB, where any market participant can submit virtual bids
at any allowed node in the transmission network.15

       Implicit virtual bidding is only feasible at locations with generation units, because
load-serving entities are only allowed to submit demand bids at the level of their service
territory.16 For example, California’s Independent System Operator (ISO) requires its
three large distribution utilities—Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California
Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E)—to bid their electricity demand
into the day-ahead market at the service-area or load aggregation point (LAP) level. The
California ISO then allocates this demand to all nodes in the utility’s service territory
using load-distribution factors (LDFs).17 Thus, it is very costly for a utility to implicitly
virtual bid one MWh at a single location, because this would effectively require the utility
to implicitly virtual bid one MWh at all nodes within its service territory.



3       How Purely Financial Participants Can Improve
        Market Efficiency

Without EVB, only suppliers were able to participate in day-ahead and real-time elec-
tricity markets at the nodal level, and only at the nodes where they inject electricity.
Consequently, they face no direct competition from other suppliers that don’t inject
electricity at these locations. As noted earlier, load-serving entities must submit their
demand bids at the LAP level, which typically involves the system operator allocating
their service-territory level demand bid to up to thousands of nodes for the three large dis-
  15
      The California ISO and other US wholesale markets typically restrict the set of nodes at which
virtual bidding is allowed. The California ISO eliminates nodes it deems are electrically equivalent to
other nodes where virtual bidding is allowed.
   16
      The California ISO assigns collections of nodes to load-serving entities and each load-serving entity
is charged an hourly price equal to the weighted average of MWhs withdrawn at each of these nodes for
their wholesale electricity. This collection of nodes is a called a Load Aggregation Point (LAP) and this
price-setting mechanism is called LAP pricing.
   17
      For example, if a utility is required to serve 100 MWhs of electricity demand and the ISO computes
equal LDFs for the ten nodes in its service area, then the LDFs are equal to 1/10 for each node. The
load aggregation point (LAP) level price received by the utility is equal to the LDF-weighted average of
the 10 nodal-level prices in its service area.


                                                    14
tribution utilities in California. Thus, the introduction of explicit virtual bidding allows
far more opportunities for purely financial participants to contribute their information
to the day-ahead and real-time markets at each individual node in the form of virtual
bids.18

       EVB allows both physical market participants and purely financial players to sub-
mit virtual bids in the day-ahead market at any location for any hour of the day. The
profit-maximizing actions of market participants seeking to exploit day-ahead/real-time
price spreads at any location on the grid creates incentives for the day-ahead schedules of
generation units to be as close as possible to their real-time output. This outcome means
that the California ISO has to accept fewer supply and demand offers from generation
units in the real-time market. These actions also create incentives for day-ahead genera-
tion schedules to be as close as possible to the real-time output levels that minimize the
cost of operating the transmission network in real-time. This section provides several
examples of how explicit virtual bidding can lead to market efficiency gains.

       As noted earlier, solving for LMPs and generation unit dispatch levels in the day-
ahead market is an extremely challenging mixed-integer programming problem, particu-
larly during high demand hours when transmission constraints and generation unit run-
time and ramping constraints are likely to be binding. The LMP optimization problem
determines which generation units to start up and how much each of these generation
units are scheduled to produce. This optimization problem has thousands of choice vari-
ables and thousands of constraints and thus has many potential local optima. If virtual
bidders are able to figure out lower-cost solutions to meeting demand across the trans-
mission network, they will likely also earn profits from the resulting difference between
day-ahead and real-time prices for the reasons described below.

       Consider the example of a transmission link between nodes A and B where the virtual
bidder believes that 3 MWs more transmission capacity will be made available in real-
time than is available in the day-ahead market, so that more energy can flow from A to
B in real-time. A virtual bidder can submit a virtual demand bid for 3 MWhs at node A.
This demand bid increases the amount of generation scheduled at node A by 3 MWhs.
Similarly, she can submit a virtual supply bid at node B for 3 MWhs that reduces the
amount of energy supplied at node B by this amount. These two virtual bids create
  18
    See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for a full list of both the physical and financial participants that
are licensed to place virtual bids in California’s wholesale electricity market.


                                                  15
3 MWs of virtual transmission capacity between nodes A and B. When the real-time
market clears and it turns out that 3 MWs more transmission capacity between A and B
becomes available, the additional 3 MWhs of virtual supply provided in real-time at node
A will flow to node B, replacing the 3 MWhs of virtual demand provided in real-time
at node B. In this case, the virtual bidder is likely to earn a profit on both transactions
because she correctly anticipated the existence of the additional transmission capacity in
real-time.

    It is important to emphasize that the purely financial participant does not have to
know that there is a difference between the amount of available transmission capacity
between node A and node B in the day-ahead versus real-time markets to find this
profitable strategy. She would only need to notice that day-ahead prices at node A are
lower than real-time prices and day-ahead prices at node B are higher than real-time
prices. This alone would cause her to submit a demand bid in the day-ahead market at
node A and submit a supply bid in the day-ahead market at node B.

    Another market-efficiency enhancing action by purely financial traders is based on
the fact that load-serving entities submit demand bids at the LAP level in the day-ahead
market and the California ISO uses load-distribution factors to allocate this LAP-level
demand to individual nodes. If a purely financial market participant finds that too much
demand is allocated to a specific node in the day-ahead market relative to the quantity
of demand that will ultimately show up in real-time, he can submit a supply bid at that
node to sell energy in the day-ahead market. Then, when a smaller actual demand shows
up in real-time, he gets to buy his virtual supply back at the resulting lower real-time
price.

    Just as in the previous case, it is not necessary that the purely financial player
understand the divergence between the quantity of demand that the retailer serves at
this node in real-time and the quantity of demand allocated to the node in the day-
ahead market through the LAP-level bidding process. Locations where more demand is
allocated in the day-ahead market than is demanded in real-time will have day-ahead
prices that are higher than real-time prices. The virtual bidder would thus profit from
selling in the day-ahead market and buying back in real-time at these locations.

    Our final example concerns the case of whether to start a fossil fuel-fired generation
unit in anticipation of producing the next day. Because of the runtime constraints, if


                                            16
this unit is not committed in the day-ahead market it will not be available to operate in
real-time. This energy must instead be produced by units that are more responsive but
have higher operating costs. Suppose a purely financial player believes that committing
this unit in the day-ahead market provides a lower cost solution to meeting demand in
the peak hours of the day than turning on fast-responding but more expensive units.
This financial player can submit virtual demand bids at that unit’s location in the day-
ahead market for the peak hours of the day in order to commit the unit in the day-ahead
market, which in turn enables lower cost real-time dispatch. In real-time, the financial
player would then sell the virtual energy back at a higher average price for these hours.

    Just as in the other two cases, the purely financial player would not need to under-
stand why day-ahead prices are lower than real-time prices at the location of the runtime-
constrained fossil fuel generation unit during these hours. Purely financial players would
only need to attempt to exploit this profitable arbitrage opportunity by submitting vir-
tual demand bids during peak hours of the day at this location. The implied sale in the
real-time market improves the efficiency of the real-time market outcome by dispatching
the run-time constrained unit in the day-ahead market.

    With the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB), all physical market
participants–generation unit owners and load-serving entities–as well as all purely fi-
nancial participants can submit virtual supply and demand bids at any of the thousands
of nodes where virtual bidding is allowed by the California ISO. As the above examples il-
lustrate, the process of exploiting profitable day-ahead/real-time arbitrage opportunities
at nodes throughout the transmission network can yield market efficiency gains.

    The introduction of purely financial participation through virtual bidding increases
the likelihood that our empirical context of a multi-settlement wholesale electricity mar-
ket using the locational marginal pricing algorithm satisfies the ”separable” condition de-
scribed by Ostrovsky (2012). This condition is necessary for prices in a multi-settlement
market with a finite number of partially informed traders to aggregate all available infor-
mation. The existence of non-zero trading costs implies that the California ISO wholesale
market does not satisfy all of the conditions for the information aggregation result in Os-
trovsky (2012). That being said, the basic insight of the “separable” condition is that,
for every non-degenerate prior belief about states of the world, there exists a trader
who, with positive probability, receives an informative signal. Expanding the number


                                            17
of participants able to arbitrage day-ahead/real-time price differences at each node in
the transmission network increases the likelihood that some market participant receives
an informative signal about real-time conditions in the transmission network at that
location.

    Before concluding this section, we should emphasize that all of the examples of vir-
tual bidding improving market efficiency are significantly more likely to occur during
high demand hours when both transmission network constraints and generation runtime
constraints are more likely to bind. Even the issue of non-representative load distribution
factors (LDFs) is more relevant during stressed system conditions when the differences
in day-ahead and real-time prices across nodes within a service territory are likely to
be larger. For this reason, our empirical framework for measuring the efficiency benefits
from introducing purely financial participants to California’s wholesale electricity mar-
ket relies on differences between high versus low demand periods before versus after the
introduction of EVB.



4     Statistical Test of Arbitrage With Trading Costs

This section develops a hypothesis testing framework to determine whether or not a
profitable trading strategy exists when accounting for the presence of transactions costs.
In this framework, a trader can buy and sell positions in hourly day-ahead/real-time price
spreads corresponding to each of the 24 hours-of-the-day. Trading strategies based on
the first lag of the vector of day-ahead/real-time price differences are not feasible because
market participants submit their offers into the day-ahead market for day t before the
vector of day-ahead/real-time price differences for date t − 1 is made public. Market
participants can thus condition their trading strategies on price differences from two or
more days prior.

    In Appendix Section C.1, we formulate a statistical test of the null hypothesis that the
elements of the autocorrelation matrices between the current vector of day-ahead/real-
time price spreads and the second through tenth lags of this vector are jointly zero. We
find little empirical evidence against this null hypothesis, suggesting that traders cannot
earn significantly more profits by conditioning on day-ahead/real-time price differences
from two or more days prior to the current day. See Appendix Tables C.1 and C.2 for


                                             18
the results when applying this statistical test to price spreads calculated at the service-
area level for the three large investor-owned utilities in California and at the nodal level
respectively.


4.1       The Trader’s Problem

Our statistical test is based on a market participant who buys or sells hourly positions, ah ,
                                    DA    RT
associated with Xhd , where Xhd ≡ (Phd − Phd ) is the difference between the day-ahead
and real-time electricity prices in hour-of-the-day h in day-of-sample d. The trader can
condition her positions on the hour of the day, so that ah can take on different values for
for h ∈ {1, 2, ..., 24}. Moreover, ah can be positive or negative.19 Let a = (a1 , a2 , ..., a24 )0
denote the 24 × 1 vector of hourly positions. Consistent with market rules, she chooses
positions for all hours of the day simultaneously. Holding a positive (negative) position
earns revenues if and only if the day-ahead price for hour h of day d is higher (lower) than
the real-time price in hour h of day d. In other words, a trader earns positive revenue if
and only if the position, ah , and realized price spread, Xd,h , have the same sign.
                              DA         RT
       Let µh ≡ E(Xh,d ) = E(Ph,d ) − E(Ph,d ) be the unconditional expectation of the
day-ahead/real-time price spread for hour h; define µ to be the 24 × 1 vector composed
of (µ1 , µ2 , ..., µ24 )0 . The trader faces trading cost c associated with buying or selling one
MWh of any combination of these 24 assets. The trader’s expected profit-maximization
problem is:
                                          24                    24
                         max     0
                                         X                     X
                               a   µ − c     |a i | subject to     |ai | = 1                         (1)
                       a ∈ R24
                               |       {zi=1 }                 i=1

                                   Expected Profits

The vector of positions a∗ (µ) ∈ R24 denotes the solution to the constrained optimization
problem described in Equation 1. We consider both the null hypothesis that profitable
trading strategies exist (i.e.: a∗ (µ)0 µ − c > 0) and the null hypothesis that no profitable
trading strategies exist (i.e.: a∗ (µ)0 µ − c ≤ 0).

       The trader pays the same per-unit trading cost c regardless of whether they buy
or sell the asset; this is why overall trading costs are calculated based on the sum of
the absolute values of the portfolio weights (i.e.: c 24
                                                     P
                                                       i=1 |ai |). Canonical portfolio choice
  19
     A positive (negative) value of ah implies selling (buying) energy in the day-ahead market and buying
(selling) it back in the real-time market.


                                                      19
models (Markowitz (1952); Sharpe (1994)) instead impose a normalization based on “net
position” ( 24
           P
            i=1 ai = 1). This normalization assumes that a positive position in one asset

can be offset by a negative position in another asset, which only makes sense in models
with zero transaction costs.

       The revenues earned by solving the optimization problem presented in Equation 1
are:
                                                           max
                                φ(µ) ≡ a∗ (µ)0 µ =                      |µh |                       (2)
                                                       h ∈ {1, ..., 24}
In words, the trader simply buys or sells 1 MWh of the asset with the highest expected
pay-off in absolute value.


4.2       Implementation of our Statistical Test of Arbitrage

We implement our hypothesis test using data on realized day-ahead/real-time price
spreads for each hour h of each day-of-sample d.                   Let Xd = (Xd,1 , Xd,2 , ..., Xd,24 )0
be the 24 × 1 data vector composed of realized day-ahead/real-time price spreads
for day-of-sample d.          Then, our estimate of the unconditional expectation of day-
ahead/real-time price spreads for each hour-of-the-day is simply the sample average (i.e.:
µ̂ ≡ X = N1 N
             P
               d=1 Xd ). Our estimate of the revenue generated from the trader’s optimal

strategy, presented in Equation (2), is the element of X that is largest in absolute value
                    max
(i.e.: φ(X) ≡    h∈{1,...,24}
                              |X h |).   Our test statistic is based on the difference between φ(X)
and per-unit trading cost c.

       However, the maximum operator is not differentiable; we thus cannot use the Delta
Method to derive the asymptotic distribution of φ(X). Instead, we use the method devel-
oped by Fang and Santos (2018) for testing hypotheses involving directionally differen-
tiable functions of a regular parameter estimate. This method is applicable because φ(µ)
is a directionally differentiable function of the parameter vector µ and sample average X
                                     √
is a regular estimator of µ0 (i.e.: N (X − µ0 ) is asymptotically normally distributed).
Fang and Santos (2018) propose a modified bootstrap estimator for the asymptotic dis-
            √
tribution of N (φ(X) − φ(µ)).

       To implement this estimator, we simulate the distribution of φ(X) using a procedure
based on numerical derivatives developed by Hong and Li (2018). For this procedure,
we first compute moving blocks bootstrap re-samples of X with block size equal to the

                                                     20
largest integer less than or equal to N 1/3 (Kunsch et al. (1989)).20 Let the sample average
                                                                          b
calculated from the bth bootstrap re-sample be denoted X . We next construct:
                                                   √    b
                                      φ(X +         N (X − X)) − φ(X)
                            Zb =                                                                            (3)
                                                          

for b = 1, 2, ..., B. Hong and Li (2018) demonstrates that the asymptotic distribution
   √
of N (φ(X) − φ(µ)) can be approximated by the bootstrap distribution of Z b provided
                                                            √
that, as sample size N goes to infinity,  tends to zero but N  tends to infinity. To
satisfy these conditions, we set  = N −1/3 , which is the value recommended by Hong
and Li (2018).
                                                                  √
       This estimate of the asymptotic distribution of             N (φ(X) − φ(µ)) allows us to test
for the existence of profitable arbitrage opportunities for any per-unit trading cost c.
However, setting c equal to the explicit transaction fee charged by the market operator
ignores both the monthly fixed charge to participate in California’s electricity market
and the opportunity cost of the money posted as collateral with the system operator.
Using the transaction fee for c also assumes that there is no opportunity cost associated
with the time and effort of the individual undertaking the trades as well as no operating
cost associated with scaling up a trading strategy. For these reasons, we instead use
our hypothesis testing procedure to calculate the per unit trading costs implied by just
rejecting the null hypothesis of profitable arbitrage as well as just rejecting the null of
no profitable arbitrage.

       To do this, we estimate the distribution of φ(X) using moving blocks bootstrap; in
particular, the bth re-sample gives us:

                                               b      Zb
                                        φ(X) = φ(X) + √  .                                                  (4)
                                                       N

This bootstrap distribution is used to compute two values. The first, clower , is the smallest
value of the trading cost, c, that would cause rejection of the null hypothesis that a
  20
    Given a sample {X1 , X2 , ..., XN }, each moving blocks bootstrap re-sample b ∈ {1, 2, ..., B} is
constructed as follows. First, we partition the data into K non-overlapping blocks of size M :
{B1 , B2 , ..., BK } ≡ {X1 , X2 , ..., XM }, {XM+1 , ..., X2M }, ..., {XM(K−1)+1 , ..., XKM }. Next, let S be
a discrete uniform variable over the integers {0, 1, ..., K}; we construct the bth bootstrap re-sample by
drawing K integers from S independently and identically and merging together blocks based on these
draws. For example, if we draw {2, 5, K, ..., 5}, then the bootstrap sample would be {B2 , B5 , BK , ..., B5 }.
                                                                                       N
When implementing this procedure, we set M = f loor(N 1/3 ) and K ≡ f loor( M            ), where f loor(X) is X
rounded down to the nearest integer.


                                                      21
profitable trading strategy exists (i.e.: reject the null hypothesis that a∗ (µ)0 µ − c > 0).
Therefore, clower is equal to the 5th percentile of the bootstrapped distribution of φ(X).
The second magnitude, cupper , is the largest value of the trading cost that results in
rejection of the null hypothesis that no profitable trading strategy exists (i.e.: reject the
null hypothesis that a∗ (µ)0 µ − c ≤ 0). As a result, cupper is simply the 95th percentile
of the distribution of φ(X). Our estimates are thus lower bounds on the true clower and
cupper required to reject the null hypotheses of arbitrage and no arbitrage respectively to
the extent that we are under-estimating the trading revenues that a market participant
can earn by exploiting expected day-ahead/real-time price spreads.



5       Estimates of Implied Trading Costs

This section describes the results from applying our statistical test of arbitrage with
transaction costs to hourly day-ahead and real-time electricity prices from California’s
wholesale electricity market.


5.1       Data

We use hourly data on day-ahead and real-time wholesale electricity prices at all pricing
locations (i.e.: nodes) in the transmission grid run by California’s Independent System
Operator (CAISO). Our data span from April 1, 2009 to December 31, 2012.21 There are
over 5,000 nodes, all with potentially different prices, depending on the level of demand,
configuration of the transmission network, set of available generation units and other
system operating constraints. We also consider the load aggregation point (LAP) level
prices faced by each of California’s three major electricity distribution utilities: Pacific
Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and
Electric (SDG&E). The LAP-level real-time price for a given hour is computed by taking
the quantity-weighted average over the real-time prices at all nodes in the utility’s service
area with a positive amount of energy withdrawn in that hour. LAP-level day-ahead
prices are computed the same way using day-ahead quantities.

      Figure 2 presents a comparison by hour-of-the-day of the average difference between
 21
      California introduced nodal pricing on April 1, 2009.



                                                    22
the day-ahead and real-time prices faced by PG&E, SCE, and SDG&E before versus
after the introduction of financial trading (i.e.: explicit virtual bidding) on February 1,
2011. This figure provides descriptive evidence that day-ahead/real-time price spreads
are larger in absolute value before the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB)
for each of the three distribution utilities.22 For example, day-ahead prices for PG&E
are much lower than real-time prices on average for the hours of 8PM to 12AM. We
demonstrate in Appendix Section C.2 that the reduction in average day-ahead/real-time
price differences after the introduction of purely financial participants is statistically
significant.

    We next perform a joint test of the null hypothesis that the average differences
between day-ahead and real-time prices are zero for all 24 hours of the day. This test is
performed separately for each LAP before versus after the introduction of explicit virtual
bidding. We compute our chi-squared test statistics accounting for the potential for
up to 14 days of autocorrelation using the autocorrelation-consistent covariance matrix
estimator developed by Newey and West (1987).23 The test statistics corresponding to
these tests, presented in Table 1, are quite large. We reject the null hypothesis that all 24
of the hourly price difference means are zero for every LAP both before and after EVB.24

    However, this result does not imply that traders can profitably arbitrage day-
ahead/real-time price spreads after the introduction of EVB. This is because the sta-
tistical tests presented in Table 1 do not account for the potentially sizable transaction
costs faced by purely financial participants in the California ISO. In the next subsec-
tion, we present results from a statistical test of arbitrage that accounts for the fact that
day-ahead/real-time price differences can differ from zero simply due to transaction costs.


5.2     Implied Trading Cost Estimates

We first implement the statistical test of arbitrage described in Section 4 using data on
the day-ahead and real-time electricity prices faced by each of the three major electricity
  22
     Appendix Figure A.2 plots these hourly average day-ahead/real-time spreads along with their point-
wise 95% confidence intervals. This figure indicates that we can reject the null hypothesis that expected
price spreads are zero for some hours-of-the-day even after the introduction of financial trading.
                                                                     Pm                   0
  23
     The Newey-West covariance matrix estimator is: Σ̂ = Λˆ0 + j=1 w(j, m)(Λˆj + Λˆj ), where Λˆj =
1
   PT                          0       1
                                         PT                               j
T    t=j+1 (Xt − X)(Xt−j − X) , X = T       t=1 Xt , and w(j, m) = 1 − m+1 . We account for m = 14 days
of autocorrelation.
  24
     The upper α = 0.05 critical value for the χ224 distribution is 36.415.


                                                   23
Figure 2: Day-Ahead/Real-Time Price Spreads By Hour-of-Day: Before and After EVB

                                                   Time-Weighted Average Price Spreads For PGE                                                                                                             Time-Weighted Average Price Spreads For SCE
  Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)




                                                                                                                                                          Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)
                                          5




                                                                                                                                                                                         0        5
                             0




                                                                                                                                                                              -5
               -5




                                                                                                                                                                   -10
 -10




                                                                                                                                                         -15
                                               0         5         10             15                                                    20        25                                                   0           5        10             15           20   25
                                                                    Hour of the Day                                                                                                                                          Hour of the Day

                                                                Before EVB                                                      After EVB                                                                                Before EVB             After EVB




                                                                                                                               Time-Weighted Average Price Spreads For SDGE
                                                                              Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)
                                                                             -20    -15       -10      -5       0     5




                                                                                                                           0            5         10             15                                                 20       25
                                                                                                                                                   Hour of the Day

                                                                                                                                               Before EVB                                                   After EVB




                                     Notes: This figure presents the average for each hour-of-the-day of the difference between day-
                                     ahead and real-time electricity prices for each of three major load aggregation points (LAPs) in
                                     California. We plot this average price spread separately for the sample periods before versus after the
                                     introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB). The three LAPs considered in this figure correspond
                                     to the territories served by Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE),
                                     and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E).

                                                   Table 1: Test Statistics for the Joint Test of Zero Mean Price Differences

                                                                                                                                             Before EVB                                                    After EVB
                                                                                                                            PG&E              140.175                                                        194.317
                                                                                                                             SCE              137.659                                                        164.065
                                                                                                                           SDG&E              151.456                                                        260.327
                                     Notes: This table presents the chi-squared test statistic corresponding to the null hypothesis that
                                     all 24 hour-of-the-day average day-ahead/real-time price spreads are equal to zero. This statistical
                                     test is performed separately for each load aggregation point (LAP) before and after the introduction
                                     of explicit virtual bidding (EVB). The three LAPs correspond to the territories served by Pacific Gas
                                     and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E).
                                     We compute these test statistics accounting for the potential for up to 14 days of autocorrelation
                                     using the autocorrelation-consistent covariance matrix estimator developed by Newey and West
                                     (1987). We reject the null hypothesis if the test statistic is larger than 36.415, which is the upper
                                     α = 0.05 critical value for the χ224 distribution.



                                                                                                                                                       24
                      Table 2: LAP-Level Implied Trading Costs: clower and cupper

                                                 LAP          Before EVB      After EVB
                           Lower 5% C.I.        PG&E            8.290               4.509
                              (clower )          SCE            11.728              4.662
                                               SDG&E            16.028              6.594
                          Upper 95% C.I.        PG&E            15.211              7.387
                             (cupper )           SCE            21.307             8.827
                                               SDG&E            36.281             10.740
          Notes: This table presents the implied trading costs from our statistical framework, estimated sep-
          arately for each load aggregation point (LAP) for sample periods before the introduction of explicit
          virtual bidding (4/1/2009-2/1/2011) versus after the introduction of EVB (2/1/2011-12/31/2012).
          The three LAPs considered in this table correspond to the territories served by California’s three
          major electricity distribution companies: Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California
          Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). clower is the smallest value of per-unit
          trading costs c for which we can reject the null hypothesis that a profitable trading strategy exists
          while cupper is the largest value of c such that we can reject the null hypothesis that no profitable
          trading strategy exists.



distribution utilities in California: Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California
Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). Specifically, Table 2 reports
our estimated implied trading costs both before and after the introduction of explicit
virtual bidding for each load aggregation point (LAP). Recall that clower is the smallest
value of per-unit trading costs, c, for which we can reject the null hypothesis that a
profitable strategy exists while cupper is the largest value of c for which we can reject the
null hypothesis that no profitable trading strategy exists. Table 2 demonstrates that our
estimates of clower and cupper fell substantially after the introduction of explicit virtual
bidding for all three LAPs.25 This result is consistent with the logic outlined in Section
2.

          In order to more formally compare implied trading costs before versus after the
introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB), Figure 3 plots the bootstrap distribution
                                                                   pre             post
of the difference in implied trading costs (i.e.: φ(X                    ) − φ(X          )) for each LAP before
versus after EVB. The left vertical line in this figure is the 5th percentile of the distribution
of cpre − cpost and the right vertical line is the 95th percentile of this distribution. If the
5th percentile of the distribution of bootstrap estimates of cpre − cpost is greater than
zero, then we can reject the null hypothesis that cpre ≤ cpost at a 5% significance level.
     25
    Appendix Figure A.3 plots the bootstrap distributions of implied trading costs for the pre-EVB and
post-EVB sample periods for each of the three LAPs.



                                                         25
If the 95th percentile of the bootstrapped distribution of estimated cpre − cpost is less than
zero, then we can reject the null hypothesis that cpre ≥ cpost at a 5% significance level.
For both SCE and SDG&E, we reject the null hypothesis that our implied trading costs
are higher post-EVB relative to pre-EVB, but fail to reject the null hypothesis that our
implied trading costs are higher pre-EVB relative to post-EVB. However, we do not have
the statistical power to reject either null hypothesis for PG&E. Summarizing, Figure 3
provides statistical evidence that the implied costs of trading LAP-level price spreads fell
after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding for the SCE and SDG&E LAPs.

    We also compute clower and cupper for each pricing node in the California ISO control
area. Figure 4 plots the values of clower and cupper for each node before and after the
introduction of EVB. This figure plots the across-node distributions of clower and cupper
separately for nodes associated with generation units (“Gen Nodes”) and nodes not
associated with generation units (“Non-Gen Nodes”). We see from Figure 4 that the
distributions of both clower and cupper are shifted downward post-EVB relative to pre-
EVB. Thus, for any fixed value of trading costs c, we reject the null hypothesis that a
profitable trading strategy exists for more nodes in the post-EVB sample period relative
to the pre-EVB sample period. Similarly, our estimated across-node distribution of cupper
indicates that the null hypothesis that no profitable trading strategies exist for a given
trading cost c can be rejected for more nodes before EVB relative to after EVB.

    Next, we compute the bootstrap distribution of estimates of cpre − cpost for each of
the more than 4,000 nodes in the California ISO control area; “pre” refers to the sample
period before the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (4/1/2009-2/1/2011) and “post”
refers to the sample period after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (2/1/2011-
12/31/2012). The first row of Table 3 reports the proportion of nodes for which we reject
the null hypothesis that implicit trading costs increased after the introduction of EVB
(i.e.: cpre ≤ cpost ), separately for generation nodes (“Gen Nodes”) versus non-generation
nodes (“Non-Gen Nodes”). The second row of Table 3 reports the proportion of nodes
for which we reject the null hypothesis that implicit trading costs decreased after the
introduction of EVB (i.e.: cpre ≥ cpost ), once again separately for generation nodes versus
non-generation nodes. We reject the null hypothesis that implicit trading costs increased
after the introduction of EVB for more than 70 percent of the nodes; the percentage
of rejections at non-generation nodes is slightly higher than at generation nodes. In



                                             26
                         Figure 3: Bootstrap Distribution of the Difference in Trading Costs

                    PGE Bootstrapped Trading Costs Distribution                                           SCE Bootstrapped Trading Costs Distribution
                             Before minus After EVB                                                                Before minus After EVB
             0.25
                                                                                                   0.25


              0.2                                                                                   0.2
Proportion




                                                                                      Proportion
             0.15                                                                                  0.15



              0.1                                                                                   0.1



             0.05                                                                                  0.05



               0                                                                                     0
               -10         -5        0                   5          10          15                   -10        -5        0     5     10     15   20     25
                                Trading Costs ($/MWh)                                                                     Trading Costs ($/MWh)

                                                             SDGE Bootstrapped Trading Costs Distribution
                                                                      Before minus After EVB
                                                      0.25



                                                       0.2
                                         Proportion




                                                      0.15



                                                       0.1



                                                      0.05



                                                        0
                                                        -10         0      10             20               30        40        50
                                                                         Trading Costs ($/MWh)
                                                                                                                                                       pre
               Notes: This figure plots the bootstrap distribution of the difference in trading costs (i.e.: (φ(X )−
                   post
               φ(X      )), where “pre” indicates the sample period before the introduction of explicit virtual bidding
               (4/1/2009-2/1/2011) and “post” indicates the sample period after the introduction of explicit virtual
               bidding (2/1/2011-12/31/2012). We plot this distribution separately for each of three LAPs; these
               LAPs correspond to the territories served by California’s three major electricity distribution utilities:
               Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric
               (SDG&E). The left vertical line on the graph is the 5th percentile of the distribution of cpre − cpost
               and the right vertical line is the 95th percentile of the distribution of cpre − cpost .




                                                                                     27
      Figure 4: Nodal-Level Distribution of Implied Trading Costs: Before and After EVB

                                                     5% Lower C.I for Generation Nodes: Pre vs. Post EVB                                                              95% Upper C.I for Generation Nodes: Pre vs. Post EVB




                                                                                                                95% of Implied Trading Cost Distribution (in $/MWh)
5% of Implied Trading Cost Distribution (in $/MWh)




                                                                                                                                                               240
                                               80




                                                                                                                                                       200
                                   60




                                                                                                                                       120    160
                       40




                                                                                                                                80
            20




                                                                                                                         40
 0




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                     Before EVB       After EVB                                                                                        Before EVB       After EVB



                                                     5% Lower C.I for Non-Gen Nodes: Pre vs. Post EVB                                                                  95% Upper C.I for Non-Gen Nodes: Pre vs. Post EVB
                                                                                                                95% of Implied Trading Cost Distribution (in $/MWh)
5% of Implied Trading Cost Distribution (in $/MWh)




                                                                                                                                                               240
                                               80




                                                                                                                                                       200
                                   60




                                                                                                                                       120    160
                       40




                                                                                                                                80
            20




                                                                                                                         40
 0




                                                                                                                  0




                                                                     Before EVB       After EVB                                                                                        Before EVB       After EVB


                                                Notes: This figure plots the values of clower and cupper for each pricing location (i.e.: node) esti-
                                                mated separately for the sample period before the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (4/1/2009-
                                                2/1/2011) versus the sample period after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (2/1/2011-
                                                12/31/2012). clower is the smallest value of per-unit trading costs c for which we can reject the null
                                                hypothesis that a profitable trading strategy exists while cupper is the largest value of c such that
                                                we can reject the null hypothesis that no profitable trading strategy exists. We plot the across-node
                                                distributions of clower and cupper separately for nodes associated with generation units and nodes not
                                                associated with generation units. The box portion of this box and whiskers plot contains all nodes
                                                within the 25% through 75% quantiles of the distribution of our implied trading costs. The whiskers
                                                include nodes in the 1.5×IQR of the distribution of implied trading costs, where IQR (inter-quartile
                                                range) is the distance between the 25% and 75% quartiles of a distribution. Finally, the remaining
                                                nodes are outliers outside of the 1.5 × IQR of the distribution of implied trading costs.




                                                                                                           28
         Table 3: Proportion of Nodes that Reject cpre ≤ cpost or cpre ≥ cpost

                                       Total    1(Gen Node)       1(Non-Gen Node)
               H0 : cpre ≤ cpost       0.707         0.659                0.711
               H0 : cpre ≥ cpost       0.042         0.076                0.039

               Number of Nodes         4,316           355                3,961
   Notes: This first row of this table reports the proportion of nodes for which we can reject the null
   hypothesis that implied trading costs are larger after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding
   (EVB) relative to before the introduction of EVB (i.e.: cpre ≤ cpost ), separately for generation
   nodes (“Gen Nodes”) versus non-generation nodes (“Non-Gen Nodes”). The second row of this table
   reports the proportion of nodes for which we can reject the null hypothesis that implied trading costs
   are larger pre-EVB relative to post-EVB (i.e.: cpre ≥ cpost ), once again separately for generation
   nodes and versus non-generation nodes.



contrast, we reject the null hypothesis that trading costs fell after the introduction of
EVB for less than 5 percent of the nodes. A rejection frequency of 5% is consistent with
the null hypothesis being true for all nodes because the size of each hypothesis test is
α = 0.05.

    As discussed in Section 2, before the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB)
suppliers could only exploit expected differences between day-ahead and real-time prices
using their physical bids at the locations where their generation units inject electricity
(“generation nodes”). Load-serving entities could only place physical bids at the service
territory or load aggregation point (LAP) level, making it extremely costly for load-
serving entities to exploit expected day-ahead/real-time price spreads using their physical
bids (termed “implicit virtual bidding”). Based on this, we expect implied trading costs
to be higher at non-generation nodes relative to generation nodes before EVB because
neither suppliers nor demanders could implicitly virtual bid at non-generation nodes. The
introduction of explicit virtual bidding allowed any market participant to place virtual
bids at any node; thus, we expect the mean reduction in implied trading costs after EVB
to be larger for non-generation nodes relative to generation nodes.

    To test these two hypotheses, we regress the value of clower at each node both before
and after the introduction of EVB on a constant, an indicator variable for whether the
node is associated with a generation unit (i.e.: 1(Gen Node), an indicator variable for
whether the implied trading cost is from the post-EVB period (i.e.: 1(Post EVB)), and
an indicator variable for whether the observation is from a generation node during the
post-EVB period. The unit of observation for this regression is thus a node in the pre-

                                                  29
EVB or post-EVB sample period. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in
parentheses. Finally, we run the same regression with cupper as the dependent variable.

    Table 4 presents the results of estimating this difference-in-differences specification
for both the 5% and 95% percentiles of the bootstrapped distribution of implied trading
costs for each node before versus after EVB. We see that the coefficient on Post EVB is
negative for both clower and cupper , indicating that the average level of implied trading
costs across locations fell after the implementation of EVB. Moreover, the results indicate
that both clower and cupper are significantly lower for generation nodes relative to non-
generation nodes prior to EVB. However, this difference across generation versus non-
generation nodes is essentially eliminated after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding.
Specifically, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the sum of the coefficient estimates
corresponding to the variables 1(Gen Node) and 1(Post EVB) × 1(Gen Node) is zero for
both clower and cupper . As expected, the difference in implied trading cost before versus
after explicit virtual bidding (i.e: cpre − cpost ) fell more for non-generation nodes than for
generation nodes.

    Summarizing, Table 4 provides statistical evidence consistent with all three of our hy-
potheses: (1) implied trading costs are lower for generation nodes versus non-generation
nodes prior to EVB, (2) implied trading costs fell after EVB, and (3) implied trading
costs fell more for non-generation nodes relative to generation nodes after EVB.




                                              30
Table 4: Implied Trading Costs Before vs. After EVB For Gen. versus Non-Gen Nodes

                                                             (1)         (2)
                      Dependent Variable                    clower      cupper
                      1(Post EVB) × 1(Gen Node)             0.532       1.421
                                                           (0.174)     (0.431)

                      1(Post EVB)                           -3.527      -5.404
                                                           (0.075)     (0.193)

                      1(Gen Node)                           -0.654      -1.765
                                                           (0.119)     (0.250)

                      Constant                              10.72       19.16
                                                           (0.054)     (0.118)

                      Mean of Dep. Var.                     8.840      16.221
                      Std. Dev. of Dep. Var.                3.847      9.306

                      Number of Obs.                        9,791       9,791
                      R2                                    0.202       0.080
  Notes: This table reports the results from our difference-in-differences specification comparing im-
  plied trading costs before versus after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB) for pricing
  locations (i.e.: nodes) associated with generation units (i.e.: “Gen Nodes”) versus not associated
  with generation units (i.e.: “Non-Gen Nodes”). The unit of observation for these regressions is a node
  before versus after the introduction of EVB. We report heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors
  in parentheses. This specification includes an indicator 1(Post EVB) for implied trading costs esti-
  mated for the sample period after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (2/1/2011-12/31/2012);
  the pre-EVB sample period is 4/1/2009-2/1/2011. We also include an indicator 1(Gen Node) that’s
  one if and only if the node is associated with a generator. Finally, we include the interaction be-
  tween these two variables (1(Post EVB) × 1(Gen Node)). We consider two dependent variables:
  clower (Column 1) and cupper (Column 2). clower is the smallest value of per-unit trading costs c
  for which we can reject the null hypothesis that a profitable trading strategy exists and cupper is
  the largest value of c for which we can reject the null hypothesis that no profitable trading strategy
  exists.




                                                 31
6       Quantifying Market Efficiency Benefits in High
        versus Low Demand Hours

This section describes the data, methodology, and results of our empirical analysis demon-
strating that the introduction of purely financial participants resulted in market efficiency
benefits in high demand hours relative to low demand hours. As discussed in Section 3,
the market efficiency benefits from introducing financial trading are likely to be largest
in the highest demand hours.


6.1       Data

We utilize hourly data on generator-level output from the California ISO, daily natural
gas prices for each of Northern and Southern California from SNL Financial26 , and daily
fuel oil prices from the Energy Information Administration. These data span the sample
period 4/1/2009-3/31/2012. We also have information for each electricity generation
unit in the California ISO control area on its capacity, fuel type (i.e: natural gas, oil,
wind, etc.), total amount of thermal energy required to start up the unit, and its heat
rate curve. This heat rate curve tells us: “if a generation unit is currently utilizing X%
of their generation capacity, we need Y Million BTU (MMBTU) of thermal input in
order to produce one more MWh of electrical energy”. Combined, these data allow us to
compute the total quantity of thermal energy consumed by each generation unit during
each hour of our sample period.

       We define generation unit i as starting in hour t if its output in hour t-1 is zero
(Qi,t−1 = 0) and its output in hour t is greater than zero Define the thermal energy
required to start up unit i to be EiS . Each unit also submits the heat rate HRik relevant
for each of k = 1, 2, ..., 10 quantity steps. In particular, the thermal energy required to
produce Qi,t is:
                                            10                     k−1
                                  P
                                            X                      X      j
                                 Ei,t   =         HRik (Qi,t   −         Qi )+
                                            k=1                    j=1

                                                    j
where the notation y + ≡ y × 1(y > 0), Qi corresponding to step j is the maximum level
of output for which heat rate HRij is applicable. Then, the total quantity of thermal
  26
    We use the city-gate natural gas price corresponding to the Pacific Gas and Electric delivery point
and the Southern California Gas Citygate delivery point respectively.

                                                        32
energy consumed by unit i in hour t is:

                                   P
                           Ei,t = Ei,t + EiS 1(Qi,t > 0)1(Qi,t−1 = 0)


The total fuel costs associated with this quantity of energy consumed is simply:

                                                         F
                                       T Ci,t = Ei,t × Pi,t

        F
where Pi,t is the daily fuel price (either natural gas or oil) applicable to that unit. For
natural gas fired units, we use the PG&E City-gate natural gas price if the unit is located
in Pacific Gas and Electric’s service territory and we use the SCE City-gate price if the
unit is located in either Southern California Edison’s service territory or San Diego Gas
and Electric’s service territory. We calculate the costs of the relatively small amount of
distillate fuel oil burned by generation units in California using the diesel fuel price paid
in Los Angeles.27 We sum the total fuel costs, total heat energy used, and total number
of starts over fossil-fired units for each hour-of-sample in order to construct our first three
market-level outcome variables. In particular, we assess how the introduction of financial
trading impacted the hourly aggregate fuel costs per MWh of electricity produced by
fossil-fuel fired units, the hourly aggregate thermal energy used per MWh, and whether
any fossil fuel fired unit was forced to start up in each hour.

       The California ISO incurs ancillary service costs in order to procure sufficient ”reg-
ulation reserves,” “spinning reserves” and “non-spinning reserves ” to make certain that
electricity supplied equals electricity demanded at every instant in time even in the face
of generation and tranmission deratings and outages. Policymakers and regulators have
expressed concern that financial traders take advantage of physical constraints such as
transmission congestion in order to make profits, driving up these ancillary service costs.
Thus, we consider the ancillary service costs paid by CAISO per MWh of fossil-fuel-fired
electricity produced in each hour-of-sample as one of our market outcome measures.

       Finally, we use hourly data on day-ahead and real-time electricity prices paid by each
of California’s three large, investor-owned utilities: Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E),
Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). In par-
ticular, our last three outcome measures are the absolute differences between hourly
  27
    In particular, we use data from the Energy Information Administration (EIA) on the “ultra-low
sulfur CARB diesel spot price” relevant to Los Angeles, California.

                                               33
day-ahead and real-time prices paid by the three utilities. This allows us to explore the
extent to which day-ahead/real-time price spreads converged after the introduction of
financial trading in relatively high demand hours.


6.2    Difference-in-Differences Methodology

For each market outcome Yt in hour-of-sample t, we employ the following difference-in-
differences framework:


          Yt = αm + γh + θw + Xt φβ0 HIGHpt + δDD HIGHpt × POSTEVBt + ut                (5)


where we include month-of-sample fixed effects (αm ), hour-of-the-day fixed effects (γh ),
and an indicator for whether the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend (θw ). This
specification also controls for a host of factors Xt : the log of total electricity demand,
two separate controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and
SCE, as well as separate controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind
and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources, and (3) hydro sources.

    The indicator variable POSTEVBt is equal to one if the day-of-sample is after the
introduction of financial trading in 2/1/2011 and is equal to zero otherwise; this variable
is not included separately in the regression specification because it is absorbed by the
month-of-sample fixed effects. The indicator variable HIGHpt is equal to one if and only
if aggregate electricity demand in hour-of-sample t is larger than the pth percentile of the
distribution of aggregate hourly demand across our 4/1/2009 to 3/31/2012 sample period.
Although our primary specifications are based on the p = 90th percentile of demand, we
show that our results are qualitatively similar for the 50, 75, 95, and 99 percentiles in a
sensitivity analyses. The independent variable of interest, HIGHpt ×POSTEVBt , captures
how the introduction of financial trading impacts each hourly market-level outcome Yt
in high demand hours relative to low demand hours. Finally, we cluster standard errors
by week-of-sample.




                                            34
6.3    Primary Findings

Table 5 presents the results from estimating the difference-in-differences specification
described in the previous subsection. We discuss the robustness checks, such as the pre-
trend analysis, pertaining to these results in the next subsection. Column (1) of Table
5 indicates that the introduction of financial trading to California’s wholesale electricity
market resulted in a 3.6% reduction in average fuel costs per MWh in high demand hours
relative to low demand hours. Similarly, we see a 4.2% reduction in average input heat
energy per MWh due to financial trading in relatively high demand hours. Translating
these effects to dollars, a 3.6% reduction in fuel costs per MWh across all of the power
plants in our sample results in a 4.2 million dollar reduction in the annual fuel costs paid
in high demand hours. Similarly, a 4.2% reduction in thermal energy per MWh, implies
a reduction in CO2 emissions of 145,000 tons, focusing only on high demand hours.

    One source of the efficiency gains from purely financial participants described in
Section 3 is the incentive for these participants create for a lower cost dispatch of available
of generation units. Indeed, we see from Column (3) that at least one unit has to start
up in 4.2% less high demand hours after financial trading on average. Both the sign and
lack of statistical significance of this effect assuages concerns that physical and financial
participants are placing trades in order to profit from the physical constraints such as
start-up or ramping. To more directly address this concern, we consider total “ancillary
services” payments made to electricity suppliers in order to ensure that supply meets
demand at every instant in time. If the introduction of purely financial participants
resulted in an exacerbation of transmission, start-up, ramping, or other system operating
constraints, we would expect a marked increase in the ancillary services costs. This does
not turn out to be the case; Column (4) of Table 5 demonstrates that there is no statistical
difference in the ancillary costs per MWh paid out in relatively high demand hours before
versus after financial trading. In fact, the point estimate is negative, suggesting that
financial participation results in lower ancillary services costs per MWh in relatively
high demand hours.

    Finally, the last three columns of Table 5 consider the effect of financial trading on
the absolute difference between the day-ahead and real-time electricity prices faced by
each of California’s three major distribution utilities: PG&E, SCE, and SDG&E. All
three columns indicate that the average absolute day-ahead/real-time price spread fell

                                              35
Table 5: Diff-in-Diff: High Demand vs. Low Demand Hours Before vs. After EVB

                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)

1(Demand > 90%) -0.036              -0.042      -0.042     -0.071     -5.715    -13.902     -21.568
  × 1(Post EVB) (0.012)            (0.012)     (0.028)    (0.139)    (3.003)    (5.665)     (9.864)

1(Demand > 90%)          0.032      0.036       0.008      0.123      2.496      6.231       7.882
                        (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.022)    (0.055)    (2.145)    (4.395)     (5.891)

      R2                 0.903       0.362      0.125     0.590       0.041       0.039      0.049
Avg. DV in Levels        32.63       8.048     0.686       1.704     13.199      15.055     16.426
 Number of Obs.         26,277      26,277     26,277     26,276     26,277      26,277     26,277
 Notes: The unit of observation for these regressions is hour-of-sample. Standard errors are clustered
 by week-of-sample and are reported in parentheses. The dependent variables considered in this
 table are: (1) the log of fuel cost per MWh, (2) the log of input energy per MWh, (3) an indicator
 of whether any fossil fuel fired units started up, (4) the log of ancillary services per MWh, (5)
 the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in PG&E, (6) the absolute value of the day-
 ahead/real-time prices in SCE, and (7) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in
 SDG&E. The row titled “Avg. DV in Levels” reports the mean of the dependent variable in levels
 even if the dependent variable is logged when running the regression. For all of the specifications,
 we control for month-of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day fixed effects, an indicator for whether
 the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend, the log of total electricity demand, two separate
 controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE as well as separate
 controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources,
 and (3) hydro sources.
 Table Description: This table presents the difference-in-differences results pertaining to the effect
 of explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading) on market outcomes in high demand hours relative
 to low demand hours. The data used for this table span the sample period 4/1/2009-3/31/2012.
 California introduced explicit virtual bidding (EVB) on 2/1/2011; the “Post EVB” indicator is thus
 one if and only if the day-of-sample is on or after 2/1/2011. Hours-of-sample with system demand
 greater than the 90% of the distribution of hourly demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample
 period are deemed to be “high demand” hours.




                                                36
significantly after 2/1/2011 in relatively high demand hours. Moreover, we demonstrate
in Appendix Section C.3 that the volatility in both day-ahead/real-time price spreads
and real-time prices fell after the introduction of purely financial participants. Combined,
our findings suggests that day-ahead electricity prices better predict expected real-time
prices, providing both electricity suppliers and demanders with the information to make
their day-ahead market outcomes more closely reflect real-time system conditions.


6.4    Robustness Checks

This subsection discusses the various robustness checks pertaining to our difference-in-
differences analysis. First, Appendix Table B.1 indicates that there is no statistical
difference in the trends over time in average outcomes in high demand hours versus low
demand hours prior to the introduction of financial trading on 2/1/2011. This provides
evidence that our results are not driven by pre-existing trends in how outcomes vary
across high versus low demand hours.

    Next, the empirical results remain similar if we remove the 28 days before and after
2/1/2011 (see Appendix Table B.2); our findings do not seem to be due to any short-run
adjustments to the policy change. In addition, Appendix Table B.3 presents the results
using only data from the 6 months before and after the introduction of financial trading
on 2/1/2011. These empirical results are quantitatively quite similar to our primary
results from Table 5.

    Appendix Table B.5 presents our specifications estimated on data aggregated to the
daily level. The results at the daily-level are broadly consistent with those presented in
Table 5 with the exception of the absolute day-ahead/real-time price spreads. This in
unsurprising given that day-ahead prices are far more likely to deviate substantially from
real-time prices during certain hours of the day; financial trading is especially beneficial
in reducing price spreads in those hours.

    Finally, Appendix Table B.6 shows that our estimated effect of financial trading
on average fuel costs per MWh in relatively high demand hours remains quantitatively
similar if “high demand” is defined to hours-of-sample above the 50, 75, 95, and 99
percentiles of hourly demand rather than the p = 90th percentile as considered in our
primary specifications. We use this effect in order to calculate the efficiency benefits


                                            37
from slightly lowering the per-unit transaction costs in relatively high demand hours in
the next section. Thus, it is comforting that our physical efficiency benefit per MWh of
fossil-fuel-fired electricity production doesn’t change significantly based on our definition
of “relatively high demand”.



7     Implications for the Design of Electricity Markets

Allowing purely financial participants in multi-settlement LMP wholesale electricity mar-
kets is not without controversy. Many have argued that financial traders take advantage
of physical constraints such as transmission or the start-up/ramping of units in order
to profit at the expense of electricity consumers. We assess the empirical importance of
these concerns by comparing market outcomes in high versus low demand hours before
versus after California introduced financial trading to its electricity market on February
1st 2011. Using this difference-in-differences framework, we find that, in relatively high
demand hours, the introduction of financial trading resulted in a 3.6% (4.2%) reduction
in fuel costs (thermal energy) per MWh. This reduction in fuel costs per MWh implies
an annual fuel cost savings in relatively high demand hours of roughly 4.2 million dollars.
Moreover, the annual environmental benefit from the reduction in fuel used during high
demand hours due to financial trading is 145,000 tons of CO2 . These market efficiency
gains do not appear to come with a deterioration in physical market conditions. Specifi-
cally, we find no statistical difference before versus after February 1st 2011 in either the
number of high demand hours in which at least one thermal unit was required to start
up or the per MWh ancillary services costs associated with ensuring that supply meets
demand in high demand hours.

    Of course, the market efficiency gains from financial trading are directly tied to the
financial volumes traded in the market. This trading volume in turn is a function of the
transaction costs associated with financial trading. We develop a statistical framework
to estimate the implied per-unit trading costs faced by traders in California’s wholesale
electricity market. These implied trading costs are defined to be the trading cost that
just causes a failure to reject the null hypothesis of no profitable trading strategy. Our
empirical findings indicate that nodal-level implied trading costs decreased significantly
after California introduced purely financial participation in 2/1/2011. We find substantial


                                             38
heterogeneity across nodes in the distribution of implied trading costs; the 5% (95%)
quantile of the distribution of implied trading costs across locations is $5.29 ($12.84) per
MWh.

       Our results thus indicate that both implied trading costs and the physical efficiency
benefits from financial trading vary over both time and space. This suggests the scope
for extracting additional efficiency benefits from financial trading by setting trading costs
that vary by location and hour-of-the-year. To underscore this point, we consider the
following back-of-the-envelope calculation in which we slightly increase (decrease) per-
unit transaction costs in low (high) demand hours. First, the 25% quantile (75% quantile)
of our across node distribution of implied trading costs is 2.47 (4.11) dollars per MWh
lower after the introduction of financial trading for generation nodes. The corresponding
25% and 75% quantiles of the reductions in implied trading costs across non-generation
nodes are 2.65 and 4.86 dollars per MWh respectively. Our market efficiency estimates
imply that the reduction in implied trading costs after 2/1/2011 results in a roughly 1.12
dollar per MWh reduction in fuel costs in relatively high demand hours. Dividing these
two estimates and multiplying by 0.05 gives us that a 5 cents per MWh reduction in
implied trading costs in high demand hours results in fuel cost savings ranging from 1-2
cents per Mwh in these hours depending on which location is considered.28

       However, the operator’s ability to influence market outcomes using transaction fees
is limited by the extent to which the cost of trading is based on implicit factors such as
the opportunity cost of traders’ time and effort. Indeed, even after 2/1/2011, our average
estimated implied trading cost ($7.18 per MWh) is far higher than the roughly $0.50-$0.70
per MWh in transaction fees charged by the market operator. That being said, our back-
of-the-envelope calculation suggests that even a 5 cents per MWh reduction in transaction
fees in high demand hours can result in economically sizable efficiency benefits. There
is thus substantial scope for improvements to electricity market design even without
solving the difficult problem of setting transaction fees subject to equilibrium responses
by financial participants.



  28
    As an example, financial trading reduced implied trading costs by 4.11 dollars per MWh at the 75%
quantile in the distribution of non-generation nodes. Assume that this 4.11 dollars per MWh reduction
in implied trading costs yielded a 1.12 dollar per MWh reduction in fuel costs savings in relatively high
demand hours. This back-of-the-envelope calculation implies that a 5 cent reduction in implied trading
costs would result in 1.4 = 0.05 × 1.12
                                    4.11 cents per MWh in fuel cost savings.


                                                   39
References
Bessembinder, Hendrik, and Michael L Lemmon. 2002. “Equilibrium pricing and
 optimal hedging in electricity forward markets.” the Journal of Finance, 57(3): 1347–
 1382.

Bessembinder, Hendrik, and Michael L Lemmon. 2006. “Gains from trade under
 uncertainty: The case of electric power markets.” The Journal of Business, 79(4): 1755–
 1782.

Birge, John, Ali Hortaçsu, Ignacia Mercadal, and Michael Pavlin. 2013. “The
  role of financial players in electricity markets: An empirical analysis of miso.”

Bohn, Roger E, Michael C Caramanis, and Fred C Schweppe. 1984. “Optimal
 pricing in electrical networks over space and time.” The Rand Journal of Economics,
 360–376.

California Independent System Operator. 2015. “Convergence Bidding: Set-
 tlement Implications and Convergence Bidding Fees.” https:// www.caiso.com/
 Documents/ ConvergenceBiddingSession7-ConvergenceBiddingFees.pdf .

California Independent System Operator. 2019. “List of SCs, CRR Hold-
 ers,    Convergence     Bidding    Entities.”  https:// www.caiso.com/ Documents/
 ListofSchedulingCoordinatorsCRRHoldersandConvergenceBiddingEntities.pdf .

Dávila, Eduardo, and Cecilia Parlatore. 2019. “Trading costs and informational
 efficiency.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Fang, Zheng, and Andres Santos. 2018. “Inference on directionally differentiable
  functions.” The Review of Economic Studies, 86(1): 377–412.

Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 2014. “Staff Analysis of Uplift in RTO
  and ISO Markets.” https:// www.ferc.gov/ legal/ staff-reports/ 2014/ 08-13-14-uplift.pdf .

Frazzini, Andrea, Ronen Israel, and Tobias J Moskowitz. 2018. “Trading costs.”

Hadsell, Lester. 2007. “The impact of virtual bidding on price volatility in New York’s
 wholesale electricity market.” Economics Letters, 95(1): 66–72.

Hirshleifer, David. 1988. “Residual risk, trading costs, and commodity futures risk
 premia.” The Review of Financial Studies, 1(2): 173–193.

Hong, Han, and Jessie Li. 2018. “The numerical delta method.” Journal of Econo-
 metrics, 206(2): 379–394.

Isemonger, Alan G. 2006. “The benefits and risks of virtual bidding in multi-settlement
  markets.” The Electricity Journal, 19(9): 26–36.

Ito, Koichiro, and Mar Reguant. 2016. “Sequential markets, market power, and
  arbitrage.” American Economic Review, 106(7): 1921–57.


                                            40
Kilian, Lutz, and Daniel P Murphy. 2014. “The Role of Inventories and Specula-
 tive Trading in the Global Market for Crude Oil.” Journal of Applied Econometrics,
 29(3): 454–478.

Kilian, Lutz, and Thomas K Lee. 2014. “Quantifying the Speculative Component
 in the Real Price of Oil: The Role of Global Oil Inventories.” Journal of International
 Money and Finance, 42: 71–87.

Knittel, Christopher R, and Robert S Pindyck. 2016. “The Simple Economics
 of Commodity Price Speculation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 8(2): 85–110.

Kunsch, Hans R, et al. 1989. “The jackknife and the bootstrap for general stationary
 observations.” The Annals of Statistics, 17(3): 1217–1241.

Li, Ruoyang, Alva J Svoboda, and Shmuel S Oren. 2015. “Efficiency impact of
  convergence bidding in the california electricity market.” Journal of Regulatory Eco-
  nomics, 48(3): 245–284.

Longstaff, Francis A, and Ashley W Wang. 2004. “Electricity forward prices: a
  high-frequency empirical analysis.” The journal of finance, 59(4): 1877–1900.

Markowitz, Harry. 1952. “Portfolio selection*.” The journal of finance, 7(1): 77–91.

Mercadal, Ignacia. 2018. “Dynamic competition and arbitrage in electricity markets:
 The role of financial players.”

Newey, Whitney K, and Kenneth D West. 1987. “A simple, positive semi-definite,
 heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix.” Econometrica:
 Journal of the Econometric Society, 703–708.

Ostrovsky, Michael. 2012. “Information aggregation in dynamic markets with strategic
 traders.” Econometrica, 80(6): 2595–2647.

Parsons, John E, Cathleen Colbert, Jeremy Larrieu, Taylor Martin, and Erin
 Mastrangelo. 2015. “Financial arbitrage and efficient dispatch in wholesale electricity
 markets.”

Pindyck, Robert S. 2001. “The Dynamics of Commodity Spot and Futures Markets:
  A Primer.” The Energy Journal, 1–29.

Routledge, Bryan R, Chester S Spatt, and Duane J Seppi. 2001. “The” spark
 spread:” An equilibrium model of cross-commodity price relationships in electricity.”

Saravia, Celeste. 2003. “Speculative trading and market performance: the effect of ar-
  bitrageurs on efficiency and market power in the New York electricity market.” Center
  for the Study of Energy Markets.

Schweppe, Fred C, Michael C Caramanis, Richard D Tabors, and Roger E
  Bohn. 2013. Spot pricing of electricity. Springer Science & Business Media.


                                          41
Sharpe, William F. 1994. “The sharpe ratio.” Journal of portfolio management,
  21(1): 49–58.

Williams, Jeffrey. 1987. “Futures markets: A consequence of risk aversion or transac-
 tions costs?” Journal of Political Economy, 95(5): 1000–1023.

Wolak, Frank A. 1989. “Local and Global Testing of Linear and Nonlinear Inequality
 Constraints in Nonlinear Econometric Models.” Econometric Theory, 51(1): 1–35.

Wolak, Frank A. 2019. “The Role of Efficient Pricing in Enabling A Low-Carbon
 Electricity Sector.” http:// web.stanford.edu/ group/ fwolak/ cgi-bin/ sites/ default/ files/
 efficient pricing wolak march 31 2019.pdf .




                                             42
Appendices

A Additional Tables and Figures                                                           45

B Difference-in-Differences Robustness Checks                                             51
  B.1 Pre-Trends Analysis     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51
  B.2 Additional Robustness Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        53

C Additional Empirical Results                                                            62
  C.1 Is there autocorrelation in daily price differences beyond the first lag? . .       62
  C.2 Absolute Average Price Spreads Before Versus After Financial Trading .              65
  C.3 Volatility in Prices Before versus After Financial Trading . . . . . . . . .        67




                                          43
List of Appendix Figures

 A.1 California’s Investor-Owned Utility Service Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . .         46

 A.2 Hourly Graphs of Price Differences with 95% C.I: Before and After EVB               47

 A.3 Bootstrap Distribution of φ(X) with 95% C.I: Before and After EVB . .               48

 B.1 Event Study Estimates: Market Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            54

 B.2 Event Study Estimates: Absolute Price Spreads . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           56



List of Appendix Tables

 A.1 List of Market Participants Registered to Explicit Virtual Bid: Part (1) .          49

 A.2 List of Market Participants Registered to Explicit Virtual Bid: Part (2) .          50

 B.1 Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Pre-Trends Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .          52

 B.2 Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Excluding the 28 Days Before and After
      2/1/2011 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   55

 B.3 Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: 6 Months Before and After 2/1/2011 . . .             57

 B.4 Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Accounting for 168 hours of Autocorrelation 58

 B.5 Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Daily-Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        60

 B.6 Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: By Percentage of Demand . . . . . . . . .            61

 C.1 Test Statistics for Autocorrelation (1 < L ≤ 10) in Daily Price Differences         63

 C.2 Proportion of Autocorrelation Tests that Fail to Reject (α = 0.05): Num-
      ber of Locations in Brackets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     64

 C.3 LAP-level P-values for the Absolute Difference Tests . . . . . . . . . . .          66

 C.4 Proportion of Nodes for which we fail to reject the α = 0.05 sized Absolute
      Difference Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    67

 C.5 LAP-level P-values for Volatility Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       69

 C.6 Proportion of Nodes for which we fail to reject the α = 0.05 sized Volatility
      Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   70

                                           44
A     Additional Tables and Figures

Appendix Figure A.1 presents a map of the territories served by each of California’s
investor-owned utilities.

    Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 list the market participants that are registered to place
financial trades in California’s wholesale electricity market. Suppliers and demanders
that inject or withdraw electricity (“participants that schedule electricity”) are listed
separately from purely financial players (“participants that don’t schedule electricity”).
This list suggests that a sizable number of both physical and financial participants place
financial bids in this market.

    Appendix Figure A.2 shows hourly average day-ahead/real-time spreads, along with
their pointwise 95% confidence intervals, for the PG&E, SCE, and SDG&E LAPs before
versus after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB). We can reject that the
average day-ahead/real-time price spread is zero for some hours of the day for all three
load-serving entities. Importantly, this by itself does not imply that financial traders can
profitably arbitrage LAP-level day-ahead/real-time price differences. One must also take
into account the potentially sizable transaction costs associated with these price spreads.

    Appendix Figure A.3 plots the bootstrap distributions of implied trading costs for
the pre-EVB and post-EVB sample periods for each of the three LAPs. The solid vertical
lines correspond to the values of clower and cupper for the pre-EVB sample period and the
dotted vertical lines on each graph correspond to the values of clower and cupper for the
post-EVB sample. This figure indicates that both clower and cupper fell substantially after
the introduction of EVB. We consider a formal test of the null hypothesis that clower and
cupper remained the same before versus after EVB in Figure 3.




                                            45
           Figure A.1: California’s Investor-Owned Utility Service Areas




Notes: This figure is a map of the territories served by each of California’s investor-owned electric
utilities. This map is provided by the California Energy Commission; see https://www.ferc.gov/
market-oversight/mkt-electric/california.asp.




                                               46
Figure A.2: Hourly Graphs of Price Differences with 95% C.I: Before and After EVB


                                                         Pre-EVB Price Spreads with 95% C.I. For PGE                                                                    Post-EVB Price Spreads with 95% C.I. For PGE




                                                                                                                                                               10
        Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)




                                                                                                                       Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)
                                                5




                                                                                                                                                      5
                            -5         0




                                                                                                                                           0
                 -10




                                                                                                                                -5
       -15




                                                                                                                      -10
                                                     0         5             10             15       20     25                                                      0          5            10             15       20     25
                                                                              Hour of the Day                                                                                                Hour of the Day

                                                                Average Price Difference         95% C.I.                                                                      Average Price Difference         95% C.I.




                                                         Pre-EVB Price Spreads with 95% C.I. For SCE                                                                    Post-EVB Price Spreads with 95% C.I. For SCE


                                                                                                                                                              10
        Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)




                                                                                                                      Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)
                                         0      5




                                                                                                                                                      5
                                -5




                                                                                                                                           0
                       -10




                                                                                                                                 -5
              -15




                                                                                                                       -10
       -20




                                                     0         5             10             15       20     25                                                      0          5            10             15       20     25
                                                                              Hour of the Day                                                                                                Hour of the Day

                                                                Average Price Difference         95% C.I.                                                                      Average Price Difference         95% C.I.




                                                         Pre-EVB Price Spreads with 95% C.I. For SDGE                                                                   Post-EVB Price Spreads with 95% C.I. For SDGE
                                                10




                                                                                                                                                               10
        Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)




                                                                                                                       Mean Price Difference (in Dollars per MWh)
                                                                                                                                                         5
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                0
                           -10




                                                                                                                                       -5
                 -20




                                                                                                                             -10
       -30




                                                                                                                      -15




                                                     0         5             10             15       20     25                                                      0          5            10             15       20     25
                                                                              Hour of the Day                                                                                                Hour of the Day

                                                                Average Price Difference         95% C.I.                                                                      Average Price Difference         95% C.I.




 Notes: This figure presents average day-ahead/real-time price spreads for each hour-of-the-day
 and each load aggregation point (LAP), separately for the sample periods before versus after the
 introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB). The three LAPs correspond to Pacific Gas and
 Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E).
 This figure also includes pointwise 95% confidence intervals around the day-ahead/real-time price
 spread averages for each hour-of-the-day.




                                                                                                                 47
        Figure A.3: Bootstrap Distribution of φ(X) with 95% C.I: Before and After EVB

                    PGE Bootstrapped Trading Costs Distribution                                                 SCE Bootstrapped Trading Costs Distribution
                        Before (Purple) v. After EVB (Green)                                                        Before (Purple) v. After EVB (Green)
              0.3                                                                                         0.3


             0.25                                                                                        0.25


              0.2                                                                                         0.2




                                                                                            Proportion
Proportion




             0.15                                                                                        0.15


              0.1                                                                                         0.1


             0.05                                                                                        0.05


               0                                                                                           0
                    0       5        10                  15             20        25                            0    5     10    15    20     25    30    35
                                Trading Costs ($/MWh)                                                                      Trading Costs ($/MWh)
                                                              SDGE Bootstrapped Trading Costs Distribution
                                                                  Before (Purple) v. After EVB (Green)
                                                        0.3


                                                       0.25


                                                        0.2
                                          Proportion




                                                       0.15


                                                        0.1


                                                       0.05


                                                         0
                                                              0    10        20        30                  40       50    60    70
                                                                             Trading Costs ($/MWh)

             Notes: This figure plots the bootstrap distributions of implied trading costs separately for sample
             periods before the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (4/1/2009-2/1/2011) versus after the
             introduction of EVB (2/1/2011-12/31/2012) for each of three load aggregation points (LAPs). These
             LAPs correspond to territories served by each of California’s three major electricity distribution
             utilities: Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas
             and Electric (SDG&E). The solid vertical lines correspond to the values of clower and cupper for the
             pre-EVB sample period while the dotted vertical lines correspond to the values of clower and cupper
             for the post-EVB sample. clower is the smallest value of per-unit trading costs c for which we can
             reject the null hypothesis that a profitable trading strategy exists while cupper is the largest value of
             c for which we can reject the null hypothesis that no profitable trading strategy exists.




                                                                                       48
 Table A.1: List of Market Participants Registered to Explicit Virtual Bid: Part (1)

            Participants that Schedule Electricity            Participants that Don’t Schedule Electricity
(1)               J. Aron and Company, LLC                                    Amber Power
(2)            Brookfield Energy Marketing LP                   Appian Way Energy Partners West, LLC
(3)                  BP Energy Company                                        ATNV Energy
(4)               Engelhart CTP (US), LLC                              Automated Algorithms LLC
(5)              Calpine Energy Services, LP                             Bilton Wong Power, Inc.
(6)       California Department of Water Resources                    Blackout Power Trading, Inc.
(7)                       Just Energy                                      Calicot Energy LLC
(8)                  Citigroup Energy, Inc.                                 Clear Power LLC
(9)                ConocoPhillips Company                                 Cumulus Master Fund
(10)        Shell Energy North America (US), L.P.                         Darby Energy, LLLP
(11)                   CWP Energy, Inc.                              Dynasty Energy California Inc.
(12)              DC Energy California, LLC                              Dynamis Capital, LLC
(13)               DTE Energy Trading Inc.                             Eagle’s View Partners, Ltd
(14)          EDF Trading North America, LLC                     EDP Renewables North America LLC
(15)          Dynegy Marketing and Trade, LLC                           ETC Endure Energy LLC
(16)           CP Energy Marketing (US), Inc.                               ETRACOM, LLC

(17)      Boston Energy Trading and Marketing, LLC
       (formerly Edison Mission Marketing and Trading)                       FANTODS, LLC

(18)          Exelon Generation Company, LLC                          Freepoint Commodities, LLC
(19)           NextEra Energy Marketing, LLC                  Golden Dome LLC (previously Ecesis LLC)
(20)                 Guzman Energy, LLC                                       Gridmatic Inc.
(21)                  Rubicon NYP Corp                                    Heartland Power Inc.
(22)    Castleton Commodities Merchant Trading L.P.                 Hemsworth Capital Midwest LP
(23)                Macquarie Energy LLC                              High Resolution Energy LLC
(24)             MAG Energy Solutions, Inc.                          Hopewell Capital Partners, LP
(25)              Modesto Irrigation District                            Inertia Power VII, LLC
(26)          GenOn Energy Management, LLC                              LTSTE Investments, LLC

  Notes: This table presents the first part of the list of market participants that are registered to place
  financial bids in California’s wholesale electricity market (CAISO (2019a)). This table is split into
  two columns: the first column lists physical participants who actually inject of withdraw electricity
  from the grid while the second column lists purely financial participants that don’t actually inject
  or withdraw electricity.




                                                  49
 Table A.2: List of Market Participants Registered to Explicit Virtual Bid: Part (2)

              Participants that Schedule Electricity              Participants that Don’t Schedule Electricity
(27)           Morgan Stanley Capital Group Inc.                         Mercuria Energy America, Inc.
(28)              Constellation NewEnergy, Inc.                             MET West Trading, LLC
(29)                NRG California South, LP                                   Monterey CA, LLC
(30)               NRG Power Marketing LLC                                     NDC Partners LLC
(31)   Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E - Trading)                       NorthStar SW Ltd.
(32)           Portland General Electric Company                               Precept Power LLC
(33)                Avangrid Renewables, LLC                                   Red Wolf CT, LLC
(34)   Public Service Company of Colorado (Xcel Energy)                     Saracen Energy West, LP
(35)                       Powerex Corp.                                        Sesco Caliso, LLC
(36)                  Royal Bank of Canada                                 Sirius Power Trading LLC
(37)         Rainbow Energy Marketing Corporation                               Solios Power, LLC
(38)           City of Roseville (Roseville Electric)                           Tios Capital, LLC
(39)          Southern California Edison Company                         Tommy Energy Solutions Corp
(40)          San Diego Gas and Electric Company                            Triolith Energy Fund, LP
(41)                 Calpine Energy Solutions                              TrueLight Energy Fund, LP
(42)               Direct Energy Business, LLC                               Trumpet Trading, LLC
(43)         Sempra Gas and Power Marketing, LLC                               Tungsten Power LP
(44)          Sacramento Municipal Utility District                         Tyne Hill Investments LP
(45)             TransCanada Energy Sales Ltd.                             Uncia Energy LP - Series C

(46)                    City of Tacoma
          Department of Public Utilities, Light Division            Velocity American Energy Master I, LP

(47)                The Energy Authority, Inc                                 XO Energy CAL, LP
(48)                     TEC Energy Inc.                                       Yuma Electric, LLC
(49)         TransAlta Energy Marketing (U.S.) Inc.
(50)                Tenaska Power Services Co.
(51)             Valley Electric Association, Inc.
(52)                         Vitol, Inc.

(53)           Western Area Power Administration
                 Sierra Nevada Region (WAPA)

(54)                        ZGlobal Inc.

  Notes: This table presents the second part of the list of market participants that are registered
  to place financial bids in California’s wholesale electricity market (CAISO (2019a)). This table is
  split into two columns: the first column lists physical participants who actually inject of withdraw
  electricity from the grid while the second column lists purely financial participants that don’t actually
  inject or withdraw electricity.




                                                  50
B       Difference-in-Differences Robustness Checks

This Appendix section describes the different robustness checks pertaining to the
difference-in-differences results presented in Table 5 in Section 6.


B.1     Pre-Trends Analysis

This subsection argues that the results presented in Table 5 are not driven by pre-
existing trends in outcomes between high versus low demand hours. Namely, in order
to interpret the findings from our difference-in-differences analysis as causal, trends over
time in outcomes should not be different across low and high demand outcomes prior
to the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading). We test this
assumption in two ways. First, we show that the first difference in hourly outcomes prior
to explicit virtual bidding (EVB) is the same across high versus low demand hours. The
second approach is to estimate an event study framework, demonstrating that: (1) effects
estimated separately for each quarter-of-sample are not significantly different from zero
prior to EVB, and (2) there is no pre-existing trend in these effects prior to EVB.


B.1.1    Statistical Test on First-Differences

The definition of “common pre-existing trends” is that the slope over time in outcomes
is the same across high versus low demand hours. The “slope over time” is simply the
                                Yt+1 −Yt
first difference in outcomes:    t+1−t
                                           = Yt+1 − Yt . Thus, to formally test the “common
pre-existing trends” assumption, we estimate the following regression model using only
data from hours-of-sample before the introduction of financial trading on February 1st ,
2011:
                      Yt − Yt−1 = αm + γh + θw + Xt φβ0 HIGHpt + ut                        (6)

where we include month-of-sample fixed effects (αm ), hour-of-the-day fixed effects (γh ),
and an indicator for whether the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend (θw ). This
specification also controls for a host of factors Xt : the log of total electricity demand, two
separate controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE,
as well as separate controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar
sources, (2) nuclear sources, and (3) hydro sources. Finally, we cluster standard errors


                                                51
              Table B.1: Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Pre-Trends Analysis

                                 (1)          (2)          (3)     (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)

 1(Demand > 90%)               0.001         0.001     -0.007     0.002      0.848       -0.113     -1.173
                              (0.001)       (0.001)   (0.009)    (0.009)    (0.855)     (1.823)    (1.480)

 R2                             0.031       0.018      0.017     0.111       0.013       0.011       0.009
 Average DV in Levels          33.396       8.002      0.677     1.229      13.402      15.66       17.275
 Number of Obs.                16,078       16,078     16,078    16,078     16,078      16,078      16,078
   Notes: The unit of observation for these regressions is hour-of-sample. Standard errors are clustered
   by week-of-sample and are reported in parentheses. The dependent variables considered in this table
   are the first differences of: (1) the log of fuel cost per MWh, (2) the log of input energy per MWh,
   (3) an indicator of whether any fossil fuel fired units started up, (4) the log of ancillary services per
   MWh, (5) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in PG&E, (6) the absolute value of
   the day-ahead/real-time prices in SCE, and (7) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices
   in SDG&E. The row titled “Avg. DV in Levels” reports the mean of the dependent variable in levels
   even if the dependent variable is logged when running the regression. For all of the specifications,
   we control for month-of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day fixed effects, an indicator for whether
   the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend, the log of total electricity demand, two separate
   controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE as well as separate
   controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources,
   and (3) hydro sources.
   Table Description: This table presents the pre-trends analysis corresponding to the difference-in-
   differences results presented in Table 5; in particular, we estimate the specification documented in
   Equation (6) in Appendix Section B.1. The data used for this table span the sample period 4/1/2009-
   1/31/2011, noting that California introduced explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading) on
   2/1/2011. Hours-of-sample with system demand greater than the 90% of the distribution of hourly
   demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample period are deemed to be “high demand” hours.



at the week-of-sample.


B.1.2    Event Study Framework

We also assess the common pre-existing trends assumption using an event study frame-
work. In particular, we estimate the following regression specification:

                                Yt = αm + γh + θw + Xt φβ0 HIGHpt
                              4
                              X                                                                         (7)
                          +           βτ Dtτ + βτ <−6 Dtτ <−6 + βτ >6 Dt>6 + ut
                              τ =−6


where, as before, we include month-of-sample fixed effects (αm ), hour-of-the-day fixed
effects (γh ), an indicator for whether the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend
(θw ) as well as a host of other variables Xt : the log of total electricity demand, two
separate controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE,


                                                      52
as well as separate controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar
sources, (2) nuclear sources, and (3) hydro sources. Standard errors are clustered at the
week-of-sample level.

    Dtτ is an indicator function that is equal to one if and only if: (1) hour-of-sample t
is a “high demand hour” and (2) the difference between the quarter-of-sample q and the
first quarter of 2011 (denoted f (q)) is equal to τ (i.e.: τ = q − f (q)). For example, the
quarter in which financial trading was introduced (i.e.: the first quarter of 2011) would
correspond to τ = 0. Dtτ <−6 (Dtτ >6 ) is equal to one if and only if: (1) hour-of-sample
t is a “high demand hour”, and (2) the difference between quarter of sample q and the
first quarter of 2011 is less than -6 (greater than 6). Finally, we normalize to zero the
coefficient corresponding to the quarter prior to the introduction of financial trading (i.e.:
βτ =−1 = 0).

    The results of this event study analysis are plotted up in two separate figures. Ap-
pendix Figure B.1 focuses on the effects for the log of fuel costs per MWh, the log of
thermal energy per MWh, whether thermal units started up in the hour, and the log of
ancillary services costs per MWh. Appendix Figure B.2 plots the event study coefficients
corresponding to the absolute day-ahead/real-time price spreads for each of California’s
three major electricity distribution companies: Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), South-
ern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). In both cases,
the coefficient estimates corresponding to the first quarter of 2011 as well as four quarters
prior (i.e.: τ = 0 and τ = −4) are missing simply because there are no high demand
hours in those two quarters. Moreover, the coefficient estimates corresponding to the last
quarter of 2009 are generally substantially noiser than the other coefficient estimates, re-
flecting the relatively small number of high demand hours in this quarter. That being
said, across all seven panels, we do not see a substantial trend in effect in the quarters
prior to the introduction of financial trading. This provides comforting evidence in favor
of the common trends assumption required to interpret the results of Table 5 as causal.


B.2     Additional Robustness Checks

This subsection considers our remaining sensitivity analyses pertaining to the difference-
in-differences results presented in Table 5 in Section 6. First, Appendix Table B.2 shows



                                             53
                                                                Figure B.1: Event Study Estimates: Market Outcomes

                                                              Log of Fuel Cost Per MWh                                                                                             Log of Input Energy Per MWh


   Estimated Effect of EVB in High Demand Hours




                                                                                                                        Estimated Effect of EVB in High Demand Hours
                                                                                                                                                                .1
                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                        .05
                         .1        .2




                                                                                                                                   -.05       0
    -.1        0




                                                                                                                         -.1
                                                  -6     -4               -2             0            2        4                                                       -6     -4               -2             0            2        4
                                                                           Month - 2/2011                                                                                                       Month - 2/2011

                                                       Estimated Effect              95% Confidence Interval                                                                Estimated Effect              95% Confidence Interval



                                                         Hours with Thermal Unit Start-Ups                                                                                    Log of Ancillary Services per MWh
   Estimated Effect of EVB in High Demand Hours




                                                                                                                        Estimated Effect of EVB in High Demand Hours
                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                      .5      1
                                 .1




                                                                                                                                             0
                      0




                                                                                                                                  -.5
         -.1




                                                                                                                          -1



                                                  -6     -4               -2             0            2        4                                                       -6     -4               -2             0            2        4
                                                                           Month - 2/2011                                                                                                       Month - 2/2011

                                                       Estimated Effect              95% Confidence Interval                                                                Estimated Effect              95% Confidence Interval



     Notes: This figure presents the coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals corresponding to
     the event study framework described in Equation (7). The dependent variables considered in this
     figure are: (top left panel) the log of fuel cost per MWh, (top right panel) the log of input energy
     per MWh, (bottom left panel) an indicator of whether any fossil fuel fired units started up, and
     (bottom right panel) the log of ancillary services per MWh. The coefficient estimates reflect the
     average outcomes in high relative to low demand hours τ quarters away from the introduction of
     financial trading on February 1st , 2011; hours-of-sample with system demand greater than the 90%
     of the distribution of hourly demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample period are deemed to
     be “high demand” hours. The x-axis simply plots the number of quarters away from the first quarter
     of 2011 (i.e.: τ ). All coefficient estimates are relative to the quarter before the first quarter of 2011
     (i.e.: βτ =−1 is normalized to be zero). For all of the event study specifications, we control for month-
     of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day fixed effects, an indicator for whether the day-of-sample is a
     weekday versus weekend, the log of total electricity demand, two separate controls for the logs of the
     citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE as well as separate controls for the log of total
     hourly production from (1) wind and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources, and (3) hydro sources.



that our empirical results remain similar if we estimate Equation (5) removing the 28 days
before and after 2/1/2011. Thus, our findings do not seem to be due to any short-run
adjustments to the policy change.

              Next, Appendix Table B.3 presents the results using only data from the 6 months
before and after the introduction of financial trading on 2/1/2011. The empirical results
are quantitatively quite similar to our primary results from Table 5. Further, Appendix
Table B.4 presents our findings with the standard errors calculated using the Newey-West

                                                                                                                   54
Table B.2: Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Excluding the 28 Days Before and After
                                    2/1/2011

                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)

1(Demand > 90%) -0.036              -0.042      -0.042     -0.062     -5.833    -14.090     -21.664
  × 1(Post EVB) (0.012)            (0.012)     (0.027)    (0.138)    (3.009)    (5.668)     (9.878)

1(Demand > 90%)          0.030      0.035       0.003      0.142      3.205      6.831       8.395
                        (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.022)    (0.054)    (2.089)    (4.345)     (5.765)

      R2                 0.906       0.366      0.127     0.610       0.041      0.039       0.050
Avg. DV in Levels       32.485       8.043      0.684     1.731      12.987      14.888     16.264
 Number of Obs.         24,909      24,909     24,909     24,908     24,909      24,909     24,909
 Notes: The unit of observation for these regressions is hour-of-sample. Standard errors are clustered
 by week-of-sample and are reported in parentheses. The dependent variables considered in this
 table are: (1) the log of fuel cost per MWh, (2) the log of input energy per MWh, (3) an indicator
 of whether any fossil fuel fired units started up, (4) the log of ancillary services per MWh, (5)
 the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in PG&E, (6) the absolute value of the day-
 ahead/real-time prices in SCE, and (7) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in
 SDG&E. The row titled “Avg. DV in Levels” reports the mean of the dependent variable in levels
 even if the dependent variable is logged when running the regression. For all of the specifications,
 we control for month-of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day fixed effects, an indicator for whether
 the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend, the log of total electricity demand, two separate
 controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE as well as separate
 controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources,
 and (3) hydro sources.
 Table Description: This table presents the difference-in-differences results pertaining to the effect
 of explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading) on market outcomes in high demand hours relative
 to low demand hours. The data used for this table span the sample period 4/1/2009-3/31/2012; in
 contrast with Table 5, we estimate Equation (5) removing the 28 days before and after 2/1/2011.
 California introduced explicit virtual bidding (EVB) on 2/1/2011; the “Post EVB” indicator is thus
 one if and only if the day-of-sample is on or after 2/1/2011. Hours-of-sample with system demand
 greater than the 90% of the distribution of hourly demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample
 period are deemed to be “high demand” hours.




                                                55
                                                              Figure B.2: Event Study Estimates: Absolute Price Spreads

                                                       Absolute Price Spread: Pacific Gas and Electric                                                                                                                         Absolute Price Spread: Southern California Edison


   Estimated Effect of EVB in High Demand Hours




                                                                                                                                                                           Estimated Effect of EVB in High Demand Hours
                                           80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   80
                                     60




                                                                                                                                                                                                             60
                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                     20




                                                                                                                                                                                             20
             0




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
    -20




                                                                                                                                                                            -20
                                                  -6         -4               -2             0                                                    2               4                                                       -6           -4               -2             0            2        4
                                                                               Month - 2/2011                                                                                                                                                            Month - 2/2011

                                                           Estimated Effect                                           95% Confidence Interval                                                                                        Estimated Effect              95% Confidence Interval



                                                                                                                                         Absolute Price Spread: San Diego Gas and Electric
                                                                                     Estimated Effect of EVB in High Demand Hours
                                                                                            0                 50             100




                                                                                                                                    -6           -4               -2             0                                                      2               4
                                                                                                                                                                   Month - 2/2011

                                                                                                                                               Estimated Effect                                             95% Confidence Interval



     Notes: This figure presents the coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals corresponding to
     the event study framework described in Equation (7). The dependent variables considered in this
     figure are the absolute differences between day-ahead and real-time prices corresponding to each of
     California’s three major investor-owned utilities: Pacific Gas and Electric (top left panel), Southern
     California Edison (top right panel), and San Diego Gas and Electric (bottom middle panel). The
     coefficient estimates reflect the average outcomes in high relative to low demand hours τ quarters
     away from the introduction of financial trading on February 1st , 2011; hours-of-sample with system
     demand greater than the 90% of the distribution of hourly demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012
     sample period are deemed to be “high demand” hours. The x-axis simply plots the number of
     quarters away from the first quarter of 2011 (i.e.: τ ). All coefficient estimates are relative to the
     quarter before the first quarter of 2011 (i.e.: βτ =−1 is normalized to be zero). For all of the event
     study specifications, we control for month-of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day fixed effects, an
     indicator for whether the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend, the log of total electricity
     demand, two separate controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE
     as well as separate controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar sources,
     (2) nuclear sources, and (3) hydro sources.



formula (Newey and West, 1987) accounting for 168 hours (i.e.: one week) of autocor-
relation in the outcome variables. Our conclusions remain the same when analyzing
Appendix Table B.4: financial trading improves market outcomes such as fuel costs per
MWh and absolute price spreads without exacerbating market constraints such as unit
start ups or ancillary services.

              Appendix Table B.5 presents our specifications estimated on data aggregated to the


                                                                                                                                                                      56
  Table B.3: Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: 6 Months Before and After 2/1/2011

                          (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)

1(Demand > 90%) -0.056              -0.062      -0.006     -0.463     -9.740    -14.367     -12.471
  × 1(Post EVB) (0.016)            (0.016)     (0.030)    (0.167)    (4.879)    (6.300)     (6.105)

1(Demand > 90%)          0.062      0.064       -0.032     0.303      0.092      2.245       -1.367
                        (0.011)    (0.011)     (0.032)    (0.099)    (4.347)    (5.681)     (5.968)

      R2                 0.675      0.375       0.120      0.665      0.038      0.040       0.038
Avg. DV in Levels       34.635      8.226       0.706      2.588     15.298      17.023      18.27
 Number of Obs.          9,503      9,503       9,503      9,503     9,503        9,503      9,503
 Notes: The unit of observation for these regressions is hour-of-sample. Standard errors are clustered
 by week-of-sample and are reported in parentheses. The dependent variables considered in this
 table are: (1) the log of fuel cost per MWh, (2) the log of input energy per MWh, (3) an indicator
 of whether any fossil fuel fired units started up, (4) the log of ancillary services per MWh, (5)
 the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in PG&E, (6) the absolute value of the day-
 ahead/real-time prices in SCE, and (7) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in
 SDG&E. The row titled “Avg. DV in Levels” reports the mean of the dependent variable in levels
 even if the dependent variable is logged when running the regression. For all of the specifications,
 we control for month-of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day fixed effects, an indicator for whether
 the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend, the log of total electricity demand, two separate
 controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE as well as separate
 controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources,
 and (3) hydro sources.
 Table Description: This table presents the difference-in-differences results pertaining to the effect
 of explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading) on market outcomes in high demand hours relative
 to low demand hours. In contrast with Table 5, the data used for this table span the sample period
 2/1/2010-8/31/2011 (i.e.: the 12 months before and after 2/2011). California introduced explicit
 virtual bidding (EVB) on 2/1/2011; the “Post EVB” indicator is thus one if and only if the day-
 of-sample is on or after 2/1/2011. Hours-of-sample with system demand greater than the 90% of
 the distribution of hourly demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample period are deemed to be
 “high demand” hours.




                                                57
Table B.4: Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Accounting for 168 hours of Autocorrelation

                            (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)

 1(Demand > 90%) -0.036               -0.042     -0.042     -0.071      -5.715    -13.902     -21.568
   × 1(Post EVB) (0.012)             (0.012)    (0.028)    (0.138)     (3.029)    (5.631)     (9.505)

 1(Demand > 90%)          0.032       0.036      0.008      0.123       2.496      6.231       7.882
                         (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.023)    (0.054)     (2.126)    (4.418)     (5.756)

       R2                  0.903      0.362      0.125      0.590       0.041       0.039      0.049
 Avg. DV in Levels         32.63      8.048     0.686        1.704     13.199      15.055     16.426
  Number of Obs.          26,277     26,277     26,277      26,276     26,277      26,277     26,277
  Notes: The unit of observation for these regressions is hour-of-sample. Standard errors are cal-
  culated using the Newey-West estimator (Newey and West, 1987) accounting for 168 hours (i.e.:
  one week) of autocorrelation and are reported in parentheses. The dependent variables considered
  in this table are: (1) the log of fuel cost per MWh, (2) the log of input energy per MWh, (3) an
  indicator of whether any fossil fuel fired units started up, (4) the log of ancillary services per MWh,
  (5) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in PG&E, (6) the absolute value of the
  day-ahead/real-time prices in SCE, and (7) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in
  SDG&E. The row titled “Avg. DV in Levels” reports the mean of the dependent variable in levels
  even if the dependent variable is logged when running the regression. For all of the specifications,
  we control for month-of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day fixed effects, an indicator for whether
  the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend, the log of total electricity demand, two separate
  controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE as well as separate
  controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources,
  and (3) hydro sources.
  Table Description: This table presents the difference-in-differences results pertaining to the effect
  of explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading) on market outcomes in high demand hours relative
  to low demand hours. The data used for this table span the sample period 4/1/2009-3/31/2012.
  California introduced explicit virtual bidding (EVB) on 2/1/2011; the “Post EVB” indicator is thus
  one if and only if the day-of-sample is on or after 2/1/2011. Hours-of-sample with system demand
  greater than the 90% of the distribution of hourly demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample
  period are deemed to be “high demand” hours.




                                                  58
daily level. In particular, we take the daily sum over hours-of-the-day of electricity de-
mand, fuel costs, thermal input energy, electricity production by type (thermal, nuclear,
hydro, and renewables), number of thermal units started up and ancillary services costs;
daily total fuel costs, thermal input energy and ancillary services costs are the divided by
daily total electricity production from fossil-fuel-fired units in order to construct the out-
come variables considered in Appendix Table B.5. In contrast with Table 5, we consider
the log of the total number of thermal units that started up in the day rather than an
indicator of whether any thermal units started up in the hour. This is because at least
one fossil fuel fired unit started up in every day-of-sample. Finally, the hourly day-ahead
and real-time electricity prices for each service area are averaged to the daily-level; we
take the absolute difference between these day-ahead and real-time prices for our last
three outcome measures.

    Our difference-in-differences specification thus considers days-of-sample above versus
below the 90% of the distribution of daily total electricity demand before versus after
the introduction of financial trading. The results of this analysis, presented in Appendix
Table B.5, are broadly consistent with those presented in Table 5 with the exception of the
absolute day-ahead/real-time price spreads. This in unsurprising given that day-ahead
prices are far more likely to deviate substantially from real-time prices during certain
hours of the day; financial trading is especially beneficial in reducing price spreads in
those hours.

    Finally, Appendix Table B.6 shows that our estimated effect of financial trading
on average fuel costs per MWh in relatively high demand hours remains quantitatively
similar if “high demand” is defined to hours-of-sample above the 50, 75, 95, and 99
percentiles of hourly demand rather than the p = 90th percentile as considered in our
primary specifications. We use this effect in order to calculate the efficiency benefits
from slightly lowering the per-unit transaction costs in relatively high demand hours in
the next section. Thus, it is comforting that our physical efficiency benefit per MWh of
fossil-fuel-fired electricity production doesn’t change significantly based on our definition
of “relatively high demand”.




                                             59
                 Table B.5: Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: Daily-Level

                 Log of Average Fuel Cost Per MWh
                         (1)     (2)       (3)    (4)                   (5)         (6)        (7)

1(Demand > 90%) -0.022               -0.030     -0.176      -0.276     -2.810     -2.451      -2.293
  × 1(Post EVB) (0.011)             (0.012)    (0.055)     (0.119)    (2.543)    (2.743)     (2.997)

1(Demand > 90%)          0.037       0.043      0.131       0.250      3.239      -1.022      -4.640
                        (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.044)     (0.100)    (2.243)    (2.771)     (5.444)

      R2                  0.983      0.750       0.544      0.841      0.124      0.103       0.173
Avg. DV in Levels        32.444      8.003      45.275      1.685      8.353      9.725      10.815
 Number of Obs.          1,095       1,095      1,095       1,095      1,095      1,095       1,095
 Notes: The unit of observation for these regressions is day-of-sample. Standard errors are clustered
 by week-of-sample and are reported in parentheses. The dependent variables considered in this
 table are: (1) the log of fuel cost per MWh, (2) the log of input energy per MWh, (3) an indicator
 of whether any fossil fuel fired units started up, (4) the log of ancillary services per MWh, (5)
 the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in PG&E, (6) the absolute value of the day-
 ahead/real-time prices in SCE, and (7) the absolute value of the day-ahead/real-time prices in
 SDG&E. The row titled “Avg. DV in Levels” reports the mean of the dependent variable in levels
 even if the dependent variable is logged when running the regression. For all of the specifications, we
 control for month-of-sample fixed effects, an indicator for whether the day-of-sample is a weekday
 versus weekend, the log of total electricity demand, two separate controls for the logs of the citygate
 natural gas prices paid in PG&E and SCE as well as separate controls for the log of total hourly
 production from (1) wind and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources, and (3) hydro sources.
 Table Description: This table presents the difference-in-differences results pertaining to the effect
 of explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading) on market outcomes in high demand days relative
 to low demand days. The data used for this table span the sample period 4/1/2009-3/31/2012.
 California introduced explicit virtual bidding (EVB) on 2/1/2011; the “Post EVB” indicator is thus
 one if and only if the day-of-sample is on or after 2/1/2011. Days-of-sample with system demand
 greater than the 90% of the distribution of daily demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample
 period are deemed to be “high demand” days.




                                                 60
       Table B.6: Diff-in-Diff Robustness Check: By Percentage of Demand

                           Log of Average Fuel Cost Per MWh
                                    (1)      (2)      (3)   (4)                      (5)

       1(Demand > Cut-off) -0.011                -0.025      -0.036     -0.044      -0.022
          × 1(Post EVB)    (0.006)              (0.010)     (0.012)    (0.013)     (0.018)

       1(Demand > Cut-off)            -0.005     0.001       0.032      0.062       0.077
                                     (0.003)    (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.006)     (0.009)

          Demand Cut-Off              50%         75%        90%         95%        99%
               R2                     0.903       0.903      0.903       0.904      0.904

         Avg. DV in Levels            32.63       32.63     32.63        32.63     32.63
          Number of Obs.             26,277      26,277     26,277      26,277     26,277
Notes: The unit of observation for these regressions is hour-of-sample. Standard errors are clustered
by week-of-sample and are reported in parentheses. The row titled “Avg. DV in Levels” reports the
mean of fuel costs per MWh in levels even though fuel costs per MWh are logged when running the
regression. For all of the specifications, we control for month-of-sample fixed effects, hour-of-the-day
fixed effects, an indicator for whether the day-of-sample is a weekday versus weekend, the log of
total electricity demand, two separate controls for the logs of the citygate natural gas prices paid
in PG&E and SCE as well as separate controls for the log of total hourly production from (1) wind
and solar sources, (2) nuclear sources, and (3) hydro sources.
Table Description: This table presents the difference-in-differences results pertaining to the effect
of explicit virtual bidding (i.e.: financial trading) on fuel costs per MWh in high demand hours
relative to low demand hours. The data used for this table span the sample period 4/1/2009-
3/31/2012. California introduced explicit virtual bidding (EVB) on 2/1/2011; the “Post EVB”
indicator is thus one if and only if the day-of-sample is on or after 2/1/2011. Hours-of-sample
with system demand greater than the 50%, 75%, 90%, 95%, and 99% of the distribution of hourly
demands across our 4/1/2009-3/31/2012 sample period are deemed to be “high demand” hours for
the specification estimated in Columns 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 of this table respectively.




                                                61
C     Additional Empirical Results

C.1     Is there autocorrelation in daily price differences beyond
        the first lag?

Our statistical test of arbitrage opportunities accounting for trading costs only considers
trading strategies that vary by hour-of-the-day. We do not allow for trading strategies to
be updated based on information from past days. However, trading strategies in practice
cannot be a function of information from the prior day because the values of the 24 × 1
vector of real-time prices for day d − 1 are not known before offers are submitted to
the day-ahead market for day d. Thus, any trading strategies involving portfolios of the
24 × 1 vector of day-ahead/real-time price differences can only condition on realized day-
ahead/real-time price differences from k ≥ 2 days ago (Xd−k ). Our analysis is restricted
to trading strategies that do not condition on any past values of Xd−k ; this restriction
is valid if the autocorrelation matrices for the Xd process are zero beyond the first lag,
noting again that traders cannot utilize the realization Xd−1 in setting their trading
strategy for day d.

    We formulate a statistical test of the null hypothesis that the first R autocorrelation
matrices associated with Xd beyond the first lag are equal to zero. In particular, consider
the τ th auto-correlation matrix (which is 24 × 24): Γ(τ ) = E[(Xt − µ)(Xt−τ − µ)0 ].
Consistent with our above discussion, we expect Γ(1) to be non-zero but restrict Γ(τ ) = 0
for all τ > 1. Thus, we consider the Null hypothesis:


                        H : Γ(2) = 0, Γ(3) = 0, ..., Γ(R) = 0


for a fixed value of R. Empirically, we test using R = 10. This hypothesis test is
implemented by first defining ξ     ≡ [vec(Γ(2))0 , vec(Γ(3))0 , ..., vec(Γ(L))0 ]0 , where the
vec(.) operator takes each 24 × 24 auto-correlation matrix and stacks it column-wise to
create a 576 × 1 vector. Therefore, ξ has 5760 = 576 × 10 elements, all of which must
equal zero under the null hypothesis. We use the moving block bootstrap described more
fully in the previous subsection in order to estimate the 5760 × 5760 covariance matrix
associated with ξ.ˆ Our Wald statistic T S = ξˆ0 Σ̂−1 ξˆ is asymptotically chi-squared
                                                    ξ,boot

distributed with 242 × (R − 1) degrees of freedom under the null hypothesis. We perform


                                            62
 Table C.1: Test Statistics for Autocorrelation (1 < L ≤ 10) in Daily Price Differences


                                          Before EVB       After EVB
                              PG&E        2862.2           2767.0
                              SCE         2789.2           2842.6
                              SDG&E       3082.1           2700.7
   Notes: This table presents the chi-squared test statistics for each load aggregation point (LAP)
   before and after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB) corresponding to the null hy-
   pothesis that the second through tenth autocorrelation matrices of the 24 × 1 vector of daily
   day-ahead/real-time price differences are zero; in math, we are testing the null hypothesis that
   Γ(2) = Γ(3) = ... = Γ(10) = 0. We consider the three LAPs corresponding to California’s three
   major load-serving entities (read: electricity demanders): Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), South-
   ern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). To conduct this statistical
   test, we first estimate (Γ(2), Γ(3), ..., Γ(10)), which are each 24 × 24, pre-EVB and post-EVB for
   each LAP and stack the elements column-wise; this results in a 5760 = 242 × 9 element vector. We
   use a moving block bootstrap procedure in order to estimate the covariance matrix associated with
   this 5760 × 1 vector. The upper α = 0.05 critical value for these test statistics is χ25184 = 5352.6.



this test separately for the day-ahead/real-time price differences associated with each
location for sample periods before versus after the implementation of explicit virtual
bidding.

    Our statistical test of arbitrage is based on calculating the most profitable strategy
to exploit expected differences between day-ahead and real-time prices that conditions
only on hour-of-day. In order to provide statistical evidence that more complex trading
strategies do not generate significantly higher revenues, we test the null hypothesis that
the second through tenth autocorrelation matrices associated with the 24 × 1 vector
of daily day-ahead/real-time price spreads are zero: Γ(2) = Γ(3) = ... = Γ(10) = 0.
We do not include the first autocorrelation matrix Γ(1) in this test because market
participants are required to submit offers into the day-ahead market cleared for day d
(for energy to be delivered in day d + 1) prior to the clearing of the real-time market
for day d; thus, traders cannot utilize information on realized day-ahead/real-time price
spreads for day d when forming trading strategies for day d + 1. Our statistical test for
autocorrelation is conducted separately for each of three load aggregation points (LAPs)
both before and after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding. We consider the three
LAPs corresponding to California’s three major load-serving entities (i.e.: electricity
demanders): Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE) and
San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). Test statistics are reported in Table C.1; the
upper α = 0.05 critical value for these test statistics is χ2 (5184) = 5352.6.


                                                  63
Table C.2: Proportion of Autocorrelation Tests that Fail to Reject (α = 0.05): Number
                              of Locations in Brackets

                                                  Before EVB       After EVB
                     Non-Generation Node          0.299            0.912
                                                  [4,031]          [4,386]

                     Generation Node              0.265            0.932
                                                  [669]            [673]
   Notes: This table presents the proportion of nodes (read: pricing locations) for which we fail to
   reject a size α = 0.05 test of the null hypothesis that the second through tenth autocorrelation
   matrices of the 24 × 1 vector of daily day-ahead/real-time price spreads are zero; in math, we are
   testing the null hypothesis that Γ(2) = Γ(3) = ... = Γ(10) = 0. We perform this hypothesis
   test separately for each node before and after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB).
   We estimate covariance matrices (Γ(2), Γ(3), ..., Γ(10)), which are each 24 × 24, pre-EVB and post-
   EVB for each node and stack the elements column-wise; this results in a 5760 = 242 × 9 element
   vector. We use a moving block bootstrap procedure in order to estimate the covariance matrix
   associated with this 5760 × 1 vector. The upper α = 0.05 critical value for these test statistics is
   χ2 (5184) = 5352.6. Generators inject electricity at some nodes; these nodes are called “generation
   nodes”. The remaining nodes are categorized as “non-generation” nodes. The number of nodes in
   each cell is reported in brackets.



    We fail to reject the null hypothesis that the second through tenth autocorrelation
matrices are zero for any LAP at the 5% level, either before or after the introduction of
explicit virtual bidding. This lends strong evidence in favor of our assertion that daily
price differences have zero autocorrelation matrices past the first lag. We repeat these
same autocorrelation tests at the nodal level in Table C.2, finding that the null hypothesis
that Γ(2) = Γ(3) = ... = Γ(10) = 0 can be rejected at a 5% level at approximately 70
percent of nodes before the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB); these rejections
occur less frequently at locations where electricity generation is injected (i.e: “generation
nodes”), which is consistent with the fact that suppliers could implicitly virtual bid only
at the nodes where their generators were located. However, we reject the same null
hypothesis at only approximately 7-9% percent of both generation and non-generation
nodes after the implementation of explicit virtual bidding; this is consistent with the
intuition that financial traders would take advantage of any systematic auto-correlation
between day-ahead/real-time price spreads post-EVB. Summarizing, as traders cannot
condition on the previous day’s real-time price realizations when submitting into the
day-ahead market, the results from this subsection help to justify our focus on trading
strategies that do not condition on past lags of the daily price difference vector.




                                                 64
C.2     Absolute Average Price Spreads Before Versus After Fi-
        nancial Trading

This subsection describes our statistical test of whether expected day-ahead/real-time
price spreads decrease in absolute value after the introduction of explicit virtual bid-
ding (EVB). In particular, we formulate the statistical test of the null hypothesis that
|µpre | > |µpost |, where |µJ | for J ∈ {pre, post} is a 24 × 1 vector composed of the
absolute values of the average day-ahead/real-time price differences for each hour-of-
the-day h ∈ {1, 2, ..., 24} for a given location computed using the sample period before
(after) explicit virtual bidding for J = pre (J = post). We implement this statistical
test separately for each pricing location. This statistical framework can also be used to
test whether average day-ahead/real-time price spreads increase after the introduction
of explicit virtual bidding. Failing to reject the null hypothesis that |µpre | > |µpost | but
rejecting the null hypothesis that |µpost | > |µpre | gives us statistical evidence that arbi-
trage opportunities were present in the post-EVB sample period only if they were also
present in the pre-EVB sample period for a given transaction cost c.

    These two multivariate nonlinear inequality constraints tests are implemented using
the methodology derived in Wolak (1989). In particular, we compute the following test
statistic in order to test the null hypothesis that |µpre | > |µpost |:

                             min    pre    post              pre    post
                 TS =            (|X | − |X | − θ)0 V̂ −1 (|X | − |X | − θ)
                             θ≥0

where all objects with a “pre” (“post”) superscript are based on the 4/1/2009-2/1/2011
(2/1/2011-12/31/2012) period before (after) the introduction of explicit virtual bidding
           pre        pre
(EVB). X         (X         ) is a 24 × 1 vector of the average day-ahead/real-time price differ-
ences for each hour-of-the-day for the pre-EVB (post-EVB) sample. We calculate the
covariance matrix V̂ as follows:

                                 1                pre                    pre
                       V̂ =       pre
                                      diag[SIGN (X )]0 Σ̂pre diag[SIGN (X )]
                                N

                               1                     post                             post
                        +             diag[SIGN (X          )]0 Σ̂post diag[SIGN (X          )]
                             N post
where the diag[Z] operator takes a vector Z and returns a diagonal matrix with the
elements of Z on the diagonal. N pre (N post ) is the number of days in the sample period

                                                        65
              Table C.3: LAP-level P-values for the Absolute Difference Tests

                                          |µpre | > |µpost |   |µpost | > |µpre |
                            PG&E          0.704                0.141
                            SCE           0.907                0.006
                            SDG&E         0.689                0.040
    Notes: This table reports the p-value for each load aggregation point (LAP) associated with the
    statistical test of the null hypothesis that |µpre | > |µpost | (Column 1) and the null hypothesis that
    |µpost | > |µpre | (Column 2). µpre (µpost ) is a 24 × 1 vector composed of the average day-ahead/real-
    time price spreads for a given LAP for each hour-of-the-day for the sample period before (after) the
    introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB); the pre-EVB sample period is 4/1/2009-2/1/2011
    while the post-EVB sample is 2/1/2011-12/31/2012. We consider the three LAPs corresponding to
    California’s three major load-serving entities (read: electricity demanders): Pacific Gas and Electric
    (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E).



before (after) the introduction of explicit virtual bidding. Σ̂pre (Σ̂post ) is a 24×24 estimate
                                                                        pre        post
of the asymptotic covariance matrix corresponding to X                        (X          ); we compute these
covariance matrices using the autocorrelation consistent estimator proposed by Newey
and West (1987) with m = 14 days of lagged data. We reject the null hypothesis that
|µpre | > |µpost | if and only if

                             24
                             X
                                    w(24, 24 − h, V̂ )P r[χ2(h) > T S] < α
                              h=1


where χ2(h) is a chi-squared random variable with h degrees of freedom, w(24, 24 − h, V̂ )
are the weights defined in Wolak (1989), and α is the size of the hypothesis test.

    The p-values corresponding to these statistical tests for each load aggregation point
(LAP) are presented below in Table C.3. From this table, we see that we cannot reject
the null hypothesis that |µpre | > |µpost | for any of the three LAPs, while we can reject
the null hypothesis that |µpost | > |µpre | at the 5% level for SCE and SDG&E.

    We also run the statistical test of the null hypothesis that |µpre | > |µpost | separately
for each node; Column 1 of Table C.4 provides the proportion of nodes for which we fail
to reject this null hypothesis, separately for generation versus non-generation nodes. We
see from this table that we fail to reject the Null hypothesis that average hourly absolute
differences are higher pre-EVB relative to post-EVB for roughly 98% of nodes; there is
not a sizable difference in the proportion of nodes for which we fail to reject the null
hypothesis for generation versus non-generation nodes. Column 2 of Table C.4 presents
the proportion of nodes for which we fail to reject the null hypothesis that |µpost | > |µpre |.

                                                     66
Table C.4: Proportion of Nodes for which we fail to reject the α = 0.05 sized Absolute
                                   Difference Test

                                            |µpre | > |µpost | |µpost | > |µpre |
                       Gen Node             0.983              0.015
                       Non-Gen Node         0.988              0.013
   Notes: This table reports the proportion of nodes (read: pricing locations) for which we fail to reject
   the null hypothesis that |µpre | > |µpost | (Column 1) and the null hypothesis that |µpost | > |µpre |
   (Column 2). Note that µpre (µpost ) is a 24 × 1 vector composed of the average day-ahead/real-time
   price differences for a given node for each hour-of-the-day for the sample period before (after) the
   introduction of explicit virtual bidding. 653 generation nodes and 3,961 non-generation nodes are
   in both the pre-EVB sample (4/1/2009-2/1/2011) and post-EVB sample (2/1/2011-12/31/2012).



We fail to reject this null hypothesis for only roughly 1.5% of nodes; as before, our
results are similar across generation versus non-generation nodes. Combining these two
findings, we have strong evidence that nodal-level absolute average day-ahead/real-time
price spreads fell after the introduction of financial trading. Interpreting this result in
another way, if market participants could trade the financial instrument at a fixed value
of trading costs c both before and after EVB, then traders would make profits from
exploiting expected day-ahead/real-time price spreads post-EVB only if they would also
make profits from exploiting expected day-ahead/real-time price spreads pre-EVB.


C.3     Volatility in Prices Before versus After Financial Trading

As described in Section 2, we also expect financial participation in wholesale electricity
markets to reduce day-ahead uncertainty regarding real time prices. We therefore expect
both the variance of day-ahead/real-time price differences and the variance of real-time
prices to fall after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB). To test this hypoth-
esis, let Λpre (Λpost ) be the 24 × 24 contemporaneous covariance matrix corresponding to
the 24×1 random vector of hourly realized day-ahead/real-time price spreads for the time
period before (after) explicit virtual bidding. The variance of day-ahead/real-time price
differences is larger before versus after the introduction of EVB if and only if Λpre − Λpost
is a positive semi-definite matrix. We construct a statistical test of this null hypothesis
by finding the eigenvalues ω̂j (j = 1, 2, ..., 24) of Λ̂dif f ≡ Λ̂pre − Λ̂post ; we test the joint
null hypothesis that all of these eigenvalues are greater than or equal to zero using the
same multivariate inequality constraints test employed in the previous subsection.



                                                   67
       Our test statistic is:


                      T S = min (Λ̂dif f − z)0 [V ar(Λ̂dif f )]−1 (Λ̂dif f − z)
                                z ≥ 0


where the covariance matrix V ar(Λ̂dif f ) is estimated using a moving-block bootstrap
procedure.29 As described in the previous subsection, the test statistic T S is asymptot-
ically distributed as the weighted sum of chi-squared random variables under the null
hypothesis. We also perform this test for the null hypothesis H2 that Λpost − Λpre is
a positive semi-definite matrix, which is equivalent to testing the null hypothesis that
day-ahead/real-time price spreads are more volatile after EVB relative to before EVB.
Failing to reject H1 but rejecting H2 would provide us with statistical evidence that the
introduction of explicit virtual bidding reduced the variance of day-ahead/ real-time price
spreads. Finally, we use the same testing procedure considering real-time prices instead
of day-ahead/real-time price spreads in order to provide evidence against the oft-cited
concern that EVB increases the volatility of real-time prices.

       The p-values from this statistical test, conducted separately for each load aggregation
point (LAP), are documented in Table C.5.

       From this table, we see that we fail to reject the null hypothesis that daily day-
ahead/real-time price differences are more volatile before versus after the introduction of
explicit virtual bidding for all three LAPs; similarly, the null hypothesis that daily real-
time prices are more volatile pre-EVB versus post-EVB can be rejected for all three LAPs.
In addition, we reject the opposite null hypothesis that the volatility of day-ahead/real-
time price differences is lower pre-EVB versus post-EVB for all three LAPs; the null
hypothesis that the volatility of real-time prices is lower pre-EVB versus post-EVB can
be rejected for PG&E and SCE, but not SDG&E.

       We also conduct these statistical tests at the nodal level; Table C.6 presents the
proportion of nodes for which we fail to reject each of our aforementioned null hypotheses,
separately for nodes corresponding to locations with generators (“Gen Nodes”) versus
nodes that don’t correspond to locations with generators (“Non-Gen Nodes”). First,
  29
     In particular, we construct L moving-block re-samples separately for sample periods before versus
after EVB. For each re-sample b ∈ {1, 2, ..., L}, we estimate Λ̂pre
                                                                  b   and Λ̂post
                                                                              b  . This allows to compute
  dif f     pre     post                                              dif f
Λ̂b     ≡ Λ̂b − Λ̂b      as well as the eigenvalues associated with Λ̂b     (which we denote ω̂b ). Finally,
we find the empirical covariance of ω̂b across the L re-samples in order to obtain our estimate of the
covariance matrix for ω̂ (which we denote V ar(Λ̂dif f )).


                                                    68
                     Table C.5: LAP-level P-values for Volatility Tests

                             LAP           Price Difference      Real-Time Price
                             PGE           0.284                 0.516
                  Pre - Post SCE           0.509                 0.697
                             SDGE          0.476                 0.647
                             PGE           0.001                 0.016
                  Post - Pre SCE           0.001                 0.034
                             SDGE          0.028                 0.165
   Notes: This table reports the p-values associated with our statistical test regarding the volatility
   of day-ahead/real-time price spreads as well as the volatility of real-time prices before versus after
   the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB). We implement these tests separately for each
   load aggregation point (LAP); the three LAPs we consider correspond the California’s three major
   load-serving entities: Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E), Southern California Edison (SCE), and San
   Diego Gas and Electric (SDG&E). To implement our test, we estimate the covariance matrix of
   the 24 × 1 vector of day-ahead/real-time electricity price spreads as well as the covariance matrix
   of the 24 × 1 vector of real-time prices separately for each LAP for the sample period before EVB
   (4/1/2009-2/1/2011) and after EVB (2/1/2011-12/31/2012). For both day-ahead/real-time price
   spreads and real-time prices, we test the null hypothesis that the pre-EVB minus post-EVB difference
   in covariance matrices is positive semi-definite (top panel) as well as the null hypothesis that the
   post-EVB minus pre-EVB difference in covariance matrices is positive semi-definite (bottom panel).



note that there aren’t marked differences across the proportion of nodes for which we
reject any null hypothesis for generation versus non-generation nodes. Thus, focusing on
the rows corresponding to overall proportions (labeled “Total”), we see from Table C.6
that the proportion of nodes for which we reject the null hypothesis that the volatility
of day-ahead/real-time price spreads is higher (lower) pre-EVB relative to post-EVB is
0.737 (0.166). Similarly, the proportion of nodes for which we reject the null hypothesis
that the volatility of real-time prices is higher (lower) pre-EVB relative to post-EVB is
0.752 (0.128).

    Combined, our statistical evidence indicates the volatility of day-ahead/real-time
price spreads fell after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding. This is consistent
with the intuition that the introduction of purely financial participants resulted in day-
ahead market outcomes that more closely resembled real-time market conditions. In
addition, we provided statistical evidence that the volatility of real-time prices is smaller
post-EVB relative to pre-EVB; this result runs counter to the claim that financial trad-
ing increases the volatility of real-time market outcomes, causing undue stress on the
electricity transmission network.




                                                  69
Table C.6: Proportion of Nodes for which we fail to reject the α = 0.05 sized Volatility
                                        Test

                     Node Type                     Price Difference      Real-Time Price
                     1(Gen Node)                   0.736                 0.751
            Pre-Post 1(Non-Gen Node)               0.744                 0.758
                     Total                         0.737                 0.752
                     1(Gen Node)                   0.168                 0.132
            Post-Pre 1(Non-Gen Node)               0.156                 0.104
                     Total                         0.166                 0.128
   Notes: This table reports the proportion of nodes (read: pricing locations) for which we fail to reject
   different null hypotheses regarding the volatility of day-ahead/real-time price spreads as well as the
   volatility of real-time prices before versus after the introduction of explicit virtual bidding (EVB). We
   report these proportions separately for nodes where generators are located (“Gen Nodes”) versus
   nodes without generators (“Non-Gen Nodes”); we also report the overall proportions aggregated
   across all pricing locations (“Total”). To implement our tests, we estimate the covariance matrix of
   the 24 × 1 vector of day-ahead/real-time electricity price spreads as well as the covariance matrix
   of the 24 × 1 vector of real-time prices separately for each node for the sample period before EVB
   (4/1/2009-2/1/2011) and after EVB (2/1/2011-12/31/2012). For both day-ahead/real-time price
   spreads and real-time prices, we test the null hypothesis that the pre-EVB minus post-EVB difference
   in covariance matrices is positive semi-definite (top panel) as well as the null hypothesis that the
   post-EVB minus pre-EVB difference in covariance matrices is positive semi-definite (bottom panel).




                                                   70
