                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  UNDERSTANDING WEAK CAPITAL INVESTMENT:
             THE ROLE OF MARKET CONCENTRATION AND INTANGIBLES

                                         Nicolas Crouzet
                                         Janice C. Eberly

                                       Working Paper 25869
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25869


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We thank John Haltiwanger, Thomas Philippon, Lewis Alexander, Ravi Jagannathan and
François Gourio for comments on earlier work that contributed to this paper. We are grateful to
Qiushi Huang for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Nicolas Crouzet and Janice C. Eberly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding Weak Capital Investment: the Role of Market Concentration and Intangibles
Nicolas Crouzet and Janice C. Eberly
NBER Working Paper No. 25869
May 2019
JEL No. E22

                                          ABSTRACT

We document that the rise of factors such as software, intellectual property, brand, and innovative
business processes, collectively known as “intangible capital” can explain much of the weakness
in physical capital investment since 2000. Moreover, intangibles have distinct economic features
compared to physical capital. For example, they are scalable (e.g., software) though some also
have legal protections (e.g., patents or copyrights). These characteristics may have enabled the
rise in industry concentration over the last two decades. Indeed, we show that the rise in
intangibles is driven by industry leaders and coincides with increases in their market share and
hence, rising industry concentration. Moreover, intangibles are associated with at least two
drivers of rising concentration: market power and productivity gains. Productivity gains derived
from intangibles are strongest in the Consumer sector, while market power derived from
intangibles is strongest in the Healthcare sector. These shifts have important policy implications,
since intangible capital is less interest-sensitive and less collateralizable than physical capital,
potentially weakening traditional transmission mechanisms. However, these shifts also create
opportunities for policy innovation around new market mechanisms for intangible capital.


Nicolas Crouzet
Finance Department
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
n-crouzet@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Janice C. Eberly
Department of Finance
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eberly@kellogg.northwestern.edu
I    Introduction

During the global financial crisis, governments and monetary institutions around the world
intervened to keep credit and financial markets functioning, and as markets stabilized, to
keep interest rates low across the yield curve. Yet despite sustained historically low interest
rates, business investment recovered slowly from its collapse during the crisis, and did not
return to pre-crisis levels. Even as the recovery continued, investment remained sluggish
(Hall, 2015; Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2017).
    Of course, interest rates and more generally, the cost of capital, are not the only funda-
mental determinant of investment. Expected cash flows, as indicators of the rate of return on
capital, are also crucial, as is the availability of financing, either through retained earnings
or through the financial sector. Yet in the recovery, corporate profitability was strong, and
importantly, the corporate sector was a net source of savings to the rest of the economy
(Alexander and Eberly, 2018). And while overall output growth remained modest (Fernald
et al., 2017), valuations and hence Tobin’s Q, as a measure of the expected return to capital,
boomed along with profitability. These observations are hard to square with explanations
of weak investment based solely on weak expected growth or lack of financing. In general,
purely crisis-based explanation of weak investment are likely to be incomplete, since the data
suggest that investment started to weaken earlier – closer to 2000 – before the financial crisis
and the Great Recession (Gutiérrez and Philippon, 2017; Alexander and Eberly, 2018).
    The pattern of investment across industries instead contains some clues to the reason for
low aggregate investment. As shown by Alexander and Eberly (2018), investment remained
high in structures and related sectors, such as Oil and Gas or Telecoms, which put in place
platforms, pipelines, or towers. Investment in these “spatially grounded” sectors, where
physical capital is hard to relocate or replace with other inputs, showed little sign of weakness,
instead responding strongly to positive shocks (hydraulic fracturing, for instance). Moreover,
in the Manufacturing and production sectors, historically the engines of aggregate capital
accumulation, investment underwent a long relative decline since the mid-1990’s.
                                                1
    However, these sectors’ share of value has also been in decline, and they do not account
for the growth in profitability and valuations discussed above. Not surprisingly, much of that
growth comes from the High-tech sector. But as its share of sales, income, and valuation
climbed, the High-tech sector’s share of investment stagnated. Likewise, the Retail sector
has been growing as a share of value added, but investment there has been weak. This
discrepancy left a gap in aggregate capital accumulation, as companies with the highest
growth and valuations failed to fuel investment demand.1
    The low investment puzzle is thus concentrated among some of the most successful sectors
and firms in the economy. Given the growth in sales and profitability of these sectors and
firms, it is difficult to argue that “low investment” results from a binding constraint limiting
capital accumulation. Instead, firms may have chosen a lower level of capital investment
than historic norms would indicate – but why? Resolving this question is important for
public policy decisions, as investment is often a leading target of public policy interventions,
either through monetary policy and low interest rates, or fiscal policy through accelerated
depreciation or tax credits. If the explanation for weak investment is a temporary suspension
of the transmission mechanism, due, for example, to credit rationing, the policy implications
are quite different than a change in the capital allocation choices made by firms. Such
changes could have a more fundamental impact on policy transmission and decisions.
    We examine the possibility that investment weakened because the composition of the
capital stock used by firms has changed over time. The weak investment puzzle states that
the level of physical investment — investment in PPE (property, plant, and equipment)
— has been low relative to valuations and expected growth. But firms increasingly use
other fixed factors than PPE for production and sales, and in particular factors known as
“intangible capital” (Corrado et al., 2005). For example, they rely more heavily on software
to produce and sell goods and services than did their predecessors. The platform developed
   1
     Simple back-of-the-envelope computations using industry-level data, reported in Figure 1 of the Online
Appendix, indicate that had the High-tech and Retail sectors kept investing at the same rate as in 2000, the
aggregate investment rate in 2015 would have been approximately 20% higher, and its overall decline would
largely have been averted.
                                                     2
by an online retailer is just as crucial to producing revenue as an oil platform is to an energy
firm. Aside from own-account software, “intangible capital” includes intellectual property
(including those related to R&D), brand, and innovative business processes.
   Some of these factors are now measured and included as “capital” for purposes of National
Income Accounting. The BEA defines capital, in principle, as resources set aside today to
produce output in the future. Hence purchases of software and development of intellectual
property are indeed investments in capital. Expenditure-based measures for these two types
of intangible factors are now available at the industry level. At the firm level, both the flow
and stock of intangibles are more difficult to measure. Firm level accounting data conven-
tions mean that intangible investment is generally not capitalized, though some of it may
eventually be booked as “intangible” capital, especially (though not only) following acquisi-
tions or mergers. For instance, while the oil platforms of an energy firm will systematically
be reflected in its PPE stock, an online retailer’s platform will not, and may not be easy to
identify using balance sheet data. As a result, measures of profitability, such as Tobin’s Q,
are typically restricted to PPE, and omit intangibles altogether.2
   Our first step is to discuss how the omission of intangibles may affect estimates of the
relationship between PPE investment and valuations. We analyze omitted factors in a con-
ventional production setting, and show what their exclusion does to empirical estimates
that ignore them. In general, the omission of a fixed factor generates an “investment gap”
between expected PPE investment and that actually observed. The higher the share of
omitted capital, the higher the gap. We then show that, consistent with the omitted factors
hypothesis, measures of the PPE investment gap are correlated with measures of the share
of intangible capital, both in the cross-section and over time. We obtain industry-level mea-
sures of the composition of the capital from the BEA, and construct firm-level measures from
Compustat, using balance sheet proxies for intangible capital, as well as expenditure-based

   2
     See Corrado et al. (2009) and Nakamura (2010) for an application to the aggregate data and the
measurement of US economic growth. See Lev (2000) for intangibles at the firm level, and the difficulties
inherent in measuring them.
                                                   3
measures that map to the BEA definitions of capital. Investment gap measures are reduced
by one quarter (in firm-level data) to three quarters (in industry data), by adjusting for the
presence (and importance) of intangible capital.
   This analysis demonstrates that intangible capital, when treated as an omitted factor
in production, can fill a substantial part of the apparent gap left by weak physical capital
investment. But the growth of this factor may have other implications, as well. Research
documenting the rising role of intangible capital, in the US and internationally (Corrado
et al., 2009; Haskel and Westlake, 2017; Bhandari and McGrattan, 2018), points out that
properly accounting for intangible capital may affect growth accounting exercises and mea-
sures of productivity, the net effect on productivity estimates in these studies is generally
small. However, intangible capital has different economic characteristics than physical capi-
tal. Corrado et al. (2005) identify three main categories of business intangibles: computerized
information, innovative property, and economic competencies. Examples of items in these
three categories include software, scientific R&D, and brand values, respectively. These types
of capital are quite distinct from PPE capital. For example, intangible capital is more readily
scalable and less excludable than physical capital: a piece of software can be more easily
replicated than a piece of equipment. This implies that ownership may be less palpable
and more contractual, requiring patent and copyright protection, as we see in intellectual
property and software. Similarly, investments in branding and business processes, such as
online platforms and order systems, may be readily scalable, but then protected by trade-
marks. These distinct economic characteristics potentially allow intangible capital to play a
different role in generating revenue and profit than traditional capital inputs. In particular,
these properties may promote economies of scale, while the protections afforded intangibles
(patents, copyrights) may exclude competitors and generate market power.
   These qualities are of particular interest given the growing evidence of rising concentration
in US industries. Recent work (Autor et al., 2017) has emphasized rising measures of industry
concentration across a range of US business sectors — coincident with the rise in intangible

                                               4
capital. We explore what role intangible capital may play in rising concentration.
   We first document that the increase in concentration is correlated with the rise in in-
tangibles across industries. Specifically, we show that both across and within firms, market
shares are positively related to firms’ intangible intensity, defined as their ratio of intangi-
ble to total capital. This suggests that the accumulation of intangible capital has occurred
hand-in-hand with the increase in the market share of industry leaders and the increasing
concentration of US industries.
   The consequence of rising concentration, however, depends on its source. Two potential
causes for the rise in concentration have been put forward in the literature. One is mar-
ket power. Empirical work by De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), Gutiérrez and Philippon
(2018) and Hall (2018) all suggest that the rise in concentration has been accompanied by
rising markups, though the estimated degree of the increase varies. Rising markups provide
stronger evidence of market power, over and above increasing concentration. Alternatively,
rising concentration may result from adoption of technologies that favor large firms, as sug-
gested by the “superstar firm” literature and emphasized by Autor et al. (2017). These
hypotheses have vastly different implications for welfare and for policy. If concentration is
rising because of the expansion of the most productive firms, it may be efficient. If, on the
other hand, rising concentration reflects greater market power, it may imply inefficiencies
and resource misallocation. The source of rising concentration is thus important for un-
derstanding the extent to which rising concentration is efficient or not, and possible policy
implications.
   While both hypotheses are consistent with rising concentration, they can be identified
separately from measures of markups and productivity. That is, if concentration is due to
market power, we should see rising markups, whereas if it is due to productivity, we should
see advancing productivity among market leaders. These explanations are not mutually
exclusive and need not play the same role in every industry, as we found in earlier work
focusing on the Retail sector (Crouzet and Eberly, 2018). Hence, we break the data into

                                               5
industry groups and examine them separately.
   We provide evidence that there are pervasive links between intangible investment, mar-
ket power, and the productivity gap in the sectors we examine, though the nature of the
link varies across sectors. In the Consumer sector, productivity growth appears to be the
primary cause of growing concentration. Moreover, it is closely associated with intangible
investment, both across and within firms. This result is intuitive, since the Consumer sector
has been transformed by process innovation, from inventory and distribution methods to
online platforms, which are embodied in intangible capital. By contrast, in the Healthcare
sector, productivity is stable but markups have risen consistently. Again, the increase in
markups is associated with intangible investment, both across and within firms. These re-
sults likely reflect innovation in Healthcare that is also embodied in intangibles, but more
likely to be patentable product innovations. In the High-tech sector, both factors appear
to be at work. Markups rise considerably, and productivity measures also increase. Both
trends — in markups and productivity — are closely correlated with intangible investment,
even within firms. Finally, the Manufacturing sector exhibits none of these trends, with
more stable markups and productivity, and modest growth in intangible capital.
   A potential issue with the interpretation of these correlations is that our main firm-level
measure of intangible capital is balance sheet intangibles. As we discuss in sections II and
IV, balance sheet intangibles capture the value of acquired intangible assets; thus, they are
potentially measure with error, because upon acquisition, firms may over- or under-value
intangibles relative to fundamentals. These valuation errors could themselves be correlated
with current or subsequent firm sales, potentially creating bias in our estimates. We address
this issue by instrumenting for balance sheet intangibles in two ways. At the industry level,
we use the BEA’s measure of intangible capital, which includes accumulated spending on
software, R&D, and intellectual property related to arts and entertainment. At the firm
level, we use a proxy for internally developed intangible assets, from the work of Peters and
Taylor (2017)), which takes a similar approach to the BEA by capitalizing firm-level expen-

                                              6
ditures on intangibles. This proxy is the capitalized value of past expenditures on sales,
general and administrative expenses and, where available, on R&D. This instrumentation
approach satisfies the exclusion restriction if the measurement error in Peters and Taylor
(2017) intangibles (likely due to the inclusion of expenditures not directly related to intan-
gible investment) are uncorrelated with the measurement error in balance sheet intangibles
(which, as mentioned above, is likely driven by over- or under-valuation of acquired intan-
gible assets.) Using this approach, we find results that are consistent, both in terms of sign
and statistical significance, with the baseline correlations obtained with simple OLS.
   Together, these results suggest that intangible capital is important to understanding
weak investment in physical capital, as well as changes in market structure. In the latter,
intellectual property, software, and other forms of “intangible capital” can generate scale
economies and enhance productivity, creating “superstar firms”. However, intangible capital
can also differentiate products and exclude competitors (branding, patent protection), which
can confer pricing power.
   We conclude by discussing the policy implications of the rise in intangible capital. In-
vestment in intangible assets differs from traditional investment in many ways, but two are
particularly relevant to policymakers. First, the user cost of intangible assets tends to be less
interest-sensitive than that of physical assets, because depreciation rates of intangibles are
substantially higher. Second, markets for intangible assets are generally illiquid (if they even
exist), and as a result, intangible capital is more difficult to use as collateral in obtaining
external financing. Both of these remarks imply that monetary policy is unlikely to influence
intangible investment as strongly as it does traditional investment. Thus, to the extent that
shifts in market structure and market power are indeed attributable to intangible investment,
policy should focus on other levers than interest rates, such as strengthening competition
regulation and intellectual property rights enforcement, and encouraging the development of
markets for intangible assets.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the facts on the decline in phys-

                                               7
ical investment and the rise in intangibles. Section 3 connects the two phenomena both
theoretically and empirically. Section 4 then documents the empirical relationship between
intangible investment and market concentration, and studies two potential economic mech-
anisms linking the two — rising market power of industry leaders, and an increasing gap
between leaders’ and followers’ productivities. Section 5 draws the policy implications of our
results, and section 6 concludes.



II       Backgrounds facts on the level and composition of

         investment

Recent research on investment in the US has emphasized that while investment has been
weak following the global financial crisis, this weakness predated the crisis itself. Similar to
the dynamics of employment, the crisis punctuated, and perhaps exacerbated, longer run,
underlying dynamics and structural changes. This weakness is evident in the raw data,
reported in Figure 1a. This figure shows investment rates using both firm-level data for
publicly traded firms and industry-level data from the BEA’s fixed asset tables; the level
and trends coincide across data sources.3
     The weakness in investment may simply be due to weak fundamentals (Fernald et al.,
2017), such as slow output growth, as the economy recovered from the financial crisis. How-
ever, strength in corporate profitability and high valuations suggest that weak investment is
not so easily explained. Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) and Alexander and Eberly (2018)
show that controlling for standard determinants of investment, an “investment gap” opens
up starting around the year 2000, rising throughout the decade. Both these papers use av-
erage Tobin’s Q as a measure of the incentive to invest. Average Q is defined as the ratio of
the market value of the firm to the replacement cost of its (physical) assets. The “investment

     3
     Throughout the paper, the sample of publicly traded firms we use consists only of firms incorporated
in the US. The data is drawn from Compustat; see the Online Appendix for a complete description of data
construction and sample selection.
                                                   8
gap” can be measured by the time effects in a standard regression of investment on average
Q. Figure 2a shows that these time effects become negative and significant around the year
2000, and remain so for the rest of the sample period. This is a sign that, since the 2000’s,
actual investment has fallen consistently short of the level consistent with observed average
Q. (We have also controlled for cash flow in these investment regressions, in order to allow
for liquidity constraints or measurement error in Q, since these considerations are not central
to our analysis and are often included in standard investment regressions.)
   The decline in physical investment, and the associated “investment gap”, are also visi-
ble at the industry level. Figures 1b and 2b report investment rates, and investment gaps,
for four particular groups of industries, Consumer, High-tech, Healthcare, and Manufactur-
ing.4 These four sectors together accounted for 54% of total value added and 60% of total
investment in 2001; all have suffered a decline in their investment rates since the mid-2000’s.
   As emphasized by Alexander and Eberly (2018), not all industries follow this pattern
(although the four highlighted above do). As a result, the distribution of investment across
industries has changed, following a pattern of “hollowing out” reminiscent of similar trends in
labor markets (Autor, 2010). Figure 4 illustrates this evolution. Prominent in the “missing
middle” is the Manufacturing sector, where offshoring and outsourcing might have replaced
domestic investment. A growing “left tail” of sectors with reasonably high investment rates
still exists; these sectors are those which require a local presence, an in particular, the energy
sector and the transportation and warehousing sectors. The “right tail” of the distribution
is made up of sectors such as Healthcare and High-tech, which are growing in value-added
terms, but with no commensurate rise in their share of investment.
   While physical investment waned over the 1995-2015 period, the accumulation of other
forms of capital did not. Figures 3a and 3b report trends in the importance of intangible
capital as a share of total capital. In this figure, we use two measures of the share of intan-
gible assets, as a fraction of total capital. The first one, derived from firm-level data, is the

   4
       See the Online Appendix for details on the industrial classification used throughout the paper.
                                                       9
ratio of balance sheet intangibles to total capital (where total capital is defined as the sum
of balance sheet intangibles, plus physical capital). Balance sheet intangibles are at best
an imperfect measure of intangible capital. First, because they reflect the overall value of
acquired intangibles, they conflate different types of intangible capital: software, intellectual
property, brand, and business processes. The total book value of acquired intangibles may
itself be a biased measure of their fundamental value, because of potential over- or under-
valuation at the time of acquisitions.5 Second, balance sheet intangibles will in general miss
any own-account intangible investment, which may be an important source of intangible
capital accumulation.6 To address some of these concerns, we also report a second mea-
sure of the composition of the capital stock, constructed using industry-level data from the
BEA’s fixed asset tables. There, the intangible share is defined as the ratio of the estimated
replacement cost of software, R&D, and intellectual property rights (in entertainment and
arts), to the replacement cost of the total capital stock. This latter measure is constructed
using industry-level estimates of spending on these three types of intangibles.
    At the aggregate level, the rise in both types of intangibles over the sample period, and
particularly since 1995, is striking. However, just as for the decline in physical investment,
the rise in intangibles is not uniform across industries. Manufacturing, for instance, stands
out as having experienced a relatively mild increase in intangible intensity. Crouzet and
Eberly (2018) show that intangible capital plays an important role in the Retail sector,

   5
      Balance sheet intangibles are in general created upon acquisition of another firm. The only cases in which
intangibles may appear on the balance sheet of a firm through internal accumulation is for the development
of software intended for sale or leasing, and exploratory costs in the Oil & Gas sectors; see FASB ASC 370.
FASB standards require firms to classify acquired intangibles into two categories: identifiable intangibles,
and goodwill. FAS 141 describes in detail the types of intangibles that are classified as “identifiable”; they
include, among others, customer-related intangibles (such as customer lists) and technology-based intangibles
(such as patents). Goodwill contains all other intangible assets not classifiable under FAS 141 categories.
We include goodwill as part of our main measure of balance sheet intangibles because, while it includes other
forms of value booked in an acquisition, it also includes intangible capital acquired by firms. The 2017 10K
of Amazon, for instance, describes goodwill as follows (p.54): “The goodwill of the acquired companies is
primarily related to expected improvements in technology performance and functionality, as well as sales
growth from future product and service offerings and new customers, together with certain intangible assets
that do not qualify for separate recognition.”
    6
      In section IV, we use capitalized measures of spending on intangibles to adress some of the potential
measurement error issues regarding balance sheet intangibles.
                                                      10
where the reliance on physical capital has historically been low, and where the investment
gap has been particularly pronounced since the mid-1990’s.7 We come back to this variation
across industries in section IV.



III        Weak physical investment and omitted factors

The previous section has shown that for the past two decades, measures of physical invest-
ment have been weak, in particular relative to average Q. At the same time, other forms of
capital seem to have gained importance. In this section, we first show, theoretically, that if
the firm utilizes other, non-physical forms of capital in production, then average Q is not a
sufficient statistic for physical investment. This is true even when there are constant returns
to scale to capital. We show that average Q in fact always overstates the incentive to invest
in physical capital, when other forms of capital contribute to the production process. We
then ask whether investment-Q regressions, once properly adjusted for non-physical capital,
still suggest that physical investment (and investment overall) has been weak relative to Q.


III.A        Theory

In order to understand how omitted capital might change the interpretation of investment-
Q regressions, we start from a standard real model of investment with adjustment costs.
Specifically, we take a discrete-time version of the Hayashi (1982) model, and modify the
revenue function. We allow for two types of capital, where both face costs of adjustment. In
particular, the revenue function takes the form:


                                            ρ             ρ
                                                                  ρ1
                                  Πt = At αK1,t + (1 − α)K2,t           .                  (1)


Here, At is a stochastic process characterizing business conditions (both productivity as
well as, potentially, demand or labor and intermediate input costs), and K1,t and K2,t are
   7
       Retail — NAICS subsector 44 — makes up the majority of the Consumer sector.
                                                  11
the two capital inputs used by the firm. Throughout, we will think of K1,t as physical
capital, and K2,t as non-physical capital. The parameter ρ ∈ ]−∞; 1] controls the elasticity
of substitution between the two capital inputs. When ρ > 0, the two types of capital are
substitutes, while when ρ < 0, they are complements.8
                                                                                                          I1,t
   In this model, the equation determining the physical investment rate, i1,t =                           K1,t
                                                                                                               ,   is the
standard marginal q condition:

                                                                            
                                             1         1
                                    i1,t   =              Et [q1,t+1 ] − P1,t ,                                      (2)
                                             γ1       1+r

where P1,t is the price of physical assets, γ1 is a parameter governing the curvature of the
physical capital adjustment costs, and:

                                                      ∂V
                                           q1,t =         (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt )
                                                      ∂K1

is the marginal value of one unit of physical capital. (Xt collects exogenous processes.)
   However, even though there are constant returns to capital overall, average (physical) Q
is not a good measure of the marginal value of one unit of physical capital. To see why, note
that under constant returns, the value of the firm, V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ), can be decomposed as:


              V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) = q1,t K1,t + q2,t K2,t = q1 (νt ; Xt ) K1,t + q2 (νt ; Xt ) K2,t ,              (3)


where q2,t denotes the marginal value of a unit of non-physical capital, and:

                                                              K2,t
                                                       νt =
                                                              K1,t

is the ratio of non-physical to physical capital. The definition of average physical Q is:

                                                       V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt )
                                            Q1,t ≡                           ,
                                                             K1,t
   8
       Appendix A contains a detailed statement of the model and a derivation of the key results below.
                                                            12
which can be rewritten, using equation 3, as:


                                          Q1,t = q1 (νt ; Xt ) + νt q2 (νt ; Xt ) .                              (4)


Equations 2 to 4 lead to two important remarks on the relationship between investment and
average physical Q.


Remark 1: Average Q systematically overstates the incentive to invest in physical
capital. Combining equation 4 with equation 2, we obtain:

                                                                                           
                            1         1                              1         1
                   i1,t   =              Et [Q1,t+1 ] − P1,t       −              Et [q2,t+1 ] νt+1 ,            (5)
                            γ1       1+r                             γ1       1+r

             K2,t+1
where νt+1 =        is determined at time t. This equation indicates that there is wedge wt
             K1,t+1
between physical investment, and average physical Q (net of the price of capital goods):

                                                                        
                                               1          1
                                          wt =               Et [q2,t+1 ] νt+1 .
                                               γ1        1+r

Note that, so long as the the marginal revenue product of non-physical capital is positive,
then q2,t > 0, so that wt > 0.9 Hence, average Q (net of the price of capital goods) is an
over-estimate of the optimal investment rate. (The fact that the wedge between average Q,
Q1,t , and marginal q, q1,t is always positive is also directly visible in equation 4, given that
q2,t > 0.) Note that this wedge is not a mechanical result of adding another capital good in
                                                                                                        I1,t
the computation of the physical investment rate; the left-hand side of equation 5 is                    K1,t
                                                                                                             ,   not
   I1,t
K1,t +K2,t
           .
    It may be surprising that the sign of this wedge does not depend on whether capital goods
are complements or substitutes. The reason is that the value of the firm, V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ),
captures the value of both types of capital; so it overstates the value of investing in either


    9
        Appendix A contains a formal proof of this statement.
                                                             13
one. In order to obtain a correct measure of the incentive to invest in physical assets, we
                                                                             Vt
need to subtract the value of non-physical capital from                     K1,t
                                                                                 ;   this value is given by νt q2,t . So
long as this value is positive (which is the case whenever the marginal revenue product of
non-physical capital is positive), this adjustment will be negative.
   Note, additionally, that all other things equal, the magnitude of the wedge is increasing
in νt+1 , the ratio of non-physical to physical capital. Thus, the adjustment will be larger,
the larger the share of non-physical capital.


Remark 2: Using a measure of “total” Q in investment regressions will still over-
state the incentive to invest in physical assets. Additionally, one may think that
simple adjustments in the computation of investment rates and Q may suffice to address the
omitted variable bias. For instance, given a measure of K2,t , consider estimating a regression
              (tot)
of i1,t on Qt         , where:
                                              (tot)       V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt )
                                           Qt         =
                                                             K1,t + K2,t

is the ratio of the value of the firm to the sum total of the two capital stocks. Using equation
3, we have that:
                                        (tot)           1             νt
                                      Qt        =            q1,t +        q2,t ,                                   (6)
                                                      1 + νt        1 + νt
           (tot)
that is, Qt           equals a time-varying weighted sum of the two marginal q terms. Using
equation 4, we have the investment equation for physical capital:

                                                                                                   
                   1          1               h
                                                (tot)
                                                      i                     1          1
          i1,t   =               (1 + νt+1 )Et Qt+1 − P1,t                −               Et [q2,t+1 ] νt+1 .       (7)
                   γ1        1+r                                            γ1        1+r

                                      (tot)
Thus, in general, even using Qt               overstates the incentive to invest in physical assets.
   Moreover, even regressions of total investment on total Q may, in general, remain biased.




                                                             14
                                                                  (tot)        I1,t + I2,t
Using equations 2 to 4, the total investment rate it                       ≡               is given by:
                                                                               K1,t + K2,t

                                                            
        (tot)       1         1  1 + νt+1 h (tot) i
       it       =   γ1       1+r
                                         Et Qt+1 − P̃t
                                  1 + νt
                                                                                                          (8)
                    
                        1      1
                                 
                                    νt    1
                                                                      1 νt+1 − νt 1
                +       γ2
                             − γ1 1+ν    1+r
                                             Et [q 2,t+1 ] − P 2,t   −                  Et [q2,t+1 ]
                                       t
                                                                       γ1 1 + ν t 1 + r

where the firm-specific investment price P̃t is given by:

                                                     1             νt
                                           P̃t =          P1,t +        P2,t .                            (9)
                                                   1 + νt        1 + νt

Again, in general, total Q still provides an incorrect estimate of the overall incentive to
invest. However, whether this is an over- or under-estimate now depends on the relative
magnitude of adjustment costs, as well as the sign of the optimal intangible investment
                                       
            1     1
rate i2,t = γ2       Et [q2,t+1 ] − P2,t . Even under the assumption of identical convexity
                 1+r
of adjustment costs, γ1 = γ2 , the standard regression remains mis-specified, because the
total investment price P̃t is a firm-specific weighted average of capital prices, as opposed
to an (industry) index. For instance, the intercept of a cross-sectional regression of total
investment on total Q will not identify the price of capital anymore; one therefore requires
direct measures of the price of capital to estimate the regression.
   The requirements for regressions using total Q to be correctly specified are very specific;
in particular, it must be the case that:


                                                                   (tot)
                                                   q1,t = q2,t = Qt        .                              (8)


When the marginal q’s of the two types of capital are equal (and therefore, using equation
6, equal to total Q), it is clear that the physical investment-total Q regression is correctly
specified. (If, additionally, γ1 = γ2 , then the total Q-total investment regression 8 is also
correctly specified). Appendix A discusses the specific assumptions under which the relation-


                                                           15
ship q1,t = q2,t holds.10 Two conditions, in particular, are necessary: identical depreciation
rates across types of capital, and perfect substitutability (ρ = 1). We discuss differences in
rates of depreciation in section V.A; available evidence suggests that intangible assets have
shorter economic lives than physical assets. Overall, we do not find the requirements to use
“total Q” very plausible in practice, and if implemented to match investment trends, they
would require price trends that seem at odds with the data
   Thus, even in generalized Q regressions, the fundamental problem remains: firm value
captures the joint value of both types of capital, but investment is determined by their
respective marginal q’s. Since the marginal q of one type of capital need not be proportional
to the other, linear combinations do not address the problem.


III.B        Evidence: can missing factors account for weak physical

             investment?

In this section, we use the theoretical predictions of the model described above to test
whether weak physical investment, relative to Q, can plausibly be explained by investment
in an omitted capital input. The omitted factor(s) we consider are intangible capital, the
rising importance of which was described in section II.


III.B.i      Industry-level evidence

In section II, we defined the “investment gap” of a particular industry as the time effects γt
obtained from a panel regression of the form:


                                  ij,t = αj + γt + δQj,t + β 0 Xj,t−1 + j,t ,                            (9)


where j indexes a firm, t indexes a year, Qj,t is average physical Q, and Xj,t−1 are lagged
firm-level controls (including, but not necessarily limited to, the ratio of EBITDA to physical

  10
       The appendix also discusses how the model outlined in this section relates to Peters and Taylor (2017).
                                                      16
assets). The time effects γt , which in a number of industries display a sharp downward trend,
are an estimate of the average discrepancy between physical investment and average physical
Q in a particular industry.
    Equation 5 states that, in a world with an omitted factor, the firm-level gap between
physical investment and average physical Q should be given by:


                                                             (e)
                                             bj,t = νj,t+1 q2,j,t+1 ,                                      (10)


         (e)       1
where q2,j,t+1 ≡      Ej,t [q2,j,t+1 ]. Taking cross-section averages, the average gap in the
                 1+r
industry should then be given by:

                                              h        i                       
                                                (e)                      (e)
                          bt = Et [νj,t+1 ] Et q2,j,t+1 + covt νj,t+1 , q2,j,t+1 .                         (11)


In particular, the average gap should be increasing with the cross-sectional average intangible
ratio ν̄t+1 ≡ Et [νj,t+1 ] in the industry. To the extent that the empirical investment gaps γt
are indeed due to an omitted factor, and that this omitted factor is in fact intangible capital,
one should therefore expect them to be negatively correlated with industry/year averages of
the intangible ratio ν̄t+1 .
    Figure 5 plots the industry-level estimates of γt for KLEMS industries, aggregated up
to the 12 sectors, against the cross-sectional averages of the intangible asset share, sj,t+1 =
      K2,j,t+1          νj,t+1
                    =            , also aggregated up to the 12-sector level.11 The figure indi-
K1,j,t+1 + K2,j,t+1   1 + νj,t+1
cates that there is indeed a negative correlation between the physical investment gap at the
industry level, and the industry-wide average of the intangible share.
    Table 1 reports regressions of the investment gap γt on the intangible share st ; an obser-
vation in these regressions is a KLEMS industry/year. The first two lines of the table report

   11
     We use the share sj,t+1 instead of the ratio νj,t+1 because the former is bounded between 0 and 1, so
that cross-sectional averages are less sensitive to outliers; however, the two are increasing transformations of
one another, so from a theoretical standpoint, the prediction that the investment gap should be increasing
in the intangible share if it is due to omitted intangible capital still holds. The sectors are defined in the
Online Appendix to the paper.
                                                       17
the simple OLS coefficients associated with the intangible share, either with no fixed effects
(first column), KLEMS industry effects (second column), and KLEMS industry/time effects
(third column). In order to address potential endogeneity arising from measurement error,
in the third to fifth lines of table 1, we instrument the Compustat balance intangibles with
the BEA’s industry-level estimate of the ratio of software and intellectual capital to total
capital.12 The IV estimates are consistent in sign, and, for the first two specifications, in
magnitude with the simple OLS. They are also somewhat more significant than the simple
OLS estimate, in particular in the saturated specification containing industry and year ef-
fects. Overall, both the simple OLS and IV results suggest that the relationship between
the investment gap and the intangible share is robust, statistically significant, and hold both
within and across industries.
    The second column of table 1, in particular, indicates that within an industry, a one per-
centage point increase in the intangible share is associated with an increase of the investment
gap of 0.21 percentage points. This number is significant at the 1% level. The magnitude of
the effect is economically large: the economy-wide increase in the (weighted) intangible share
of assets in about 30 percentage points from the mid-1990’s to 2010, as discussed in section
II. This would translate into an incremental investment gap of roughly 6 percentage points,
or two thirds of the aggregate investment gap documented in Figure 2a. In a similar spirit,
figures 6a and 6b plot, along with the estimates of the investment gap, the residuals from
the OLS projection of the investment gap on the intangible share, controlling for industry
effects — that is, the residuals from model (2) in table 1.13 These ”residual” investment gaps
are between two thirds and three quarters smaller, in magnitude, than the actual investment
gap. Overall, these industry-level results suggest that the rising importance of intangibles
may well account for a substantial portion of the observed discrepancy between physical

  12
      See section IV.B.i for a more detailed discussion of the motivation for and validity of instrumenting the
Compustat balance sheet intangibles using the BEA’s measure of intangible capital.
   13
      The graphs are constructed in two steps: first, the residuals are estimated from the OLS regression of
model (2); then, these residuals are averaged at the sector- or economy-wide levels using the share of nominal
value added of the sector in 2001 as weights.
                                                      18
investment and average physical Q.


III.B.ii   Firm-level evidence

We next turn to firm-level evidence on the relationship between the investment gap, as
measured in equations of the type 9, and the potential presence of an omitted factor. An
important feature of the data on public firms is that not all of them carry substantial amounts
of intangibles; in fact, it is not infrequent for firms to have zero balance sheet intangibles
altogether. For firms whose capital inputs are purely or primarily physical assets, equation
5 indicates that the investment gap should be smaller (in magnitude) than the investment
gap of other firms.
   Figure 7 reports a simple test of this prediction. In each KLEMS industry and year,
firms are sorted by their intangible share. We define intangible intensity as the ratio of the
intangible capital stock to total assets of the firm. High intangible-intensity firms are defined
as those in the top quartile by intangible intensity, while low intangible-intensity firms are
defined as those in the bottom quartile. In all groups, the bottom quartile by intangible
intensity corresponds to firms whose intangible share is 0-5% of total assets. The threshold
for the top quartile rises over time, from roughly 40% to 60% for all industries except
manufacturing, where it rises from 35% to 50%. The figure suggests that the investment
gap is indeed larger among more intangible-intensive firms (and conversely, lower for firms
whose capital is primarily physical).
   Finally, figure 8 reports estimates of the time effects ζt in a regression of the form:


                          ij,t = αj + ζt + ξνj,t+1 + δQj,t + β 0 Xj,t−1 + j,t ,             (12)


                 K2,t+1
where νj,t+1 =      is the end-of-period ratio of intangible to physical capital. This control
                 K1,t+1
                                                                                      h     i
                                                                                 1      (e)
mimics the expression of the wedge apparent in expression 5, wj,t = νj,t+1 1+r     Et q2,t+1 .
There is no good empirical proxy for the marginal value of intangible assets, so that the


                                                   19
wedge is measured with error, and the estimates of the coefficient ξ are likely to suffer from
attenuation bias.14 In 21 of the 33 KLEMS industries, the point estimates of ξ are negative
and significant. Figure 8 suggests that despite the likely attenuation bias, the investment
gap in the Consumer, High-tech, and Healthcare sectors falls by about a quarter relative
to the baseline model where ξ = 0. In the manufacturing sector, consistent with figure 7,
the firm-level evidence indicates that the investment gap seems less closely related to the
increase in the intangible share. Recall, however, that the trend of a rising intangible share
is weakest in the manufacturing sector.


  The evidence in this section thus points to the fact that the gap in physical investment,
relative to Q, can largely be traced back to the increase in the intangible intensity of sectors
and firms. This is consistent with the simple model laid out in the earlier part of the section,
which suggests that in the presence of an omitted factor — in this case, intangible capital —
we should expect Q to overstate the true marginal value of physical assets, and investment-Q
regressions to be significantly biased.



IV          The link with market structure

In this section, we go beyond weak physical investment and ask whether the rise in intangible
capital has other implications. In particular, we examine another important macroeconomic
trend: the apparent shift in market structure toward more concentration in a number of
US industries. We first review work on concentration and proposed explanations, and then
show that there is a strong empirical relationship between concentration and intangibles,
both at the industry and firm levels. This relationship could reflect either intangibles’ effect
on productivity or their effect on market power, so we then examine each channel separately.


   14                                                    ∂Qt
        Further analysis of the model indicates that q2,t =   , so that one could in principle try to approximate
                                                         ∂νt
q2 by the ratio of the change in Q to the change in ν. However, this leads to estimates of q2 that display a
high degree of volatility, as the change in ν is often small.
                                                         20
IV.A         Market concentration and intangible capital


The previous section documented the increasing role of intangible capital in the US business
sector. At the same time, recent research emphasizes a coincident increase in concentration
in many industries. The properties of intangible capital suggest that this timing may not
be only coincidental. Haskel and Westlake (2017) emphasize that intangible capital tends
to be scalable, such as software or intellectual property, facilitating the growth of large,
intangible-intensive firms. If this approach were correct, one would expect that intangible
capital would be more prevalent in the leading firms of an industry, leading these more
productive firms to dominate, increasing their own market share and industry concentration.
In addition, other forms of intangible capital, such as brand value, may increase market power
by reducing the price elasticity of demand for the firm’s products. Indeed, a number of papers
have documented the potential for “customer capital” to explain a number of patterns of
firm pricing and investment decisions.15 In addition, even if intangibles such as intellectual
property enhance firms’ productivity, patent and other protections may deter competition
and increase concentration.
   To date, the literature that documenting the rise in concentration has proposed several
explanations. Autor et al. (2017) show that the rising concentration in many US industries
coincides with a falling labor share in those industries. They argue that this may result from
technological change, in which industry leaders adopt new technologies, increase efficiency
and advance their market share. This necessarily raises concentration and reduces their labor
share of compensation.
   Other researchers point out rising markups along with concentration, and argue that con-
centration may be associated with rising market power and weakening competition (Gutiérrez
and Philippon, 2018, 2017; De Loecker and Eeckhout, 2017). Gutiérrez and Philippon (2018)
argue that rising market power may also lead to weak investment, as less competitive firms
have less incentive to invest.
  15
       See, for instance, Gourio and Rudanko (2014).
                                                       21
   While these two hypotheses, technology and market power, are not mutually exclusive,
they have sharply different implications for economic efficiency and welfare. Technologi-
cal improvement is associated with rising productivity and investment, and higher welfare
as a result. On the contrary, increasing market power lowers investment and reduces wel-
fare. Hence, the source of rising concentration is crucial to understanding whether rising
concentration is efficient.
   We first document the empirical link between rising concentration and intangible cap-
ital intensity, and then use this link to differentiate between market power and efficiency
explanations for the rise in concentration. Table 2 shows that there is a positive correlation
between intangibles and market share at the firm level in our data; that is, industry leaders
tend to be intangible-intensive. This result holds both in the cross section and in the time
series: within industries, firms with higher market share tend to be more intangible-intensive;
additionally, when a firm’s intangible share rises, its market share increases. This result is
robust to controlling for firm effects (which subsume industry effects) and time effects. This
result complements the observations of section III, which emphasized that, in many indus-
tries, the investment gap is driven by intangible-intensive firms. Here, we find that high,
and rising, intangibles intensity, is associated with higher market share, and rising market
share, respectively.
   Finding that industry leaders tend to be intangible-intensive naturally leads to the ques-
tion of whether this increase in firms’ market shares translates into greater industry con-
centration. That is, are more intangibles intensive industries also more concentrated — and
hence potentially responsible for the increase in concentration noted in the literature? Be-
cause there is so much heterogeneity across industries in both intangibles and concentration,
we also break the data into industry clusters, as we did for the investment data. Table 3
shows that in each of the four industry clusters, the Herfindahl index is on average higher
when the firms in those industries are more intangible-intensive. This effect is statistically
significant in all four industry clusters. The comovement between concentration and intangi-

                                              22
ble intensity is evident in Figure 9, which charts the industry clusters of Herfindahl indexes
and firm-level intangible shares.16
    Overall, intangibles appear to be more important in industries in which concentration is
higher, and the rise in concentration seems to have been connected to an increasing intangible
intensity in a number of sectors. However, what is the mechanism connecting intangibles
to concentration? In the next section, we explore the two hypotheses suggested earlier to
explain rising concentration — productivity and market power — and their links to intangible
capital.


IV.B       Market power and productivity explanations for rising con-

           centration

In this section, we examine the mechanism behind rising concentration. Specifically, are
intangibles are associated with concentration because they confer market power, or are they
instead a source of competitive advantage? Either is certainly plausible, as patents, for
example, may represent technological improvements that enhance productivity, yet they
may also exclude competition. We conduct the analysis both at the industry level — where
more precise, expenditure-based measures of intangible capital from the BEA are available
— and at the firm level, where sample sizes are larger.


IV.B.i     Intangibles and market power

Our main measures of market power are industry- and firm-level markups. We first discuss
their measurement, and then the link to intangible investment.


  16
     Two features of these graphs are notable. First, in the High-tech sector, concentration is falling during
the mid- to late 1990’s. This is entirely due to entry into the Compustat sector for one particular industry,
NAICS 518 (Data processing, internet publishing, and other information services); it captures the effect of
the dotcom bubble on the decision to go public. The second trend is the reversal in concentration in the
manufacturing sector around the mid 2000’s. This reversal primarily reflects a decline in concentration in the
transportation industry, NAICS 336, but concentration in other manufacturing industries, in the Compustat
sample, also seems to have stabilized — if not declined — around that period.
                                                     23
Markup measurement We combine two approaches in our measurement of markups:
the industry-level approach of Hall (1988) and Hall (2018), and the firm-level approach of
De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017). Specifically, using industry-level data, we estimate the
overall level of markups, between 1988 and 2015, as the elasticity of the change in output
to the change in total inputs, including quasi-fixed inputs such as capital.17 We then adjust
                                  salej,t
the (firm-level) ratios lj,t =    cogsj,t
                                            to match, within a KLEMS industry, the average markup
estimated using the industry-level data. As discussed by De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017),
within a particular industry, the ratio of revenue to cost of goods sold is a correct measure
of firm-level markups, up to an industry-specific constant.18 Our procedure amounts to
choosing the industry-specific constant in such a way that markups obtained from the firm-
level De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) approach match the average levels documented by Hall
(2018). Note that while this affects the levels of markups, it does not change the trends,
which are only driven by changes in the ratio of sales to cost of goods sold at the firm-level.19


Industry-level evidence Figures 10a and 10b report averages of these estimates at the
aggregate level, and at the level of 4 broad groups of sectors. In constructing these figures,
one average markup time series is first calculated for each KLEMS industry. This average
is value-weighted using firm sales, so that it primarily reflects the markups charged by the
largest firms in an industry. (We come back below to within-industry variation in markups.)
The average markup across industries is then computed using industries’ shares of total
nominal value added in 2001.
    Consistent with De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) and Hall (2018), we find that markups


   17
      See Hall (2018) for details on the methodology. In particular, in estimating the elasticity, we instrument
changes in output at the industry level using proxies for aggregate demand, specifically, government purchases
of different categories of final goods and services, as well as changes in oil prices.
   18
      This constant is the elasticity of output to cost of goods sold; it must be assumed to be constant over
time and across firms in an industry for the prior statement to hold.
   19
      The Online Appendix reports results using the inverse Lerner index (which includes other operating
costs than those captured in cogs) in order to proxy for markups. The results are largely consistent with
those reported here. We focus on the ratio of sales to cost of goods in the main body of the paper because
operating margins may also reflect fixed or quasi-fixed costs.
                                                      24
have increased over the span of the sample, though the increase is more moderate than
documented in De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017), with the average markup rising from ap-
proximately 1.2 to 1.4. The trends, however, differ sharply across the four major sector
groups. In particular, in the Consumer sector, which is primarily made up of the Retail and
Wholesale Trade industries, markups are stable, consistent with the evidence reported in
Crouzet and Eberly (2018). They also appear to be stable in the Manufacturing group. By
contrast, in both High-Tech and Healthcare, markups have been rising sharply, particularly
so after 1995.
    Table 4 provides further evidence of this pattern in the relationship between markups
and intangibles, at a more disaggregated level. It reports OLS and IV estimates of the elas-
ticity of markups with respect to the Compustat intangible share, at the level of the KLEMS
industry, splitting the sample between the four major sector groups.20 The instrument used
for the Compustat intangible share is the BEA intangible share. We instrument for the Com-
pustat intangible share in order to address the concern that balance sheet intangibles are
likely to measure true underlying intangible capital with substantial error. The measurement
error could arise either because firms do not apply consistent standards in capitalizing past
expenditures on intangibles, or because goodwill deviates from the true underlying value of
acquired intangible capital (for instance, because of over- or under-valuation at the time of
acquisition). Both sources of measurement error could plausibly be correlated to subsequent
outcomes, either at the firm or at the industry level. The BEA intangible capital stock,
while only capturing a small portion of the overall intangible stock (primarily that related
to R&D), is immune to both measurement problems, since it is derived only from expen-
ditures on inputs (not from acquisition values), and since those measures are consistently
capitalized. Any measurement error in the BEA stock is thus plausibly uncorrelated with
the measurement error in balance sheet intangibles.
    Results of this analysis are broadly consistent with the message of Figures 10a and 10b.
  20
     Industries not in one of the four major sector groups are omitted; see the Online Appendix for details
on the industry classification used in this paper.
                                                    25
For the Consumer sector group, the relationship between the intangible share and markups is
negative, and economically small. In the Manufacturing, High-tech and Healthcare groups,
the relationship is positive and significant (though, in the Manufacturing sector, the low
Cragg-Donald F statistic indicates potentially weak instruments.)


Firm-level evidence We next document whether, within an industry, more intangible-
intensive firms tend to charge higher markups. Table 5 summarizes the firm-level relationship
between markups and the intangible share. Panel A reports results from a specification
containing industry-year fixed effects. The first row of the table reports OLS results, and
the second row reports instrumental variables results. The motivation for using IV is the
same as in the industry regressions, namely measurement error. The instruments in these
regressions are the estimates of R&D capital and organizational capital proposed by Peters
and Taylor (2017). While these stocks are also imprecise estimates of underlying intangible
capital, their measurement error is likely to be independent to that affecting balance sheet
intangibles, since the Peters and Taylor (2017) are based only on expenditures (as opposed
to also incorporating acquisition values, in balance sheet intangibles), that are furthermore
consistently capitalized across firms.21
    The results of panel A indicate that within an industry/year, firms with a higher intangi-
ble share also tend to have higher markups, even after controlling for size, age, profitability,
and leverage. The effect is strongest in the Healthcare and High-tech groups. The results of

  21
      Another concern, specific to the regressions with markups as the dependent variable, is that the depen-
dent variable is also measured with error, and that this error may be correlated with the instrument itself.
The measurement error in the dependent variable may arise because some of the variable costs of the firm
may not be included in the denominator of the markup measure, cogs. Indeed, SG&A may contain in part
operating costs; for instance, some firms in the Consumer sector use SG&A to book a part of labor costs,
as discussed in Crouzet and Eberly (2018). Thus firms with high SG&A will tend to have high (measured)
markups; this may then create a mechanical correlation between measured markups and measures of the
intangible stock that contain capitalized SG&A, such as the organizational capital stock measure of Peters
and Taylor (2017). However, the exclusion restriction would only be threatened if (past) SG&A spending
were correlated with the measurement error in balance sheet intangibles. It is not obvious why this would
be the case, given that the measurement error in balance sheet intangibles is primarily due to either hetero-
geneous report conventions, or under-/over-valuation of intangibles. For industry regressions, the problem is
less pressing because the BEA measures are unlikely to contain expenditures on inputs contributing toward
current sales.
                                                     26
panel B in table 5, however, suggest that this may be partially a firm specific effect. Panel
B adds firm fixed effects to both the OLS and IV specifications.22 The results in Panel B
confirm a very strong effect of intangibles on markups in the Healthcare sector. In High-tech,
removing the firm effect reduces the magnitude of the effect substantially, but it is still large
and statistically significant, while in Manufacturing, the effect remains close to unity and
significant. The effect of intangibles on markups in the Consumer group remains precisely
estimated, but quantitatively small.
    Given the strength of the result in Healthcare, it is worth noting that the correlation
is significant both across firms, and within firms, meaning that firms with more intangibles
charge higher markups, and markups rise as firms increase their intangible share. This sector
group includes both pharmaceuticals and device makers, as well as hospitals and health care
providers. However, the largest firms in the sector are the leading drug manufacturers, and
belong to NAICS subsector 325, chemicals manufacturing. Results using weighted regressions
suggest that high markups are primarily driven by those firms, as opposed to either smaller
firms, or firms in service-related Healthcare sectors.23
    In the next section, we explore what else may be driving the link between intangibles
and concentration, in addition to market power.


IV.B.ii     Intangibles and productivity

We next turn to the evidence on the connection between productivity and intangible invest-
ment. We focus on measures of average labor productivity — as opposed to total factor
productivity — because they can be constructed from firm-level data without specific as-
sumptions on the production function. The most natural measure of average labor produc-
                                                               sj,t
tivity at the firm level is sales per worker, lpj,t =          lj,t
                                                                    .   Since sales are measures at market
prices, not at cost, markups are embedded in this measure; to quantify this, note that one

   22
     We also explored a first-difference specification; however, the results were generally insignificant, likely
due to measurement error in both the dependent and independent variables.
  23
     These results are available from the authors upon request.
                                                       27
can decompose the ratio as:

                                                µj,t cj,t                 sj,t
                                      lpj,t =             ,    µj,t ≡ θ        ,                          (13)
                                                 θ lj,t                   cj,t

where cj,t denotes the cost of goods sold, θ denotes the elasticity of revenue to inputs, and
µj,t denotes the firm’s markup. In order to isolate the part of the ratio of sales to worker
related to productivity from that related to the markup, we therefore report results using
the ratio:
                                                              cj,t
                                                  lpcj,t =         ,                                      (14)
                                                              lj,t

which we refer to as “sales per worker, at cost”.
    Figure 11a reports the economy-wide average of the measures lpj,t and lpcj,t , and compares
them with output per hour, obtained from the BLS. The three time series display consistent
trends at the aggregate level, roughly doubling over the duration of the sample, with a
slowdown after 2009. At the more disaggregated sectoral level, the measures derived from
firm-level data again line up with the BLS output per hour measure, as reported in Figure
11b.24 However, trends differ markedly across sectors. Labor productivity growth was weak
overall in the Manufacturing and Healthcare sectors; in the Consumer sector, it was close to
the aggregate trend; and in the High-tech sector, labor productivity boomed, rising almost
five-fold over the decade.


Industry-level evidence Table 6 reports results from industry-level regressions for the
four major sector groups of Figure 11a. These results reinforce the view that the experience
of Healthcare and Manufacturing — both sectors where productivity grew slowly — differed
sharply from those of the Consumer and High-tech sectors. The first panel of 11a reports the

  24
    The exception is the healthcare sector, where the trends derived from aggregating firm-level data appear
to be different from the trends based on BLS data. However, the discrepancy is only before 1993; after
1993, there is virtually no labor productivity growth in the sector, according to either source. The rise in
productivity in the healthcare sector over the 1990-1993 period in the firm-level data is entirely attributable
to NAICS sector 621, ambulatory health services.
                                                         28
results of a simple OLS regression of our measure of labor productivity derived from firm-
level data (sales per worker, at cost) on the Compustat industry-level intangible share. These
regressions contain (KLEMS-level) industry effects, so that they ask whether trends in the
Compustat intangible share coincided with the trends in labor productivity.The results are
consistently positive across sectors – productivity tends to comove positively with intangible
intensity. However, the second panel of the table, in which the Compustat intangible share
is instrumented using the BEA fixed asset tables’ measure of the intangible share, suggests
that this result is not robust for the Manufacturing and Healthcare sectors; in particular,
the coefficient falls by about two-thirds in the Healthcare sector, and becomes insignificant
in the Manufacturing sector. However, in the Consumer and High-tech sectors, the corre-
lation remains significant (and in fact, increases in magnitude) once potential measurement
error is accounted for. Thus, the industry-level connection between intangibles and labor
productivity seems strongest precisely in those sectors where labor productivity grew most,
the Consumer and High-tech sectors.


Firm-level evidence Table 7 describes the relationship between intangibles and our main
measure of labor productivity at the firm level. Panel A compares firms within the same
(KLEMS) industry and year. The first row reports OLS results, and the second row reports
instrumental variables results, as for the earlier analysis of markups. The Consumer and
Healthcare sectors are essentially mirror images of their results for markups, as we saw
in the industry data. Intangibles are associated with positive productivity effects in the
Consumer group, but a negative effect in Healthcare. In Manufacturing and High-tech,
these effects are positive, but weak. Moreover, this appears to be largely the firm-fixed
effect. Panel B controls for firm fixed effects, and the results show a significant positive
effect of intangibles on productivity in the Manufacturing and High-tech sectors, as we saw
in the industry data. However, the within-firm effect is stronger in Healthcare (negatively)




                                             29
and Consumer (positively), in particular with the IV estimates.25


  Across both industries and firms, the analysis of productivity provides a consistent mes-
sage. In the two sectors that experienced sharp increases in labor productivity, Consumer
and High-tech, there was a correlated rise in intangible intensity. These estimates are also
quantitatively important, as the increase in intangibles in the Consumer group would imply
roughly doubling of productivity (compared to the actual increase of 150 percent). In High-
tech, the share is smaller, with rising intangibles explaining about a 50 percent increase in
productivity. The fact that these more intangible-intensive firms also tend to be leaders in
market share, as emphasized above, suggests a potential explanation for the rise in concen-
tration in those sectors. As leading firms invested in intangible assets, these firms increased
their productivity and market share lead over competitors, opening a wider “productivity
gap” relative to the rest of the industry. By contrast, in the Healthcare and Manufactur-
ing sectors, which did not experience large increases in labor productivity, the relationship
between intangibles and productivity is insignificant or tends to even be negative.


IV.C        Summary: intangibles, markups, and productivity

Intangible capital has become more important at the same time that concentration has risen
in many industries. We show that these trends are more than coincident, as the industries
and firms with greater intangibles intensity also tend to have greater concentration, and as
firms increase their intangibles intensity, their market share also tends to rise. This comove-
ment suggests a potential mechanism for rising concentration, as firms invest more heavily in
intangible capital, facilitating economies of scale or the exercise of market power. In partic-
   25
      The strong negative effect of intangibles on productivity in the healthcare sector likely reflects the
heterogeneity within this sector. There are two main components — labor-intensive service firms and
biotech/device producers. Our earlier results on markups largely reflected the goods-producing firms, as
we remarked in that section. The productivity results are due largely to the service producers, which exhibit
declining productivity over most of the sample period. In unreported results using weighted regressions, the
effect of intangibles on Healthcare productivity is substantially smaller and weaker, especially with firm fixed
effects. This suggests that the negative effect reported in Table 7 is due to smaller firms, whereas larger
firms are more consistent with the industry results in Table 6.
                                                      30
ular, rising concentration may result from changes in technology in an otherwise competitive
environment, and thus be largely efficient. Or it may arise from market power, leading to
bigger wedges between price and marginal cost, and potentially inefficient allocations. In-
tangible investment could play a role in both scenarios, given that intangible assets can serve
both to establish market power and to advance productivity. Patents, for instance, confer
exclusivity and thus pricing power, but could also be indicative of productivity-enhancing
research conducted by a firm.
   We examined these possibilities by looking at productivity and markups by industry and
by firm. We confirm that in general, both markups and productivity have risen along with
concentration, so both hypotheses play a role. However, there are sharp differences across
broad sector groups.
   In the Consumer sector group, the rise in concentration was primarily driven by pro-
ductivity, not markups. Moreover, the increase in productivity was highly correlated with
intangible investment, both between and within firms. The Consumer sector contains retail
giants like Walmart and Amazon, who have transformed distribution through innovative
processes, which generate intangible capital and drive productivity growth. Interestingly,
these processes, such as inventory management methods, are not generally patentable. How-
ever, to the extent that they require large scale (such as big box distribution), they may
nonetheless deter replication or entry.
   The Healthcare group is the mirror image of the Consumer sector, where the primary
phenomenon behind the rise in concentration was markups, yet the increase in markups was
also highly correlated with intangible investment. While there has clearly been extensive
innovation in the Healthcare sector, many goods (pharmaceuticals, devices) are subject to
patent protection, allowing for market power. This may explain why intangibles are more
associated with markups than productivity increases in Healthcare.
   In the High-tech sector, both forces are at work. High-tech is where one might have
most expected to see intangible investment leading to productivity gains, but the data show

                                              31
that the large increase in intangible capital also led to rising markups. Thus, in High-tech,
intangible investment may contribute to product differentiation as much as it contributes
to productivity growth. Both are plausible sources of the large increase in concentration in
High-tech in recent years.
    Finally, concentration rose mildly in Manufacturing; but there, productivity and markups
were stable, and intangible investment, which rose much more slowly than in other sectors,
seems related to rising markups, but the effect is economically small. Given the long de-
cline in manufacturing employment, consolidation may be a reasonable explanation for the
remaining rise concentration, though our evidence does not speak to this or other alternative
hypotheses directly.



V      Policy implications

So far, we have shown that the rising share of intangible capital can help to explain the weak
performance of investment in the 2000s and beyond. Moreover, investment in intangible
capital contributed to rising industry concentration, though for different reasons depending
on the industry. Does the increasing role of intangible capital change how policymakers
should think about their impact on investment, and on the economy more broadly? We have
focused the fact that intangible capital has unique properties compared to physical capital,
and here we argue that these properties also affect the policy transmission mechanism.


V.A      User cost

Investment is one of the main channels through which interest rates affect the real economy.
This is most evident in the user cost of capital, which measures the effective rental rate
of capital. The interest rate plays a central role, since it measures the opportunity cost of
investing in capital rather than in other assets. The user cost also depends on taxes, since
tax considerations affect the rate of return to capital. The classic formulation of the user

                                             32
cost was presented by Hall and Jorgenson in 1967 as


                                       u = P (r + δ)–Ṗ ,                                   (15)


where u is the user cost of capital, p is the price of capital, r is the relevant discount or
interest rate, δ is the economic depreciation rate, and Ṗ is the growth rate of the price of
capital, or the capital gains on holding physical capital. Hence, the cost of holding physical
capital is the opportunity cost r plus depreciation, less any capital gain, or price increase,
on the capital. Setting the capital gain term to zero for simplicity, they show that the tax
adjustment generates a user cost of the form

                                                (1 − tc )(1 − τ z)
                                u = P (r + δ)                      ,                        (16)
                                                    (1 − τ )

where tc is the investment tax credit, τ is the firm’s tax rate, and z is the present value of
depreciation allowances on a dollar of investment. The power of monetary policy traditionally
enters through the interest rate r, since the response of the user cost to changes in r is given
by the elasticity
                                        r ∂u    r
                                             =     .                                        (17)
                                        u ∂r   r+δ

When the depreciation rate is low, this elasticity is nearly unity, and the user cost moves
one-for-one with changes in the interest rate.
   However, with intangible capital, that narrative is lost; in fact, the elasticity goes to zero
as the depreciation rate becomes high relative to the interest rate. The depreciation rate
of intangible capital as calculated and implemented by the BEA ranges from 20 percent for
some innovative property to almost 70 percent for some forms of economic competences such
as advertising. Other estimates are higher; Li and Hall (2016), for example estimate that
R&D capital has a 30 percent annual depreciation rate, while Computer System Design has
an almost 50 percent depreciation rate.


                                                33
   In the elasticity of the user cost with respect to the interest rate above, the higher is the
depreciation rate, the lower is the elasticity. For an interest rate of 5 percent, the elasticity
falls from 33 percent to around 10 percent as the depreciation rises from 10 percent to the
range of estimates presented by Hall and Li (30 to 50 percent). Hence, the higher depreciation
rates embodied in intangible capital necessarily mean the user cost is less sensitive to interest
rates by a factor of 3 or more — and hence less responsive to monetary policy. Thus,
if intangible capital represents a large share of firms’ investment, investment becomes less
interest sensitive. This may have the benefit of reducing overall investment volatility, but it
does pose a potential challenge to policy makers by dampening monetary policy transmission.
   It is worth noting that this does not necessarily imply a larger role for fiscal policy. Going
back to Hall and Jorgenson’s formula for the tax adjusted user cost, the elasticity of the user
cost with respect to the tax rate is

                                       τ ∂u     τ 1−z
                                            =              .                                (18)
                                       u ∂τ   1 − τ 1 − τz

When a capital good is expensed, z = 1, the above elasticity is zero, and the user cost is
unaffected by the corporate tax rate. This is the case for most intangibles. This means that
tax policy is also mostly ineffective in moving the user cost of intangible capital. When a
capital good is amortized, as has been implemented for R&D spending, then a cut in the
corporate tax rate decreases the user cost (the first term), but this is effect is muted by
depreciation allowances (the second term).
   Other forms of fiscal policy can have a more direct effect on intangible investment. The
investment tax credit has a direct impact on any form of capital investment. Similarly, for
any amortized capital investment, accelerated depreciation increases the present value of the
depreciation allowances. Either of these policies would be effective with respect to intangible
capital.




                                                34
V.B       Liquidity

A feature common to most forms of intangible assets is that there are limited, and sometimes
no markets on which they can be readily sold to other potential users. Blair and Wallman
(2000) suggest classifying intangibles into three categories: those that can be owned and
sold, such as patents, copyrights and brands; those that can be controlled by the firm, but
not separated from it, such as proprietary databases or software, or in-process R&D; and
those that cannot be fully controlled by the firm, such as human capital or customer/supplier
relationships. Intangibles in the second and third category are either too firm-specific, or
not sufficiently under the firms’ direct control, to be easily transferred to other users; as a
result, no markets for them exist.
    The scarcity of markets for intangibles has an important implication: business lending
against intangible assets is difficult, if at all possible. A substantial portion of business
lending — and in particular, bank-based business lending — is asset-backed. The backing
can be explicit, in the form of a lien on specific physical assets, such as machinery, or liquid
financial assets, such as account receivables. Or it can take the form of a protection of the
creditor’s claim on overall firm assets in case of liquidation (by committing not to pledge
assets to future creditors, a practice known as “negative lien”). Either way, this requires
that, in case of a default event, firm assets can be sold and transferred to another user.
Unsurprisingly, examples of lending purely backed by intangibles thus tend to be limited,
mostly to intellectual property.26
    An implication of the limited liquidity of intangible assets is that business lending in
intangible-intensive industries may be constrained, relative to industries where capital inputs
are primarily tangible. There are some signs of this in the industry-level data; figure 12 shows
that there is a negative (and significant, after controlling for industry effects) relationship
between total leverage and total intangible intensity across US industries.


  26
    See Kamiyama et al. (2006) and Loumioti (2012) for a discussion of the use of intangibles, and intellectual
property in particular, as collateral in bank financing.
                                                      35
   This has at least two implications for the transmission of monetary policy to corporate
investment. The first, straightforward implication is that a declining portion of overall in-
vestment may be financed through debt, and in particular through bank debt. Attempts
to leverage the bank lending channel of monetary policy transmission may therefore face
diminishing returns, as more economic activity moves toward intangible-intensive sectors.27
The second implication is that even conditional on begin financed by debt, the sensitivity
of investment to monetary policy shocks may still decline. First, as noted above, the high
depreciation rates of intangibles make them less interest-sensitive; as a result, the response
of (intangible) asset prices to declining interest rates should fall, which in turn should mute
the response of firm net worth. Thus, balance sheet effects may be weaker in an intangible-
intensive economy. Second, the same change in asset prices might do less relax credit con-
straints if assets are more difficult to pledge. This latter channel is an important source of
amplification in collateral constraints models, such as Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).
   One direction for policy to consider is then to relax requirements that might affect banks’
incentive to lend against intangibles, or short of this, directly underwrite and potentially
guarantee intangible-based lending. The Singaporean government, offered, between 2016 and
2018, an intellectual property financing scheme, in which it employed its intellectual property
(IP) office to conduct summary valuation exercises of the IP offered by the borrower as
collateral. In addition to those efforts, the general promotion of ”IP marketplaces” could help
generate more precise estimates of collateral values; it has indeed been under consideration
in a number of countries, including the UK.28
   However, these solutions are still relevant only to the types of intangibles that can plau-
sibly be transferred to other users; this is only a fraction of the total stock of intangible
assets which must be financed. For non-transferrable intangibles, lending may simply not be
the optimal financial arrangement. Collateral is, after all, the typical solution to the moral
hazard problems associated with lending, but it may just not be available in these situations.
  27
       See, e.g., Mishkin (1995) for a discussion of the bank lending and balance sheet channels.
  28
       See OECD (2015) for a discussion of these efforts.
                                                      36
The structural change toward a more intangible-intensive economy might instead require a
broader shift in incentives away from debt financing and toward equity financing. There are
no shortage of arguments and policy proposals to equalize the treatment of equity and debt
in the corporate tax system; the difficulty inherent financing intangibles through debt adds
to that list.29



VI       Conclusion

While physical investment has been low relative to corporate valuations since the mid-2000’s,
we document that a substantial portion of this gap is associated with a shift toward more
investment in intangible capital. This intangible capital, which includes patents, brands and
business processes, accounts for an increasingly large share of corporations’ overall capital
stock.
    Importantly, the rise in intangible capital is concentrated among industry leaders, and
thus closely related to the rise in industry concentration which took place over the same
period. The evidence furthermore suggests that intangible investment by leaders has been
associated with productivity gains in some industries, in particular the Consumer and High-
tech sectors. In those industries, intangible investment may have helped leaders further their
competitive advantage and gain market share. By contrast, in the Healthcare sector (and to
a less extent in High-tech), intangible investment is closely associated with rising markups
at leading firms. In that sector, intangible investment may instead have enabled industry
leaders to exert market power. These results emphasize that a “one size fits all” approach
to concentration may be misguided, and at least premature. The sources — and hence the
implications — of concentration need not be the same in all firms nor in all industries.
    More work is needed to understand why intangible capital may confer market power
in certain circumstances (the Healthcare sector) but not in others (the Consumer sector),

  29
     See, for instance, Mirrlees et al. (2012) for the UK. Belgium has recently moved in this direction, with
the introduction of a notional interest deduction on the basis of shareholder equity.
                                                     37
where it instead enhances productivity. This distinction is particularly important in policy
settings where there is scope for unintended consequences of well-intentioned policies. Poli-
cies intended to promote intangible capital (such as intellectual property protections) may
instead do more to create market power. Or on the contrary, policies intended to reduce
concentration might instead discourage productivity-enhancing intangible investment.
   One approach to this distinction is to identify certain types of intangible investment —
such as R&D-related intellectual property or business processes — that promote productivity
gains, while other types — such as patentable R&D, trademarks or brands — that confer
market power. Features common to all forms of intangible capital, such as scalability or
non-transferability, may also have different implications depending on the type of goods
or services which the industry produces. Pursuing these hypotheses requires more refined
data on intangible capital, which is not generally available at the firm level, though data
collection is improving and may change with updates to accounting and measurement of
intangible capital. In addition, modeling of industry equilibrium will provide more structure
for the analysis of industry concentration.
   As we work to refine and understand the role of intangible capital, however, the fact is
that software, intellectual property, business practices, and other intangibles are already a
substantial presence on firms’ balance sheets and in the national accounts.



References

Abel, A. B. and J. C. Eberly (1994). A unified model of investment under uncertainty.
  American Economic Review 84 (5), 1369.

Alexander, L. and J. Eberly (2018). Investment hollowing out. IMF Economic Review 66 (1),
  5–30.

Autor, D. (2010). The polarization of job opportunities in the us labor market: Implications
  for employment and earnings. Center for American Progress and The Hamilton Project 6.
                                              38
Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2017). The fall of the
  labor share and the rise of superstar firms. National Bureau of Economic Research working
  paper .

Bhandari, A. and E. R. McGrattan (2018). Sweat equity in us private business. National
  Bureau of Economic Research working paper .

Blair, M. M. and S. M. Wallman (2000). Unseen wealth: Report of the Brookings task force
  on intangibles. Brookings Institution Press.

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2005). Measuring capital and technology: an ex-
  panded framework. In Measuring capital in the new economy, pp. 11–46. University of
  Chicago Press.

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2009). Intangible capital and us economic growth.
  Review of income and wealth 55 (3), 661–685.

Crouzet, N. and J. Eberly (2018). Intangibles, investment, and efficiency. American Eco-
  nomic Review, Papers and Proceedings 108, 426–31.

De Loecker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2017). The rise of market power and the macroeconomic
  implications. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper .

Fernald, J. G., R. E. Hall, J. H. Stock, and M. W. Watson (2017). The disappointing recovery
  of output after 2009. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Gourio, F. and L. Rudanko (2014). Customer capital. Review of Economic Studies 81 (3),
  1102–1136.

Gutiérrez, G. and T. Philippon (2017). Investmentless growth: An empirical investigation.
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2017 (2), 89–190.

Gutiérrez, G. and T. Philippon (2018). Declining competition and investment in the us.
  National Bureau of Economic Research working paper .
                                            39
Hall, R. E. (1988). The relation between price and marginal cost in us industry. Journal of
  political Economy 96 (5), 921–947.

Hall, R. E. (2015). Quantifying the lasting harm to the us economy from the financial crisis.
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 29 (1), 71–128.

Hall, R. E. (2018). New evidence on the markup of prices over marginal costs and the role
  of mega-firms in the us economy. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper .

Haskel, J. and S. Westlake (2017). Capitalism without capital: the rise of the intangible
  economy. Princeton University Press.

Hayashi, F. (1982). Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation. Econo-
  metrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 213–224.

Kamiyama, S., J. Sheehan, and C. Martinez (2006). Valuation and exploitation of intellectual
  property. OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers 2006/05.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997). Credit cycles. Journal of political economy 105 (2),
  211–248.

Lev, B. (2000). Intangibles: Management, measurement, and reporting. Brookings institution
  press.

Li, W. C. and B. H. Hall (2016). Depreciation of business r&d capital. National Bureau of
  Economic Research working paper .

Loumioti, M. (2012). The use of intangible assets as loan collateral. University of Southern
  California working paper .

Mirrlees, J., S. Adam, T. Besley, R. Blundell, S. Bond, R. Chote, M. Gammie, P. Johnson,
  G. Myles, and J. Poterba (2012). The mirrlees review: a proposal for systematic tax
  reform. National Tax Journal 65 (3), 655.

                                              40
Mishkin, F. S. (1995). Symposium on the monetary transmission mechanism. Journal of
  Economic perspectives 9 (4), 3–10.

Nakamura, L. I. (2010). Intangible assets and national income accounting. Review of Income
  and Wealth 56, S135–S155.

OECD (2015). Enquiries into intellectual property’s economic impact. OECD Science,
  Technology and Industry Working Papers.

Peters, R. H. and L. A. Taylor (2017). Intangible capital and the investment-q relation.
  Journal of Financial Economics 123 (2), 251–272.




                                            41
42
          .16




          .14




          .12




           .1




          .08


                       1990                1995                 2000                2005                   2010          2015

                                PPE Investment rate (Compustat, average)              PPE Investment rate (BEA)
                                PPE Investment rate (Compustat, aggregate)



                                                                 (a)

                                  Consumer                                                     High-tech
           .2


          .15


           .1


          .05

                                  Healthcare                                                 Manufacturing
           .2


          .15


           .1


          .05
                1990     1995       2000       2005    2010      2015        1990     1995      2000       2005   2010   2015


                              PPE Investment rate (Compustat, average)              PPE Investment rate (BEA)
                              PPE Investment rate (Compustat, aggregate)



                                                                 (b)

Figure 1: Aggregate and sector-level investment. In Compustat data, investment is defined as
 capx
ppegt . The two Compustat investment rates reported are the industry-wide average (blue line) and
the ratio of industry total capital expenditures to industry total property, plant and equipment
(purple line). In the BEA data, investment is defined as the ratio of investment in physical assets
to their replacement cost. Investment rates are computed first at the KLEMS industry level, then
weighted across industries using the value added of the industry in 2001. The top panel reports
the economy-wide average, and the bottom panel reports the average for four major sector groups.
Details on the data sources and the industrial classification used to define the four sectors are
reported in the Online Appendix.
                                                                  43
              .05




                0




             -.05




              -.1




             -.15
                           1990                 1995                 2000               2005                  2010          2015

                                                               Investment gap          +/- 2 s.e.



                                                                     (a)

                                         Consumer                                                     High-tech
              .05

               0

             -.05

              -.1

             -.15


                                         Healthcare                                                 Manufacturing
              .05

               0

             -.05

              -.1

             -.15

                    1990          1995   2000      2005       2010     2015     1990      1995        2000    2005   2010   2015


                                                          Investment gap         +/- 2 s.e.



                                                                     (b)

Figure 2: The economy-wide and sectoral investment gaps. The investment gap is measured first
at the KLEMS industry level, as the time effect γt in the regression ij,t = αj + γt + δQj,t−1 +
βCFj,t−1 + j,t . In this regression, j indexes a firm and t indexes a year. The regression controls
for Q, as well as for the ratio of cash flow to assets, CF ; see the Online Appendix for a definition
of these in terms of Compustat variables. The top panel shows economy-wide averages, while the
second panel shows average for four major sector groups. Averages of the time effects γt across
industries are weighted using the industry’s nominal value added in 2001. Details on the data
sources and the industrial classification used to define the four sectors are reported in the Online
Appendix.
                                                                      44
          .5                                                                                                                         .15




          .4                                                                                                                         .14




                                                                                                                                     .13
          .3




                                                                                                                                     .12
          .2




                                                                                                                                     .11
          .1
                        1990                1995                2000                 2005               2010                2015

                   Balance sheet intangibles (Compustat, average; LHS)         Capitalized software and IP (BEA, aggregate; RHS)
                   Balance sheet intangibles (Compustat, aggregate; LHS)



                                                                        (a)

                                   Consumer                                                     High-tech
           .6                                                                                                                        .4

                                                                                                                                     .3
           .4

                                                                                                                                     .2
           .2
                                                                                                                                     .1

           0                                                                                                                         0

                                   Healthcare                                                 Manufacturing
           .6                                                                                                                        .4

                                                                                                                                     .3
           .4

                                                                                                                                     .2
           .2
                                                                                                                                     .1

           0                                                                                                                         0
                 1990      1995      2000       2005     2010     2015        1990     1995      2000       2005    2010      2015


                Balance sheet intangibles (Compustat, average; LHS)              Capitalized software and IP (BEA, aggregate; RHS)
                Balance sheet intangibles (Compustat, aggregate; LHS)



                                                                        (b)

Figure 3: Intangible capital as a fraction of total firm capital. The graphs report measures of the
intangible share using Compustat data (solid lines) and BEA data (dashed line). The Compustat
                           intan
measures use the ratio intan+ppegt . The two Compustat ratios reported are industry-level averages of
firm-level intangible shares, and industry level total intangible capital, as a fraction of total capital.
In the BEA data, the intangible share is defined as the ratio of the replacement cost of non-physical
capital (own-account software, R&D, and other intellectual property), to the replacement cost of
total capital. Averages across industries are computed using the industry’s share of nominal value
added in 2001. Details on the data sources and the industrial classification are reported in the
Online Appendix.
                                                                         45
                  .05




                   0




                 -.05




                  -.1
                                   Energy   Transportation       Telecoms          Retail and       Manufacturing        IT and    Healthcare
                                             warehousing                           wholesale                            software


                                                               1988-1995            1995-2005              2005-2015




Figure 4: Changes in the composition of investment. This graph reports the change in the share
of aggregate investment of seven major sectors between 1988 and 2015. See the Online Appendix
for details on the industrial classification; the Utilities, Finance, Construction, and Others sectors
are omitted. The data are from the BEA fixed asset tables.




                        .05




                          0




                        -.05




                         -.1




                        -.15
                               0                                    .2                                        .4                                .6
                                                     Balance sheet intangibles as a share of total assets (average, Compustat)

                                                                   Investment gap (p.p.)            Fitted values




Figure 5: Scatterplot of the industry-level investment gap, γt against the average intangible share.
The investment gaps are estimated at the level of the 52 KLEMS industries, then averaged up to
the 12 sector level, using the value added share of the industry in 2001 as weights. The intangible
                                                   intan
share is defined at the firm level as the ratio intan+ppegt . The average intangible share is computed
for each KLEMS industry and year separately; it is then averaged to the 12 sector and year level,
using the same weights as for the measures of the investment gap.


                                                                                 46
              .05




                0




             -.05




              -.1




             -.15
                           1990              1995                  2000                  2005                     2010            2015

                                  Investment gap                                                              +/- 2 s.e.
                                  Investment gap residual, after controlling for intangible share



                                                                 (a)

                                   Consumer                                                           High-tech
             .05

               0

             -.05

              -.1

             -.15


                                   Healthcare                                                       Manufacturing
             .05

               0

             -.05

              -.1

             -.15

                    1990   1995     2000      2005       2010       2015      1990       1995         2000    2005         2010   2015


                                                     Investment gap             +/- 2 s.e.



                                                                 (b)

Figure 6: The investment gap, before and after projecting onto average firm-level intangible
shares. The top panel shows economy-wide averages, while the second panel shows average for
four major sector groups. The blue line reports averages of the industry-level estimates of the
investment gap, with a 2 standard error confidence band. The dashed green line plots the residual
from the regression of the industry-level investment gap on the industry-level Compustat intangible
share, including industry fixed effects. This is the same specification as in the first line, second
column of table 1. Averaging across industries, to the sector- or economy-wide levels is done using
the industry’s share of nominal value added in 2001.
                                                                  47
                                     Consumer                                                         High-tech

                  .1


                  0


                 -.1


                 -.2

                                     Healthcare                                                     Manufacturing

                  .1


                  0


                 -.1


                 -.2
                       1990   1995   2000        2005       2010       2015      1990        1995     2000        2005   2010   2015


                                     Investment gap (bottom quartile of intangible intensity)            +/- 2 s.e.
                                     Investment gap (top quartile of intangible intensity)




Figure 7: The investment gap among high and low intangible intensity firms. The orange line plots
the estimated investment gap among low intangible intensity firms, and the shaded area reports
the +/- 2 standard error bands. The blue line reports the investment gap among high intangible
intensity firms. Low intangible intensity firms are defined as the bottom quartile of the intangible
share in a particular KLEMS industry/year; high intangible intensity firms are defined at the top
quartile. The results are computed at the KLEMS industry level, and averaged across industries
weighting by industries’ share of nominal value added. We use Compustat balance sheet intangibles
intan to total assets intan+ppegt as our measure of intangible intensity.




                                                                       48
                                     Consumer                                                        High-tech
                  .1



                  0



                 -.1



                 -.2

                                     Healthcare                                                    Manufacturing
                  .1



                  0



                 -.1



                 -.2
                       1990   1995   2000       2005      2010        2015      1990        1995     2000        2005   2010   2015


                                        Investment gap                                              +/- 2 s.e.
                                        Investment gap (after controling for intangibles)




Figure 8: The investment gap after controlling for intangibles. The red line plots the estimated
investment gap among all firms, and the +/- 2 standard error bands. The green line reports
                                                                           K
the investment gap after controlling for the end-of-period ratio νt+1 = K2,t+1
                                                                            1,t+1
                                                                                  at the firm level,
where K1,t+1 is physical capital and K2,t+1 is intangible capital. We use Compustat balance sheet
intangibles intan to total assets intan+ppegt as our proxy for νt+1 .




                                                                      49
                   Consumer goods                                                          High-tech
    .25                                                 .3         .18                                                 .5


                                                        .25        .16                                                 .4
     .2
                                                                   .14
                                                        .2                                                             .3

    .15                                                            .12
                                                        .15                                                            .2
                                                                    .1
     .1                                                 .1                                                             .1
          1990     2000           2010           2020                    1990           2000           2010     2020

                     Healthcare                                                          Manufacturing
     .2                                                 .4         .15                                                 .3


                                                                   .14                                                 .25
    .15                                                 .3

                                                                   .13                                                 .2

     .1                                                 .2
                                                                   .12                                                 .15

                                                                                                                       .1
    .05                                                 .1         .11
          1990     2000           2010           2020                    1990           2000           2010     2020


                   Herfindahl index of sales (LHS)                 Balance sheet intangibles (Compustat, RHS)



Figure 9: The graphs plot the average concentration of sales in four broad sector groups, jointly
with the average share of intangibles. The share of intangibles is measured using Compustat balance
sheet intangibles. Averages across industries (within a sector) are weighted using the share of value
added of the industry in 2001. Details on the data sources and the industrial classification are
reported in the Online Appendix.




                                                              50
            1.7




            1.6




            1.5




            1.4




            1.3




            1.2
                          1990                   1995                   2000                  2005                   2010              2015

                            sales/cogs                 sales/cogs, adjusted to match average Hall (2018) average markup estimates
                            θ*sales/cogs



                                                                         (a)

                                         Consumer                                                        High-tech

             2.5


              2


             1.5


              1


                                         Healthcare                                                    Manufacturing

             2.5


              2


             1.5


              1

                   1990       1995        2000        2005     2010       2015       1990       1995      2000       2005       2010   2015


                          sales/cogs              sales/cogs, adjusted to match average Hall (2018) industry markup estimates
                          θ*sales/cogs



                                                                         (b)

Figure 10: Trends in markups. The top panel shows economy-wide averages, while the second
panel shows average for four major sector groups. The purple line shows the raw average of
sale/cogs; the long dashed grey line shows the average of sale/cogs, adjusted to match the Hall
(2018) estimates of average industry markups over the period; the short dashed blue line shows
estimates of the markups obtained using the methodology of De Loecker and Eeckhout (2017). For
the last line, we estimate output elasticities θ at the KLEMS industry level, but do not adjust for
the residuals in that estimation; see the Online Appendix for details. All estimates are constructed
at the KLEMS industry level first, then averaged across industries using their share of nominal
value added in 2001. At the industry level, the markup ratios are averaged using firm-level sales
in that year as weights. Markups are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles, by year. Finally,
the agricultural and mining sectors are dropped, as markup measures obtained using the KLEMS
data are negative in both cases.                  51
             250




             200




             150




             100
                          1990                   1995                   2000             2005                   2010           2015

                                    Sales per worker (Compustat; LHS)                   Output per hour (KLEMS; LHS)
                                    Sales per worker, at cost (Compustat; LHS)



                                                                        (a)

                                        Consumer                                                    High-tech
             600

             500

             400

             300

             200

             100

                                       Healthcare                                                 Manufacturing
             600

             500

             400

             300

             200

             100
                   1990      1995        2000       2005     2010        2015    1990      1995      2000       2005   2010    2015


                   Sales per worker (Compustat, base 1988 = 100)                    Output per hour (KLEMS, base 1988 = 100)
                   Sales per worker, at cost (Compustat, base 1988 = 100)



                                                                        (b)

Figure 11: Trends in labor productivity across industries. The top panel shows economy-wide
averages, while the second panel shows averages for four major sector groups. The two solid lines are
derived from Compustat data. The purple line is the ratio of industry/year total sales (Compustat
variable sale) to industry/year total workers (Compustat variable emp). The blue line is the ratio
of industry/year total cost of goods (Compustat variable cogs) to industry/year total workers.
Variables are deflated by the output price index for the corresponding KLEMS industry, obtained
from the KLEMS database. The dashed line is output per hour from the KLEMS database. All
estimates are constructed at the KLEMS industry level first, then averaged across industries using
their share of nominal value added in 2001. All estimates are normalized to 100 in 1988.

                                                                         52
    .2




    .1




    0




   -.1




   -.2
         -.3            -.2             -.1                       0                     .1   .2
                                  Compustat intangible share of industry (centered)

                                  Industry leverage (centered)          Fitted values



Figure 12: Relationship between intangible intensity and leverage at the industry level. Leverage
is defined at the ratio of total debt (Compustat items dlc and dltt) to total book assets (Compustat
item at). Intangibles are defined as Compustat balance sheet intangibles, but the results are robust
to different definitions of the intangible share. The data are aggregated to the twelve-sector KLEMS
level, weighting underlying KLEMS industries by their share of value added in 2001. Both leverage
and the intangible share are plotted net of industry effects. The slope is −0.16, with a t-stat of
−1.64 with industry-clustered standard errors.




                                                      53
                                                   Dependent variable : investment gap
                                                         (1)            (2)              (3)

    Compustat intangible share st (OLS)              −0.137***     −0.210***        −0.065**
                                                    (−6.84)      (−10.44)          (−2.38)

       Compustat intangible share st (IV)            −0.130***     −0.303***        −0.269***
                                                    (−2.82)       (−7.68)          (−3.02)
                          First-stage F-stat         47.94          33.72            13.54

                                Observations            1456         1456             1456
                                Industry f.e.            No            Yes               Yes
                                     Year f.e.           No             No               Yes

Table 1: Regressions of the investment gap on average industry-wide intangible shares. An
observation is a KLEMS industry/year. Model (1) contains no fixed effects; model (2) contains
KLEMS industry effects; model (3) contains KLEMS industry and year effects. In all models,
standard errors are clustered at the industry and time level; t-statistics are reported in parentheses.
The first and second line contains estimates of a simple OLS regression of the investment gap on the
Compustat intangible share, while the third to fifth lines contain estimates where the Compustat
intangible share has been instrumented using the BEA’s estimate of the intangible capital share in
the KLEMS industry. See main text for a definition of the dependent and independent variables.
* : p < 0.10, ** : p < 0.05, *** : p < 0.01.


                                             Dependent variable : market share
                                                  (A)             (B)              (C)

         Compustat intangible share                0.0131***      0.0096***        0.0073***
                                                 (17.69)         (5.40)           (4.91)

                          Observations           98520           97245           97245
                  Industry × year f.e.            Yes             No               No
                               Firm f.e.           No             Yes              Yes
                               Year f.e.           No             No               Yes

Table 2: Firm-level relationship between market share and intangible share. The dependent
variable is the firm’s share of total sales in its KLEMS industry, and the independent variable is its
intangible share. Model (A) contains year-industry fixed effects; models (B) and (C) contain firm
effects (and, in the case of model (C), year effects). In model (A), standard errors are clustered at
the industry and year level; in models (B) and (C), they are clustered at the firm and year level.
t-statistics in parentheses. *** : p < 0.10, ** : p < 0.05, *** : p < 0.01.




                                                   54
    Sector group     Share of value added (2001)        Av. OLS coefficient     t-stat of av. > 2?

       Consumer                     0.17                           0.78                 yes
       High-tech                    0.09                           0.11                 yes
      Healthcare                    0.09                           0.19                 yes
  Manufacturing                     0.19                           0.19                 yes
            Other                   0.46                      −0.20                     no

Table 3: Industry-level average correlation between intangible intensity and concentration. For
each KLEMS industry, a regression of the Herfindahl index of sales on the industry-level intangible
intensity is estimated. The coefficients are then averaged across industries in a particular sector
group. The standard errors are also averaged across industries; the t-stat of the average is the ratio
of the two.

                                                   Dependent variable : markup (log)

                                           Consumer     Manufacturing     High-tech     Healthcare

  Compustat intangible share st (OLS)       −0.132***        0.044*          0.452***       0.709***
                                           (−6.32)          (1.62)          (5.90)         (6.01)

    Compustat intangible share st (IV)      −0.157***        0.879***        0.498***       1.424***
                                           (−8.75)          (2.98)          (2.81)        (18.17)
                     First-stage F-stat    802.12           10.47           89.31         617.89

                         Observations        56              504             168              112
                         Industry f.e.       Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes

Table 4: Industry-level relationship between markups and the share of intangible assets. The
dependent variable is the log of the industry-wide average markup, defined as the ratio sale/cogs,
adjusted to match the industry-level average markups estimated using the Hall (2018) method.
Results are reported separately for 4 broad group of sectors. All regressions contain industry
effects. The first panel reports the simple OLS coefficient, while the second panel report coefficients
when the Compustat intangible share is instrumented using the BEA measure of intangibles. The
t-statistics reported in parentheses are computed using heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.
Cragg-Donald F statistic reported for the first stage. * : p < 0.10, ** : p < 0.05, *** : p < 0.01.




                                                   55
                                                                    Dependent variable : markup (log)
     Panel A                                                       Cross-sectional (between) regressions
                                              Consumer              Manufacturing               High-tech               Healthcare
     Compustat intangible share sj,t            −0.019                    0.099***                 0.063                    0.421***
     (OLS)                                     (−0.49)                   (3.85)                   (1.64)                   (4.56)
     Compustat intangible share sj,t              0.204                   0.997***                 2.231***                 2.754***
     (IV)                                        (1.42)                  (8.18)                   (6.81)                   (5.92)
     First-stage F stat                         76.9                    202.6                     42.4                     81.0
     Observations                                8027                    24436                    19730                    10296
     Firms                                       646                      1726                     1718                     878
     Firm-level controls                         Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
     Standard error clustering          Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm
     Industry-year f.e.                          Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
     Firm f.e.                                    No                       No                       No                       No

     Panel B                                                             Panel (within) regressions
                                              Consumer              Manufacturing               High-tech               Healthcare
     Compustat intangible share sj,t              0.008                   0.044***                 0.012                    0.119*
     (OLS)                                       (0.46)                  (3.19)                   (0.50)                   (1.90)
     Compustat intangible share sj,t            −0.057                    1.103***                 0.723***                 4.509***
     (IV)                                      (−0.26)                   (3.35)                   (3.41)                   (2.80)
     First-stage F stat                         11.7                     19.9                     32.4                     10.9
     Observations                                8027                    24436                    19730                    10296
     Firms                                       646                      1726                     1718                     878
     Firm-level controls                   Yes (excl. age)          Yes (excl. age)          Yes (excl. age)          Yes (excl. age)
     Standard error clustering          Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm
     Industry-year f.e.                          Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
     Firm f.e.                                   Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Table 5: Firm-level relationship between intangibles and markups. The depend variable is log (sale/cogs). Panel A reports results from
specifications without firm fixed effects, while panel B reports results from specifications with firm fixed effects. The Compustat intangible
share is intan/(ppegt + intan). The instruments in the IV specifications are either the ratio of capitalized R&D expenditures to capital
(excluding balance sheet intangibles), kknow /(kknow + korg + ppegt), or the ratio of (a fraction of) capitalized SG&A expenditures to
capital, korg /(kknow + korg + ppegt), or both. The variables kknow and korg are obtained from Peters and Taylor (2017). All dependent
variables are measured at the beginning of the observation year. Firm controls are: size (log(ppegt)), age (years since first appearance
in CRSP), leverage ((dlc+dltt)/at), and cash flow to assets (ebitda/at). Kleibergen-Paap (KP) Wald F statistics are reported for the
IV specifications. The excluded instruments (the Peters-Taylor intangible shares) are selected according to the following criterion: if the
KP statistic is higher than the Stock-Yogo critical values for 15% maximal IV size, keep both; otherwise, keep the one with the highest
KP statistics. This criterion selects both the SG&A and R&D share for the High-tech and Manufacturing sector, and only the SG&A
share for Consumer and Healthcare sectors. * : p < 0.10, ** : p < 0.05, *** : p < 0.01.
                                           Dependent variable : labor productivity (log)

                                         Consumer      Manufacturing   High-tech      Healthcare

  Compustat intangible share st (OLS)       2.869***        2.153***       1.713***      1.346***
                                          (16.49)         (17.67)         (6.77)        (5.08)

   Compustat intangible share st (IV)      3.386***       −0.614          3.380***       0.555***
                                         (14.64)         (−0.45)         (4.76)         (3.99)
                    First-stage F-stat   214.98           10.01         116.16        1547.90

                        Observations       56              504            168            112
                        Industry f.e.      Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes

Table 6: Industry-level relationship between intangibles and labor productivity. The dependent
variable is the log of the industry-wide ratio of cost of goods sold (cogs) to industry-wide employ-
ment (emp), after deflating cogs using the KLEMS price indices. Results are reported separately
for 4 broad group of sectors. All regressions contain industry effects. The first panel reports the
simple OLS coefficient, while the second panel reports coefficients when the Compustat intangible
share is instrumented using the BEA measure of intangibles. The t-statistics reported in parenthe-
ses are computed using heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. * : p < 0.10, ** : p < 0.05, ***
: p < 0.01.




                                                 57
                                                                Dependent variable : labor productivity (log)
     Panel A                                                        Cross-sectional (between) regressions
                                             Consumer                Manufacturing              High-tech               Healthcare
     Compustat intangible share sj,t            0.561***                  0.123                    0.082                  −0.316***
     (OLS)                                     (2.98)                    (1.62)                   (1.45)                 (−2.87)
     Compustat intangible share sj,t            0.593                     0.428                    0.840**                −1.610***
     (IV)                                      (0.85)                    (1.49)                   (2.37)                 (−2.85)
     First-stage F stat                        71.3                     200.7                     41.5                    79.7
     Observations                               8027                     24436                    19730                    10296
     Firms                                      646                       1726                     1718                     878
     Firm-level controls                        Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes
     Standard error clustering         Industry-year and firm    Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm
     Industry-year f.e.                         Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes
     Firm f.e.                                   No                        No                       No                       No

     Panel B                                                             Panel (within) regressions
                                             Consumer                Manufacturing              High-tech               Healthcare
     Compustat intangible share sj,t            0.247***                −0.016                     0.044                  −0.033
     (OLS)                                     (3.18)                  (−0.24)                    (1.25)                 (−0.48)
     Compustat intangible share sj,t            2.736***                  0.854                    0.834***               −3.988**
     (IV)                                      (2.79)                    (1.27)                   (2.72)                 (−2.49)
     First-stage F stat                        11.3                     20.3                      30.9                     9.1
     Observations                               8027                     24436                    19730                    10296
     Firms                                      646                       1726                     1718                     878
     Firm-level controls                  Yes (excl. age)           Yes (excl. age)          Yes (excl. age)          Yes (excl. age)
     Standard error clustering         Industry-year and firm    Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm   Industry-year and firm
     Industry-year f.e.                         Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes
     Firm f.e.                                  Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes

Table 7: Firm-level relationship between intangibles and labor productivity. The depend variable is log (cogs/emp), where cogs
has been deflated at the KLEMS industry level using the KLEMS output price deflators. Panel A reports results from specifications
without firm fixed effects, while panel B reports results from specifications with firm fixed effects. The Compustat intangible share
is intan/(ppegt + intan). The instruments in the IV specifications are either the ratio of capitalized R&D expenditures to capital
(excluding balance sheet intangibles), kknow /(kknow + korg + ppegt), or the ratio of (a fraction of) capitalized SG&A expenditures to
capital, korg /(kknow + korg + ppegt), or both. The variables kknow and korg are obtained from Peters and Taylor (2017). All dependent
variables are measured at the beginning of the observation year. Firm controls are: size (log(ppegt)), age (years since first appearance
in CRSP), leverage ((dlc+dltt)/at), and cash flow to assets (ebitda/at). t-statistics in parentheses. Kleibergen-Paap (KP) Wald F
statistics are reported for the IV specifications. The excluded instruments (the Peters-Taylor intangible shares) are selected according to
the following criterion: if the KP statistic is higher than the Stock-Yogo critical values for 15% maximal IV size, keep both; otherwise,
keep the one with the highest KP statistics. This criterion selects both the SG&A and R&D share for the High-tech and Manufacturing
sector, and only the SG&A share for Consumer and Healthcare sectors. * : p < 0.10, ** : p < 0.05, *** : p < 0.01.
A       Theory
This appendix describes in detail the model used in section III to discuss how omitted factors
may affect the interpretation of empirical investment-Q regressions.

I.A      Firm model
Time is discrete. The firm solves:
                                  ρ             ρ
                                                                  ρ1
 V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) = max At αK1,t + (1 − α)K2,t                     − C (1) (K1,t , I1,t , P1,t ) − C (2) (K2,t , I2,t , P2,t )
                                          1
                                     +       Et [V (K1,t+1 , K2,t+1 ; Xt+1 )]
                                         1+r
                           s.t.   K1,t+1 = I1,t+1 + (1 − δ1 )K1,t

                                  K2,t+1 = I2,t+1 + (1 − δ2 )K2,t
                                                                                             (19)
where K1,t and K2,t are two types of capital, and Xt = (At , P1,t , P2,t ) collects the exogenous
processes entering the firm’s problem. At captures both firm-specific and aggregate business
conditions, and Pn,t denotes the price of capital of type n. We assume that all three follow
stationary first-order Markov processes. Note that the two types of capital are also allowed
to depreciated at different rates. Furthermore, following Hayashi (1982), we assume that
adjustment costs for each type of capital are quadratic:
                                                                        2 !
                                                       In,t   γ n   In,t
                    C (n) (In,t , Kn,t , Pi,t ) = Pn,t      +                 Kn,t ,         (20)
                                                       Kn,t   2 Kn,t

where γn captures the curvature of the adjustment costs for capital of type i.
   The revenue function of the firm has constant returns to scale with respect to the two
capital inputs (K1,t , K2,t ). The parameter ρ ∈ ]−∞, 1] controls the elasticity of substitution
between the two types of capital. They are substitutes if 0 < ρ < 1, with ρ = 1 the perfect
substitutes (additive) case. They are complements if ρ < 0, with ρ = −∞, the perfect
complements (Leontieff) case. When ρ = 0, the revenue function is Cobb-Douglas in the two
forms of capital, with shares (α, 1 − α).30

   30
     Here, we use the terms “complements” and “substitutes” to refer to the responsiveness of the ratio of the
two capital types to the ratio of their prices. To see why the cases ρ < 0 and ρ > 0 map to complementarity
and substitutability in this model, note that, when γ1 = γ2 = 0, and when all stochastic processes are
assumed to be constant, the optimal investment policy involves choosing:
                                                                          1
                                                                         1−ρ
                                          K2         1 − α δ1 + r P1
                                             =                                  .                                       (21)
                                          K1           α δ2 + r P2
                                                                                     1
A 1% fall in the relative user cost of type-2 capital therefore leads to a          1−ρ   % increase in the ratio of type-2
                                                          59
I.B      Optimal investment and firm value
It is straightforward to show that the first-order conditions for optimal investment are:
                                                           
                               1     1
                        in,t =           Et [qn,t+1 ] − Pn,t , n = 1, 2                   (22)
                               γn 1 + r

where:
                                       In,t              ∂V
                              in,t ≡        ,   qn,t ≡       (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) .                     (23)
                                       Kn,t              ∂Kn
Moreover, the constant returns to scale assumption implies the following decomposition of
firm value.

Lemma 1. The value function of the firm can be written as:

                        V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) = q1 (νt ; Xt ) K1,t + q2 (νt ; Xt ) K2,t ,              (24)

where:
                                                         K2,t
                                                  νt ≡        .                                        (25)
                                                         K1,t
Proof. We first establish the homogeneity of degee 1 of V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) in (K1,t , K2,t ) fol-
lowing the method of Abel and Eberly (1994). Fix K1,t , K2,t . Let a > 0. We have:

                              V (aK1,t , aK2,t ; Xt ) ≥ aV (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ).                        (26)

Indeed, the investment plan (aI1,t+k , aI2,t+k )k≥0 (where (I1,t+k , I2,t+k )k≥0 is the optimal plan
starting from (K1,t , K2,t )) is implementable from (aK2,t , aK1,t ) and yields aV (K1,t , K2,t ),
because of the linear homogeneity of the objective and constraints. Since we have established
this for arbitrary (K1,t , K2,t , a), we also have that:
                                                   
                           1           1                 1
                     V       (aK1,t ), (aK2,t ); Xt ≥ V (aK1,t , aK2,t ; Xt ).                  (27)
                           a           a                 a

So,
                         V (aK1,t , aK2,t ; Xt ) = aV (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) ∀a > 0,                      (28)
that is, V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) is homogeneous of degree one in (K1,t , K2,t ). Using Euler’s theorem,
the homogeneity of degree one implies that:
                                       ∂V                            ∂V
             V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) =       (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt )K1,t +     (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt )K2,t .     (29)
                                       ∂K1                           ∂K2
Additionally, the partial derivatives of V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) with respect to K1,t and K2,t are



to type-1 capital. This elasticity is +∞ in the perfect substitutes case, 0 in the perfect complements case,
and 1 in the Cobb-Douglas case. Note that, when ρ > 0, the marginal revenue product of one type of capital
is increasing in the other capital’s input, while when ρ < 0, it is decreasing.
                                                       60
homogeneous of degee 0 with respect to (K1,t , K2,t ). This implies that we can write:
                                                 
       ∂V                        ∂V      K2,t                        ∂V
q1,t =     (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) =      1,      ; Xt ≡ q1 (νt ; Xt ) ,     (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) = q2 (νt ; Xt ) .
       ∂K1                       ∂K1     K1,t                        ∂K2
                                                                                                 (30)
 Moreover, the envelope theorem implies that the marginal qi functions satisfy the following
two dynamic equations:
                                            1                       γ1 2      1 − δ1
   q1 (νt ; Xt ) = αAt (α + (1 − α)νtρ ) ρ −1                      +   i1,t +        Et [q1 (νt+1 ; Xt+1 ] .
                                                                    2         1+r
                                                     1              γ2        1 − δ2
   q2 (νt ; Xt ) = (1 − α)At (α + (1 − α)νtρ ) ρ −1 νtρ−1          + i22,t +         Et [q2 (νt+1 , Xt+1 )] ,
                                                                    2         1+r
                                                                                                             (31)
                             i2,t + (1 − δ2 )
where i1,t , i2,t and νt+1 =                   νt denotes the optimal investment policies. Both
                             i1,2 + (1 − δ1 )
marginal q functions can thus be expressed as the expected discounted present value of
positive terms; therefore, qi,t (νt ; Xt ) ≥ 0, i = 1, 2.

I.C     Generalization to other cost functions, and the q1 = q2 case
Note that assuming perfect substitutability (ρ = 1) in the previous model is in general not
sufficient to eliminate biases in Q regressions, even when replacing average Q by ”total”
                 V
average Q,            . Indeed, in the perfect substitutes case, the dynamic equations for
             K1 + K 2
marginal q become:
                                                  γ1 2      1 − δ1
                 q1 (νt ; Xt ) = αAt             +   i1,t +        Et [q1 (νt+1 ; Xt+1 ] .
                                                  2         1+r
                                                                                                            (32)
                                                  γ2        1 − δ2
                 q2 (νt ; Xt ) = (1 − α)At       + i22,t +         Et [q2 (νt+1 , Xt+1 )] ,
                                                  2         1+r
In this case, the marginal q functions are independent of νt (qi (νt ; Xt ) = qi (Xt )). But even
so, they are not necessarily equal — at least not so long as α 6= 12 , δ1 6= δ2 , γ1 = γ2 and
P1,t 6= P2,t . As a result, total Q is still different from either of the marginal q functions.
    More assumptions are needed to obtain equal marginal q functions. Assume that the
adjustment cost functions take a general form:

                                       Ci (I1,t , I2,t , K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ),                                (33)

while remaining homogeneous of degree 1 in (I1,t , I2,t , K1,t , K2,t ) and convex. With these
general cost functions we still obtain the firm value decomposition:

                        V (K1,t , K2,t ; Xt ) = q1 (νt ; Xt )K1,t + q2 (νt ; Xt )K2,t ,                     (34)

where q1 and q2 are again marginal q for each capital type, which are now governed by the



                                                         61
following dynamic equations:
                                            1            ∂C1,t   ∂C2,t   1 − δ1
 q1 (νt ; Xt ) = αAt (α + (1 − α)νtρ ) ρ −1 −                  −       +        Et [q1 (νt+1 ; Xt+1 )]
                                                         ∂K1,t ∂K1,t     1+r
                                                    ∂C1,t
                                                        1   ∂C2,t    1 − δ2
 q2 (νt ; Xt ) = (1 − α)At (α + (1 − α)νtρ ) ρ −1 νtρ−1 − −       +         Et [q2 (νt+1 ; Xt+1 )]
                                                    ∂K2,t ∂K2,t       1+r
                                                                                            (35)
Because of their homogeneity of degree 0, the partial derivatives of the cost functions can
always be written as a function only of νt and investment rates.
   Using this generalized cost function, we can pinpoint more specifically the cases in which
q1 = q2 . Assume that the cost functions have the property that:
         ∂C1,t   ∂C2,t   ∂C1,t   ∂C2,t    1 γ1 I1,t + γ2 I2,t    1                   
               +       =       +       =−                     = − γ1 ĩ1,t + γ2 ĩ2,t ,                              (36)
         ∂K1,t ∂K1,t     ∂K2,t ∂K2,t      2 K1,t + K2,t          2
                                        i,t     I
where the investment rates ĩi,t ≡ K1,t +K  2,t
                                                . This is the assumption made in Peters and Taylor
(2017), who use the following cost function:
                                                                 2 !
                 PT               Ii,t            γ i      Ii,t
                Ci,t = Pi,t                   +                        (K1,t + K2,t ).        (37)
                              K1,t + K2,t         2 K1,t + K2,t

When adjustment cost functions satisfy the condition above, we can write the dynamic q
equations as:
                                            1                                       1 − δ1
 q1 (νt ; Xt ) = αAt (α + (1 − α)νtρ ) ρ −1 +               1
                                                            2
                                                                γ1 ĩ1,t + γ2 ĩ2,t +       Et [q1 (νt+1 ; Xt+1 )]
                                                                                      1+r
                                                        1                1 − δ2
 q2 (νt ; Xt ) = (1 − α)At (α + (1 − α)νtρ ) ρ −1 νtρ−1 +
                                                     γ1 ĩ1,t + γ2 ĩ2,t +    1
                                                                              2
                                                                                 Et [q2 (νt ; Xt )]
                                                                           1+r
                                                                                               (38)
Next, assume that inputs are perfect substitutes and have the same rates of depreciation:
                                                                 1
                                  ρ = 1,            α = (1 − α) = ,                δ1 = δ2 .                         (39)
                                                                 2
Under these assumptions the dynamic equations simplify to:
                                                                        1−δ
                q1 (νt ; Xt ) = 12 At +     1
                                            2
                                                    γ1 ĩ1,t + γ2 ĩ2,t +     Et [q1 (νt+1 ; Xt+1 )]
                                                                          1+r
                                                                                                                     (40)
                                  1         1
                                                                               1−δ
                q2 (νt ; Xt ) =     A
                                  2 t
                                        +   2
                                                    γ1 ĩ1,t + γ2 ĩ2,t       +     Et [q2 (νt+1 ; Xt+1 )]
                                                                                1+r
and so we have:
                                    q1 (νt ; Xt ) = q2 (νt ; Xt ) = q(Xt ).                                          (41)




                                                                 62
In that case,
                        Vt         1                 νt
            Qt =               =        q1 (Xt ) +        q2 (Xt ) = q1 (Xt ) = q2 (Xt ),   (42)
                   K1,t + K2,t   1 + νt            1 + νt

so that average Q regressions are unbiased. Note that the model is still not fully symmetric,
as it allows for different prices of investment and different adjustment costs. But because
inputs are perfect substitutes, both in the production and cost functions, only (weighted)
averages of the capital prices and adjustment costs matter.




                                                 63
