                       NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            DEINDUSTRIALIZATION, REINDUSTRIALIZATION, AND THE
                           REAL EXCHANGE RATE




                             Paul R. Krugman




                         Working Paper No. 2586




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                May 1988




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #2586
                                            May 1988



DeindustrializatiOn, ReindustrialiZatiOfl, and the Real Exchange Rate




                              ABSTRACT



      This paper models an economy in which it is costly to move
  resources between the tradeable and nontradeable sectors. The
  economy is subject to capital flows that are unpredictable and are
  perceived as having only limited persistence. The model shows that
  both the fact that capital flows are perceived as temporary and
  uncertainty per se act to limit the responsivesness of resource
  reallocation to real exchange rate movements. In turn, this
  reluctance of factors to move widens the range of real exchange
  rate variation, so that larger movements of the real exchange rate
  are needed to accommodate transitory, unpredictable capital flows
  than would be required to accommodate persistent, predictable
  flows of the same magnitude. The model also shows that large
  capital inflows that lead to real exchange rate appreciation large
  enough to induce resource reallocation will typically be followed
  by a depreciation of the real exchange rate to below its original
  level.




 Paul R. Krugman
 NBER
 1050 Massachusetts Ave.
 Cambridge, MA 02138
       Changes in a country's trade balance generally involve not

only substitution in demand between domestic and foreign goods,

but also reallocation of resources between tradeable and
nontradeable sectors. Since resource reallocation is not costless,

this means that the process of adjustment to a changed capital

flow involves investment decisions at the micro level - -   which   in

turn suggests that the dynamics of trade balance adjustment will

involve expectations as well as current values of economic

variables, and that uncertainty will affect the pace and character

of the adjustment process. The dynamics of trade balance
adjustment, in turn, must have a bearing on the behavior of

exchange rates. So it is important to attempt to model just how it

is that resources get reallocated when trade balances do change.

       This issue has become particularly relevant now. The massive

capital inflows to the US in the l980s had as their counterpart a

considerable reallocation of resources out of US tradeable

sectors, with employment and capacity falling sharply in many

export and import-competing industries. This "deindustrialization"

in the US had as its counterpart a corresponding growth of

capacity abroad. With a decline in the willingness of foreigners

to continue to supply capital to the US, there has been a sharp

decline in the real exchange rate - -      but   a disappointingly

sluggish reduction in the US trade deficit. In popular discussions

of the failure of US trade to turn around more quickly, a common

theme is that uncertainty has inhibited the adjustment process - -

that    both US and foreign firms have been reluctant to shift

resources, both because they have viewed the strong dollar as


                                 1
likely to return, and because in an uncertain environment they

have adopted a general "wait-and-see" attitude. There is now

widespread concern that the sluggish response of trade flows to

the exchange rate, brought about in part because of past exchange

rate volatility, will lead to further future volatility, because

the declining dollar will now have to "overshoot" its long run

level in order to persuade US firms to invest in the
"reindustrialization" that is now needed.

    Recent theoretical work in international economics has helped

to provide an analytical basis for these concerns. Baldwin and

Krugman (1987) argued that fixed costs of entering and leaving

markets could lead to "hysteresis" in the trade balance: an

appreciation that induces US firms to exit and foreign firms to

enter markets would require a subsequent depreciation below the

original point to induce them to move back. Dixit (1987a,b) showed

that a volatile exchange rate reinforces the "wait and see"

attitude of firms that must pay a price to enter or exit markets:

in effect, moving resources becomes the exercise of an option,

which adds a sort of shadow fixed cost to resource reallocation.

Krugman (1988) suggests that this response to uncertainty leads to

a multiplier process of real exchange rate volatility: the more

volatile the exchange race, the less responsive is trade; the

less responsive is trade, the more volatile the exchange rate.

This rapidly emerging literature is highly suggestive of the

importance of thinking about how resources get reallocated in an

uncertain world.

     In the theoretical literature to date, however, the problem


                                 2
of the simultaneous determination of resource reallocation and

exchange rate behavior has not been formally tackled. Dixit's

analysis simply posits an exchange rate process, without asking

how the behavior of firms might affect this process. Baldwin and

Krugrnan offer a preliminary analysis of joint determination, but

the analysis depends on the highly unsatisfactory assumption of

iid shocks to the capital account. Thus the obvious need is for an

approach that in at least a minimal way links the problem of

reallocating resources to the behavior of the real exchange rate,

and vice versa.

     This paper offers an effort to do this. I consider a minimal

model in which a country faces uncertain future capital flows and

in which it is costly to move resources between the tradeable and

nontradeable sectors of the economy. In this model real exchange

rate behavior and the investment behavior of individual agents are

jointly determined. The model is not a complete analysis of the

real exchange rate problem: the process generating capital flows

is simply assumed, not grounded in maximizing behavior.
Nonetheless, the approach makes at least a step toward greater

completeness, and yields highly suggestive results.

     There are two main conclusions from the model. The first is

that an economy subject to transitory, uncettain capital movements

will exhibit wider fluctuations in its real exchange rate than the

same economy would need to accommodate sustained, predictable

capital flows of the same magnitude. The reason is the
unwillingness of firms to reallocate resources in the former case:

regarding the real exchange rates associated with capital


                                3
movements as likely to be temporary, they will not shift resources

even when the real exchange rate is sufficiently high or low that

it would appear profitable to do so; and they will also be

inhibited from moving resources by the "option" cost that results

from uncertainty per se. Thus widened movements of the real

exchange rate become necessary in order to accommodate any given

capital movement.

     The other main conclusion is that large exchange rate changes

will indeed typically require subsequent "overshooting" in the

opposite direction. The extent of this overshooting will be

greater, the greater the inhibitory effects on reallocation

described above.

     The paper is in five parts. The first part sets out the basic

assumptions of the model. The second part describes the analytical

technique used to find equilibrium behavior. The third part

explicitly derives behavior in several special cases for which

closed form solutions can be derived, while the fourth part

discusses   the     general    case with the aid of numerical
illustrations. A final section considers the implications of the

model and possible directions for future research.



1. Assunrntions of the model



     We consider a country that consumes two goods: a nontraded

good and a composite tradeable. Since this model will be concerned

with dynamics and expectations, it will be necessary both to

specify preferences over the two goods at each point in time and


                                   4
to specify intertemporal choices. The intertemporal choice will be

the result of maximizing a utility function of the form



                    W —
                           o
                                      NT
                               f U(C ,C )ertdt                 (1)




where CN, CT are instantaneous rates of consumption of the

two goods; U(.) is the instantaneous utility function; and r is

the rate of time preference.

     The function U(.) will be assumed to take on a very special

form, one that will make analysis much easier, namely



                                      +         -              (2)
                 U(CNCT) —       CN       aCT       (W2)C

     The key simplifying assumption here is that utility is linear

in CN. Together with (1), this implies that there will be a

constant real discount rate r in terms of the nontraded good. It

also implies that there will be no income effects in the demand

for the traded good, so that a quasi-partial-equilibrium analysis

becomes possible. The quadratic form of (2) is less important; it

simply insures a linear demand curve for the traded good, which

makes analytical solution of the model easier but does not affect

the fundamental results.

     The country can produce both goods. There is a single

resource R that can be used in either sector:



                                                                (3)




                                          5
     In the tradeable sector, we assume that one unit of resource

produces one unit of the good. Consumption of the good is domestic

production plus the trade deficit:



                                                                       (4)
                          CT_Rl+B

     We want to assume that it is costly to shift resources

between sectors. I will suppose that in order to move one unit of

the resource either into or out of the tradeable sector requires

the use of y units of resource in the nontradeable sector (i.e.,

the "resource-moving" sector - -   construction?   -   - is   treated as a

part of the nontraded sector, not as a separate sector which

itself requires costly entry and exit of resources). Thus the

production of nontraded goods for consumption depends on the

resources left over after allowing for any movement of resources

between sectors. Again choosing units so that one unit of the

resource produces one unit of the good, we have



                                                                       (5)


     Up to this point the model is a full intertemporal
optimization setup, albeit with some special assumptions. A key

variable, however, is the trade deficit B. Ideally, we should

model the current account as the consequence of savings and

investment choices, and derive the trade account as the current

account less net interest payments on past investments. For the

purposes of the present model, however, this would be very


                                    6
difficult (and in any case the ability of an optimizing approach

to account for exchange rate movements is highly doubtful!). Thus

I take an ad hoc approach instead, one that is intended to make

the linkage between real adjustment and real exchange rate
behavior without getting too deeply into the determinants of the

capital account. The approach is to ignore investment income,

setting the trade balance equal to the negative of the capital

account; and to impose directly more or less plausible but

arbitrary behavior on that account1. Specifically, the trade

deficit, a.k.a. the capital account, follows a stochastic process

of the form



                        dE — -pBdt + adz                      (6)




     This may be interpreted as follows. Capital flows fluctuate

randomly, but show a tendency to return to zero, imparting a

cyclic character to the capital account. The parameter p measures

the strength of the tendency for capital flows to end (or

equivalently is an inverse index of the persistence of current

account imbalances). The parameter a is a measure of the

uncertainty of future capital flows. As we will see shortly, the

1This way of setting up the problem can be given an alternative

 interpretation: there is no capital mobility, and B is a random

 transfer payment from abroad. In a formal sense this is the

correct description of the model; but I want to think of the model

 as yielding insights about behavior under mobile if perhaps

 erratic capital as well.


                                7
larger are both p and a, the more reluctant economic agents will

be to reallocate resources to the sector in which they earn the

higher return.

     We have now laid out the basic assumptions of the model. The

next step is to formulate the optimal resource allocation problem.



2. Determinants of resource allocation



     For any given allocation of R between the tradeable and

nontradeable sectors, and for any given rate of capital inflow B,

it is straightforward to determine the relative price of tradeable

goods that clears the market. We have



                                                               (7)
                       e_ap(RT+B)

where e is the price of traded relative to nontraded goods, and

will be referred to as the real exchange rate (recognizing that

this is one of a number of possible definitions).

     Given the simple production structure of this model, the real

exchange rate is immediately a measure of the relative earnings of

the resource in te two sectors. One unit of resource always earns

one unit of nontradeable per period in the nontradeable sector; it

earns e units in the tradeable sector. If resources could be

costlessly moved between sectors, e would always equal one.

     Since resources cannot be moved costlessly, e will in general

not equal one. Resources will only be moved when moving a unit of

resource from one sector to the other increases its value by as


                                 8
much as the cost of moving. Thus the main concern of the analysis

must be with the valuation of a unit of resources in place in

either sector   -   or   more particularly, with the difference in

value of a unit in resource in the traded as opposed to the

nontraded sector.

     The key variable is the increase in value that would occur

if a unit of resources were moved from the nontraded to traded

sector. This variable may of course take on negative values,

corresponding to the case where the resource would be worth more

in the nontraded sector. Let us denote this value as V(RT,B); it

is clearly a function of these two variables, which summarize

completely the state of the economy at any point in time.

     V(RT,B) may be thought of as the value of a kind of asset,

where the asset is the state of having a unit of resources in the

traded rather than the nontraded sector. (The "asset" can take on

negative values, but this poses no problems). The return on this

asset has two parts: the "earnings", measured by the difference

between what the resource earns in tradeables and what it could

earn in nontradeables, and the "capital gains", the expected rate

of increase of the asset's value. Together these returns must add

to an overall rate of return r. Thus we have the condition



                rV(RT,B) —   (e-l)   +
                                             E[dV(R,B)/dt]     (8)




which may be rearranged to yield the asset-pricing equation




            V(RT,)
                     — r(e-l)        +
                                         rE[dV(RT,B)/dt]      (8')



                                         9
    The role of expectations appears in the form of the expected

change in valuation. For a given RT, the expected change in V,

using the usual rules of stochastic calculus, is



              E[dV(R.r,B)/dt] — PBVB +   (a2/2)VBB               (9)




    What about changes in      As long as - < V < -y, there is no

incentive to move resources between sectors. When V would

otherwise exceed - resources will move into the tradeable sector

so as to keep V — -y. When V would otherwise be less than --y,

resources will move out of the traded sector so as to keep V —   -y.
     The analysis of the model, then, requires finding for each

value of RT the function V(RT,B) that satisfies (9) and also is

consistent with the fact that resources will be reallocated when V

reaches its upper or lower limit.



3. Three special cases



     We can derive explicit expressions for V(.), and thus

describe real exchange rate behavior, in three special cases.

While these cases are problematic, they help to suggest the final

form of the answer.



Static expectations



     The first and simplest case is where p—O and 2_O. That is,




                                10
there is no tendency for capital flows to end and no uncertainty.

This case is problematic, in the sense that if it were literally

true the capital flow would never change; however, it may be

interpreted as the case where capital flows are permanent and

predictable     enough   that   firms         have        essentially   static

expectations.

     In this case E[dV/dt] is zero; so the value function takes

the simple form



                  V(RT,B) —   r[a   -
                                         fi(R.r+B)
                                                     -
                                                         1]               (10)




     The implications of (10) are shown in Figure 1. For each

allocation of resources there is a downward sloping V function in

B,V space. That is, the higher the capital inflow, the lower the

value of having resources in the traded goods sector. The higher

the value of RT, the further to the left this line lies. That is,

when more resources are committed to the traded goods sector, the

capital inflow must be smaller or the capital outflow larger in

order to make the value of keeping them in that sector as great as

before. By bearing in mind that           shifts when V hits its upper or

lower bound, and that when it does the economy moves onto a new

V-schedule, we can use Figure 1 to represent the movements of

three variables in two dimensions.

     The dynamics of resource reallocation in this special case

may be best understood by considering a thought experiment.

Suppose that the economy is initially at point 1: capital flows

are zero, and the real exchange rate is such that it is not worth


                                    11
moving resources either in or out of traded goods production. Now

begin increasing the capital inflow. At first the economy will

simply move down the V-schedule, as indicated by movement from 1

to 2. In other words, a small capital inflow will lead to a real

appreciation (a fall in e) but not to a shift of resources out of

the tradeable sector. If the inflow is large enough to push the

economy past point 2, however, resources will move out of the

tradeable sector; this "deindustrialization" will prevent any

further real appreciation. Specifically, the real exchange rate

cannot appreciate beyond the point where e — 1    -
                                                      r-y or depreciate

beyond the point where e — 1 + r-y.

     What a large capital inflow will do, then, is promote a

decrease in RT, shifting the economy to a new V-schedule that lies

to the right -- moving, say, from 2 to 3.

     Now suppose that the capital inflow were once again to

decline. Then the economy would j     retrace   its steps. Instead it

would move back along the new V-schedule. A return to current

account balance would involve returning, not to point 1, but to a

point like point 4. At 4 the resources in the tradeable sector are

smaller than they were at 1, and thus the real exchange rate is

lower.

     This special case helps illustrate how resource reallocation

both responds to and itself affects the path of the real exchange

rate. However, it omits by assumption any possible effect of

expectations, arising either from an expected decline in temporary

capital inflows or from uncertainty about future flows. As we will

see, it is not possible to derive a closed form solution for the



                                 12
general case where both factors are operating. However, useful

insights can be gained by considering the two effects separately.

    In examining these separate cases it will be easiest if we

focus on one particular value of RT: namely, that value for which

e — 1 when B — 0, that is, where in the absence of capital flows

the two sectors offer equal returns. The principles involved are

illustrated most easily in this case, and when we want to go

beyond special cases we will have to adopt numerical methods in

any case, which will allow us to handle any level of R.



Regressive expectations



     For our next special case we allow p >           0, while continuing to
assume a2—O. That is, any capital account imbalance is now
regarded as temporary, but the future is regarded as free from

uncertainty. In this case the general relation (8') takes the form



            V(RT,B) —   r1[a   -
                                   fl(RT4B)]
                                                -
                                                    rpBVB(R.r,B)


or, given our choice of



                 V(R.,B) —     -r8B       -
                                              r1pBVB(RT,B)


     To solve this, we make a guess at the form of the function

V(.): suppose that (for this particular value of RT) it takes the

form -AB. Then we have




                                     13
                          -AB —   -r8B   + r1pAB



implying A —   $(r+p)1.   So the value function is



                       V(RT,B) —    -flB/(r+p)                     (11)




    To see the implications of this, consider Figure 2. The

lighter line indicates the value function corresponding to the

static expectations case; this function, as we already noted,

intersects the upper and lower bounds at capital flows
corresponding to real         exchange     rates of   l+r'y   and 1-ri
respectively. The heavy line indicates the value function with

p>O. Since      is assumed the same in both cases, the real exchange

rate corresponding to any given capital flow is the same. However,

the new V-schedule lies inside the band for a wider range of

capital flows than the old. Thus the real exchange rate can vary

more. The reason is that the movement of resources in or out of

the tradeable sector, which is what limits real exchange rate

variation, is inhibited by the knowledge that capital flows are

only temporary. The maximum capital inflow before resources move

in is -y(r+p)/, corresponding to a real exchange rate of l-(r+p)'y;

similarly, the maximum real exchange rate is l+(r+p).



Uncertainty



     Our remaining special case is where p—O --           that   is, the

capital account follows a random walk. This case doesn't make much



                                    14
economic sense, but once again it can be used to isolate a

particular effect. The lesson from this case is that uncertainty

about capital flows per se acts to inhibit resource reallocation.

     Now one might be inclined to think that when capital flows

are perceived as being equally likely to rise or fall from any

starting point there would be no expected change in the real

exchange rate or in the relative value of resources                 in the

tradeable and nontradeble sectors. This is, however, not the case.

The basic intuition is as follows. Suppose that at the current

level of capital inflow V is close to --y --       that   is, it is almost

worth shifting resources out of the traded goods sector. Then if B

rises substantially, everyone knows that resources will be

reallocated, preventing V from falling below -y. On the other

hand, if B falls, there is no comparable response on the other

side. Thus when V is close to --i'      the expected rate of change in V

is positive, even if B follows a random walk. Similarly, when V is

close to -i--y,   its   expected rate of change will be negative.

        These biases in the expected change in relative valuation

will have the effect of flattening out the relationship between B

and V, "dragging" V below the static expectations locus when B is

low, above it when B is high. The general shape is illustrated in

Figure 3: a backwards S that lies below the line V —          -B/r   in the

upper part of the band between -i and --y, above it in the lower

part.

        Given the particular functional forms assumed in this model,

 it is in fact possible to derive a closed-form solution for the

 curve in Figure 3. Again focussing on the particular value of


                                       15
where e — 1 when B —    0, we can write the value function as


              V(RT,B) —     -B/r      +
                                          (a2/2r)VBB(RT,B)                    (12)




     A functional form that works in this case2 is



               V(RT,B) —      -flB/r      +   p(e       -
                                                            e]                (13)




where both A and       need to be determined.

     To determine A we note that




                   VBB(RT,B)
                                  —
                                      .A2(e         -
                                                        e]                    (14)




     When we substitute this back into (12), we get



     -B/r +   [e   -
                        eB]   —   -flB/r       +   (pa2A2/2r)[e     -
                                                                        eB]   (15)




But this must be true for all values of B, which can only be true

if



                              —   (2r/a2)1'2                                  (16)




     To determine p we first note that in order to get the general

shape illustrated in Figure 3, we must have p<O. The specific

      function is chosen to be symmetric around B — 0, as we would

expect for the particular value of                      chosen. More generally, the

form is [a (RTfB) -lJ/r +         p1e          +


                                              16
value of j.    is   determined by the requirement that the curve be

precisely tangent to the edges of the band, i.e., reach a maximum

at -y   and a minimum at --y.   This is the "smooth pasting" condition
of option-pricing theory, which has recently been shown to play a

role in a wide variety of problems of behavior under uncertainty

(see Krugman 1987 for an application to target zone exchange rate

regimes, Dixit 1987a for an application to entry and exit under

fluctuating exchange rates, and Duxnas 1988 for an application to

international investment). The parallel with option pricing should

not be surprising: agents, in valuing resources in this model,

know that they have the future option of moving the resources to

the other sector; their decision to do so is therefore like

exercising an option, and the optimal allocation problem has

associated with it a value function that looks a lot like an

option pricing problem.

        The important point in terms of the economics is that the

effect of uncertainty in this case is to inhibit resource

movements and thus widen the range of possible real exchange rate

variation. This may be seen clearly from Figure 3, where the

V-function is flatter than the static-expectations locus and thus

intersects the edges of the band at higher and lower values of B

than in the static-expectations case; the result will therefore be

that the real exchange rate can move to levels that would have

been      impossible,     ruled    out    by   the    possibility   of

deindustrialization or reindustrialization, if there were no

uncertainty. That is, uncertainty generates a "wait-and-see"

attitude that discourages movement of resources between sectors.



                                     17
      An alternative way to think about this is to push the option

analogy: moving resources is like exercising an option. In the

face of volatility, options will not be exercised as soon as they

are in the money, that is, as soon as the market price exceeds the

contract price. Instead, it is optimal to hold out for a higher

price, with the optimal exercise price increasing in volatility.

Similarly, uncertainty makes agents reluctant to move resources,

with their reluctance an increasing function of volatility.

      We have now shown two reasons why an unstable pattern of

capital flows may lead to wider real exchange rate fluctuations

than would be produced by persistent, predictable capital flows of

the same magnitude. To the extent that capital flows are perceived

as temporary, firms are reluctant to reallocate resources; even

if the capital flows do not show a tendency to revert to the mean,

the      "option"   cost   of       reallocating        resources   inhibits

deindustrialization and reindustrialization. Our next step is to

combine these two motives and examine the behavior of the general

model.



4. fl general case and real exchange rate dynamics


      The general equation for the value function given the

behavior of B described by (6) is



                                -                   +                      (17)
 V(RT,B) —    [afl(RT+B)l]/r        (p/r)VB(RT,B)       (a2/2r)VBB(RT,B)


      This has no closed-form solution, but it can be solved


                                       18
numerically. The general shape will be the same as that

illustrated in Figure 3; that is, for each value of         there will

be a backwards-S that is tangent to the edges of the band defined

by the maximum and minimum values of V. We can denote the maximum

and minimum values of B for any given IL as Bmax(IL)
                                                  I
                                                     and B
                                                          mm     (R._).
                                       I                             J.




     The numerical solution procedure is a "shooting" technique3.

We make a guess at Bi(RT). We know that at that point V —        y   and

VB — 0, which allows us to infer VBB from (17). Once we have
estimated VB and VBB at one point, we can then compute V and VB

for a slightly higher value of B, find the value of VBB necessary

to justify this V, and repeat. This allows computation of the

value function passing through our initial guess. We then search

over starting values of B .
                         mm    (IL)
                                 I
                                      until we find one for which the

minimum value of V is -y - -   that   is, where the function is tangent

to the bottom as well as the top of the band.

          Figure 4 shows the value function computed for the

parameters shown in Table 1, as well as the static expectations

locus. The value of R.,., chosen is that for which e—l when B—O, that

is, resources earn the same return in the two sectors when trade

is balanced. The values of -y and r imply that in a static

expectations world the maximum and minimum values of e would be

1.05 and -0.95, that is, a five percent shift in the exchange rate

would be enough to induce resources to move. However, p—O.2 --

capital   flows are viewed as transitory, with a mean persistence of

five years; and substantial volatility is also introduced.


3This technique was suggested by the analysis of target zones in

Miller and Weller (1988).


                                  19
    The consequence of the combination of expected mean-reversion

and uncertainty is a drastic widening of the range of potential

real exchange rate variation. The "range of no change", the range

of capital flows for which resources will not be reallocated, is

almost 5 times as large as in the static expectations case. Thus

the range of potential real exchange rate variation is also five

times as large, that is, plus or minus 24.8 percent.

    We can also now consider the general dynamics of the real

exchange rate. The V-schedule in Figure 4 is one of a family of

such curves, each corresponding to a different value of R,, as

illustrated in Figure 5. As B fluctuates, it moves the economy up

or down a particular curve until V hits -y or --y. Then the economy

shifts resources into or out of the traded goods sector, so that

we move along the edge of the band. Then when B reverses direction

the economy moves back along the backwards-S that is tangent to

the band at the highest or lowest B reached.

     A typical exchange rate cycle might involve the path
illustrated as 1234 in the figure. Starting from an equilibrium in

the middle of the band, rising capital inflows would at first lead

to real appreciation but not to resource reallocation. When point

2 is passed, however, the economy will begin to shift resources

out of tradeables; the real exchange rate at which this takes

place is considerably below that at which such a shift would have

taken place if the capital flows were regarded as permanent. The

further rise in B to point 3 produces no further real
appreciation, only more reallocation. If B now begins to fall, the

economy moves back along the V-schedule that is tangent to the


                                 20
band at 3, and thus returns to 4, not to 1; since RT is lower at

the end of this cycle than at the beginning, the real exchange

rate is higher. Looking at the path of e over time, we get the

results illustrated in Figure 6. The broken lines show the maximum

and minimum values of e in a static expectations world; the figure

shows both that the range of real exchange variation is wider in

an uncertain world and that a large exchange rate movement that

leads to deindustrialization must be offset by a subsequent

overshooting in the opposite direction.



5. Implications



      This paper has offered a simple model that appears to

confirm recent intuitions about real exchange rate behavior.

Perceptions that capital flows are temporary and/or uncertain

discourage reallocation of resources even when the real exchange

rate produces large differences in returns between tradeable and

nontradeable sectors, and this reluctance to shift resources

in turn widens the fluctuations of the real exchange rate.

      An interesting corollary of the analysis is that economic

policy can shift the trade balance by influencing beliefs about

the process generating capital flows as well as by changing the

current real exchange rate. Currently officials at the IMF and

other organizations concerned about the US trade deficit argue

that the US trade deficit will fall if only firms can be convinced

that in future the dollar will remain stable at its current level

--   that   is, if their caution over the possibility of a rebound can



                                   21
be cured. This is the kind of idea that makes sense in this model.

    Of course, the IMF would then follow this with the assertion

that stable macroeconomic policies plus targets for nominal

exchange rates can in fact alter the process generating capital

flows in a desirable way. This assertion cannot be tested in this

model, since capital flows were treated as exogenous. This points

to the clear next step in this modelling effort, the integration

of real models like this one with the monetary factors that most

economists believe underlie exchange rate fluctuations in

practice.

     Thus this paper is not the last word on its subject, by a

long shot. However, I hope that it does make convincingly the case

that to understand exchange rate dynamics we must also address the

dynamics of resource reallocation.



REFERENCES



Baldwin, R. and P. Krugman (1986):"Persistent trade effects of

large exchange rate shocks", NBER Working Paper.



Dixit, A. (l987a): "Entry and exit decisions of firms under

fluctuating exchange rates"; mimeo, Princeton University.



Dixit, A. (1987b): "Hysteresis, import penetration, and exchange

rate pass-through", mimeo, Princeton University



Dumas, 8.    (1988): "Pricing physical assets internationally",
mimeo, Wharton.

                               22
Krugman, P. (1987): "Trigger strategies and price dynauiics in

equity and foreign exchange markets", NZER Working Paper #2459.



Krugman, P.   (1988): Exchang Rate Instability, The Robbins

Memorial Lectures, MIT Press, forthcoming.



Miller, M. and P. Weller (1988): Target zones, currency options,

and the dollar", mimeo, University of Warwick.




                                 23
Table 1:   Parameter values for Figure



a=2           p—O.2           RT1
              0   —0.01
              r—O.l
           V




                       B




               2   3




Figure 1
              V



 ———              ——————



                           B


———S——              ——S




   Figure 2
             V




                         13




———SSS           S—   IS —




  Figure 3
           U'   4   (,i   P..)   C)   -.
                                      pp9ppP..)   (.,i   0'




    0
    Ii.)




w
    0




    p
    p..)
                   B



           2   3




Figure 5
e



    S—SSS—     SS




                    tit
    Figure 6
