                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INDUSTRIALIZATION WITHOUT INNOVATION

                                            Paula Bustos
                                    Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi
                                            Joan Monras
                                          Jacopo Ponticelli

                                        Working Paper 25871
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25871


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2019




We received valuable comments from Thibault Fally (discussant), Manuel García-Santana
(discussant), Donald Davis, Gene Grossman, Michael Peters, Diego Puga, Andres Rodriguez-
Clare, Chris Tonetti, Chris Udry, Jose P. Vasquez, and seminar participants at CEMFI, CREI,
University of Lugano, Columbia, Northwestern, Bank of Spain, the NBER Economic
Consequences of Trade, McGill University and the Princeton Growth conferences. We are
grateful to acknowledge financial support from the European Research Council Starting Grant
716338. Mark He provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Paula Bustos, Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi, Joan Monras, and Jacopo Ponticelli. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Industrialization without Innovation
Paula Bustos, Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi, Joan Monras, and Jacopo Ponticelli
NBER Working Paper No. 25871
May 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. F1,F16,F43,O1,O13,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

The introduction of labor-saving technologies in agriculture can release workers who find
occupation in the manufacturing sector. The traditional view is that this structural transformation
process leads to economic growth. However, if workers leaving agriculture are unskilled, the
labor reallocation process reinforces comparative advantage in the least skill-intensive
manufacturing industries. We embed this mechanism in a multi-sector endogenous growth model
where only skill-intensive manufacturing industries innovate and generate knowledge spillovers.
In this setup, the increase in the relative size of the unskilled-labor intensive industries reduces
the incentives to innovate and slows down growth. We test the predictions of the model in the
context of a large and exogenous increase in agricultural productivity in Brazil. We use social
security data to develop a new measure of the labor input in innovation which is representative at
any level of spatial aggregation. We find that regions adopting the new agricultural technology
experienced a reallocation of unskilled workers away from agriculture into the least R&D-
intensive manufacturing industries. The expansion of low-R&D industries attracted workers away
from innovative occupations in high-R&D industries, slowing down local aggregate
manufacturing productivity growth.

Paula Bustos                                      Joan Monras
Centro de Estudios Monetarios y Financieros       Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Casado del Alisal 5, 28014 Madrid                 Ramon Trias Fargas, 25
Spain                                             08005 Barcelona
paula.bustos@cemfi.es                             Spain
                                                  joan.monras@upf.edu
Juan Manuel Castro-Vincenzi
Department of Economics                           Jacopo Ponticelli
Princeton University                              Kellogg School of Management
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building                    Northwestern University
20 Washington Rd                                  2211 Campus Drive
Princeton, NJ 08544                               Evanston, IL 60208
castro.vincenzi@princeton.edu                     and NBER
                                                  jacopo.ponticelli@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1     Introduction
    Early development economists noted that the reallocation of workers from agricul-
ture to manufacturing was fundamental to sustain long run growth (Lewis 1954, Kuznets
1973). This structural transformation process can lead to higher output because labor
productivity is lower in agriculture than in the rest of the economy (Caselli 2005, Restuc-
cia, Yang, and Zhu 2008, Lagakos and Waugh 2013). In addition, the manufacturing
sector is characterized by economies of scale and knowledge spillovers. As a result, indus-
trialization can lead to higher long run growth (Krugman 1987, Lucas 1988, Matsuyama
1992a). In this paper we qualify these views by noting that manufacturing productivity
growth depends not only on the size of the industrial sector but also on its composition
(Grossman and Helpman 1991). Thus, if workers leaving the agricultural sector are mostly
unskilled, the structural transformation process can reinforce comparative advantage in
non-innovating industries, reducing long run growth.
    We study the effects of structural transformation on industrial development in the
context of a large and exogenous increase in agricultural productivity due to the adop-
tion of genetically engineered (GE) soy in Brazil. This new technology requires fewer
but relatively high-skilled workers to yield the same output, thus can be characterized as
unskilled-labor-saving technical change. In addition, the technology had heterogeneous
effects on yields across areas with different soil and weather characteristics, which permits
to estimate the effect of local agricultural technical change on local structural transfor-
mation.
    To guide our empirical work, we build a three sector endogenous growth model and
analyze the free trade equilibrium for each region within a country. The agricultural
sector produces an homogeneous traded good using land, skilled and unskilled labor. The
manufacturing sector has two industries, H and L. The H industry is skilled-labor intensive
and uses non-traded differentiated intermediate inputs for production. The expansion in
the number of input varieties used enhances overall productivity in this industry as it
facilitates labor specialization as in Adam Smith (1776), Ethier (1982) and Romer (1987).
In contrast, new intermediate inputs do not increase productivity in the L industry. This is
because this is a traditional, unskilled-labor intensive industry where the scope for process
innovation is lower. Still, innovations in the local H-industry have positive productivity
spillovers on the local L-industry.1 Intermediate inputs are produced by monopolistically
competitive firms which use their profits to invest in R&D and invent new input varieties.
In equilibrium, profits from introducing new varieties are proportional to demand, which
   1
     For example, suppose that the L industry is food processing and the H industry is the computer
industry. The introduction of a new food additive does not necessarily increase labor productivity in the
food industry. However, the introduction of new programs to organize production in the local H industry
can generate new management practices that improve the division of labor in the H industry and spill
over to the local L industry making it more productive.



                                                   2
is given by the size of each industry. Thus, the growth rate of output in the regional
economy is determined by the relative size of the H industry.
    In this setup, we model the introduction of GE soy seeds as a skilled-labor-augmenting
technical change in agriculture. We show that when skilled and unskilled workers are
imperfect substitutes and land and labor are strong complements in production, this type
of technical change leads to a reduction in the marginal product of unskilled labor in
agriculture. As a result, there is a reduction in labor demand in agriculture and an excess
supply of unskilled workers. In equilibrium, unskilled workers reallocate towards the
manufacturing sector, reinforcing comparative advantage in the L industry.2 The larger
size of the L industry increases incentives to invest in the development of intermediate
inputs for this industry relative to the H industry. As a result, the H industry conducts
less R&D, generates less local knowledge spillovers and aggregate regional output grows
at a slower pace.
    In our empirical work, we attempt to isolate the mechanisms highlighted in the model
by tracing the effects of the agricultural productivity shock generated by the introduction
of GE soy seeds from the agricultural sector to the rest of the economy. First, to identify
the effects of this new technology we exploit variation in the increase in potential soy yields
across regions of Brazil as in Bustos, Caprettini, and Ponticelli (2016). This measure of
technical change in soy production is a function of weather and soil characteristics, not of
actual yields. As a result, it permits to assess the causal effects of agricultural technical
change on industrial specialization, innovation and growth by comparing the evolution of
variables of interest across micro-regions differently exposed to the new technology.3
    We start by tracing the flow of workers with different education levels across sectors
using detailed individual information from the decadal Brazilian Population Census. We
find that the adoption of GE soy led to a reallocation of unskilled workers away from
agriculture and towards the manufacturing sector.4 Our estimates indicate that micro-
regions with a one standard deviation higher increase in potential soy yields experienced
a 2.4 percentage points larger decrease in the share of unskilled workers employed in
agriculture, and a corresponding 2.1 percentage points larger increase in the share of
unskilled workers employed in manufacturing. We confirm these findings using yearly
formal employment data from Social Security Records (RAIS) which, in addition, shows
that the labor reallocation process starts right after the introduction of GE seeds.
   2
     This result requires that the L manufacturing industry is not much more skill intensive than agri-
culture. Otherwise, unskilled workers are absorbed again by the agricultural sector. This is because of
Hecksher-Ohlin forces: an increase in the relative supply of a factor generates an expansion of the sector
using that factor intensively (Rybczinsky Theorem).
   3
     Our geographical unit of observation are Brazilian micro-regions. Micro-regions consist of a group of
municipalities and can be thought of as small open economies that trade in agricultural and manufacturing
goods but where production factors are immobile.
   4
     We classify skilled workers as those who completed the 8th grade, which is equivalent to graduating
from middle school in the US.



                                                    3
    Next, we study the consequences of the reallocation of unskilled labor from agri-
culture to manufacturing for industrial specialization. From the point of view of the
manufacturing sector, the reallocation of unskilled workers amounts to an increase in the
relative supply of unskilled labor. We document, using Population Census data, that this
inflow of unskilled workers was completely absorbed by an expansion of the manufactur-
ing industries in the lowest quartile of skill-intensity. A key implication of the model is
that specialization in low-skill intensive industries slows down manufacturing productivity
growth. This is because as low-skill-intensive industries expand, the return to introduce
new intermediate inputs in these industries increases relative to the high-skill industries.
Then, investment in product development reallocates to low-skill industries. However,
these are traditional industries with lower scope for generating productivity enhancing
innovations. In addition, they do not generate knowledge spillovers towards other indus-
tries. As a result, productivity growth slows down both in low and high skill industries.
To test this mechanism we need to identify which are the industries with the highest and
lowest scope for innovation and assess the effect of agricultural technical change on their
size, innovation investment and productivity growth. In what follows we discuss how we
perform each of these three steps.
    First, we source industry-level measures of expenditures in research and development
(R&D) from the Industrial Innovation Survey (PINTEC) to show that the manufacturing
industries that expanded are in the lowest quartile of expenditure in research and devel-
opment as a share of sales. This is consistent with their characterization in the model as
traditional industries with low scope for developing productivity enhancing innovations.
However, standard innovation surveys such as PINTEC do not permit to assess the con-
sequences of this change in industrial specialization for innovation because they are based
on a sample of firms which is not representative at fine levels of spatial aggregation.5
To overcome this problem, we propose a new measure of investment in innovation which
is representative at any level of geographical aggregation as it can be constructed using
social security data, which covers the universe of formal firms, as described below.
    We construct a new measure of investment in innovation activities based on textual
analysis of the task descriptions of more than 2500 occupations in RAIS. Tasks generating
innovations include, for example, developing new products and processes, creating proto-
types, or optimizing methods of production. We use this measure to document that, in
regions more exposed to agricultural technical change, the inflow of low-skill agricultural
workers into low-R&D manufacturing industries was followed by a reallocation of inno-
vation workers away from high-R&D industries. In particular, micro-regions with a one
standard deviation larger increase in potential soy yields experienced a 20 percent larger
   5
     Alternative measures of innovation such as patents might be geographically representative but are
not representative of the type of innovations which are most frequent in developing countries. According
to PINTEC, only 20% of firms which introduced innovations in the period 1997-2008 filed a patent
application.


                                                   4
decline in innovation expenditures in high-R&D industries, measured as the wage bill of
workers in innovative occupations.
    Finally, we test the predictions of the model regarding the effects of agricultural tech-
nical change on manufacturing productivity growth. For this purpose, we use data from
the yearly manufacturing survey (PIA) which allows us to observe the evolution of labor
productivity in the manufacturing sector. We find that micro-regions facing faster agri-
cultural technical change experienced a slowdown in manufacturing productivity growth.
Our estimates imply that micro-regions with a one standard deviation larger increase in
potential soy yields experienced a 14.8 percent larger increase in the relative size of the
low-skill intensive industry and a corresponding 1.2 percent lower yearly growth rate of
manufacturing productivity. This decrease in manufacturing productivity is not simply
due to a composition effect. As predicted by the model, it is driven by a reduction in
productivity growth within both high- and low-R&D intensive industries.
    Overall, our empirical findings indicate that unskilled-labor-saving technical change in
agriculture can lead to a reallocation of workers towards unskilled-labor-intensive manu-
facturing industries. This leads to an expansion of the industrial sectors with the lowest
R&D intensity in the economy, decreasing innovation in high R&D industries and ag-
gregate manufacturing productivity. We interpret this result as a cautionary tale on the
effects of structural change on aggregate productivity growth. The adoption of new tech-
nologies in agriculture may result in static productivity gains in the agricultural sector
but dynamic losses in manufacturing productivity.
    Our findings suggest that different forces driving structural transformation can lead to
different types of industrial specialization. In most countries, the process of labor realloca-
tion from agriculture to manufacturing can be ascribed to one of two forces: “push” forces,
such as new agricultural technologies that push workers out of agriculture, or “pull” forces,
such as industrial productivity growth, that pull workers into manufacturing. We show
that when labor reallocation from agriculture to manufacturing is driven by unskilled-
labor-saving technical change in agriculture – rather than manufacturing productivity
growth – it can generate an expansion in those manufacturing sectors with the lowest
potential contribution to aggregate productivity. In this sense, our results are informative
for low- to middle-income countries where a large share of the labor force is employed in
agriculture, and who import new agricultural technologies from more developed countries.

Related Literature

    There is a long tradition in economics of studying the links between agricultural pro-
ductivity and industrial development. Nurkse (1953), Schultz (1953), and Rostow (1960)
argued that agricultural productivity growth was an essential precondition for the indus-
trial revolution. Classical models of structural transformation formalized their ideas by
proposing two main mechanisms through which agricultural productivity can speed up

                                              5
industrial growth in closed economies. First, agricultural productivity growth increases
income, which can increase the relative demand for manufacturing goods, driving labor
away from agriculture and into manufacturing (see Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny 1989,
Kongsamut, Rebelo, and Xie 2001, Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson 2002, Boppart 2014).
Second, if productivity growth in agriculture is faster than in manufacturing and these
goods are complements in consumption, the relative demand for agricultural goods does
not grow as fast as productivity and labor reallocates toward manufacturing (Baumol
1967, Ngai and Pissarides 2007).6 Note that these two mechanisms are not operative
in open economies, where high agricultural productivity induces a reallocation of labor
towards agriculture, the comparative advantage sector (Matsuyama 1992b). However,
Bustos et al. (2016) show that, if agricultural technical change is labor-saving, increases
in agricultural productivity can lead to a reallocation of labor towards the industrial sec-
tor, even in open economies, depending on whether land and labor are strong complements
which is the focus of their empirical investigation.
    Several scholars argue that reallocating agricultural workers into manufacturing can
increase aggregate productivity.7 First, there might be large static productivity gains
when labor reallocates from agriculture to manufacturing. Sizable productivity and wage
gaps between agriculture and manufacturing have been measured in several studies and
have been shown to be larger in developing economies (e.g., Caselli 2005, Restuccia et al.
2008, Lagakos and Waugh 2013, Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2014). To the extent that
these gaps arise from the existence of inefficiencies and frictions in the economy, a reallo-
cation of labor from agriculture to the other sectors of the economy is both productivity-
and welfare-enhancing.8 Second, there can be dynamic productivity gains when labor
reallocates towards manufacturing if this sector is subject to agglomeration externalities
and knowledge spillovers (Krugman 1987, Lucas 1988, Matsuyama 1992a).9
    In this paper, we take a different perspective based on endogenous growth theory,
which stresses that manufacturing productivity growth not only depends on the size of
the industrial sector, but also on its composition. In particular, we build on the work of
Grossman and Helpman (1991) who study open economy endogenous growth models. In
   6
      See also: Caselli and Coleman 2001, Acemoglu and Guerrieri 2008, Buera, Kaboski, and Rogerson
2015.
    7
      Although this view has been recently challenged by Franck and Galor (2019) who argue, in line with
this paper, that the type of industrial specialization is what determines long-run growth.
    8
      More recently, Herrendorf and Schoellman (2018) measure and compare agricultural wage gaps in
countries in different stages of the structural transformation process. They find that the implied bar-
riers to labor reallocation from agriculture are smaller than usually thought in the macro-development
literature, and argue that labor heterogeneity and selection are important drivers of such gaps. Other
scholars emphasize that structural change can be growth-enhancing or growth-reducing depending on the
correlation between changes in employment shares and productivity levels (McMillan and Rodrik (2011)
and McMillan, Rodrik, and Sepulveda (2017)).
    9
      Recent evidence suggests that this channel may be operative in some circumstances. Peters (2019)
uses the displacement of Eastern Germans towards Western Germany to show that places experiencing
larger population growth specialized in manufacturing and saw GDP per capita grow over the long run.


                                                   6
their model there are two manufacturing industries with different skill intensities that use
differentiated intermediates with the same intensity. As a result, incentives for inventing
new goods depend on the opportunity cost of performing R&D, which is driven by the
skill premium. In contrast, in our model the incentive to do R&D depends on the relative
size of the two industries, as in Romer (1990). As a result, an increase in the supply
of unskilled labor generates an expansion of the unskilled-labor intensive industry and a
reduction in the growth rate. Note that this is not the case in Grossman and Helpman
(1991), where an expansion of the supply of unskilled workers does not affect the growth
rate. This is so because if both industries are active in the trade equilibrium, there is
factor price equalization and, hence, an increase in the supply of unskilled workers does
not affect the skill premium, the opportunity cost of innovation, thus the growth rate
remains constant.
    This paper also builds upon the literature studying the effects of agricultural technical
change, particularly those papers that provide evidence that technological advancements
in agriculture are skill-biased. For instance Foster and Rosenzweig (1996), who study
the effects of the introduction of high-yield varieties in India, show that technological
innovations in agriculture increased the relative demand for skill in agriculture and thus
returns to primary schooling.10 We contribute to this literature by showing that the
recent introduction of GE soy was also skill-biased. More importantly, we study the
implications of skill-biased agricultural technical change for industrialization, which have
not previously been explored.
    In terms of empirical findings, our paper is also related to contemporaneous work by
Imbert, Seror, Zhang, and Zylberberg (2019), who exploit short-run agricultural shocks
in China to document how migration from rural to urban areas reduces labor costs and
makes firms expand labor usage. They find that firms reduce capital-biased technology
adoption in response to these labor supply shocks. Differently from Imbert et al. (2019)
we focus on technology adoption in agriculture as the factor driving structural transfor-
mation. In terms of outcomes, we do not focus on the capital intensity of manufacturing
technology but we study the effects of the reallocation of unskilled workers on industrial
specialization through a Hecksher-Ohlin comparative advantage mechanism and its rela-
tionship with endogenous growth forces such as innovation investments and their impact
on manufacturing productivity dynamics.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the theoretical
framework that guides our empirical investigation. Section 3 describes the institutional
background, the data, our identification strategy and the empirical results. Finally, section
4 contains our final remarks.
  10
   In related recent work, Bragança (2014) shows that investments in soybean adaptation in Central
Brazil in the 1970s induced positive selection of labor in agriculture.




                                                7
2      Model
    In this section we describe the model that guides our empirical work. Our model gives
rise to a number of predictions on the effects of agricultural technical change on structural
transformation, industrial specialization, and economic growth that are useful to interpret
the evidence that we present in Section 3. We provide further details of the model and
formal proofs of all the results in Appendix C. The model highlights the mechanisms
that explain how a positive agricultural shock (i.e. GE soy adoption) may result in a
(temporary) slow down in manufacturing productivity growth.


2.1     General setting
    The model describes a small region which is open to goods trade. The region produces
one agricultural good and two manufacturing goods using land, skilled and unskilled labor.
We assume that these production factors are perfectly mobile across sectors but immo-
bile across regions. In what follows, we describe consumer preferences and production
technologies in each sector.

Preferences

This economy is populated by infinitely lived consumers that maximize life-time utility.
We assume that consumers have constant relative risk aversion flow utility given by:

                                                  c1−η − 1
                                         u(c) =            ,                                      (1)
                                                    1−η
where c is the composite of consumption of the three goods in the economy: one agricul-
tural good, and two manufacturing goods.11 Life-time utility is given by e−ρt u(c(t))dt,
                                                                             R

where ρ is the discount factor and t indexes (continuous) time. The budget constraint
of the representative consumer is given by p(t)~c(t) + ȧ(t) ≤ w(t) + ra(t), where p(t) is
the vector of prices and ~c(t) is the vector of consumption quantities. a(t) denotes savings
and w(t) wages. In what follows we omit time t when it does not lead to confusion. We
assume no asset trade across regions nor with the rest of the world.12

Agriculture

The agricultural sector produces an homogeneous final good combining labor and land in
a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function. In turn, labor is a CES
  11
     For simplicity we assume that c is a CES composite. However, given our assumption of a small open
economy, demand and supply within each period only determine trade patterns, as long as the three
sectors of activity are active.
  12
     Alternatively, we can assume open capital markets but binding borrowing constraints so that local
returns to investment can be above the international interest rate.



                                                  8
composite of high- and low-skilled labor. The agricultural production function is defined
by:

                                                           σ−1                     σ−1     σ
                      Ya = Kth Qa = Kth [(AL La )           σ    + (AT Ta )         σ    ] σ−1   (2)

where AL and AT are labor-augmenting and land-augmenting technologies, respectively,
and σ is the elasticity of substitution between labor (La ) and land (Ta ). Kth is a Hicks-
neutral technology parameter reflecting the level of knowledge in the local economy at
time t. We discuss this term in detail below. In turn, La is a CES aggregate of high- and
low-skilled labor:

                                                   ε−1                ε−1      ε
                                La = [(AU Ua )      ε    + (AS Sa )    ε    ] ε−1

where ε is the elasticity of substitution between the two labor types. AU and AS are
unskilled- and skilled-labor augmenting technologies, respectively.

Manufacturing sector

The manufacturing sector has two industries which produce traded homogeneous final
goods using high- and low-skilled labor, albeit with different intensities. In addition,
production requires the use of non-traded differentiated intermediate inputs.


H-industry The first industry, which we call the H-industry, uses labor and interme-
diates to produce an homogeneous good using the following technology:
                                                                 Z   Kth
                      Ymh   =   Kth Qhm   =   Fmh (Um
                                                    h    h α
                                                      , Sm ) (             (xhk )1−α dk),        (3)

where Fmh (.) is a skill-intensive technology which allows to combine skilled and unskilled
labor into one aggregate labor input which we call Lhm ; xhk is the quantity used of a given
intermediate input k and Kth is the total amount of input varieties in the industry. Note
that this production function implies that the expansion of input variety enhances overall
productivity in the industry. To see this, assume that each intermediate is produced in
the same amount x = Xt /Kt , as it will be the case in equilibrium. Then, output is
increasing in Kth given factor inputs U , S and Xt . Similar production functions have been
used by Romer (1987) and Ethier (1982) to illustrate a situation in which a larger variety
of inputs or machines gives rise to higher total factor productivity as it facilitates labor
specialization in the spirit of the pin factory example by Adam Smith (1776).

L-industry The second industry, which we call the L-industry, uses labor and inter-
mediates to produce an homogeneous good using the following technology:



                                                     9
                                                 `  `    `      Z Kt`
                                             h Fm (Um , Sm ) α
                    Ym`   =   Kth Q`m   =   Kt (      `
                                                            ) (       (x`j )1−α dj)     (4)
                                                   Kt
Note that the expansion of the total amount of intermediates in this industry (Kt` ) does
not lead to higher productivity. This is because this is a traditional industry where
the scope for process innovation is lower. As a result, new intermediate inputs do not
facilitate the division of labor nor increase productivity. Still, innovations in the H-
industry have positive productivity spillovers on the L-industry. For example, suppose
that the L-industry is food processing and the H-industry is the computer industry. The
introduction of a new food additive does not necessarily increase labor productivity in
the food industry. However, the introduction of new programs to organize production
in the local H-industry can generate new management practices that spill over to the
local L-industry making it more productive. Note that the model refers to non-traded
intermediate inputs, hence these production process innovations are specific to the needs
of the industry in a given region in Brazil and only generate knowledge spillovers to other
industries within the region.

Intermediate inputs are non-traded differentiated goods produced by monopolisti-
cally competitive firms. Each firm is the owner of a blueprint to produce one differentiated
intermediate good using one unit of the final good of the industry.

Innovation and growth New intermediate goods are produced by competitive R&D
firms using a research technology which invests one unit of the final good of the targeted
industry to produce a new intermediate with success probability η. Then, the measure of
varieties in the H industry Kth grows at a rate that is proportional to R&D investment
(Ih ):
                                       K̇th = ηIh .

With a similar equation for the L industry as both use the same research technology.


2.2    Equilibrium
    In this section we describe the equilibrium conditions of the regional economy. We
start by discussing the optimal behavior of intermediate goods producers and R&D firms
in the manufacturing sector. Next, we describe the equilibrium in final goods and factor
markets.

Intermediate goods producers

    Intermediate goods producers optimally choose production to maximize profits which,
in the case of the H-industry, are given by:

                                                     10
                                         Πhk = phk xhk − xhk                             (5)

Note that the demand of inputs from final good producers is given by the marginal product
of each input in the final good production:

                                   ∂Ymh                     h α −α
                           phk =                       h
                                        = (1 − α)Fmh (Um , Sm ) xk
                                   ∂xk

We can use this price in equation (5) to find the optimal output of each variety of inter-
mediates:
                              xk = (1 − α)2/α Fmh (Um
                                                    h    h
                                                      , Sm ).

And the equilibrium price phk = ph = (1 − α)−1 . Note that equilibrium output of each
variety of intermediates is proportional to Fmh (Um
                                                  h    h
                                                    , Sm ) which is the aggregate labor input
in the H-industry, in efficiency units. We can use this solution to obtain output in the
final good industry H:

                                     Qhm = Kth κFmh (Um
                                                      h    h
                                                        , Sm )                           (6)

where κ = (1 − α)2∗(1−α)/α . Equilibrium profits of intermediate good producers are given
by:
                                Πhk = Πh = χFmh (Um  h    h
                                                       , Sm )

where χ = [(1 − α)(2−α)/α − (1 − α)2/α ]. Hence, in the H-industry we obtain that output
of each intermediate good, total output, and profits of intermediate good producers are
                          h
all proportional to Fmh (Um    h
                            , Sm ), the aggregate labor input in the H-industry.
    Similar derivations imply that profits for intermediate good producers in the L-industry
are given by:

                                               Kth p`m Fm` (Um`    `
                                                                , Sm )
                             Π`k = Π` = χ                   l
                                                                       .
                                                         Kt
   And the price of intermediate inputs in the L industry is p`k = p` = (1 − α)−1 .

Innovation

   R&D firms invent new input varieties and sell the blueprints to intermediate good
producers who are willing to pay up to the present value of their profits. As a result, the
return from inventing new varieties for the H industry is given by:

                                   rh = ηΠh = ηχFmh (Um
                                                      h    h
                                                        , Sm ).

Note that rh does not decline with the number of intermediates being used. This feature
of the model generates endogenous growth, as we will see below. In addition, rh is

                                                 11
proportional to aggregate employment in the H industry Lhm = Fmh (Um   h    h
                                                                         , Sm ).
   We assume that research technologies for inventing new varieties for the L and H
industry are identical. However, in the L-industry profits for inventing new varieties are
declining in the stock of varieties available, Kt` :

                                                               `
                                               ηχKth p`m Fm` (Um    `
                                                                 , Sm )
                                r` = ηΠ` =                  `
                                                                        .
                                                         Kt

There is free entry into R&D activities and firms decide whether to invest in innovation
in the L or H industry by comparing their returns. Then, the return to innovation is
r = max{rl , rh }, which determines the equilibrium interest rate. For example, if the
economy starts with a high number of varieties in the H industry, then r` is relatively
high and there is innovation only in the L industry. As time passes, Kt` grows until the
return of inventing varieties for the L industry is lower or equal than that for the H
industry. At this point, innovation takes place in the H industry forever as returns are
constant. Note that, in addition, innovation still takes place in the L industry as spillovers
from the H industry keep rl constant as long as varieties grow at the same rate in both
industries.

Factor prices

    International final goods prices determine factor prices as in the standard Hecksher-
Ohlin model. This is because once equilibrium intermediate good production is taken
into account, manufacturing industries behave as a constant returns to scale sector. To
see this, note that the production technology for the H industry can be described by
equation 6. This implies that we can write the zero profit conditions in the three final
good industries using unit cost functions, as follows:

                                    pa = ca (ws , wu , wT , As )/Kth                                  (7)


        1 = chm (ws , wu , ph , Kth ) = (chm (ws , wu , 1)1−α (ph )α )/Kth ∝ chm (ws , wu , 1)/Kth    (8)



       p`m = c`m (ws , wu , p` , Kth ) = (c`m (ws , wu , 1)1−α (p` )α )/Kth ∝ c`m (ws , wu , 1)/Kth   (9)

   To obtain these equations we have used the fact that knowledge spillovers generate
Hicks-neutral productivity shocks in agriculture and low-skill manufacturing. In addition,
given symmetry and optimal behavior in the intermediate goods market, all intermediates
are priced at the same level (ph = p` = (1 − α)−1 ) in each industry and produced in the
same quantity xj , and hence, Kth also enters as a Hicks-neutral term in the production of


                                                   12
high-skilled manufacturing.
    The zero profit conditions imply “conditional” factor price equalization for labor in-
puts. This is the case because given final and intermediate goods prices, equations 8
and 9 define a system of two equations and two unknowns (ws , wu ). In turn, land prices
are determined by the zero profit condition in the agricultural sector given international
prices and the equilibrium prices of labor.

Aggregate output

We define the gross domestic output of the economy as total output minus inputs:
                                                              !                               !
                                              Z   Kth                         Z   Kth
                GDP = pa Ya + p`m     Ym` −             x`k       +   Ymh −             xhk       (10)

                                                       GDP            ˙
and the long-run growth rate of the economy as g = GDP      , where the dot indicates the
derivative with respect to time, and where total output in each sector is defined in Equa-
tions 2, 3, and 4.

Equilibrium

   In this context we define the equilibrium in the economy as:

Definition 1. Given intra-temporal and inter-temporal consumer preferences given by
equation 1, a three sector economy with production functions given by equations 2, 3, and
4, and profits from the production of intermediate goods given by equation 5, we say that
the economy is in equilibrium if:

  1. Given world prices for each sector {pa , 1, p`m }, the representative perfectly competi-
     tive firm in each final goods sector maximizes profits.

  2. Given the demand for intermediates generated in the H- and L-industries, inter-
     mediate producers maximize profits by choosing the optimal quantity produced and
     intermediate goods prices.

  3. R&D firms decide how many new varieties to invent for each manufacturing indus-
     try, which determines the return to R&D and the interest rate.

  4. Consumers optimally decide how much to consume of each good and how much to
     save for future consumption.

  5. Land and labor markets of high- and low-skilled workers clear.

   In what follows, we will investigate how an exogenous change in AS , i.e. a technology
that makes high-skilled agricultural workers more productive, changes the allocation of
workers across sectors and how this in turn affects the economy’s growth rate.

                                              13
2.3    Structural transformation
    We start the discussion of the model’s predictions by investigating how agricultural
skill-biased technical change affects the demand for high- and low-skilled workers in agri-
culture. We first discuss the relative demand for high- and low-skilled workers and later
the absolute demand for low-skilled labor in agriculture.

Proposition 1. Skilled-labor augmenting technical change in agriculture, represented by
AS , leads to an increase in the relative demand for high skilled workers in agriculture if
and only if the elasticity of substitution between high- and low-skilled workers is greater
than one (ε > 1).

Proof. See Appendix C.

   This result essentially follows from Acemoglu (2002). When it is relatively easy to
substitute low- for high-skilled labor, when the latter becomes more productive firms
want to hire relatively more skilled labor.
   Note that, at the same time, this increase in AS makes the aggregate effective labor
input in agriculture La increase, which is akin to labor-augmenting technical change in
Agriculture, as studied in Bustos et al. (2016). That paper shows that this type of
technical change leads to a relocation of labor from agriculture to manufacturing, provided
that the elasticity of substitution between land and labor (σ) is smaller than the land
share in agricultural production. Thus, by combining the insights in Acemoglu (2002)
and Bustos et al. (2016) we obtain that, under the condition stated below, skilled-labor
augmenting technical change in agriculture leads to the relocation of low-skilled workers
away from agriculture.

Proposition 2. An increase in As in agriculture leads to an absolute decrease in the
demand for low skilled workers in agriculture if labor and land are strong complements
(σ < εΓ).
                                                       σ−1
                                                                
                                                (AT Ta ) σ
Proof. See Appendix C. Note that Γ =             σ−1        σ−1   is the share of land in
                                              (AL La )   σ   +(AT Ta )   σ

agricultural production, and ε is the elasticity of substitution between high- and low-
skilled workers.

   Proposition 2 extends the logic of Bustos et al. (2016) to two types of labor, and
in doing so we obtain new insights. With only labor and land in agriculture, labor
augmenting technical change may lead to a decrease in the demand of labor only if land
and labor are sufficiently strong complements. When there are two labor types, the
argument is more nuanced. If one of the labor types becomes more productive, then, on
the one hand, firms would like to use more of it if it can substitute the other type of labor.
On the other hand, however, firms want to use less labor overall if labor and land are strong


                                             14
complements. As a result, when skill-biased-factor-augmenting technologies (As ) improve,
as may be the case in many developing countries when importing technologies from more
developed countries, the demand for unskilled labor in agriculture may decrease. With
two labor types, as long as ε > 1, strong complementarity (σ < εΓ) is a substantially
weaker condition than with just one labor type. The reason for that is that part of the
adjustment takes place within labor.


2.4    Industrial specialization
    From the view point of the manufacturing sector, the release of low-skilled workers
from agriculture is akin to an exogenous increase in the relative supply of labor. Hecksher-
Ohlin forces imply that this inflow of low-skilled workers into manufacturing expands the
industries that use low-skilled labor more intensively. Industrial specialization matters, as
we discuss in section 2.5, because the composition of the manufacturing sector determines
the long-run growth rate of the economy.
    To investigate the effect of skilled-labor augmenting agricultural technical change on
industrial specialization, we start by analyzing how it changes the return to the three
factors in the economy, namely: land, high- and low-skill labor. To do so, we need to
analyze the zero profit conditions in each sector of activity introduced above.

Lemma 1. If all three sectors are active, the effect of an increase in skilled-biased-factor-
augmenting technology in agriculture (As ) on wages is mediated by the effect of As on
local knowledge (Kth ). In particular:

                                ∂ ln ws   ∂ ln wu   ∂ ln Kth
                                        =         =
                                 ∂As       ∂As        ∂As

and the effect of As on land prices is given by:

                                ∂ ln wT   ∂ ln Kth    θSa
                                        =          +
                                  ∂As       ∂As      As θTa

where θSa is the cost share of high-skilled workers and θTa is the cost share of land in
agriculture.

Proof. See Appendix C.

    Lemma 1 says that when all sectors are active the economy is in an “efficiency cor-
rected” factor price equalization set for labor inputs.
    Next, we investigate how an increase in skilled-biased-factor-augmenting technology
in agriculture leads to particular patterns of industrial specialization. We summarize our
results with the following proposition.



                                             15
Proposition 3. Skilled-labor augmenting technical change in agriculture (As ) leads to an
expansion of low-skill intensive manufacturing industries, provided that:
  1. High- and low-skilled workers are imperfect substitutes (i.e. when ε > 1)

  2. Land and labor are strong complements (i.e. when σ < εΓ)

  3. Agriculture is not much more intensive in low-skilled labor than the low-skill inten-
     sive industry.
Proof. In Appendix C we provide a proof of this proposition assuming that all sectors are
active in equilibrium.

    The intuition for this result follows, essentially, from standard Hecksher-Ohlin inter-
national trade theory. To fix ideas, let’s first consider what would happen in a simple
Hecksher-Ohlin world with only two manufacturing industries. An exogenous increase in
low-skilled workers expands the low-skilled intensive industry more than proportionately
and shrinks the high-intensive industry. This is the only way to guarantee factor market
clearing given the excess supply of unskilled labor. Note that given our assumption of a
small open economy, prices are fixed. Hence, if output of the high-skilled intensive good
does not change and all the extra low-skilled labor enters the low-skill intensive sector,
the marginal product of high-skilled labor would be higher in the low-skilled intensive
industry. This means that some high-skilled labor would want to leave the high-skilled
intensive industry towards the low-skilled intensive one. As a result, the high-skill in-
tensive industry shrinks and all the low-skilled labor released from agriculture plus some
high-skilled labor from the high-skill intensive industry enter the low-skilled intensive
industry, expanding its size.
    In our context we have three sectors (agriculture, low-skilled intensive manufacturing
and high-skill intensive manufacturing), instead of two. In this case, unskilled-labor-
saving agricultural technological progress frees unskilled labor. From the point of view
of the manufacturing sector, this is equivalent to an increase in the supply of unskilled
labor, which according to the discussion in the above paragraph generates an expansion
in the unskilled industry and a contraction in the skilled industry. Note, however, that if
agriculture is very low-skill intensive (much more than the other two sectors), Rybczynski
forces would push the “freed labor” back into agriculture. This is why Proposition 3
requires that agriculture is not much more intensive in low-skilled labor than low-skill
intensive manufacturing.


2.5    Endogenous growth
   As mentioned before, industrial specialization is important in this model because it
determines the growth rate of the economy. Hence, our final result relates industrial
composition and economic growth. In particular, we have that:

                                            16
Proposition 4. When the following conditions hold:

  1. High- and low-skilled workers are imperfect substitutes (i.e. when ε > 1)

  2. Land and labor are strong complements (i.e. when σ < εΓ)

  3. Agriculture is not much more intensive in low-skilled labor than the low-skill inten-
     sive industry.

   Skilled-labor-augmenting technical change in agriculture (As ), results in:

  1. Static gains from increased productivity in the agricultural sector.

  2. Dynamic losses shaped by the decrease in the incentives to invest in new intermediate
     varieties for the H-industry.

   In particular, the growth rate of consumption is given by:

                                                 max{rl , rh } − ρ
                                         gC =                                               (11)
                                                        η
   The change in gross domestic output is given by:


                                           `
      ∂ ln GDPt      ∂ ln pa Qa    ` ∂ ln pm Q`    h ∂ ln Qh              χ ∂Fmh
                = ωa            + ωm            + ωm         + 1{rh ≥rl }        t          (12)
          ∂As           ∂As             ∂As            ∂As                η ∂As
                  |                   {z                   } |         {z        }
                                         Static gains/losses         Dynamic gains/losses


                        p j Qj
   where ωj =                      h .
                pa Qa +p`m ςQ`m +ςFm

Proof. See Appendix C.

    To provide some intuition for this result note that in equilibrium output growth de-
pends on the sectoral composition of the economy. This is because when agricultural
productivity growth pushes workers out of agriculture, the L-industry expands as it ab-
sorbs these workers, and its demand for intermediate goods increases. Then, returns for
inventing new input varieties used by the L-industry increase and R&D firms direct their
innovation efforts towards this industry and Ktl grows and Kth stops growing. However,
only the expansion of varieties in the H-industry generates larger productivity and knowl-
edge spillovers. As a result, manufacturing productivity stops growing for a few periods,
which depends on how fast labor relocates towards the L industry – something we do not
explicitly model given our focus on steady-state outcomes. We labeled the productivity
slow down as dynamic losses. On impact, however, total output increases since there are
productivity gains in agriculture and employment gains in the L-industry, where the set
of intermediates also expands. This is what we labeled as static gains, which is different

                                                       17
from the static gains emphasized in prior literature and that we abstract from in the
model.13
    We provide a qualitative illustration of Proposition 4 in Figure 1. The graph on the left
shows the level of profits when inventing for the H- and L-industries. Before the increase
in agricultural productivity, profits for inventing in each industry are the same, which we
assume in the figure at 5%. When low-skilled workers enter the L-industry it becomes
more profitable to invent new varieties for this industry. Hence, for a while intermediate
goods producers only invest in expanding the set of intermediates in the L-industry. As
the number of intermediates expands, profits decline, up to the point where profits are at
the level that they were before the increase in agricultural productivity.
    The graph on the right of Figure 1 shows the evolution of the overall output. Shown in
a solid line, total output keeps increasing over time (log) linearly at the steady state growth
rate. If As increases (permanently) at a point in time (denoted by t = 0 in the graph), then
total output increases instantaneously, as shown by the dashed line. This instantaneous
increase is the result of the higher productivity in agriculture (higher As ) and the increased
output in manufacturing due to the entry of low-skilled workers into the sector. However,
because the sector that absorbs labor is the L-industry, intermediate goods producers
start inventing intermediate varieties for an industry that does not generate productivity
growth nor local spillovers. Hence, local productivity stops growing for a few periods.
    Note that this model is ambiguous on whether the increased productivity in agriculture
is good or bad for long-term output growth. If adjustment is fast, then the amount of time
that it takes to bring the profits of inventing for the L-industry down to the steady-state
level will be short, and hence the economy may start growing at the steady-state rate at
a level that is higher than without technical change in agriculture. Alternatively, it may
be that the economy takes a long time to adjust, and hence the level of output is lower
than without the technical change in agriculture, as depicted in Figure 1.


                                      Figure 1 goes around here




3      Empirics
    In this section we test the predictions of the model using data from Brazil. Our em-
pirical analysis has three main objectives. First, we trace the reallocation of workers with
  13
     Previous literature (see Caselli 2005, Restuccia et al. 2008, Lagakos and Waugh 2013, Lagakos and
Waugh 2013, or Gollin et al. 2014) argues that there are frictions to mobility from agriculture to manu-
facturing that impede workers to move across sectors. Instead, in this paper we observe patterns that are
in-line with relatively flexible cross-sector mobility, and the static gains come exclusively from increases
in agricultural productivity.



                                                    18
different skills across sectors following the introduction of a new labor saving technology
in agriculture. Second, we study the implications of this reallocation on local industrial
specialization. Third, we document the effect of industrial specialization on innovative
activities and productivity growth in the short and medium run.
    To establish the direction of causality, from agriculture to manufacturing, we exploit
the legalization of genetically engineered (GE) soy in Brazil as a natural experiment. We
start by providing background information on GE soy in section 3.1. Our identification
strategy uses the potential increase in soy yields that can be obtained with GE seeds in
each region based on its weather and soil characteristics as a plausibly exogenous measure
of technical change. We describe this strategy in detail, along with the data used to
implement it, in sections 3.2 and 3.3. We then develop the three steps of our empirical
analysis.
    We start by studying the effect of the introduction of GE soy on the reallocation of
workers with different skills from agriculture to manufacturing. Our theoretical framework
predicts that the adoption of technologies that increase the productivity of skilled labor
in the production function – such as GE soy – should displace unskilled workers from
agriculture (Proposition 2). We test this prediction using the Population Census, which
contains detailed information on both formal and informal workers, and the social security
data from RAIS, which contains detailed information on formal employment at yearly
frequency. These results are discussed in section 3.4.1.
    Next, we study the consequences of this reallocation of unskilled labor from agriculture
to manufacturing for the industrial composition of the local economy. Our model predicts
that an increase in the relative supply of unskilled labor should be absorbed by industries
that use unskilled labor intensively (Proposition 3). These industries correspond to the
L-industry in our theoretical framework. We use the Population Census and RAIS data
to study the effect of soy technical change on labor allocation across industries within the
manufacturing sector, as documented in section 3.4.2.
    Finally, we study the impact of industrial specialization on innovation and manu-
facturing productivity growth. Our theoretical framework predicts that manufacturing
productivity should slow down following a large inflow of workers into the L-industry
(Proposition 4). In our model, this reallocation makes more profitable for R&D firms to
invent new inputs for the L-industry than for the H-industry. However, new input vari-
eties in the L-industry do not increase productivity nor generate knowledge spillovers. As
a result, productivity growth declines. In the empirical analysis we measure R&D invest-
ments using the wage bill of workers employed in innovative activities. For this purpose,
we construct a new measure of labor employed in innovative activities that varies across
regions and across sectors using the detailed description of occupations reported in the
social security data. We then use this measure to test the mechanism emphasized by the
model and study differences in the evolution of manufacturing productivity across regions


                                            19
that were differently exposed to soy technical change in section 3.4.3.


3.1     Background Information on GE Soy
    In this section we describe the technological change introduced in Brazilian agriculture
by GE soybean seeds. GE soy seeds are genetically engineered in order to resist a specific
herbicide (glyphosate). The use of these seeds allows farmers to spray their fields with
glyphosate without harming soy plants, reducing labor requirements for weed control.14
For example, the planting of traditional seeds is preceded by soil preparation in the form
of tillage, the operation of removing the weeds in the seedbed that would otherwise crowd
out the crop or compete with it for water and nutrients. In contrast, planting GE soy seeds
requires no tillage, as the application of herbicide selectively eliminates all unwanted weeds
without harming the crop. As activities related to weed control are mostly performed by
unskilled workers, the introduction of GE soy seeds tends to displace unskilled labor
relatively more than skilled labor.
    The first generation of GE soy seeds (Monsanto’s Roundup Ready) was commercially
released in the U.S. in 1996 and legalized in Brazil in 2003.15 Prior to 2003, smuggling of
GE soy seeds from Argentina was only detected in 2001 and 2002 according to the Foreign
Agricultural Service of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA, 2001). The
2006 Brazilian Agricultural Census reports that, only three years after their legalization,
46.4% of Brazilian farmers producing soy were using GE seeds with the “objective of
reducing production costs” (IBGE 2006, p.144). According to the Foreign Agricultural
Service of the USDA, by the 2011-2012 harvesting season, GE soy seeds covered 85% of
the area planted with soy in Brazil (USDA 2012).
    Panel (a) of Figure 2 documents that the legalization of GE soy seeds was followed by a
fast expansion of the area planted with soy, which increased from 11 to 19 million hectares
between 2000 and 2010.16 This graph suggests that the area planted with soy started to
increase very rapidly already in 2002. Panel (b) of Figure 2 documents that, in the same
period, the number of workers employed in the soy sector decreased substantially. This is
consistent with the adoption of GE seeds reducing the number of agricultural workers per
hectare required to cultivate soy. Bustos et al. (2016) document that labor intensity in
soy production fell from 28.6 workers per 1000 hectares in 1996 to 17.1 workers per 1000
hectares in 2006. In addition, the production of soy is less labor-intensive than all other
major agricultural activities. According to the Agricultural Census, the average labor
intensity of cereals in 2006 was 94.9 workers per 1000 hectares, 129.8 for other seasonal
  14
     Other advantages of GE soy seeds are that they require fewer herbicide applications (Duffy and Smith
2001; Fernandez-Cornejo, Klotz-Ingram, and Jans 2002), allow a higher density of the crop on the field
(Huggins and Reganold 2008) and reduce the time between cultivation and harvest.
  15
     See Law 10.688 of 2003 and Law 11.105 – the New Bio-Safety Law – of 2005 (art. 35).
  16
     According to the two most recent agricultural censuses, the area planted with soy increased from 9.2
to 15.6 million hectares between 1996 and 2006 (IBGE 2006, p.144).


                                                   20
crops, and 126.7 for permanent crops.17 Thus, whenever soy displaced other agricultural
activities, labor intensity in agriculture decreased.


                                   Figure 2 goes around here


    In Panel (c) of Figure 2, we decompose the decrease in employment in the soy sector
between skilled workers and unskilled workers, where a worker is considered as skilled if
she has completed at least the 8th grade. As shown, the decrease in employment in the soy
sector is entirely driven by low-skilled workers, while the skilled ones were retained. This
is consistent with GE soy seeds being an unskilled labor saving technology. Notice that
in addition to being less labor intensive, soy production is also more skill intensive than
most other agricultural activities. As shown in Panel (d) of Figure 2, the share of skilled
workers (those completed at least the 8th grade) employed in soy is above 20 percent,
while in most other agricultural activities this share ranges between 5 and 15 percent.
Thus, whenever soy displaced other agricultural activities, skill-intensity of agriculture
increased.


3.2     Identification strategy
    Our identification strategy builds on Bustos et al. (2016): we exploit the legalization
of GE soy seeds in Brazil as a source of time variation and differences in the potential
increase in soy yields from the introduction of the new technology across regions as a
source of cross-sectional variation. The potential increase in soy yields due to GE soy
seeds is constructed using data on potential soy yields sourced from the FAO-GAEZ
database. This dataset reports the maximum attainable yield for a specific crop in a
given geographical area. In addition, it reports the maximum attainable yields of each
crop under different technologies or input combinations. Yields under the low technology
are described as those obtained planting traditional seeds, with no use of chemicals or
mechanization. Yields under the high technology are obtained using improved high-
yielding varieties, with optimum application of fertilizers, herbicides, and mechanization.
    Following Bustos et al. (2016), we define technical change in soy production as the
difference in potential yields between high and low technology. This measure aims at
capturing the theoretical change in soy yields obtained by switching from traditional
soy production to the use of improved seeds and optimum weed control, among other
characteristics. Technical change in soy production in micro-region k is therefore defined
as:
  17
    According to the 2006 Agricultural Census, even cattle ranching uses more workers per unit of land
than soy production (30.6 per 1000 hectares).




                                                 21
                                  ∆Asoy  soy,High
                                    k = Ak        − Asoy,Low
                                                     k

where Asoy,Low
         k      is equal to the potential soy yield under the low technology and Asoy,High
                                                                                  k
                                                                18    soy
is equal to the potential soy yield under the high technology. ∆Ak is our exogenous
measure of agricultural technical change in agriculture.
    Figure 3 shows the geographical variation in this measure of technical change across
micro-regions.

                                   Figure 3 goes around here

    The map suggests large variation in agricultural technical change across Brazilian
micro-regions. Some regions, most notably the regions around the Amazon river, and
near the South-East coast, experienced little changes in soy productivity. Instead, the
regions of the Center-West and South gained substantially from the introduction of the
new seed.
    With decennial data, we use the following specification to estimate the effect of soy
technical change on (long-run) changes in outcomes of interest:

                                ∆Yk = α + β∆Asoy
                                             k + ϕXk + εk                                        (13)

where ∆Yk is the change in the outcome of interest in micro-region k between 2000 and
2010 – the years of the last two Population Censuses –, and Xk is a vector of controls of
micro-region k. Our identification strategy relies on the fact that the new GE soybeans
seeds were introduced around 2001 or 2002 and legalized in Brazil in 2003, and that this
new technology disproportionately favored micro-regions with certain soil and weather
characteristics (as captured by ∆Asoy   k ), something that was not anticipated as of 2000. In
all our specifications we include the share of rural population in 1991 and the measure of
maize technical change presented in Table 1 as baseline controls in order to capture dif-
ferential trends between urban and rural micro-regions and contemporaneous agricultural
changes. In addition, in all our specifications we include macro-region fixed effects, to
account for differential trends across the five major geographical regions of the country:
north, northeast, south, southeast and central-west. In our extended specification, we
also control for the initial level of income per capita, alphabetization rate, and population
density at the micro-region level, all observed in 1991 and sourced from the Population
Census. These additional controls are meant to flexibly capture differential trends across
micro-regions with different initial levels of income and human capital.
  18
     Although soy farming in certain areas of Brazil was already using relatively advanced techniques
before the introduction of GE soybeans, our conversations with researchers in charge of the FAO-GAEZ
dataset show that GE soy seeds are, in fact, the improved seed varieties used to compute predicted soy
yields for Brazil under high inputs. The predictive power of the instrument on GE soy seeds adoption
documented in what follows supports this.


                                                 22
   When we analyze the manufacturing sector in detail we use annual data from the
social security records (RAIS) and the yearly manufacturing survey (PIA). This allows
us to trace the timing of the effect more precisely by estimating two types of equations.
First, to provide visual support to our evidence, we estimate the following event-study
specification:

                                      j=2009
                                       X
                ln yk,t = δt + δk +            βj ∆Asoy              0
                                                    k + γXk,t + t × Xk,1991 ω + εk,t               (14)
                                      j=1999

where ∆Asoyk  is the long-run change in our exogenous measure of technical change in soy
in micro-region k,19 and ln yk,t is an outcome of interest in micro-region k at time t. βj
estimates the effect of the change in the productivity of soy in each year between 1999
and 2009. Thus, we flexibly allow βj to capture the effect of soy technical change on
the outcomes of interest in each year. This type of specification is informative of the
timing and persistence of the effects. δk and δt are micro-region and year fixed effects,
respectively. Xk,t are time-varying controls and Xk,1991 are the baseline controls discussed
above interacted with a time trend. .
    With annual data, we estimate the effect of agricultural technical change on manufac-
turing outcomes using the following specification:

                     ln yk,t = δt + δk + βAsoy                0
                                           k,t + γXk,t + t × Xk,1991 ω + εk,t

where Asoy
         k,t is defined as potential soy yield under high inputs for the years between 2003
and 2009, and the potential soy yield under low inputs for the years between 1999 and
2002 in micro-region k. δk and δt are micro-region and year fixed effects, respectively,
and Xk,t are time-varying controls and Xk,1991 are baseline controls interacted with a
time trend. Hence, β is the (continuous) difference-in-difference estimate obtained from
comparing micro-regions before and after 2003.20
    Table 1 reports a set of results aimed at validating our measure of soy technical change
using data from the 1996 and 2006 Agricultural Censuses. First, in Panel A, we show
that our measure of soy technical change strongly predicts variation in the actual adoption
of GE seeds by Brazilian farmers across micro-regions (columns 1 and 2). Importantly,
it does not predict the expansion of area farmed with traditional soy (columns 3 and
4). This indicates that this measure of the effect of technical change on in potential soy
yields is a good proxy of the actual benefits of GE soy adoption given soil and weather
characteristics of different areas. Second, in Panel B, we show that our measure of soy
technical change predicts the expansion of agricultural area farmed with soy, but not
the one farmed with maize, the other main temporary crop which experienced significant
  19
    The same measure used Equation 13.
  20
    In these specifications we use a balanced panel of micro-regions that includes all the micro-regions
for which we have observations in each year of the decade.


                                                    23
technological innovation in this period (columns 1 and 2).21 If we build a measure of
maize technical change using the same methodology, we find that such measure predicts
the expansion in maize area between 1996 and 2006, but not the expansion of soy area
(columns 3 and 4). This indicates that our measure of technical change is a good proxy
of technological innovation at the crop level. Note that the results reported in Table
1 effectively replicate the results presented in Bustos et al. (2016) at a larger level of
aggregation (micro-region instead of municipality).

                                     Table 1 goes around here


3.3     Data sources
    In this section we describe the main data sets used in the empirical analysis. We obtain
information on employment from two different sources: the Population Census and RAIS,
the social security records dataset of the Ministry of Labor. The Population Census has
the advantage of covering both formal and informal workers, and it is available at ten
year intervals. RAIS covers only formal employees, but it has the advantage of being
available at yearly level. We also use data from two different manufacturing surveys: PIA
and PINTEC. We use data from PIA – the Brazilian manufacturing survey – to construct
measures of manufacturing productivity. We use data from PINTEC – the Brazilian
Innovation survey – to classify industries by innovation intensity. In what follows we
describe these four data sources in more detail.

    We use the Censuses of 2000 and 2010 to obtain detailed information on employment
and wages in all sectors. We focus on individuals with strong labor force attachment.
In particular, we include individuals aged between 25 and 55 that work more than 35
hours a week.22 Differently from social security data, the Population Census covers both
formal and informal workers, which makes it well suited to study movements of workers
in the agricultural sector – whose labor force is largely informal – as well as any effect
on informal employment in manufacturing. For each individual, we define the sector of
occupation as the sector of their main job during the reference week of the census. The
Population Census also provides information on the number of hours worked during the
reference week and the monthly wage.23 We use information on education to categorize
individuals as unskilled or skilled. We define a worker as skilled if they have completed
at least the 8th grade, although our results are robust to alternative definitions of this
  21
     See Bustos et al. (2016) for a detailed discussion of second-season maize.
  22
     In order to deal with extreme observations, we focus on individuals whose absolute and hourly wages
are between the 1st and the 99th percentile for the distribution of wages in their respective year, and
who work less than the 99th percentile of hours. Moreover, we only consider individuals not enrolled in
the education system at the time of the survey.
  23
     We compute hourly wages as the monthly wage divided by 4.33 times the hours worked reference
week.


                                                  24
threshold. This level should be attained when an individual is 14 or 15 years old and
is equivalent to graduating from middle school in the US. We also use data from the
Population Census to compute “composition-adjusted” wages (i.e., wages net of observable
worker’s characteristics). To this end, we estimate a Mincerian regression of log hourly
wages on observable characteristics for the two census years of 2000 and 2010, as explained
in Appendix B.

    The Annual Social Information System (RAIS) is an employer-employee dataset that
provides individual information on the universe of formal workers in Brazil.24 We use
RAIS to study movements of workers across industries within manufacturing at yearly
level from 1998 to 2009. As in the Population Census, we focus on individuals aged
between 25 and 55 that work more than 35 hours a week.25 RAIS contains detailed
information on workers’ occupations, which we use to construct the new spatial measure
of the labor input in innovation activities described below.

    We use data from the two manufacturing surveys. We use data on number of workers,
value added and wage bill from the Annual Industrial Survey (PIA) to construct our
measure of manufacturing productivity.26 The data from PIA comes aggregated at micro-
region and industry level and is constructed using manufacturing firms with more than
30 employees. Since all firms with 30 or more employees are sampled in the PIA survey,
our sample is representative at the micro-region and industry level. We focus on firms
operating in manufacturing as defined by the CNAE 1.0 classification (codes between 15
and 37) and on the period between 2000 and 2009.

   Finally, we use data from the Survey of Innovation PINTEC to classify manufacturing
industries by R&D intensity. This survey is designed to capture innovation activities of
Brazilian firms and it is available every 3 years starting in 2000. The PINTEC survey pro-
vides information on expenditure in R&D at industry level. Using this data we construct
a measure of R&D intensity at industry level, measured as the monetary value of R&D
expenditures divided by sales in the baseline year 2000. We define high R&D intensive
industries as those above the median level of R&D intensity, weighting industries by their
employment at baseline. Table A.1 reports the full list of manufacturing industries by
  24
      Employers are required by law to provide detailed worker information to the Ministry of Labor. See
Decree n. 76.900, December 23rd 1975. Failure to report can result in fines. RAIS is used by the Brazilian
Ministry of Labor to identify workers entitled to unemployment benefits (Seguro Desemprego) and federal
wage supplement program (Abono Salarial ).
   25
      Following Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler, and Redding (2017), our data cleaning procedure includes:
(i) restricting to workers employed as of December 31st in each year; (ii) restricting to the highest-paying
job for each worker that appears more than once in the data during one year (randomly dropping ties).
   26
      We define employment as end-of-year number of workers, and value added as the difference between
output value and production costs. Specifically, the value of output is defined as the sum of revenue
from industrial sales, the value of production used for investment and the changes in inventories, whereas
production costs are equal to the sum of the cost of industrial operations and the cost of materials used.


                                                    25
R&D intensity and skill intensity. R&D intensity and skill intensity at industry level are
highly correlated, as can be seen in Figure A.1 in the Appendix.27

    Table 2 reports summary statistics of individual level characteristics observed in the
Population Census for workers operating in agriculture, low-R&D manufacturing, high-
R&D manufacturing and services.28 As shown, there is large heterogeneity in skill inten-
sity of workers across these broad sectors. Almost 90 percent of workers in agriculture
had not completed the 8th grade in 2000, while this number is around 50 percent for
manufacturing and services. Within manufacturing there are also large differences, where
the share of high-skill workers tend to be higher in high R&D industries, particularly in
2010.

                                       Table 2 goes around here

    Table 3 provides summary statistics for the main variables used in the empirical anal-
ysis at the micro-region level. micro-regions are statistical units defined by the Brazilian
Statistical Institute (IBGE) and consist of a group of municipalities. There are 557
micro-regions in Brazil, with an average population of around 300,000 inhabitants. We
use micro-regions as an approximation of the local labor market of a Brazilian worker.
They can be thought of as small, open economies that trade in agricultural and manu-
facturing goods but where production factors are immobile.29 For outcomes sourced from
the Population Census – which are observed in 2000 and 2010 — we report the mean and
standard deviation of their level in the baseline year (2000) and of their change between
2000 and 2010.

                                       Table 3 goes around here

A new measure of innovation across space

    In the model, the increase in the relative size of low-skill industries reduces incentives
to innovate in high-skill industries, the only ones which generate productivity growth and
knowledge spillovers, thus aggregate growth slows down. To test this prediction we need to
  27
      Notice that data on R&D expenditure from the PINTEC survey is not representative at the micro-
region level. Thus, to construct a measure of innovation that is representative at any geographical level,
we use the description of occupations reported in the social security records, as described below.
   28
      We define agriculture, manufacturing and services by following the classification of the CNAE Domi-
ciliar of the 2000 census. Agriculture includes Sections A and B (agriculture, cattle, forestry, and fishing).
Manufacturing includes Section D, which corresponds to the transformation industries. Services include:
construction, commerce, lodging and restaurants, transport, finance, housing services, domestic workers,
and other personal services. We exclude the following sectors because they are mostly under government
control: public administration, education, health, international organizations, extraction, and public
utilities.
   29
      In Table A.3 of the Appendix we show that internal migration did not respond to the shock. This is
in line with evidence from Brazil’s lack of internal migration responses documented also in Dix-Carneiro
and Kovak (2019) and Costa, Garred, and Pessoa (2016).

                                                     26
observe innovation at the micro-region level, our unit of observation for empirical analysis.
For this purpose, we develop a new measure of innovation which is representative at any
level of geographical disaggregation using the description of occupations in social security
data (RAIS). More specifically, we propose a new measure of the labor input in innovation
activities based on textual analysis of the task descriptions of more than 2500 occupations.
Tasks generating innovations include, for example, developing new products and processes,
creating prototypes, or optimizing methods of production. An important advantage of
this innovation measure is that it allows us to track innovation workers across sectors and
regions. This is because the social security data covers the universe of formal firms. In
contrast, standard manufacturing innovation surveys, such as PINTEC, are based on a
sample of firms which is not representative at low levels of geographical disaggregation.
An alternative measure of innovation that is potentially representative at micro-region
level is patents. However, as we detail below, patenting is relatively uncommon and is
only a small part of innovation activities in Brazil. In addition, patented innovations are
more likely to generate spillovers beyond the locality where R&D activities take place,
while the focus of our empirical analysis are local productivity spillovers.
    In what follows we describe our methodology to identify workers in innovative occu-
pations within each manufacturing industry and region. As a first step, we digitized the
text containing the official description of the tasks associated with each occupation as
provided by the Ministry of Labor. In the second step, we defined a set of 39 keywords
or combination of keywords capturing tasks related to innovative activities. To generate
this list, we relied on keywords – or combination of keywords – that are used to define
innovative activities in the technical documentation of PINTEC, the Survey of Innovation
of Brazilian firms. The list of keywords is reported in Appendix Table A.2. As shown,
most entries are a combination of a verb and a noun describing a task associated with
innovation. These combinations can be grouped in those capturing innovation of products
(e.g. “develop/improve product/s”), innovation of processes (e.g. “develop/improve/test
process/es”), innovation of machinery and equipment (e.g. “develop device/s, ”develop
equipment”). We also include single nouns, combinations of nouns or combinations of
nouns and adjectives that are often found in the description of innovation intensive tasks
(e.g. “innovation”, “prototypes”, ”research and development”, ”new technologies”). Fi-
nally, in the last step, we run a text analysis that identifies all occupations whose descrip-
tion contains at least one of the keywords listed in Appendix Table A.2. This methodology
identifies 251 occupations, which we define as innovation-intensive.
    Figure A.2 shows the total number and the share of manufacturing workers in innovation-
intensive occupations in Brazil. According to our measure, the number of workers in
innovation-intensive occupations increased from approximately one hundred thousand in
2000 to three hundred thousands in 2014, and started falling afterward when Brazil entered
into a severe recession. Workers in innovation intensive occupations constitute between 3


                                            27
and 4 percent of total manufacturing formal employment. This share has been increasing
during the period under study from 2.5 percent in the early 2000s to slightly above 4
percent in most recent years.30
    In Figure A.3 of the Appendix we report the correlation between our measure of
employment share in innovative occupations at the industry level and other sector level
measures of innovation. As shown, our measure has a positive correlation with other input
based measures of innovation, such as R&D expenditure per worker from PINTEC. Our
measure has the advantage of capturing innovation effort that is often not categorized
under ”R&D”, especially by smaller firms. More importantly, as mentioned above, our
measure allows to capture innovation effort not only at the sector level but also at fine
geographical level. Figure A.4 reports the share of local manufacturing employment en-
gaged in innovation intensive activities in each micro-region of Brazil in the baseline year
2000. As shown, the share of innovation workers ranges from 0 to almost 20 percent of
formal manufacturing employment, with higher shares observed in the coastal regions of
the south and south-east of Brazil, but also in several micro-regions encompassing large
cities in the north and western regions of the country.
    Finally, we want to briefly discuss the differences between our measure of innovation
based on workers’ task description and other measures of innovation based on the outcome
of the innovation process, such as patenting. The advantage of using patent data to
measure innovation is that – differently from input based measures – patents capture
the efficiency of the innovation process and allow researchers to make statements about
the quality of the innovation produced, e.g. by using patent citations (Carlino and Kerr
2015). However, one important disadvantage of patent data is that many innovations are
not patented. Data from PINTEC, the survey of innovation of Brazilian firms, shows that,
in the decade 1997 to 2008, 34 percent of surveyed firms declare to have introduced some
innovation, such as new processes or products. However, only 7 percent of those firms
have filed a patent application or have an approved patent for such innovation.31 Thus,
one advantage of our measure relative to data on patenting activities is that patenting is
relatively uncommon and is only a small part of innovation activities. This is not only the
case in Brazil as survey data from approximately 1500 R&D labs of manufacturing firms
in the US, shows that patenting is used less frequently than other approaches to protect
the return from invention, as patent applications require firms to disclose to competitors
  30
     The Brazilian Ministry of Labor has updated its classification of occupations in 2002. RAIS uses the
new classification (CBO2002) starting from 2003. We identify innovation intensive occupations using the
the description of tasks provided for the CBO2002 classification. To extend our analysis to the pre-2003
years we match the old classification (CBO 1994) and new classification (CBO 2002) using the official
correspondences provided by the Ministry of Labor. Whenever one occupation in the old classification is
matched with multiple occupations in the new one, we weight the number of workers in that occupation
by the share of innovation workers observed in the first year in which the new classification is used (2003).
  31
     These statistics are based on Table 6497 of the PINTEC surveys run in 2000, 2003, 2005 and 2008.
Each PINTEC survey captures the innovative activities in the previous three years, so they effectively
cover the decade 1997 to 2008. The statistics reported are averages across the four waves.


                                                     28
a large amount of information Cohen, Nelson, and Walsh (2000). According to the same
survey, smaller firms tend not to apply for patents due to their legal costs, and are also
more likely to consider patents ineffective.


3.4     Estimates of the effects of agricultural technical change
    In this section we estimate the effects of agricultural technical change on the allo-
cation of workers with different skills across the agricultural, manufacturing and service
sectors. Next, we test the predictions of the model regarding the effects of the realloca-
tion of unskilled labor towards manufacturing on industrial specialization, innovation and
productivity growth in the short and medium run.

3.4.1    Labor reallocation across sectors

    We start in Table 4 using Census data to document that soy technical change generated
a reallocation of (mostly unskilled) labor from away from agriculture into manufacturing.
Panel A shows that micro-regions with higher exposure to soy technical change experi-
enced a decrease in the share of workers employed in agriculture and an increase in the
share of workers employed in manufacturing and services.32 The estimate presented in
column (2) indicates that micro-regions with a one standard deviation larger increase in
soy technical change experienced a 2.4 percentage points larger decline in agricultural
employment share. This estimate is stable to the inclusion of initial controls described in
section 3.2. Agricultural workers displaced by the new technology relocated mostly into
manufacturing. Manufacturing employment share increased by 1.8 percentage points for
a standard deviation differential change in soy technical change, while services employ-
ment share increased by 0.6 percentage points. Hence, the results presented in Panel A,
indicate that soy technical change was labor-saving and led to structural transformation,
which are the main findings documented in Bustos et al. (2016).33


                                     Table 4 goes around here
  32
      Soy technical change had only small and not significant effects on total employment. Thus, the
employment changes that we document in what follows are not driven by migration between micro-
regions or by changes in the total number of workers employed, but by movement of workers across
sectors within micro-regions. In Table A.3 in the Appendix we provide evidence on the effect of soy
technical change on total employment and migration.
   33
      Bustos et al. (2016) find that soy technical change had a positive and significant effect on the em-
ployment share in manufacturing but no significant effect on the employment share in the services sector.
Panel A of Table 4 in this paper documents that micro-regions more exposed to soy technical change
experienced an increase in employment share in both manufacturing and services. There are two reasons
behind this difference in results when the outcome is the employment share in the services sector. The
first is that, in this paper, we focus on remunerated labor – i.e. workers receiving a wage – whereas
Bustos et al. (2016) also included workers who helped household members without receiving a payment
or worked in subsistence agriculture. The second is the unit of observation, which is a micro-region in
this paper, a municipality in Bustos et al. (2016).


                                                   29
    In Panels B and C of Table 4, we study the effect of soy technical change on the
reallocation of workers with different skills across sectors. More specifically, we character-
ize whether the reallocation of workers from agriculture to manufacturing documented in
Table 4 is mostly driven by unskilled or skilled workers. In Panel B of Table 4 we focus
on unskilled workers. We find that micro-regions more exposed to soy technical change
experienced a reallocation of unskilled workers from agriculture to manufacturing. The
magnitude of the estimated coefficients indicate that micro-regions with a standard devi-
ation higher increase in soy technical change experienced a 2.4 percentage points larger
decrease in the share of low-skilled workers employed in agriculture, and a corresponding
2.2 percentage points larger increase in the share of low-skilled workers employed in man-
ufacturing. These magnitudes correspond to a 7.2 percent decrease in the initial share of
low-skilled workers employed in agriculture, and a 16.1 percent increase of the share of
those employed in manufacturing. Combined with the fact that soy technical change had
no differential effect on total employment (Table A.3 in the Appendix), these results are
consistent with a decline in the absolute demand for low-skilled labor in agriculture in
response to skilled labor-augmenting technical change, as predicted by the model. Finally,
in Panel C we focus on skilled workers. We find that micro-regions more exposed to soy
technical change experienced a larger decrease in the share of high-skill workers in agricul-
ture, and a larger increase in the share of high-skill workers employed in manufacturing.
In terms of magnitude, the effect of soy technical change on low-skill labor is about twice
as large as the effect on high-skill labor.
    We explore the labor reallocation process described above in more detail using yearly
data from RAIS in what follows. Although RAIS data captures only formal employment,
its annual frequency allows us to check whether the employment changes documented
with Census data occurred right after GE soy was introduced in Brazil. For this, we plot
the interaction of year dummies with our measure of soy technical change as explained
in Section 3.2. As can be seen in Figure 4 (a), low-skilled labor started to move towards
manufacturing in micro-regions more exposed to soy technical change around 2002, while
there is no systematic difference in the trends leading to this year. When focusing on
formal employment captured by social security data, the differential increase in labor
moving towards manufacturing is almost exclusively driven by unskilled labor, as shown in
Figure 4 (b). The timing of the effect suggests that changes were permanent. Reallocation
of unskilled labor towards manufacturing started around 2002, one year after the first
reported smuggling of the new soy seeds and the year when area planted with soy started
expanding at a faster rate (Figure 2). The reallocation then accentuated around 2004,
one year after the formal legalization of GE soy in Brazil, and stabilized during the second
half of the decade.


                                 Figure 4 goes around here

                                             30
    Taken together, the estimates presented in Table 4 and Figure 4 show that the agri-
cultural sector experienced a decrease in its employment share of both low-skill and high-
skill labor, while the manufacturing sector experienced an increase in employment driven
mainly by low-skill labor. These findings indicate that labor-saving technical change in
agriculture driven by the adoption of GE soy was skill-biased and led mainly low-skill
workers to reallocate towards manufacturing.34

3.4.2    Industrial specialization

    As discussed in Section 2, our model predicts that if the supply of low-skilled workers
released from agriculture is absorbed into manufacturing, this sector tends to specialize
in unskilled labor-intensive industries. In the model, these industries are also the least
innovative in the sense that the introduction of new intermediate inputs do not gener-
ate productivity nor knowledge spillovers. This assumption is consistent with the data
where we observe that unskilled-labor intensive industries are also the least innovative as
measured by R&D expenditure per unit of output, as discussed in 3.3. In what follows,
we study industrial specialization by splitting manufacturing industries between low and
high-R&D as described in Section 3.3. We obtain similar results when splitting industries
by skill intensity, as shown in the Appendix.
    We start by investigating the effect of soy technical change on industrial specialization
using Census data. The results are reported in Table 5. In Panel A we decompose the
effect of soy technical change on the manufacturing employment share between high-
and low-R&D intensive industries. Column (1) replicates the estimate shown in Table 4.
Columns (2) and (3) show that 84% (.21 / .25) of the soy-driven increase in the share
of workers in manufacturing occurs in industries with low levels of R&D intensity. In
Panels B and C, we report the estimates separately for high and low-skilled workers. The
numbers indicate that almost all workers moving into manufacturing – both unskilled and
skilled –found employment in the manufacturing industries with lower R&D intensity.


                                      Table 5 goes around here


    Our model predicts that low-skill workers reallocate to sectors whose skill intensity
is sufficiently close to that of agriculture. To investigate this further, we split manufac-
turing industries into four quartiles of R&D intensity, each employing one fourth of total
  34
     In the Appendix A we provide additional evidence that supports our findings. In particular, Tables
A.4 and A.5 show that wages of high skill workers increased while those low-skill workers did not change,
consistent with an increase in the relative demand for high-skill labor. We show that the reason why
low-skilled wages did not decrease despite the excess supply of workers is related to the increase in
minimum wages in Brazil during the decade. The share of workers at the minimum wage increased
disproportionately in high soy shocks micro-regions, as documented in Table A.6. This evidence points
to the fact that adjustment is easier observed in quantities rather than in prices, hence our focus on labor
reallocation throughout the paper.

                                                    31
manufacturing workers at baseline. Then, we estimate which of the four groups absorbed
low-skilled labor using the following equation:

                              Lm,ik
                          ∆         = α + βi ∆Asoy
                                               k × γi + γi + εik                        (15)
                               Lk
where i indexes quartiles of R&D intensity at industry level and k indexes micro-regions.
The outcome variable in this regression is the change in manufacturing employment in
each quartile of industry R&D intensity as a share of total employment in a given micro-
                         L
region. For example, ∆ m,1kLk
                              is the change in manufacturing workers employed in indus-
tries belonging to the lowest quartile of initial R&D-intensity divided by total workers
in a given micro-region. When estimating equation (15) we include the standard set of
controls at micro-region level interacted with quartiles of R&D intensity at the industry
level (γi ). Figure 5 shows the results, where we report the estimated coefficients on soy
technical change by quartile of industry R&D-intensity. The Figure shows that the effect
of soy technical change on the change in manufacturing employment share documented in
Table 4 is concentrated in industries in the lowest quartile of R&D-intensity. We obtain
similar results when splitting industries by skill intensity, as shown in Appendix Figure
A.5. Hence, as the model predicts, labor released from agriculture finds employment in
manufacturing sectors that are similar to agriculture in terms of skill-intensity.


                                 Figure 5 goes around here



3.4.3   Innovation and manufacturing productivity

    In section 3.4.2 we showed that agricultural technical change led to a reallocation of
low-skilled workers into low-skill intensive manufacturing industries. A key implication
of the theoretical framework presented in Section 2 is that specialization in low-skill
intensive industries slows down manufacturing productivity growth. This is because as
low-skill-intensive industries expand, the return to introduce new intermediate inputs in
these industries increases relative to the high-skill industries. Then, investment in product
development reallocates to low-skill industries. However, these are traditional industries
with lower scope for generating productivity enhancing innovations. In addition, they
do not generate knowledge spillovers towards other industries. As a result, productivity
growth slows down both in low and high skill industries.
    We can test this specific mechanism thanks to the richness of the social security data
which permits to construct a granular measure of investment in innovation. As described
in Section 3.3, we use the description of workers’ occupations to develop a new measure of
employment in innovation-intensive activities that varies both across regions and sectors.
This measure allows us to investigate the effect of agricultural technical change on the

                                             32
allocation of innovative activities across industries. As a proxy for the investment in
innovative activities in each industry we use the total wage bill of workers in innovation-
intensive occupations.35
    First, we confirm the findings reported above with Census data. Figure 6 reports
the results of estimating equation (14) when the outcome variable is the total wage bill
of workers employed in innovation and non-innovation intensive occupations (in logs).
We start by focusing on workers in non-innovation intensive occupations. Figure 6 (a)
shows that regions more exposed to soy technical change experienced an increase in the
wage bill in non-innovative activities within low-R&D industries. The timing of the effect
is consistent with the timing of the legalization of the new GE soy seeds and with the
reallocation of unskilled labor towards low-R&D manufacturing industries documented
using Population Census data in the previous section. In turn we do not find any effect
of agricultural technical on the wage bill of non-innovative occupations in high R&D
industries, which is also consistent with the findings reported above.
    Next, we study the effect of agricultural technical change on investment in innovation-
intensive activities. We define workers engaged in innovation intensive occupations as
those effectively producing new ideas – such as new products and processes – within
each industry. As shown in Figure 6 (d), regions more exposed to soy technical change
experienced a significant decline in investment in innovative activities within high R&D
intensive industries, whose timing corresponds with the legalization of GE soy and the
expansion of soy that followed. As shown in panel (c) we find a modest, positive, and
non statistically significant effect of soy technical change on innovative activities in low
R&D industries. The model provides an interpretation for these findings: the expansion
of the low-R&D intensive industries generated higher returns for solving problems or
introducing new intermediate inputs in that industry, drawing innovation workers from
high-R&D industries. However, as these innovative workers relocate from high to low
R&D intensive industries they tend to specialize in tasks that do not generate productivity
enhancing innovation nor knowledge spillovers. For example, they might take managerial
occupations which are not included in our measure of innovative labor.


                                      Figure 6 goes around here


   Table 6 quantifies the effects documented in Figure 6. The coefficient reported in
column (1) indicates that micro-regions with a one standard deviation larger increase in
potential soy yields experienced an 11 percent higher increase in the wage bill of non-
innovative labor in low R&D manufacturing industries. The coefficient in column (2) is
  35
    We think of wage bill as a measure of investment in innovative activities in a given sector that captures
not just the number of workers employed but also their ”quality” (as captured by their remuneration).
Our results are robust to using employment instead of wage bill as a measure of investment in innovative
activities in each sector.

                                                     33
instead close to zero and not statistically significant, consistent with this inflow of non
innovative labor coming from the agricultural sector rather than from other industries
within manufacturing. Column (4) shows a negative and significant effect of soy technical
change on investment in innovative labor in high R&D intensive industries, as measured
by the wage bill. The magnitude of the coefficient indicates that micro-regions with one
standard deviation larger increase in soy technical change experienced a 20 percent larger
decline in the wage bill of innovative labor in high R&D industries. The coefficient in
column (3) is instead positive but not statistically significant. As mentioned above, inno-
vative workers moving to low R&D industries tend to switch to non-innovative activities.
    Taken together, the results in Figure 6 and Table 6 are consistent with a realloca-
tion of workers engaged in innovative activities in high R&D to low R&D industries. In
our model, this reallocation is driven by the initial movement of unskilled workers from
agriculture towards low R&D industries, which increases the demand for investment in
new intermediate products those industries. As these new intermediates do not gen-
erate productivity improving innovations nor knowledge spillovers, local manufacturing
productivity growth slows down. We turn to investigate this prediction next.


                                 Table 6 goes around here


    We use equation (14) to estimate the effect of agricultural technical change on labor
productivity in manufacturing. We measure labor productivity as value added over wage
bill as observed in the Annual Industrial Survey PIA, where we observe these variables
aggregated at the micro-region and industry level. Figure 7 reports the results. The graph
shows that micro-regions more exposed to soy technical change experienced a relative
decline in manufacturing labor productivity. The effect becomes statistically significant
and increases in magnitude in the years after the legalization of GE soy in Brazil. In
other words, the effect takes place with some delay relative to the effects documented for
labor reallocation and investment in innovative activities, as one would perhaps expect
given that those results capture the impact of soy technical change on the inputs of the
innovation process.


                                 Figure 7 goes around here


    While Figure 7 is in line with the predictions of the model, it could also be explained by
labor productivity decreasing in manufacturing purely as a result of a composition effect.
For example, if labor productivity is lower in low-R&D intensive industries, a movement
of workers towards these industries necessarily results in lower aggregate labor produc-
tivity. Our model highlights instead that manufacturing productivity decreases because

                                             34
investment in innovation in high-R&D intensive sectors decreases, affecting productivity
in both sectors. Thus, in Table 7, we split the effect of soy technical change on labor
productivity between high and low R&D intensive industries. As shown in columns (2)
and (3), the decrease in manufacturing productivity occurs in both high- and low-R&D
intensive industries.
    Next, in column (4) of Table 7, we study the effect of soy technical change on the share
of innovation performed in high R&D intensive sectors. As shown, we find a negative
and significant coefficient on soy technical change, indicating a reallocation of innovative
activities out of high R&D intensive sectors. In terms of magnitude, the coefficients
reported in columns (1) and (4) of Table 7 indicate that micro-regions with a one standard
deviation larger increase in potential soy yields experienced a 3.2 percentage points decline
in the share of innovation performed in high R&D intensive industries, and a corresponding
1.4 percent lower yearly growth rate of manufacturing productivity in the period after the
legalization of GE soy.36 As shown in Panel B, these results are similar in magnitude
independently of whether we measure labor productivity as value added divided by total
wage bill or value added divided by number of workers.


                                    Table 7 goes around here




4      Conclusions
    The reallocation of labor from agriculture into manufacturing is generally regarded
as positive in economic development literature. Several studies have documented that
the manufacturing sector has, on average, higher productivity and pays higher wages.
However, little is known about which type of workers are released from the agricultural
sector and which manufacturing industries absorb them during the process of structural
transformation.
    Our paper contributes to the literature by showing that the forces driving structural
transformation can shape the type of industries in which a country specializes. In most
countries, the process of industrialization can be ascribed to one of two forces: “push”
forces, such as new agricultural technologies that push workers out of agriculture, or
“pull” forces, such as industrial growth that pull workers into manufacturing. We show
that when labor reallocation from agriculture to manufacturing is driven by labor-saving
agricultural productivity growth – rather than manufacturing labor demand – it can
  36
    The effect on the yearly growth rate of manufacturing productivity is computed by multiplying the
coefficient in column (4) of Table 7 by a standard deviation in soy technical change and computing the
annualized effect on labor productivity for the post GE soy legalization years.



                                                 35
generate an expansion in low R&D-intensive manufacturing sectors which can reduce
investment in innovation and slow down aggregate manufacturing productivity growth.
    We guide our empirical analysis through the lenses of an open economy, three sector
endogenous growth model. The model suggests that the low-skilled labor released from
agriculture should find accommodation in the low-skilled intensive manufacturing indus-
tries. The expansion of these industries increases demand for new intermediate inputs
which attracts innovation workers from high R&D industries. Once employed by the low-
R&D industry, these workers engage in tasks that do not lead to productivity enhancing
innovations nor knowledge spillovers. We use yearly data on labor productivity and a
new measure of investment in innovation based on task descriptions to show that the
data supports the predictions of the model.
    Taken together, our findings indicate that structural transformation obtained through
labor-saving and skill-biased technical change in agriculture – which may be quite common
when developing countries adopt agricultural technologies from more developed ones –
can attenuate the standard gains from reallocation into manufacturing emphasized by the
existing literature.




                                           36
References
Acemoglu, D. (2002, October). Directed Technical Change. The Review of Economic
  Studies 69 (4), 781–809.

Acemoglu, D. and V. Guerrieri (2008, June). Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Eco-
  nomic Growth. Journal of Political Economy 116 (3), 467–498.

Baumol, W. (1967). Macroeconomics of Unbalanced Growth: The Anatomy of Urban
  Crisis. American Economic Review 57(3), 415–26.

Boppart, T. (2014). Structural Change and the Kaldor Facts in a Growth Model with
  Relative Price Effects and Non-Gorman Preferences. Econometrica.

Bragança, A. (2014). Three Essays on Rural Development in Brazil. Ph. D. thesis, PUC-
  Rio.

Buera, F., J. Kaboski, and R. Rogerson (2015). Skill-Biased Structural Change. Mimeo.

Bustos, P., B. Caprettini, and J. Ponticelli (2016). Agricultural Productivity and Struc-
  tural Transformation: Evidence from Brazil. American Economic Review .

Carlino, G. and W. R. Kerr (2015). Agglomeration and innovation. In Handbook of
  regional and urban economics, Volume 5, pp. 349–404. Elsevier.

Caselli, F. (2005). Chapter 9 Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences. Volume
  1, Part A of Handbook of Economic Growth, pp. 679 – 741. Elsevier.

Caselli, F. and W. J. Coleman (2001, June). The U.S. Structural Transformation and
  Regional Convergence: A Reinterpretation. Journal of Political Economy 109 (3), 584–
  616.

Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, and J. P. Walsh (2000). Protecting their intellectual assets:
  Appropriability conditions and why us manufacturing firms patent (or not).

Costa, F., J. Garred, and J. P. Pessoa (2016, September). Winners and losers from a
  commodities-for-manufactures trade boom. Journal of International Economics 102,
  50–69.

Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2019, March). Margins of labor market adjustment
  to trade. Journal of International Economics 117, 125–142.

Duffy, M. and D. Smith (2001). “Estimated Costs of Crop Production in Iowa”. Iowa
 State University Extension Service FM1712.

Ethier, W. (1982). National and international returns to scale in the modern theory of
  international trade. American Economic Review .

Fernandez-Cornejo, J., C. Klotz-Ingram, and S. Jans (2002). “Estimating Farm-Level
  Effects of Adopting Herbicide-Tolerant Soybeans in the USA”. Journal of Agricultural
  and Applied Economics 34, 149–163.

Ferreira, F., S. Firpo, and J. Messina (2017). Ageing Poorly? Accounting for the Decline
  in Earnings Inequality in Brazil, 1995-2012. IDB Working Paper Series.

                                           37
Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (1996). Technical Change and Human-Capital Re-
  turns and Investments: Evidence from the Green Revolution. The American Economic
  Review 86 (4), 931–953.

Franck, R. and O. Galor (2019). Flowers of evil? industrialization and long run develop-
  ment. Journal of Monetary Economics.

Gollin, D., D. Lagakos, and M. E. Waugh (2014). The Agricultural Productivity Gap.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Gollin, D., S. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2002). The Role of Agriculture in Development.
 American Economic Review , 160–64.

Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1991). Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy.
  The MIT Press.

Helpman, E., O. Itskhoki, M.-A. Muendler, and S. J. Redding (2017). Trade and inequal-
  ity: From theory to estimation. The Review of Economic Studies 84 (1), 357–405.

Herrendorf, B. and T. Schoellman (2018). Wages, Human Capital and Structural Trans-
  formation. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.

Huggins, D. R. and J. P. Reganold (2008). “No-Till: the Quiet Revolution”. Scientific
 American 299, 70–77.

IBGE (2006). “Censo Agropecuário 2006”. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Instituto Brasileiro de
  Geografia e Estatı́stica (IBGE).

Imbert, C., M. Seror, Y. Zhang, and Y. Zylberberg (2019). Migrants and firms: Evidence
  from china.

Kongsamut, P., S. Rebelo, and D. Xie (2001). Beyond Balanced Growth. The Review of
 Economic Studies 68 (4), 869–882.

Krugman, P. (1987). The Narrow Moving Band, the Dutch Disease, and the Competitive
  Consequences of Mrs. Thatcher: Notes on Trade in the Presence of Dynamic Scale
  Economies. Journal of Development Economics 27 (1-2), 41–55.

Kuznets, S. (1973). Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections. American
 Economic Review .

Lagakos, D. and M. E. Waugh (2013). Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Pro-
  ductivity Differences. American Economic Review 103 (2), 948–80.

Lewis, A. W. (1954). Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor. The
  Manchester School .

Lucas, R. (1988). On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary
  Economics.

Matsuyama, K. (1992a). A Simple Model of Sectoral Adjustment. The Review of Eco-
 nomic Studies, 375–388.



                                          38
Matsuyama, K. (1992b, December). Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage,
 and Economic Growth. Journal of Economic Theory 58 (2), 317–334.

McMillan, M. and D. Rodrik (2011). Globalization, Structural Change and Productivity
 Growth. In Making Globalization Socially Sustainable. ILO/WTO.

McMillan, M., D. Rodrik, and C. Sepulveda (2017). Structural Change, Fundamentals
 and Growth: A Framework and Case Studies. National Bureau of Economic Research
 Working Paper Series No. 23378.

Murphy, K. M., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1989). Income Distribution, Market Size, and
 Industrialization. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 104 (3), 537–564.

Ngai, L. R. and C. A. Pissarides (2007). Structural change in a multisector model of
  growth. American Economic Review 97 (1), 429–443.

Nurkse, R. (1953). Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries. Oxford:
 Basil Blackwell.

Peters, M. (2019). Market size and spatial growth - evidence from germany’s post-war
  population expulsions. Unpublished manuscript.

Restuccia, D., D. T. Yang, and X. Zhu (2008). Agriculture and Aggregate Productivity:
  A Quantitative Cross-Country Analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (2), 234 –
  250.

Romer, P. (1987). Growth based on increasing returns due to specialization. American
  Economic Review .

Romer, P. (1990). Endogenous Technological Change. Journal of Political Economy 98 (5).

Rostow, W. (1960). The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non Communist Manifesto.
  Cambridge University Press.

Schultz, T. (1953). The Economic Organization of Agriculture. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Smith, A. (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
  McMaster University Archive for the History of Economic Thought.

USDA (2001). “Agriculture in Brazil and Argentina: Developments and Prospects for
 Major Field Crops”. United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
 Service.

USDA (2012). “Agricultural Biotechnology Annual”. United States Department of Agri-
 culture, Economic Research Service.




                                          39
5      Figures and Tables

        Figure 1: Theoretical model: Evolution of intermediate
         producers’ profits and output given an increase in As




       Profits intermediate producers                                           Total Output

Notes: This figure shows the qualitative theoretical evolution of the profits of intermediate producers (left panel) and
total output (right panel) implied by our model when at time t = 0 skilled-biased-factor-augmenting technology (As ) in
agriculture increases. The figure displays the evolution of the economy both with (dashed line) and without (solid line) the
technological change.




                                                            40
                                           Figure 2: Soy Production and Employment
                                         (a) Soy: Area planted                                                                                 (b) Soy: Employment




                                                                                                                            700
                          20




                                                                                                                            525
                                                                                                   workers (in thousands)
                          15
 area (million ha)




                                                                                                                            350
                          10




                                                                                                                            175
                          5




                                                                                                                            0




                                1980             1990                    2000          2010                                       1980                 1990                       2000                       2010
                                                                  Year                                                                                                Year



                                                                                                                            (d) Share of Skilled Workers by Agricultural
                                   (c) Soy: Employment by Skill Group                                                                          Activity
                          600




                                                                                                    .2
                          500
 Workers (in thousands)
                          400




                                                                                                    .15
                          300
                          200




                                                                                                    .1
                          100




                                                                                                    .05




                                1990      1995               2000               2005   2010
                                                                  year
                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                              CassavaTobacco Maize   Rice   Coffee   Sugar   Other Vegetab. Citrics Livestock Soy
                                                        Skilled           Unskilled




Notes: Figures in Panels (a) and (b) are from Bustos et al. (2016). Data sources are CONAB (Panel A), PNAD (Panel B
and C) and 2000 Population Census (Panel D). CONAB is the Companhia Nacional de Abastecimento, an agency within
the Brazilian Ministry of Agriculture, which runs surveys of farmers and agronomists to monitor the annual harvests of
major crops in Brazil. PNAD is the Brazilian National Household Sample Survey. The states of Rondonia, Acre, Amazonas,
Roraima, Pará, Amapá, Tocantins, Mato Grosso do Sul, Goias, and Distrito Federal are excluded due to incomplete coverage
by PNAD in the early years of the sample. In Panels C and D, an individual is classified as skilled if she has completed at
least the 8th grade.




                                                                                              41
                 Figure 3: ∆ in Potential Soy Yield 2000-2010




                        (2.8,3.6]
                        (2.4,2.8]
                        (2.2,2.4]
                        (2.0,2.2]
                        (1.8,2.0]
                        (1.6,1.8]
                        (1.4,1.6]
                        (1.1,1.4]
                        (0.7,1.1]
                        [-0.2,0.7]
                        no data




Notes: Authors’ calculations from FAO-GAEZ data. Technical change in soy production for each microregion is computed
by deducting the average potential yield under low inputs from the average potential yield under high inputs.




                                                        42
                                    Figure 4: Effect of agricultural technical change on
                                                manufacturing employment
                                            Yearly Social Security Data (1998-2009)

                                           (a) Unskilled Labor                                                                        (b) Skilled Labor
             .4




                                                                                                          .4
                        .3




                                                                                                          .3
 Log. Unskilled Workers




                                                                                                 Log. Skilled Workers
                .2




                                                                                                               .2
       .1




                                                                                                      .1
             0




                                                                                                          0
             -.1




                                                                                                          -.1
                             1998   2000      2002       2004       2006           2008   2010                          1998   2000     2002       2004       2006           2008   2010
                                                         Year                                                                                      Year

                                               90% C.I     Estimated Coefficient                                                         90% C.I     Estimated Coefficient




Notes: The plot shows the point estimates and the 90% confidence intervals for the estimates of the βj coefficients of the
following regression:
                                                                                          j=2009
                                                                                                    βj ∆Asoy
                                                                                           X
                                                                                                                 0
                                                         ln yk,r,t = δt + δk + δrt +                     k   + tXk,1991 ω + εk,t
                                                                                          j=1998

Standard errors are clustered at the microregion level. ln yk,r,t corresponds to aggregate log. employment of skilled and
unskilled labor in microregion k located in region r at the end of year t for manufacturing industries. An individual is
classified as skilled if she has completed at least the 8th grade. (Source: RAIS).




                                                                                             43
  Figure 5: Effect of agricultural technical change on industrial
               specialization within manufacturing
             Decadal Population Census Data (2000-2010)



                                                                      .03
                           Change in industry’s share of agg. employment
                          -.01        0          .01        .02




                                                                            1                         2                           3              4
                                                                                            Manufacturing industry’s quartile of R&D intensity

                                                                                                       95% C.I       Estimated Coefficient




Notes: The plot shows the βi coefficients of the following regression:

                                                                                    Lkm,i
                                                                                ∆           = α + βi ∆Asoy × γi + γi + ϕXk,1991 + εik
                                                                                     Lk
for i = 1, 2, 3, 4 where γi is a dummy for the different quartiles of R&D intensity. The dependent variable corresponds to
the change in industry i share of aggregate employment in microregion k between 2000 and 2010. We split manufacturing
industries in quartiles according to their level of R&D intensity so that 25% of the Brazilian manufacturing employment is
in each group. Changes in dependent variables are calculated over the years 2000 and 2010 (source: Population Censuses).
We define R&D intensity as R&D expenditure as a share of total sales at baseline and we source it from from the 2000
Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica (PINTEC)




                                                                                                               44
Figure 6: Effect of agricultural technical change on expenditure
         on non-innovative and innovative occupations
               Yearly Social Security Data (1998-2009)
                                                 Low R&D Industries                                                                                      High R&D Industries

                                         (a) Non-innovative labor wage bill                                                                       (b) Non-innovative labor wage bill
                  .6




                                                                                                                           .6
 Log no innovation workers wage bill




                                                                                                          Log no innovation workers wage bill
                            .4




                                                                                                                                     .4
                 .2




                                                                                                                          .2
      0




                                                                                                               0
                  -.2




                                                                                                                           -.2
                                       1998     2000   2002       2004       2006           2008   2010                                         1998     2000   2002       2004       2006           2008   2010
                                                                  Year                                                                                                     Year

                                                        90% C.I     Estimated Coefficient                                                                        90% C.I     Estimated Coefficient




                                              (c) Innovative labor wage bill                                                                           (d) Innovative labor wage bill
                  .6




                                                                                                                           .6
                                 .4




                                                                                                                                          .4
   Log innovation workers wage bill




                                                                                                            Log innovation workers wage bill
                           .2




                                                                                                                                    .2
                     0




                                                                                                                              0
              -.2




                                                                                                                       -.2
        -.4




                                                                                                                 -.4
 -.6




                                                                                                          -.6
                  -.8




                                                                                                                           -.8




                                       1998     2000   2002       2004       2006           2008   2010                                         1998     2000   2002       2004       2006           2008   2010
                                                                  Year                                                                                                     Year

                                                        90% C.I     Estimated Coefficient                                                                        90% C.I     Estimated Coefficient




Notes: The plot shows the point estimates and the 90% confidence intervals for the estimates of the βj coefficients of the
following regression:
                                                                                                   j=2009
                                                                                                                βj ∆Asoy
                                                                                                    X
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                  ln yk,r,t = δt + δk + δrt +                        k   + tXk,1991 ω + εk,t
                                                                                                   j=1998

Standard errors are clustered at the microregion level. ln yk,t corresponds to the log. wage bill on non-innovative and
innovative labor in microregion k located in region r at the end of year t for Low R&D and High R&D manufacturing
industries (Source: RAIS). Manufacturing industries are classified as Low-R&D or High-R&D intensive depending on
whether their R&D intensity is below or above the median in 2000 (weighting industries by number of employees so that
each group captures around 50 percent of total manufacturing employment). We define R&D intensity as R&D expenditure
as a share of total sales at baseline and we source it from from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica (PINTEC).




                                                                                                      45
            Figure 7: Effect of agricultural technical change on
                       manufacturing productivity
                Yearly Manufacturing Survey Data (2000-2009)


                                .2
                    Manufacturing Productivity
                    -.4        -.2
                                -.6        0




                                                 2000             2002           2004               2006           2008       2010
                                                                                           Year

                                                                              90% C.I           Estimated Coefficient



Notes: The plot shows the point estimates and the 90% confidence intervals for the estimates of the βj coefficients of the
following regression:
                                                                                      j=2009
                                                                                               βj ∆Asoy
                                                                                       X
                                                                                                            0
                                                        ln yk,r,t = δt + δk + δrt +                 k   + tXk,1991 ω + εk,t
                                                                                      j=2000

The measure of manufacturing productivity, ln yk,r,t , corresponds to the aggregate log. value added per wage bill in
microregion k located in region r at the end of year t for manufacturing industries. Standard errors are clustered at the
microregion level. (Source: PIA).




                                                                                        46
        Table 1: Effect of Agricultural Technical Change on GE Soy Adoption

 Panel A                      ∆ GE-soy area share       ∆ GE-soy area share       ∆ non-GE soy area share        ∆ non-GE soy area share
                                     (1)                       (2)                         (3)                            (4)

 ∆Asoy                              0.022***                   0.020***                     -0.007*                        -0.008**
                                     [0.005]                    [0.004]                     [0.004]                         [0.004]
 Share rural population             0.034***                   0.117***                      -0.009                        -0.057**
                                     [0.010]                    [0.023]                     [0.009]                         [0.023]
 Log Income per capita                                          -0.009                                                      -0.002
                                                                [0.006]                                                     [0.007]
 Literacy rate                                                 0.162***                                                     -0.043
                                                                [0.034]                                                     [0.035]
 Log population density                                        0.005***                                                   -0.006***
                                                                [0.001]                                                     [0.001]

 Observations                          557                       557                          557                            557
 R-squared                            0.094                     0.208                        0.013                          0.053


 Panel B                        ∆ Soy area share          ∆ Soy area share           ∆ Maize area share             ∆ Maize area share
                                      (1)                       (2)                         (3)                            (4)

 ∆Asoy                              0.022***                   0.016***                     -0.006                          0.000
                                     [0.004]                    [0.004]                     [0.004]                        [0.004]
 ∆Amaize                            -0.003**                     -0.001                    0.005***                        0.003*
                                     [0.001]                    [0.001]                     [0.002]                        [0.002]
 Share rural population             0.029***                   0.064***                    0.020***                         0.012
                                     [0.007]                    [0.013]                     [0.008]                        [0.015]
 Log Income per capita                                          -0.010*                                                    -0.011
                                                                [0.006]                                                    [0.007]
 Literacy rate                                                 0.122***                                                    -0.002
                                                                [0.018]                                                    [0.023]
 Log population density                                          -0.001                                                   0.003***
                                                                [0.001]                                                    [0.001]

 Observations                          557                       557                          556                            556
 R-squared                            0.135                     0.245                        0.041                          0.066
Notes: Changes in dependent variables are calculated over the years 1996 and 2006 (source: Agricultural Census). The unit of observation is the
micro-region. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                                                     47
    Table 2: Summary Statistics of the
     Sample of Individuals by Sector

                                                               2000      2010
 Agriculture
 Age                                                            38.0       39.0
 Male (% of the Total)                                          89.3       81.2
 White (% of the Total)                                         55.4       48.6
 Education level (highest degree obtained)
   Less than Middle School (% of the Total)                     86.1       72.7
   Completed Middle School (% of the Total)                      7.4       13.8
   High School Graduates (% of the Total)                        5.2       11.4
   University Graduates (% of the Total)                         1.3        2.1
 Average log real hourly wage                                   0.81       1.06
   For skilled labor                                            1.39       1.38
   For unskilled labor                                          0.71       0.95

 Low-R&D Manufacturing
 Age                                                            36.8       37.3
 Male (% of the Total)                                          61.6       58.7
 White (% of the Total)                                         65.0       55.6
 Education level (highest degree obtained)
   Less than Middle School (% of the Total)                     52.2       36.8
   Completed Middle School (% of the Total)                     20.4       21.5
   High School Graduates (% of the Total)                       21.9       35.2
   University Graduates (% of the Total)                         5.5        6.6
 Average log real hourly wage                                   1.23       1.51
   For skilled labor                                            1.73       1.63
   For unskilled labor                                          1.15       1.23

 High-R&D Manufacturing
 Age                                                           36.28       36.9
 Male (% of the Total)                                          80.6       76.2
 White (% of the Total)                                         63.0       55.2
 Education level (highest degree obtained)
   Less than Middle School (% of the Total)                     49.8       31.3
   Completed Middle School (% of the Total)                     20.0       19.8
   High School Graduates (% of the Total)                       23.4       39.8
   University Graduates (% of the Total)                         6.8        9.1
 Average log real hourly wage                                   1.58       1.66
   For skilled labor                                            1.92       1.81
   For unskilled labor                                          1.24       1.35

 Services
 Age                                                            37.1       37.8
 Male (% of the Total)                                          67.3       62.1
 White (% of the Total)                                         58.9       50.8
 Education level (highest degree obtained)
   Less than Middle School (% of the Total)                     51.1       36.0
   Completed Middle School (% of the Total)                     17.9       19.3
   High School Graduates (% of the Total)                       23.4       34.3
   University Graduates (% of the Total)                         7.6       10.4
 Average log real hourly wage                                   1.42       1.51
   For skilled labor                                            1.77       1.67
   For unskilled labor                                          1.01       1.24
 Notes: The data comes from the Population Censuses for years 2000 and
2010. These summary statistics come from our final sample of individuals as
detailed in Section 3.3. An individual is classified as skilled if it has at least
completed the 8th grade. This level should be attained when an individual
is 14 or 15 years old and is equivalent to graduating from middle school.
Manufacturing industries are classified as Low-R&D or High-R&D intensive
depending on whether their R&D intensity is below or above the median
in 2000 (weighting industries by number of employees so that each group
captures around 50 percent of total manufacturing employment). We define
R&D intensity as R&D expenditure as a share of total sales at baseline and we
source it from from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica (PINTEC).




                                       48
            Table 3: Summary Statistics of the Sample of Microregions
                                                                             2000                        ∆2000-2010
                                                     Source:           Mean         SD         Mean       SD      Observations
 Potential Yields                                  FAO-GAEZ
   Soy                                                                  0.286     0.135         1.787    0.740           557
   Maize                                                                1.847     0.9984        3.082    1.639           557

 Employment Shares                             Population Census
   Agriculture                                                          0.279     0.140        -0.050    0.055           557
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                0.081     0.055         0.007    0.033           557
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                               0.067     0.043        -0.001    0.025           557
   Services                                                             0.573     0.118         0.044    0.057           557

 Log. Employment                               Population Census
    Agriculture                                                         8.268     0.890         0.122    0.249           557
    Low-R&D Manufacturing                                               7.076     1.569         0.358    0.400           557
    High-R&D Manufacturing                                              6.897     1.485         0.309    0.394           557
    Services                                                            9.194     1.887         0.404    0.175           557


                                                     Source:                                   Mean       SD      Observations


 Manufacturing Employment                             RAIS
 Log. Employment
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                                        7.753    1.315          3,816
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                                                       7.509    1.384          3,816

 Log. Non-Innovative Labor
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                                        7.733    1.310          3,816
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                                                       7.484    1.375          3,816

 Log. Innovative Labor
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                                        3.530    1.857          3,816
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                                                       3.308    2.214          3,816

 Log. Non-Innovative Wage Bill
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                                       16.103    2.206          3,816
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                                                      15.883    2.304          3,816

 Log. Innovative Wage Bill
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                                       12.781    2.869          3,816
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                                                      12.523    3.273          3,816



 Manufacturing Productivity                            PIA
 Log. Value Added per Worker
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                                       10.692    0.866          3,070
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                                                      10.536    0.944          3,070


 Log. Value Added per Wage Bill
   Low-R&D Manufacturing                                                                        1.537    0.593          3,070
   High-R&D Manufacturing                                                                       1.360    0.613          3,070


 Notes: The data sources are the Population Census (2000, 2010), RAIS and PIA. Manufacturing industries are classified as Low-R&D
or High-R&D intensive depending on whether their R&D intensity is below or above the median in 2000 (weighting industries by number
of employees so that each group captures around 50 percent of total manufacturing employment). We define R&D intensity as R&D
expenditure as a share of total sales at baseline and we source it from from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica (PINTEC). A
worker is classified as skilled if she has completed at least the 8th grade (completed middle school).




                                                                49
Table 4: Effect of agricultural technical change on sectoral
                    employment shares
         Decadal Population Census Data (2000-2010)
                                                       Panel A
 Outcome:                 Change in employment shares by sector
 Sector:                  Agriculture      Agriculture      Manufacturing           Manufacturing        Services   Services
                              (1)              (2)              (3)                     (4)                (5)        (6)

  ∆Asoy                    -0.032***        -0.033***           0.025***                0.025***           0.007    0.008*
                             [0.005]          [0.005]            [0.005]                 [0.005]          [0.004]   [0.004]

 Observations                 557               557                557                     557              557       557
 R-squared                   0.233             0.246              0.164                   0.166            0.346     0.359
 Baseline Controls            Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes              Yes       Yes
 Region FE                    Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes              Yes       Yes
 All Controls                 No                Yes                No                      Yes              No        Yes
                                                       Panel B
 Outcome:                 Change in employment shares of unskilled workers by sector
 Sector:                  Agriculture      Agriculture      Manufacturing           Manufacturing        Services   Services
                              (1)              (2)              (3)                     (4)                (5)        (6)

 ∆Asoy                     -0.033***        -0.033***           0.030***                0.030***           0.003     0.004
                             [0.006]          [0.006]            [0.005]                 [0.005]          [0.004]   [0.004]

 Observations                 557               557                557                     557              557       557
 R-squared                   0.122             0.126              0.146                   0.157            0.205     0.208
 Baseline Controls            Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes              Yes       Yes
 Region FE                    Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes              Yes       Yes
 All Controls                 No                Yes                No                      Yes              No        Yes
                                                       Panel C
 Outcome:                 Change in employment shares of skilled workers by sector
 Sector:                  Agriculture      Agriculture      Manufacturing           Manufacturing        Services   Services
                              (1)              (2)              (3)                     (4)                (5)        (6)

 ∆Asoy                     -0.015***        -0.015***           0.014***                0.014***           0.001     0.001
                             [0.004]          [0.004]            [0.005]                 [0.005]          [0.005]   [0.005]

 Observations                 557               557                557                     557              557       557
 R-squared                   0.041             0.047              0.107                   0.112            0.093     0.103
 Baseline Controls            Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes              Yes       Yes
 Region FE                    Yes               Yes                Yes                     Yes              Yes       Yes
 All Controls                 No                Yes                No                      Yes              No        Yes
 Notes: Changes in dependent variables are calculated over the years 2000 and 2010 (source: Population Censuses). The
unit of observation is the micro-region. All the regressions include the baseline specification controls which are the share of
rural population in 1991, a measure of technical change in maize and region fixed effects. The regressions with all controls
also include income per capita (in logs), population density (in logs), literacy rate, all observed in the 1991 Population
Census. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. Significance levels:   ∗∗∗ p   < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                                             50
Table 5: Effect of agricultural technical change on industrial
            specialization within manufacturing
          Decadal Population Census Data (2000-2010)
                                               Panel A
        Outcome:                Change in employment shares by manufacturing industry
        Industry:                   All       Low R&D Intensive                 High R&D Intensive
                                    (1)             (2)                                (3)

        ∆Asoy                   0.025***               0.021***                         0.004**
                                 [0.005]                [0.004]                         [0.002]

        Observations               557                    557                                 557
        R-squared                 0.166                  0.135                               0.172
        Baseline Controls          Yes                    Yes                                 Yes
        Region FE                  Yes                    Yes                                 Yes
        All Controls               Yes                    Yes                                 Yes
                                               Panel B
         Outcome:                 Change in employment shares of unskilled workers
                                  by manufacturing industry
         Industry:                    All       Low R&D Intensive               High R&D Intensive
                                      (1)             (2)                              (3)

         ∆Asoy                    0.030***               0.026***                       0.004**
                                   [0.005]                [0.004]                       [0.002]

         Observations                557                       557                            557
         R-squared                  0.157                     0.159                          0.101
         Baseline Controls           Yes                       Yes                            Yes
         Region FE                   Yes                       Yes                            Yes
         All Controls                Yes                       Yes                            Yes
                                               Panel C
         Outcome:                 Change in employment shares of skilled workers
                                  by manufacturing industry
         Industry:                    All       Low R&D Intensive               High R&D Intensive
                                      (1)             (2)                              (3)

         ∆Asoy                    0.014***                   0.012**                      0.002
                                   [0.005]                   [0.005]                     [0.002]

         Observations                557                       557                            557
         R-squared                  0.112                     0.080                          0.080
         Baseline Controls           Yes                       Yes                            Yes
         Region FE                   Yes                       Yes                            Yes
         All Controls                Yes                       Yes                            Yes
         Notes: Changes in dependent variables are calculated over the years 2000 and 2010 (source:
        Population Censuses). The unit of observation is the micro-region. All the regressions
        include the baseline specification controls which are the share of rural population in 1991,
        a measure of technical change in maize and region fixed effects. The regressions with all
        controls also include income per capita (in logs), population density (in logs), literacy rate,
        all observed in the 1991 Population Census. In these regressions, manufacturing industries
        are classified as Low-R&D or High-R&D intensive depending on whether their R&D intensity
        is below or above the median in 2000 (weighting industries by number of employees so that
        each group captures around 50 percent of total manufacturing employment). We define
        R&D intensity as R&D expenditure as a share of total sales at baseline and we source it
        from from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica (PINTEC). Robust standard errors
        reported in brackets. Significance levels:   ∗∗∗ p   < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.



                                                       51
Table 6: Effect of agricultural technical change on industry size
                  and innovation expenditures
              Yearly Social Security Data (1998-2009)
                                              Industry Size                          Innovation Expenditures
     Outcomes:                 Wage Bill of Non-Innovation Workers              Wage Bill of Innovation Workers
     Industry:                 Low R&D                 High R&D                 Low R&D              High R&D
                                  (1)                     (2)                      (3)                  (4)

     Asoy                       0.148***                  -0.008                   0.060                -0.274*
                                 [0.047]                  [0.046]                 [0.109]               [0.152]

     Observations                 3,816                    3,816                   3,816                 3,816
     R-squared                    0.984                    0.988                   0.940                 0.929
     Baseline Controls             Yes                      Yes                     Yes                   Yes
     Region x Year FEs             Yes                      Yes                     Yes                   Yes
     All Controls                  Yes                      Yes                     Yes                   Yes
     Notes: The dependent variables correspond to the wage bill on non-innovation workers (in logs) for each manufac-
    turing industry in each microregion as a proxy for industry size and the wage bill on innovation workers (in logs) for
    each type of industry in every microregion as a proxy for expenditure on innovation. We use aggregate information
    from RAIS at the microregion-industry level for the time period 1998-2009. We include only those microregions
    that have positive employment for all the years in the sample. Asoy is defined as potential soy yield under high
    inputs for the years between 2003 and 2009, and the potential soy yield under low inputs for the years between 1998
    and 2002. Baseline controls include the share of rural population in 1991, a measure of technical change in maize
    and region-year fixed effects. The regressions with all controls also include income per capita (in logs), population
    density (in logs), literacy rate, all observed in 1991, all interacted with a linear trend. The unit of observation is
    a microregion. In these regressions, manufacturing industries are classified as Low-R&D or High-R&D intensive
    depending on whether their R&D intensity is below or above the median in 2000 (weighting industries by number
    of employees so that each group captures around 50 percent of total manufacturing employment). We define R&D
    intensity as R&D expenditure as a share of total sales at baseline and we source it from from the 2000 Pesquisa
    de Inovação Tecnológica (PINTEC). Standard errors clustered at the microregion level reported in parentheses.
    Significance levels: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                                             52
Table 7: Effect of agricultural technical change on
           manufacturing productivity
    Yearly Manufacturing Survey Data (2000-2009)
                                                Panel A
  Outcomes:                            Log Value Added                     High R&D Innovation Share
                                        per Wage Bill                         measured by wage bill
  Industry:                     All        Low R&D         High R&D                       All
                                (1)           (2)             (3)                         (4)

  Asoy                      -0.133***       -0.135**         -0.109*                   -0.043**
                              [0.040]        [0.054]         [0.057]                    [0.020]

  Observations                 3,070          3,070           3,070                      3,816
  R-squared                    0.735          0.627           0.635                      0.755
  Baseline Controls             Yes            Yes             Yes                        Yes
  Region x Year FEs             Yes            Yes             Yes                        Yes
  All Controls                  Yes            Yes             Yes                        Yes
                                                Panel B
  Outcomes:                            Log Value Added                     High R&D Innovation Share
                                         per Worker                         measured by employment
  Industry:                     All        Low R&D         High R&D                       All
                                (1)           (2)             (3)                         (4)

  Asoy                      -0.141***       -0.151**         -0.119*                  -0.051***
                              [0.043]        [0.059]         [0.071]                    [0.018]

  Observations                 3,070          3,070           3,070                      3,816
  R-squared                    0.876          0.796           0.799                      0.747
  Baseline Controls             Yes            Yes             Yes                        Yes
  Region x Year FEs             Yes            Yes             Yes                        Yes
  All Controls                  Yes            Yes             Yes                        Yes
  Notes: The dependent variables correspond to the total value added divided by total wage bill (in logs) and
 total value added divided by employment (in logs) for each type of manufacturing industry in each microregion
 as a proxy for productivity and the share of the High R&D industry innovation share as measured by the
 share of the innovation workers’ wage bill working in the High R&D industry and share of the innovation
 workers working in the High R&D industry. We use aggregate information from PIA at the microregion level
 for the time period 2000-2009 for Columns (1)-(3) and aggregate information from RAIS at the microregion-
 industry level for the time period 1998-2009 for Column (4). We include only those microregions that
 have positive employment for all the years in the sample. Asoy is defined as potential soy yield under
 high inputs for the years between 2003 and 2009, and the potential soy yield under low inputs for the
 years between 2000 and 2002. Baseline controls include the share of rural population in 1991, a measure
 of technical change in maize and region year fixed effects. The regressions with all controls also include
 income per capita (in logs), population density (in logs), literacy rate, all observed in 1991, all interacted
 with a linear trend. The unit of observation is a microregion. In these regressions, manufacturing industries
 are classified as Low-R&D or High-R&D intensive depending on whether their R&D intensity is below
 or above the median in 2000 (weighting industries by number of employees so that each group captures
 around 50 percent of total manufacturing employment). We define R&D intensity as R&D expenditure as
 a share of total sales at baseline and we source it from from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica
 (PINTEC). Standard errors clustered at the microregion level reported in parentheses. Significance levels:
 ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                                       1
A        Appendix: Figures and Tables

      Figure A.1: Correlation between Skill Intensity and R&D
                    Intensity at Industry Level
               1
               .8
        Skill Intensity
               .6
               .4
               .2




                          0       .02              .04         .06                    .08               .1
                                                    R&D Share of Sales

                                         Actual Values                    Fitted Values



Notes: We define skill intensity as the share of skilled individuals in a particular industry in Brazil at baseline and we
source it from the 2000 Population Census. Our measure of R&D activity is R&D expenditure as a share of total sales at
baseline and we source it from from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica ](PINTEC). The correlation between these
variables is approximately 0.34.




                                                            2
Figure A.2: Manufacturing Employment in Innovation Intensive
                        Occupations


                                                                250000




                                                                                                                                                                            .01 .02 .03 .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09 .1
                                                                    200000




                                                                                                                                                                                    share of total workers
                                                         number of workers
                                                        150000  100000




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                             2000        2005            2010                                       2015              2020

                                                                                      employment                                              employment share




Notes: Authors’ calculations using RAIS data.                                                  Innovation intensive occupations are defined using the methodology
described in section 3.3.




Figure A.3: Correlations between share of workers in innovation
   intensive occupations and other industry-level measures of
                           innovation
                                      (a) R&D expenditure per worker                                                                               (b) Share of High-Skill workers
               12




                                                                                                                           1
 log R&D expenditure per worker




                                                                                                                                         .8
                           10




                                                                                                             share of high-skilled workers
                                                                                                                             .6
               8




                                                                                                                .4
     6




                                                                                                                           .2
               4




                                  0          .05                 .1                 .15             .2                                        0            .05                 .1                 .15                .2
                                        share of workers in innovation intensive occupations                                                          share of workers in innovation intensive occupations




Notes: Innovation intensive occupations are defined using the methodology described in section 3.3. The share of workers
in innovation intensive occupations in each sector is constructed using RAIS data for the year 2000. Skill intensity is the
share of skilled individuals in each sector constructed using RAIS data for the year 2000. R&D expenditure per worker is
defined as R&D expenditure from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica ](PINTEC) divided by number of workers
in each industry in 2000 (from RAIS).




                                                                                                         3
Figure A.4: Geographical distribution of share of manufacturing
      workers in innovation intensive occupations in 2000




Notes: Authors’ calculations using RAIS data and Population Census data for year 2000. Innovation intensive occupations
are defined using the methodology described in section 3.3. The Figure reports the share of innovation intensive workers
over total workers in the manufacturing sector in the year 2000 by microregion.




                                                           4
    Figure A.5: Employment Share Growth by Quartile of Skill
                           Intensity




                                                                      .03
                           Change in industry’s share of agg. employment
                          -.01        0          .01        .02




                                                                            1                         2                          3                 4
                                                                                            Manufacturing industry’s quartile of skill intensity

                                                                                                       95% C.I        Estimated Coefficient




Notes: The plot shows the βi coefficients of the following regression:

                                                                                    Lkm,i
                                                                                ∆           = α + βi ∆Asoy × γi + γi + ϕXk,1991 + εik
                                                                                     Lk
for i = 1, 2, 3, 4 where γi is a dummy for the different quartiles of skill intensity. We split manufacturing industries in
quartiles according to their level of skill and R&D intensity so that 25% of the Brazilian manufacturing employment is in
each group. Changes in dependent variables are calculated over the years 2000 and 2010 (source: Population Censuses).
We define skill intensity as the share of skilled individuals in a particular industry in Brazil at baseline and we source it
from the 2000 Population Census.




                                                                                                                 5
                  Table A.1: Classification of Manufacturing Industries by R&D Intensity
 IBGE Code                                                    Description                                                  R&D Share of Sales            Skill Intensity
          26091     Ceramic products                                                                                                            0.106                 0.275
          34001     Manufacturing and assembly of motor vehicles                                                                                0.105                 0.738
          23030     Production of nuclear fuels                                                                                                 0.100                 0.830
          31002     Electrical material for vehicles                                                                                            0.088                 0.599
          27001     Steel products                                                                                                              0.084                 0.659
          35030     Construction, assembly and repair of airplanes                                                                              0.080                 0.875
          28002     Foundries, stamping shops, powder metallurgy and metal treatment services                                                   0.066                 0.502
          33003     Machines, equipment for electronic systems for industrial automation, and control                                           0.064                 0.848
          24020     Pharmaceutical products                                                                                                     0.062                 0.809
          33001     Medical equipment                                                                                                           0.061                 0.753
          29002     Appliances                                                                                                                  0.058                 0.709
          34002     Cabins, car bodies, trailers and parts for motor vehicles                                                                   0.058                 0.637
          20000     Wooden products                                                                                                             0.055                 0.247
          33004     Equipment, instruments and optical, photographic and cinematographic material                                               0.055                 0.709
          33002     Measuring, testing and control equipment - except for controlling industrial processes                                      0.054                 0.725
          24010     Paints, dyes, varnish, enamels and lacquers                                                                                 0.053                 0.656
          25020     Plastic products                                                                                                            0.052                 0.543
          32000     Electronic material and communications equipment                                                                            0.052                 0.757
          31001     Machines, equipment and miscellaneous electric material - except for vehicles                                               0.051                 0.678
          27003     Foundries                                                                                                                   0.051                 0.462
          15043     Other food products                                                                                                         0.049                 0.426
          36090     Miscellaneous products                                                                                                      0.048                 0.576
          23010     Coke plants                                                                                                                 0.047                 0.487
          37000     Recycling                                                                                                                   0.045                 0.304
          35090     Miscellaneous transportation equipment                                                                                      0.044                 0.581
          21002     Corrugated cardboard, packaging, and paper and cardboard objects                                                            0.044                 0.577
          17001     Processing of fibers, weaving and cloth making                                                                              0.043                 0.471
          28001     Metal products - except machines and equipment                                                                              0.042                 0.496
          24030     Soap, detergents, cleaning products and toiletries                                                                          0.042                 0.658
          29001     Machines and equipment - except appliances                                                                                  0.041                 0.605
          21001     Pulp, paper and smooth cardboard, poster paper and card paper                                                               0.040                 0.602
          34003     Reconditioning or restoration of engines of motor vehicles                                                                  0.038                 0.556
          24090     Miscellaneous chemical products                                                                                             0.037                 0.635
          25010     Rubber products                                                                                                             0.036                 0.567
          26092     Miscellaneous products of non-metallic minerals                                                                             0.035                 0.382
          22000     Editing, printing and reproduction of recordings                                                                            0.035                 0.702
          19012     Leather objects                                                                                                             0.034                 0.453
          30000     Office machines and data-processing equipment                                                                               0.034                 0.852
          36010     Pieces of furniture                                                                                                         0.034                 0.402
          26010     Glass and glass products                                                                                                    0.031                 0.576
          15021     Preserves of fruit, vegetables and other vegetable products                                                                 0.029                 0.484
          17002     Manufacturing of textile objects based on cloth - except for garments                                                       0.028                 0.433
          18001     Making of clothing articles and accessories - except on order                                                               0.023                 0.425
          18002     Making clothing articles and accessories - on order                                                                         0.023                 0.435
          18999     Making of clothing articles and accessories - on order or not                                                               0.023                 0.690
          27002     Non-ferrous metals                                                                                                          0.022                 0.644
          15030     Dairy products                                                                                                              0.022                 0.433
          19020     Footwear                                                                                                                    0.019                 0.348
          15010     Slaughtering and preparation of meat and fish                                                                               0.018                 0.355
          35010     Construction and repair of boats                                                                                            0.018                 0.493
          23020     Products in oil refining                                                                                                    0.015                 0.763
          33005     Chronometers, clocks and watches                                                                                            0.015                 0.751
          23400     Alcohol production                                                                                                          0.014                 0.350
          15041     Manufacturing and refining of sugar                                                                                         0.013                 0.334
          15042     Roasting and grinding of coffee                                                                                             0.013                 0.499
          19011     Tanning and other preparations of leather                                                                                   0.013                 0.325
          16000     Tobacco products                                                                                                            0.013                 0.496
          15050     Beverages                                                                                                                   0.012                 0.555
          15022     Vegetable fat and oil                                                                                                       0.009                 0.446
          35020     Construction and assembly of locomotives, cars and other rolling stock                                                      0.004                 0.632
                    Median                                                                                                                      0.041                 0.432
 Notes: The industry codes correspond to the CNAE-Domiciliar, the industry classification used in the 2000 Population Census. Industries are sorted by their R&D intensity at
baseline. We measure R&D intensity as R&D expenditure as a share of total sales at baseline and we source it from from the 2000 Pesquisa de Inovação Tecnológica (PINTEC).
We define skill intensity as the share of skilled individuals in a particular industry in Brazil at baseline and we source it from the 2000 Population Census. The correlation
between these variables is approximately 0.34. Industries below the median are classified as low and the ones above the median as high.




                                                                                    6
       Table A.2: Keywords Identifying Innovative Occupations
                       Nouns or combination of nouns in task description of occupations
 Portuguese                                                    English
 pesquisa e desenvolvimento                                               research and development
 inovação                                                               innovation
 p&d                                                                      R&D
 desenvolvimento de produtos                                              product development
 desenvolvimento de processos                                             process development
 pesquisador                                                              researcher
 novas tecnologias                                                        new technologies
 protótipos                                                              prototypes
 pesquisas tecnologicas                                                   technological research
 automaçao de processos                                                  process automation

                            Actions (verb + noun) in task description of occupations
 Portuguese                                                      English
 desenvolvem produtos                                                     develop products
 desenvolvem pesquisas                                                    develop research
 desenvolvem equipamentos                                                 develop equipment
 desenvolvem processos                                                    develop processes
 desenvolvem dispositivos                                                 develop devices
 otimizam métodos                                                        optimize methods
 otimizam os meios                                                        optimize means
 aperfeiçoam sistemas                                                    improve systems
 aperfeiçoam processos                                                   improve processes
 aperfeiçoam produtos                                                    improve products
 aperfeiçoam dispositivos                                                improve devices
 implementam dispositivos de automaçao                                   implement automation devices
 desenvolvem, testam e supervisionam sistemas, processos e                develop, test and supervise systems, pro-
 métodos produtivos                                                      cesses and production methods

      Nouns or combinations of nouns (source: Technical Appendix of the 2008 PINTEC survey)
 Portuguese                                               English
 produto novo / novo produto                                              new product
 produtos novos / novos produtos                                          new products
 produto aprimorado                                                       improved product
 produtos aprimorados                                                     improved produts
 inovação de produto                                                    product innovation
 aperfeiçoamento de produto                                              product improvement
 processo novo / novo processo                                            new process
 processos novos / novos processos                                        new processes
 processo aprimorado                                                      improved process
 processos aprimorados                                                    improved processes
 inovação de processo                                                   process innovation
 aperfeiçoamento de processo                                             process improvement
 Notes: The Table reports the keywords used to identify innovation intensive occupations and their English translation. Task
descriptions for each occupations are obtained from the official publication of the ”Brazilian Classification of Occupations”,
Ministry of Labor, 3rd Edition (2010).




                                                              7
                                                                                  Table A.3: Internal migration
     Outcomes                ∆ log L     Net Migration        In-Migration      Out-Migration        Net Migration       In-Migration       Out-Migration        Net Migration       In-Migration      Out-Migration
     Skill Group:                                             All                                                            Skilled                                                   Unskilled
                                (1)             (2)                  (3)               (4)                  (5)               (6)                  (7)                 (8)               (9)                  (10)

     ∆Asoy                    -0.014           0.004                 0.002           -0.003               -0.001             -0.004              -0.003               0.012             0.011**             -0.002
                              [.0134]         [0.009]               [0.005]          [0.006]              [0.010]            [0.005]             [0.007]             [0.008]            [0.005]             [0.006]

     Observations               557             557                  557               557                 557                 557                557                  557                557                 557
     R-squared                 0.171           0.553                0.401             0.592               0.507               0.380              0.593                0.582              0.407               0.566
     Baseline Controls          Yes             Yes                  Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
     Region FE                  Yes             Yes                  Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
     All Controls               Yes             Yes                  Yes               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                 Yes
    Notes: Dependent variables are calculated for 2010 (source: Population Censuses). The unit of observation is the micro-region. These regressions compute the 5 year internal migration rate between 2005 and
    2010, using the microregion of residence 5 years prior to the Census 2010. All the regressions include the baseline specification controls which are the share of rural population in 1991, a measure of technical
    change in maize and region fixed effects. The regressions with all controls also include income per capita (in logs), population density (in logs), literacy rate, all observed in the 1991 Population Census. . Robust
    standard errors reported in brackets. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.
8
              Table A.4: Effect of technical change in soy on wages by sector
 Outcome:                 Change in composition-adjusted wages by sector
 Sector                   Overall     Overall      Agriculture      Agriculture      Manufacturing        Manufacturing        Services     Services
                           (1)         (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)                  (6)                (7)          (8)

 ∆Asoy                     0.012      0.023***       0.042***         0.051***             0.009                0.018            0.004       0.016*
                          [0.008]      [0.007]        [0.010]          [0.010]            [0.011]              [0.011]          [0.009]      [0.008]

 Observations               557          557            557              557                557                  557              557          557
 R-squared                 0.241        0.355          0.319            0.374              0.082                0.139            0.191        0.319
 Baseline Controls          Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes          Yes
 Region FE                  Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes          Yes
 All Controls               No           Yes            No               Yes                No                   Yes              No           Yes
Notes: Changes in wages are calculated over the years 2000 to 2010. The unit of observation is the micro-region. All the regressions include the
baseline specification controls which are the share of rural population in 1991, a measure of technical change in maize and region fixed effects. The
regressions with all controls also include income per capita (in logs), population density (in logs), literacy rate, all observed in the 1991 Population
Census. We recover the estimates of the dependent variable from a first stage Mincerian regression in which we estimate a regression of the log of
hourly wage on microregion fixed effects, and a vector of individual characteristics that includes dummies for sector, skill group, age group, race, and
all the interactions between these variables. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                                                       9
Table A.5: Effect of technical change in soy on wages by skill
                            group
                                                                   Panel A
 Outcome:                 Change in composition-adjusted wages of unskilled workers by sector
 Sector                   Overall     Overall     Agriculture      Agriculture      Manufacturing        Manufacturing        Services     Services
                           (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)                  (6)                (7)          (8)

 ∆Asoy                     0.003       0.012        0.039***         0.045***             0.003                0.012           -0.002        0.010
                          [0.008]     [0.008]        [0.011]          [0.012]            [0.013]              [0.012]          [0.009]      [0.009]

 Observations               557         557            557              557                556                  556              557          557
 R-squared                 0.339       0.387          0.323            0.170              0.060                0.104            0.185        0.293
 Baseline Controls          Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes          Yes
 Region FE                  Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes          Yes
 All Controls               No          Yes            No               Yes                No                   Yes              No           Yes
                                                                   Panel B
Outcome:                Change in composition-adjusted wages of skilled workers by sector
Sector                   Overall      Overall      Agriculture      Agriculture      Manufacturing        Manufacturing        Services     Services
                          (1)          (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)                  (6)                (7)          (8)

∆Asoy                   0.024**      0.033***       0.055***         0.065***              0.029              0.042**          0.022**      0.034***
                        [0.010]       [0.010]        [0.019]          [0.018]             [0.018]             [0.017]          [0.011]       [0.011]

Observations               557          557            557              557                555                  555              557           557
R-squared                 0.157        0.216          0.179            0.199              0.063                0.107            0.132         0.217
Baseline Controls          Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes           Yes
Region FE                  Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes           Yes
All Controls               No           Yes            No               Yes                No                   Yes              No            Yes
                                                                   Panel C
 Outcome:                 Change in composition-adjusted skill premia by sector
 Sector                   Overall     Overall     Agriculture      Agriculture      Manufacturing        Manufacturing        Services     Services
                           (1)         (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)                  (6)                (7)          (8)

 ∆Asoy                    0.021**     0.021**         0.016            0.017              0.026                0.028           0.024**      0.024**
                          [0.009]     [0.009]        [0.019]          [0.019]            [0.020]              [0.019]          [0.010]      [0.010]

 Observations               557         557            557              557                554                  554              557          557
 R-squared                 0.162       0.165          0.145            0.150              0.027                0.042            0.031        0.032
 Baseline Controls          Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes          Yes
 Region FE                  Yes         Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes              Yes          Yes
 All Controls               No          Yes            No               Yes                No                   Yes              No           Yes
Notes: Changes in wages and skill premia are calculated over the years 2000 to 2010. All regressions include the baseline specification controls
which are the share of rural population in 1991, a measure of technical change in maize and region fixed effects. The regressions with all controls
also include income per capita (in logs), population density (in logs), literacy rate, all observed in the 1991 Population Census. In columns (5) and
(6) of Panel A we lose one observation because there are no unskilled manufacturing workers in our sample in the microregion Amapá (IBGE ID
16002) in 2010. In columns (5) and (6) of Panel B we lose two observations because there are no skilled male manufacturing workers in our sample
in the microregions of Japurà (IBGE ID 13002) and Chapadas Das Mangabeiras (IBGE ID 21021) in 2000. The missing observations in columns (5)
and (6) of Panel C follow from the above explanation. We recover the estimates of the dependent variable from a first stage Mincerian regression in
which we estimate a regression of the log of hourly wage on microregion fixed effects, and a vector of individual characteristics that includes dummies
for sector, skill group, age group, race, and all the interactions between these variables. Robust standard errors reported in brackets. Significance
levels: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1.




                                                                         10
  Table A.6: Effect of technical change in soy on the number of
                 workers at the minimum wage
   Outcome:               Change in the share of workers at the minimum wage by sector
   Industry               Manufacturing       Manufacturing       Low R&D       Low R&D       High R&D       High R&D
   ∆Asoy                    0.210***            0.177***           0.245***      0.207***      0.231***       0.185***
                             [0.045]             [0.044]            [0.052]       [0.048]       [0.048]        [0.045]

   Observations                  556                556              555            555           555             555
   R-squared                    0.124              0.184            0.146          0.221         0.213           0.302
   Baseline Controls             Yes                Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
   Region FE                     Yes                Yes              Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
   All Controls                  No                 Yes              No             Yes           No              Yes

Notes: Changes in dependent variables are calculated over the years 2000 and 2010 (source: Population Censuses). The
unit of observation is the micro-region. Workers at the minimum wage are workers paid below the mandatory minimum
wage in 2000 and 2010. All the regressions include the baseline specification controls which are the share of rural population
in 1991, a measure of technical change in maize and region fixed effects. The regressions with all controls also include
income per capita (in logs), population density (in logs), literacy rate, all observed in the 1991 Population Census. Robust
standard errors reported in brackets. Significance levels: ∗∗∗ p < 0.01,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗ p < 0.1..




                                                             11
B      Appendix: data
B.1     Wages
    To compute composition-adjusted wages we estimate the following Mincerian regres-
sions:

                     ln(wikt ) = γkt + Hikt βHt + εikt for t=2000, 2010                    (16)

where ln(wijkt ) is the log hourly wage of individual i, working in sector j in micro-region
k at time t, and γkt is a micro-region fixed effect, while Hijkt is a vector of individual
characteristics, which includes dummies for sector, skill group, age group, race, and all the
interactions between these variables. We estimate the previous Mincerian regression for
each micro-region and for each broad sector separately. Also, we estimate these regressions
constraining the sample to either unskilled or skilled labor only, recovering the unit price
of labor in each micro-region for each type of labor in both cross sections. Since the
existing literature documented how Brazil has experienced a considerable reduction in
its gender pay gap (Ferreira, Firpo, and Messina 2017), we estimate equation (16) only
for male workers. Observations are weighted by their corresponding population census
weight. Next, we use the micro-region fixed effects estimated above as the unit price of
labor for a given skill group in a given micro-region, and we compute the change in unit
prices of labor in micro-region k between 2000 and 2010 as ∆γk = γk,2010 − γk,2000 , which
gives us the change in the composition-adjusted wages at the micro-region level.


C      Appendix: Theory
In this appendix we provide the proofs of Propositions 1 to 4 and Lemma 1.


Proposition 1. An increase in As in agriculture, leads to an increase in the relative
demand for high skilled workers in agriculture if and only if the elasticity of substitution
between high- and low-skilled workers is greater than one (ε > 1).

Proof. Take the agriculture sector. Solving for the inner nest we get that the conditional
factor demands Sa (ws , wu , La ), Ua (ws , wu , La ) and the cost function C(ws , wu , La ) for
agriculture labor La are given by:




                                              12
                                                                          −ε
                                                                      ws
                                                                      As
                                                                                 La
                      Sa (ws , wu , La ) =                                                       ε                      (17)
                                                As [ws1−ε Aε−1
                                                            s    + wu1−ε Aε−1
                                                                          u ]
                                                                              ε−1
                                                            −ε
                                                              wu
                                                              Au
                                                                    La
                      Ua (ws , wu , La ) =                                                       ε                      (18)
                                          Au [ws1−ε Aε−1
                                                     s   + wu1−ε Aε−1
                                                                  u ]
                                                                      ε−1

                                             "                         1
                                                     1−ε    1−ε # 1−ε
                                                 ws           wu
                       C(ws , wu , La ) = La             +                                                              (19)
                                                 As           Au

   Thus, the relative demand for skilled workers in agriculture is given by:
                                                            ε           ε−1
                                        Sa              wu          As
                                           =                                                                            (20)
                                        Ua              ws          Au



Proposition 2. Whether an increase in As in agriculture leads to an absolute decrease
in the demand for low skilled workers in agriculture depends on whether labor and land
are strong complements (σ < εΓ).

Proof. From the production function we can can compute the marginal productivity for
each raw labor type:


                                                        1     σ−1      −(ε−σ)         ε−1   −1
                            M P Ua = Kth γΘ σ−1 ALσ La                   εσ
                                                                                 Au ε U a ε                             (21)
                                                        1     σ−1      −(ε−σ)         ε−1   −1
                            M P Sa = Kth γΘ σ−1 ALσ La                   εσ
                                                                                 As ε S a ε                             (22)

                     σ−1                σ−1
where Θ = (AL La )    σ    + (AT Ta )    σ    . Clearly, we can see that

                                 ∂Θ    σ − 1 σ−1 σ−ε  ε−1  −1
                                     =      ALσ Laσε Sa ε Asε
                                 ∂As     σ
Moreover,

                                     ∂Lm
                                       a     m−1+ 1ε ε−1  −1
                                         = mLa      Sa ε Asε
                                     ∂As
Therefore,

                                                                                                          −(ε−σ)
                                                                                                                    
      ∂M P Ua                  σ−1 1 ε−12−σ ∂Θ −1                                     −(ε−σ)         1   ∂La εσ

              = An Kth AL Au Ua 
                                σ
                                      Θ σ−1
                                      ε
                                                La
                                                ε                                       εσ
                                                                                               + Θ σ−1              
       ∂As                        σ−1       ∂As                                                            ∂As




                                                             13
                                                                                                       
    ∂M P Ua           σ−1 ε−1   −1    1   −(ε−σ)
                                                               1      ∂Θ    (ε − σ) −1 ∂La
            = An Kth ALσ Au ε Ua ε Θ σ−1 La εσ                    Θ−1     −        La
     ∂As      |              {z                }              σ−1     ∂As      εσ      ∂As
                                     κ


Notice that κ > 0. Thus,
                                                                                               
              ∂M P Ua             1 −1 σ−1 σ−ε  ε−1  −1   (ε − σ) 1−ε  ε−1  −1
                      =κ            Θ ALσ Laσε Sa ε Asε −        La ε Sa ε Asε
               ∂As                σ                          εσ
                                                                        
                 ∂M P Ua  κ 1 ε−1 −1              −1
                                                     σ−1 σ−ε (ε − σ) 1−ε
                         = Laε−1 Sa ε Asε        Θ AL L a −
                                                      σ   σε
                                                                    La ε

                  ∂As     σ                                     ε
          1     ε−1   −1
Since σκ Laε−1 Sa ε Asε > 0

                      ∂M P Ua             σ−1 σ−ε   (ε − σ) 1−ε
                              < 0 ⇐⇒ Θ−1 ALσ Laσε −        La ε < 0
                       ∂As                             ε
                                                                                              σ−1
                                                        σ−1                σ−1
                                                                                                    !
              ∂M P Ua                        (AL La )    σ    + (AT Ta )    σ    − (AL La )    σ
                      < 0 ⇐⇒ σ < ε
               ∂As                                                  Θ
                                                                           σ−1
                                                                                 !
                            ∂M P Ua                             (AT Ta )    σ
                                    < 0 ⇐⇒ σ < ε                                                            (23)
                             ∂As                                    Θ



Lemma 1. If all three sectors are active, the effect of an increase in skilled-biased-factor-
augmenting technology in agriculture (As ) on wages is mediated by the effect of As on
local knowledge (Kth ). In particular:

                                     ∂ ln ws   ∂ ln wu   ∂ ln Kth
                                             =         =
                                      ∂As       ∂As        ∂As
   and the effect of As on land prices is given by:

                                     ∂ ln wT   ∂ ln Kth    θSa
                                             =          +
                                       ∂As       ∂As      As θTa
   where θSa is the cost share of high-skilled workers and θTa is the cost share of land in
agriculture.

Proof. The unit cost functions are defined as:

                ca (ws , wu , wT , As , Kth ) = min{ws Sa + wu Ua + wT Ta | Ya ≥ 1}


               chm (ws , wu , wT , p, Kth ) = min{ws Sm
                                                      h        h
                                                        + wu U m + ph Kth xh | Ymh ≥ 1}


                                                  14
                                                 `
              c`m (ws , wu , wT , Kt ) = min{ws Sm       `
                                                   + wu Um + p` Kt` x` | Ym` ≥ 1}

    Where As denotes skilled-biased factor-augmenting technologies in agriculture, Kth is
the local knowledge which is an endogenous hicks neutral technology, and pj is the price
of inputs and xj is the quantity of inputs. Note that we already use the symmetry of the
input market to simplify notation.
    From the unit cost functions we can define the unit factor demands:

                                                         ∂ci (ws , wu , wT , Ai , Kth )
                    aUi (ws , wu , wT , Ai , Kth ) =
                                                                    ∂wu
                                                      ∂ci (ws , wu , wT , Kth )
                        aSi (ws , wu , wT , Kth )   =
                                                                ∂ws
                                              ∂ci (ws , wu , wT , Kth )
                        aTi (ws , wu , wT , Kth ) =
                                                         ∂r
   In this economy, when all sectors are active, zero profit conditions are given by:

                  pa = ca (ws , wu , wT , As , Kth ) = ca (ws , wu , wT , As )/Kth


                        1 = chm (ws , wu , p, Kth ) = chm (ws , wu , ph )/Kth


                        p`m = c`m (ws , wu , Kth ) = c`m (ws , wu , p` )/Kth

   These equations can be re-written as:

                                                ws
                                   p a = ca (      , wu , wT )/Kth
                                                As

                                    1 = chm (ws , wu , ph )/Kth


                                    p`m = c`m (ws , wu , p` )/Kth

    Where we made clear that the unit cost function in agriculture depends on the skilled
biased factor-augmenting technology As that we study, and that the productivity in all
sectors also depends on Kt . Taking log derivatives of these equations with respect to As
we obtain that:

         ∂ ln pa       ∂ ln wT       ∂ ln ws       ∂ ln As       ∂ ln wu ∂ ln Kth
                 = θTa         + θSa         − θSa         + θUa        −
          ∂As            ∂As          ∂As           ∂As           ∂As      ∂As




                                                    15
                            ∂ ln 1       ∂ ln ws        ∂ ln wu        ∂ ln ph ∂ ln Kth
                                   = θSm
                                       h         + θUmh         + θxhm        −
                             ∂As          ∂As            ∂As            ∂As      ∂As

                            ∂ ln p`m       ∂ ln ws        ∂ ln wu        ∂ ln p` ∂ ln Kth
                                     = θSm
                                         `         + θUm`         + θx`m        −
                             ∂As            ∂As            ∂As            ∂As      ∂As
   But, we will later see that the price of inputs is proportional to the cost of producing
them. And the cost of producing one input is the same as the final good.37 Defining:

                                                                                  θSm
                                                                                    j
                                              θ̃Sm
                                                 j = (θ j + θ j
                                                       Sm    xm                          )
                                                                               θSm
                                                                                 j + θ j
                                                                                      Um

       We then have:

                                          ∂ ln Kth        ∂ ln ws         ∂ ln wu
                                                   = θ̃Sm
                                                        h         + θ̃Umh
                                            ∂As            ∂As             ∂As

                                          ∂ ln Kth        ∂ ln ws         ∂ ln wu
                                                   = θ̃Sm
                                                        `         + θ̃Um`
                                            ∂As            ∂As             ∂As
       Hence:

                                     ∂ ln Kth        ∂ ln ws               ∂ ln wu
                                              = θ̃Sm
                                                   h         + (1 − θ̃Sm
                                                                       h )
                                       ∂As            ∂As                   ∂As

                                     ∂ ln Kth        ∂ ln ws               ∂ ln wu
                                              = θ̃Sm
                                                   `         + (1 − θ̃Sm
                                                                       ` )
                                       ∂As            ∂As                   ∂As
       In matrix form:

                                       ∂ ln Kth
                                   "              #                 "                         #"             #
                                                                                                   ∂ ln ws
                                         ∂As
                                                                        θ̃Sm
                                                                           h (1 − θ̃Sm
                                                                                     h )
                                                                                                    ∂As
                                       ∂ ln Kth            =                                       ∂ ln wu
                                         ∂As
                                                                        θ̃Sm
                                                                           ` (1 − θ̃Sm
                                                                                     ` )
                                                                                                    ∂As

       Using Cramer’s rule:


                                                                   ∂ ln Kth                                 ∂ ln Kth
          "             #                        "                                                                    #
              ∂ ln ws                                                                           ∂ ln Kt
                                          1            h − θ̃S ` )
                                                   (θ̃Sm                    +   (1 −  θ̃S h )(          −            )
               ∂As                                                   ∂As                         ∂As          ∂As
              ∂ ln wu
                              =                               m
                                                                       ∂ ln Kth
                                                                                          m
                                                                                           ∂ ln Kth     ∂ ln Kth
               ∂As                 θ̃Sm
                                      h   − θ̃Sm
                                               `           h − θ̃S ` )
                                                       (θ̃Sm       m     ∂As
                                                                                −  θ̃ `
                                                                                     Sm  (   ∂As
                                                                                                     −    ∂As
                                                                                                                 )

       Hence:

                                                                                   ∂ ln Kth
                                                      "             #          "              #
                                                          ∂ ln ws
                                                           ∂As                       ∂As
                                                          ∂ ln wu
                                                                          =        ∂ ln Kth
                                                           ∂As                       ∂As

    This equation means that skilled-biased factor-augmenting technical change in agri-
culture will result in wage increases for high and low skilled workers of the exact same
  37
   Note that an alternative is to use the fact that the cost function is Cobb-Douglas as we have in the
main text.


                                                                          16
magnitude. Note that this result is a consequence of the small open economy assumption.
If increased exports of low-skill intensive goods decreased prices of low-skilled intensive
goods, then Stolper-Samuelson type forces would appear, which would tend to decreased
low-skilled workers’ wages.
    We now turn to land prices. From,

                      ∂ ln wT       ∂ ln ws       ∂ ln As       ∂ ln wu ∂ ln Kth
            0 = θTa           + θSa         − θSa         + θUa        −
                        ∂As          ∂As           ∂As           ∂As      ∂As
   we have that:

              ∂ ln wT   (1 − θSa − θUa ) ∂ ln Kth    θSa     ∂ ln Kth    θSa
                      =                           +        =          +
                ∂As           θTa          ∂As      As θTa     ∂As      As θTa


Proposition 3. An increase in skilled-biased-factor-augmenting technology in agriculture
(As ), leads to an expansion of low-skill intensive manufacturing industries, provided that:

  1. High- and low-skilled workers are imperfect substitutes (i.e. when ε > 1)

  2. Land and labor are strong complements (i.e. when σ < εΓ)

  3. Agriculture is not much more intensive in low-skilled labor than the low-skill inten-
     sive industry.

Proof. Consider the factor market clearing equilibrium conditions,



                                                     aT a Y a = T                       (24)
                                              `         h
                                aSa Ya + aSm
                                           ` Ym + aS h Ym = S
                                                    m
                                                                                        (25)
                                aU a Ya + aUm` Ym` + aUmh Ymh = U                       (26)

Log-differentiating Equations 24, 25 and 26 we get that:



                                                aT a dYa + daT a Ya = dT
                                                   `          h
                         aSa dYa + daSa Ya + aSm
                                               ` dYm + aS h dYm = dS
                                                         m

                        daU a Ya + aU a dYa + aUm` dYm` + aUmh dYmh = dU

                              b = dX and λij = aIj Yj , i.e the share of factor I in industry
Now, define a hat-variable as X     X               I
j. Therefore, dividing at both sides of the equalities by the respective factor endowment,
we can write the previous expressions as follows:



                                               17
                                                λT a Yba + λT ab
                                                               aT a = Tb                (27)
                                         Ya       c`       ch b
                          λSa Yba + daSa + λSm ` Ym + λS h Ym = S                       (28)
                                          S             m

                                         Ya        `       ch b
                         λU a Yba + daU a + λUm` Yc
                                                  m + λUm
                                                        h Ym = U                        (29)
                                         U

Since in our economy the factor endowments are unchanged, dT = dS = dU = 0. This
simplifies the expressions above in the following way:



                                                        Yba = −ac
                                                                Ta                      (30)
                                           c`       ch          Ya
                          λSa Yba + λSm ` Ym + λS h Ym = −daSa                          (31)
                                                  m
                                                                S
                                            `       ch          Y a
                          λU a Yba + λUm` Yc      h Ym = −daU a
                                           m + λ Um                                     (32)
                                                                U

Combining these expressions, we arrive to:



                  λSm c`        ch
                    ` Ym + λS h Ym = − aSa λSa + λSa ac           T a − ac
                                                      T a = λSa (ac        )            (33)
                                                                   {z Sa}
                             m
                                       c
                                                            |
                                                                        γs

                       `      ch
                            h Ym = −d
                λUm` Yc
                      m + λUm       aU a λU a + λU a ac            Ta − a
                                                      T a = λU a (ac    d)              (34)
                                                            |       {z U a}
                                                                        γu




                                      h
                                         λUm` γs − λSm
                                                     ` γu
                                    Yc
                                     m =                                                (35)
                                                 ∆
                                      `
                                         λSm u − λUm
                                           h  γ      h γs
                                    Yc
                                     m =                                                (36)
                                                 ∆

where ∆ ≡ λUm` λSm h − λU h λS ` and ∆ > 0 since the share of unskilled in the low-skilled
                           m   m

intensive industry times the share of skilled in the skill-intensive industry is greater than
the share of high-skilled in the low-skilled intensive industry times the share of unskilled
in the high-skilled intensive industry. Then, Yc h            ` γs − λS ` γu < 0. Which holds
                                                 m < 0 iff λUm         m

iff:

                                        λUm` γs < λSm
                                                    ` γu



   This can be re-written as:


                                    T a − ac
                         λUm` λSa (ac      Sa ) < λSm
                                                    ` λU a (a
                                                            c Ta − a
                                                                   d U a)




                                               18
   This can be further simplified to:

                          λUm` λSa (ac
                                     Sa + Ya ) > λSm
                                          b        ` λU a (d
                                                           aU a + Yba )

   And so, Ych
            m < 0 iff:


                                   λUm` (ac
                                          Sa + Ya )
                                                 b      λU a
                                                      >
                                   λSm
                                     ` (daU a + Yba )   λSa
   Now, note that ac   Sa > a
                            d U a , which we show that it holds in more detail below (note,

however, that this is simply saying that the demand for high-skilled labor increases relative
to unskilled labor with increases in As ). From this, we have that, a∗ ≡ ((aad  Sa +Ya )
                                                                                    c ) > 1.
                                                                                d   c
                                                                                Ua +Ya
                                  λU `     λU a
                        h           m ∗
Hence, we have that Yc  m < 0 iff λ ` a > λSa . This condition holds as long as agriculture
                                   Sm
is not much more intensive in low-skilled labor than the low-skilled intensive industry.
    Finally we are going to prove that ac   Sa > ad U a . This condition basically says that

the elasticity of the agricultural unit factor demand with respect to As is larger for the
skilled factor than for the unskilled factor, i.e ∂lna
                                                  ∂lnAs
                                                       Sa
                                                          > ∂lnaUa
                                                             ∂lnAs
                                                                   . Now, take the marginal
productivities for skilled and unskilled labor in agriculture (Equations 21 and 22) and
equate them to their factor price:



                                         wu = M P Ua
                                         ws = M P Sa

and notice that we can write the following conditional labor demand equations:


                            1    1          1   σ−1 −(ε−σ) ε−1
                          Uaε =     An KγΘ σ−1 ALσ La εσ Au ε
                                 wu
                             1   1          1   σ−1 −(ε−σ) ε−1
                           Saε =    An KγΘ σ−1 ALσ La εσ As ε
                                 wu

Log-differentiating both expressions with respect to As :

                                                                    
                          ∂lnUa          1 ∂lnΘ        (ε − σ) ∂lnLa
                                 =ε                 −
                          ∂lnAs        σ − 1 ∂lnAs        εσ ∂lnAs
                                                                    
                   ∂lnSa        1 ∂lnΘ        (ε − σ) ∂lnLa ε − 1
                         =ε                −                 +
                   ∂lnAs      σ − 1 ∂lnAs        εσ ∂lnAs         ε

Therefore,




                                               19
                         ∂lnaSa   ∂lnaU a    ∂lnSa   ∂lnUa
     ac
      Sa > a
           d U a ⇐⇒             >         ⇐⇒       >       ⇐⇒ ε − 1 > 0                         (37)
                         ∂lnAs    ∂lnAs      ∂lnAs   ∂lnAs

Therefore, Ych          c`
             m < 0 and Ym > 0. Upon the technical change in agriculture, the low-skill
intensive industry expands and the high-skill intensive industry contracts.


Proposition 4. When the following conditions hold:

  1. High- and low-skilled workers are imperfect substitutes (i.e. when ε > 1)

  2. Land and labor are strong complements (i.e. when σ < εΓ)

  3. Agriculture is not much more intensive in low-skilled labor than the low-skill inten-
     sive industry.

   An exogenous change in skill-biased-factor-augmenting technology (As ), results in:

  1. Static gains from increased productivity in the agricultural sector.

  2. Dynamic losses shaped by the decrease in the incentives to invest in new intermediate
     varieties for the H-industry.

   In particular, the growth rate of consumption is given by:

                                                max{π l , π h , r} − ρ
                                         gC =                                                   (38)
                                                          η
   The change in gross domestic output is given by:


                                           `
      ∂ ln GDPt      ∂ ln pa Qa    ` ∂ ln pm Q`    h ∂ ln Qh              χ ∂Fmh
                = ωa            + ωm            + ωm         + 1{πh ≥πl }        t              (39)
          ∂As           ∂As             ∂A             ∂As                η ∂As
                  |                   {z s                 } |         {z        }
                                         Static gains/losses             Dynamic gains/losses


                        p j Qj
   where ωj =                      h .
                pa Qa +p`m ςQ`m +ςFm

Proof. Note that entrepreneurs produce intermediates for either the H- or the L-industries
if the returns to entering are at least r. Hence, the growth rate of consumption is the
maximum between the three possible investments.

                                                max{π ` , π h , r} − ρ
                                         gC =
                                                          η
    In general, this is pinned-down by the profits made in the H-industry, hence in steady
state:

                                                       20
                                          χFmh (Um
                                                 h    h
                                                   , Sm )−ρ
                                   gC =
                                                  η
    This equation shows that consumption is growing in steady-state as a function of the
size of the high-skilled sector. Moreover, knowledge grows at the level of investment,
which is given by what is not consumed. The growth rate in each sector is given by the
growth rate in Kth which is given by investment. This means that everything is growing
at the same rate as consumption.
    Finally we need to see how skilled-biased-factor-augmenting productivity increases
affect the growth rate of the economy. For this, we obtain the evolution of GDP:

                          GDPt = pa Kth Qa + p`m ςKth Q`m + ςKth Fmh

   to obtain that:

                        ln GDPt = ln Kth + ln(pa Qa + p`m ςQ`m + ςFmh )

   In equilibrium, we have that ln Kt = ln K0 + gc t. And, hence:

                     ln GDPt = ln K0 + g C t + ln(pa Qa + p`m ςQ`m + ςFmh )

   And hence:

                      ∂ ln GDPt   ∂g C    ∂ ln(pa Qa + p`m ςQ`m + ςFmh )
                                =      t+
                          ∂As     ∂As                 ∂As
   And hence

         ∂ ln GDPt   ∂g C               1             ∂Qa ∂p`m ςQ`m ∂ςFmh
                   =      t+                        (    +         +      )
             ∂As     ∂As     pa Qa + p`m ςQ`m + ςFmh ∂As    ∂As      ∂As
   And hence:

             ∂ ln GDPt   ∂g C        ∂ ln pa Qa            `  `
                                                   ` ∂ ln pm Qm
                                                                           h
                                                                   h ∂ ln Fm
                       =      t + ωa            + ωm            + ωm
                 ∂As     ∂As            ∂As              ∂As           ∂As
   with ωa = pa Qa +pp`a Q a
                            `  h , and analogously for the other ωj .
                      m ςQm +ςFm
   Which is equal to:

                                             `
        ∂ ln GDPt      ∂ ln pa Qa    ` ∂ ln pm Q`    h ∂ ln Qh              χ ∂Fmh
                  = ωa            + ωm            + ωm         + 1{πh ≥πl }        t
            ∂As           ∂As             ∂As            ∂As                η ∂As
                    |                   {z                   } |         {z        }
                                      Static gains/losses               Dynamic gains/losses




                                                 21
