NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION, MOBILE COMMUNICATION, AND REFERRAL EFFECTS
Panle Jia Barwick
Yanyan Liu
Eleonora Patacchini
Qi Wu
Working Paper 25873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25873

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019, Revised June 2019

We thank Susan Athey, Patrick Bayer, Giacomo De Giorgi, Jessie Handbury, Tatsiramos
Konstantinos, Mike Lovenheim, Michele Pellizzari, and Steve Ross for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Panle Jia Barwick, Yanyan Liu, Eleonora Patacchini, and Qi Wu. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Information, Mobile Communication, and Referral Effects
Panle Jia Barwick, Yanyan Liu, Eleonora Patacchini, and Qi Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 25873
May 2019, Revised June 2019
JEL No. J60,R23
ABSTRACT
Information is a crucial ingredient in economic decision making. Yet measuring the extent of
information exchange among individuals and its effect on economic outcomes is a difficult task.
We use the universe of de-identified cellphone usage records from more than one million users in
a Chinese city over twelve months to quantify information exchange among individuals and
examine its role in urban labor markets. We present the first empirical evidence that information
flow (measured by call volume) correlates strongly with worker flows, a pattern that persists at
different levels of geographic aggregation. Conditional on information flow, socioeconomic
diversity in the source of information (social contacts), especially that associated with the
working population, is crucial and helps to predict worker flows. We supplement our phone
records with auxiliary data sets on residential housing prices, job postings, and firm attributes
from administrative data. Information passed on through social contacts is valuable: referred jobs
are associated with higher monetary gains, a higher likelihood to transition from part-time to fulltime, reduced commuting time, and a higher probability of entering desirable jobs. Referral
information is more valuable for young workers, people switching jobs from suburbs to the inner
city, and those changing their industrial sectors. Firms receiving referrals are more likely to have
successful recruits and experience faster growth.
Panle Jia Barwick
Department of Economics
Cornell University
462 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
panle.barwick@cornell.edu
Yanyan Liu
IFPRI (International Food Policy
Research Institute)
Senior Fellow
Washington, DC 20006-1002
Y.Liu@cgiar.org

Eleonora Patacchini
Department of Economics
Cornell University
430 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
ep454@cornell.edu
Qi Wu
Department of Economics
Cornell University
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
qw98@cornell.edu

1

Introduction

Information affects every aspect of economic decisions, from firm production to household consumption, from government regulation to international treaty negotiations. In classical analysis,
it is assumed that agents choose actions to maximize payoff under perfect information (Arrow
and Debreu, 1954). In reality, information is rarely perfect. Agents’ information sets differ
substantially, as highlighted by the influential literature on information asymmetry (Akerlof,
1970; Spence, 1973; Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). In addition, information exchange and acquisition are costly and crucially depend on the interaction between the sending and receiving
parties (agents, institutions, etc.).
Quantifying the effect of information exchange among social entities and individuals on
economic outcomes is challenging because it is difficult to measure the extent of information
exchange and even more so the quality of information that is passed on from one agent to another. The widespread use of location-aware and Global Positioning System (GPS) technologies
in mobile phone devices provides a novel avenue that allows researchers to quantify the extent
of information exchange among individuals, while also tracking their movements in physical
space. Datasets derived from geocoded phone communication records present three unique
advantages over traditional ones. First, the frequency and intensity of calling records provide a
direct measure of information exchange. Second, the panel data nature of these datasets make
it feasible to follow individuals over time and space and control for individual unobserved attributes. Third, such data portray a more accurate profile of individuals’ social networks than
do surveys commonly used in the literature. Existing research has documented that mobile
phone usage predicts human mobility (Gonzalez et al., 2008), migration (Blumenstock et al.,
2019), poverty and wealth (Blumenstock et al., 2015), credit repayment (Bjorkegren and Grissen, 2018), restaurant choices (Athey et al., 2018), and residential location choices (Buchel
et al., 2019).
In this paper, we focus on information’s impact on the dynamics of the labor market,
arguably one of the most important markets in a society. Our empirical research has the
following goals. First, we investigate the extent to which information flow is accompanied by
worker flows. Second, we examine how information flow among friends affects job transitions
and worker-vacancy match efficiency.
To this end, we exploit the universe of de-identified cellphone usage records from all users
in a large Chinese city served by a major telecommunication service provider over the course of
twelve months. These detailed records enable us to construct measures of information exchange
between geographic areas and among individuals, as well as variables on each user’s employment
status, history of work locations, home locations, and demographic attributes (gender, age, and
birthplace). We supplement our phone records with auxiliary data sets on residential housing
2

prices, job postings, and firm attributes (industry and payroll) for additional socioeconomic
measures.
We proceed in several steps. First, we provide the first empirical evidence that information
flow as measured by the frequency of phone calls correlates strongly with worker flows. Such
a correlation persists at different levels of spatial aggregation. Conditional on the amount of
information exchanged, the diversity of individuals’ social contacts (sources of information)
also matters.1 Within different diversity measures, diversity in socioeconomic status is more
valuable than diversity in spatial locations. As far as job mobility is concerned, diversity
in the information sources possessed by the working population is far more critical than the
information sources possessed by the residential population. Surprisingly, in terms of the relationship between information diversity and economic development, our data exhibit remarkable
similarity to the UK data analyzed by Eagle et al. (2010), highlighting the potentially wide
applicability of this finding in different settings.
Having documented the importance of information flow with respect to worker flow, we
examine the role of (job-related) information shared by friends on job switches. When an
individual moves to a pre-existing friend’s workplace, we define such a friend as ‘a referral’.2 We
first document that the intensity of information flow between workers and their referrals exhibits
an inverted-U shape that peaks at the time of the job switch. In contrast, the information flow
between workers and non-referral friends remains stable throughout the sample period, with no
noticeable differences during the months that precedes job switches. The distinctions in mobile
phone calling patterns are not driven by potential changes in the number of social contacts,
which is steady throughout our sample period. These results provide suggestive evidence that
individuals seek job-related information from their social contacts.
One might be concerned that the referral definition in our sample suffers from several confounding factors. First, firms sometimes relocate, consolidate, or open new plants in different
areas. If employer relocate employees in different time periods, we might observe workers
moving to the work location of pre-existing social contacts. Multi-plant firms are a rare phenomenon in the Chinese manufacturing industry; to the extent that this problem matters, we
tackle it by adding the interaction of the origin and destination neighborhood fixed effects.
Essentially, we compare individuals who share the same origin-destination neighborhood pair
but have different social networks and examine their choices of workplace locations with and
without friends.
The second confounding factor, a long-standing challenge in the literature that examines
observational data, is the difficulty of distinguishing a referral effect from homophily and sorting.
1

We use social contacts and friends interchangeably in this paper.
In our setting, referrals are social contacts in the workplace and include individuals who share job openings
with friends as well as those who tell their employers about the attributes of their friends. We discuss these
two different channels in Section 4.2.
2

3

If individuals share similar skills and preferences with their friends, then an individual might
move to a location where a friend works not because of the referral information but because the
vacant position requests certain skill sets. In addition, not all locations have desirable openings.
Leveraging the richness and structure of our data, we conduct a battery of tests. First, we limit
our analysis to individuals for whom there is at least one additional location within the same
neighborhood that has vacancy listings in the same occupation as the occupation that the job
switcher takes. This mitigates the concern that individuals sort into friends’ locations that
provide the only appropriate employment opportunity in the area.
Second, we distinguish between friends who are currently working in the location and friends
who used to work there but moved away prior to the job switch. Given that sorting into
friendship by unobserved preferences or skills should happen regardless of a friend’s current
location, we would expect to find similar estimates for both types of friends if our definition of
referrals primarily reflects sorting. Third, we compare friends who work vs. friends who live
at a location. Larger estimates for friends working in the location would be consistent with
referrals: affiliation with the workplace enables friends working there to have an information
advantage of job openings. Our results illustrate that friends currently work in the location are
indeed much more important than friends who moved away prior to the job switch and friends
who live there.
According to our analysis, one out of every four jobs are based on referrals. Having a referral
in a location increases by four times the likelihood that an individual moves there – a pattern
that is robust across a host of specifications and consistent with previous studies carried out in
various countries (Ioannides and Loury, 2004). Referrals are particularly important for young
workers, people switching jobs from suburbs to the inner city, and those who change sectors.
These results are in line with the observation that information asymmetries are more severe in
these settings.
Job information passed on via referrals is valuable for workers. Specifically, referral jobs are
associated with higher wages and non-wage benefits, shorter commutes, and a greater likelihood
that workers transition from part-time to full-time and from regular jobs to premium ones.
Information transmitted through the referral networks is also valuable for firms. Firms whose
employees have a larger social network are more likely to have successful recruits, achieve
higher retention rates, and experience faster growth. We also find suggestive evidence that
referrals improve labor market efficiency by providing better matches between workers and
vacancies, and, because women and migrants are more likely to find jobs through referrals,
referrals mitigate labor market inequality.
Our work contributes to the emerging literature that demostrates how the widespread use
of electronic technologies, and, consequently the wealth of information on individual (or firm)
digital footprints, opens new frontiers for urban economics (Glaeser et al., 2015; Donaldson
4

and Storeygard, 2016). A pioneering study by Henderson et al. (2012) exploits satellite data to
conduct an analysis on urban economic activities at a finer level of spatial disaggregation than
traditional studies. Using predicted travel time from Google Maps, Akbar et al. (2018) construct
city-level vehicular mobility indices for 154 Indian cities and propose new methodologies that
utilize such data to improve our understanding of urban development. Other studies examine
housing decisions (Bailey et al., 2018), households’ responses to income shocks (Baker, 2018),
and entrepreneurship and investment (Jeffers, 2018). Our work contributes to this literature
by creatively combining mobile phone records with traditional socioeconomic data to shed light
on urban labor market mobility at fine geographical and temporal scales.
Our work is related to the empirical literature on information economics. Recent studies
have shown that increasing information transparency (for example, through better labels and
postings) helps consumers’ perceptions of product attributes (e.g., Smith and Johnson 1988),
improves consumer choices (e.g., Hastings and Weinstein 2008), and drives up average product
quality (e.g., Jin and Leslie 2003; Bai 2018). Our analysis contributes to this strand of literature
by quantifying the importance of information exchange through referrals that facilitate urban
labor market mobility. Our study is also related to the literature on diversity, including Page
(2007) and Eagle et al. (2010). We propose novel measures of the diversity of socioeconomic
outcomes and illustrate the importance role they play in shaping worker flows.
Another relevant strand of literature examines the role of social networks in job searches
(Topa, 2011; Schumutte, 2016). To identify referred workers, this literature uses surveys or
assumes interactions and exchange of job information between social ties, such as fellow workers,
family ties, ethnic groups, residential neighbors, and Facebook friends.3 The paper closest to
ours is Bayer et al. (2008), who also study the importance of referral effects in an urban market.
Using Census data on residential and employment locations, they document that individuals
who reside in the same city block are more likely to work together than those who live in nearby
blocks, and they interpret these findings as evidence of social interactions. We contribute to
this literature by providing a superior measure of social networks and information exchange
among individuals, and we introduce complementary data on vacancies and firm attributes to
cover a diverse set of economic outcomes.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents motivating evidence that information
flow strongly correlates with the flow of workers. Section 3 discusses data and the institutional
background. Section 4 presents the regression framework and reports results from the empirical
3

In the existing literature researchers have proposed several proxies for social networks, such as former
fellow workers (Cingano and Rosolia 2012; Giltz 2017; Saygin et al. 2018), family ties (Kramarz and Skans
2014), individuals who belong to the same immigrant community or ethnic group (Edin et al. 2003 ; Munshi
and Rosenzweig 2013; Beaman 2012; Dustmann et al. 2016; Aslund et al. 2014), residential neighbors (Bayer
et al. 2008; Hellerstein et al. 2011; Hellerstein et al. 2014; Schumutte 2015), and Facebook friends (Gee et al.
2017)

5

analysis. Section 5 concludes.

2

Motivating Evidence: Information Flow and Worker
Flow

We are interested in understanding how information exchange affects urban labor markets.
Faced with the challenges in empirically measuring the extent of information flow across geographic regions and social groups, we resort to non-standard datasets. Our analysis is made
possible by a unique dataset that contains the universe of phone records for all persons in
a metropolitan city who subscribe to a major telecommunication operator in China. This
dataset provides superior coverage on individuals’ social network and allows us to identify their
geocoded work place and residence (see Section 3 for details.) We use the number of phone calls
between two areas to measure information flow and relate it to the worker flow constructed
using the same sample.4 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first analysis that examines
the empirical relationship between information flow and worker flow.
Descriptive Evidence We document a strong correlation between information flow as measured by the number of phone calls and worker flow between pairs of geographical locations at
varying levels of spatial aggregation. At the highest level, the city is divided into twenty-three
administrative districts. These districts are further broken into 1,406 neighborhoods that are
delineated by major roads (or ‘cells’), with each neighborhood populated by a varying number
of locations.5 In total there are close to eighteen thousand locations.
To illustrate the patterns of worker flow and mobile communication, we first plot in Figure
1 worker flows against the number of calls between a pair of administrative districts for ten
randomly chosen districts within the city proper. Blue non-directional edges correspond to
the number of job switches among the relevant pairs; the width of each edge is scaled proportionately to the number of switches. Red non-directional edges denote the average number of
weekly calls, and these have scaled edge-widths as well.6 Note the remarkably strong correlation
between the two types of edges. City districts with frequent information exchange (blue lines)
also have more worker flows (red lines), with the correlation between these two series exceeding
0.94. The two nodes that have the thickest edges are, respectively, the commercial center of
the city which has large retail chains, and an urban core with the second highest GDP among
4

An alternative measure of information flow, the total call volume in minutes, delivers similar results.
The average sizes for an administrative district, a neighborhood (cell) in the city proper (i.e., the urban
center of the city), and a neighborhood (cell) in the suburb are 712 km2 , 0.45 km2 , and 25.03 km2 , respectively.
A location is a building complex within a neighborhood (cell).
6
The graph is produced using the Fruchterman & Reingold algorithm which aims to distribute vertices evenly
(Fruchterman and Reingold 1991).
5

6

all areas in the city, respectively. The strong correlation remains when we include districts in
suburbs that have less economic activity (fewer job switchers and lower call volumes).
Some correlation naturally arises from heterogeneous spatial and economic attributes, such
as the two economic centers in the example described above. To address this, we run a regression
analysis and control for origin and destination fixed effects. Regressing the worker flow between
a district-pair on the total number of phone calls for the same pair leads to a significant (both
statistically and economically) coefficient: three hundred more calls are associated with one
more job switch (Column 1 in Table 1a). Using a log-log specification suggests that doubling
the number of calls is associated with a 35% increase in worker flows. The R-squared is 0.24
when the number of calls is the only regressor, and it jumps to 0.90 when origin and destination
fixed effects are included.
A key premise of our analysis is that call volumes serve as a proxy for the amount of
information exchanged between individuals. To better measure job-related information that
facilitates worker flows, we limit our analysis to calls received or made by job switchers prior
to their job change in Column 2. In practice, some calls might be initiated after individuals
have decided to move and could reflect communications arising from newly established (work)
relationships. In Column 3 and 4, we further exclude calls made within one month (Column 3)
and three months (Column 4) of the job switch. When we exclude calls that might be unrelated
to job-openings, the magnitude strengthens as we move from Column 2 to Column 4, with one
additional worker flow following eight more calls.
This strong correlation persists at finer geographical scales. Table 1b presents coefficient
estimates when we regress worker flow on information flow at the location-pair level. Our data
cover eighteen thousand locations and millions of location pairs. Predicting the exact location
(a building complex in our example) of job movers is a demanding exercise. Reassuringly, the
positive correlation exists even at this fine scale, with one thousand more calls associated with
one additional worker flow using the switcher sample (Column 4). At the neighborhood level
(an geographical area in between the administrative district and a location), the correlation
between information flow and worker flow is 0.75. Regressions using neighborhood observations
deliver very similar results, indicate that job-related information flow plays an important role
in worker flows.
Out-of-sample Prediction Existing studies have shown that mobile phone usage can predict
economic activities. Following Kreindler and Miyauchi (2019), we use the uncovered relationship between information exchange and worker flow among neighborhood pairs during the first
half of the sample to predict worker flow during the second half of the sample. We report a
couple of measures of the accuracy of the prediction exercise. We first check the correlation
between our prediction and the observed outcome. The higher this correlation, the better.
7

Then we regress the observed outcome on the predicted value and report the R-squared for the
following models: a) a linear model with neighborhood fixed effects; b) a linear spline model;
and c) a cubic-spline model.7
As shown in Table 2 (where even columns control for cell fixed effects), the out-of-sample
prediction exercise does well. In all cases we have examined, the regression coefficient between
our prediction and the observed outcome is close to one, varying between 0.97 to 1.03 depending
on specifications. The R-squared varies from 0.30 to 0.32, which is high for cross-sectional
studies with a large sample. The correlation between the predicted and actual worker flows is
0.55-0.56 across specifications. These encouraging results suggest that information flow is an
important predictor of worker flow.
Diversity and Economic Outcome The results above provide evidence of a strong parallel movement between information flow and worker flow. Both the sociology and economics
literature have long emphasized the importance of diversity (Ottaviano and Peri, 2006; Ashraf
and Galor, 2011; Alesina et al., 2016). In our setting, the content and value of information
might vary over time and across individuals. Economic opportunities are diverse and more
likely to come from contacts outside a tightly knit local friendship group. A high volume of
information exchange that is limited to the same area or social group might not be as beneficial
as information from a more diverse setting that taps into different social entities.
Following Eagle et al. (2010), we define three diversity measures using the normalized Shannon entropy: social entropy, spacial entropy, and income entropy.8 Social entropy measures the
diversity of an individual’s social ties and is defined as:
P

Dsocial (i) = −
=−

Pij ∗ log(Pij )
log(NumFriendi )
P νij
νij
j Vi log( Vi )
j

log(NumFriendi )

where Pij is the probability of communication between individuals i and j. It is measured by
the ratio of νij , the number of calls between i and j, and Vi , the total number of calls placed
or received by i. The denominator, log of the number of i’s friends, is a scaling number that
normalizes the Shannon entropy. Normalized entropy measures are guaranteed to vary from
zero and one and are comparable across different measures, with higher values representing
more diverse outcomes.
7
8

We use the default number of spline knots in STATA.
Cover and Thomas (2006) is a classic textbook on information theory and entropy measures.

8

Spatial entropy measures the diversity of an individual’s social ties in geographic locations:
D

spatial

P

(i) = −
=−

Pil ∗ log(Pil )
log(NumLocationi )
P νil
νil
l Vi log( Vi )
l

log(NumLocationi )

where Pil is the probability of communication between individual i and location l, νil is
number of calls between i and location l, and Vi is defined as above. The denominator
log(NumLocationi ) is the log number of locations where i has social contacts.
Finally, we define income entropy as:
D

income

P
(i) = −
=−

Pid ∗ log(Pid )
log(NumDecilei )
P νid
νid
d Vi log( Vi )
d

log(NumDecilei )

where νid is the number of calls between i and all individuals whose housing price falls in the dth
decile of the overall housing price distribution. The variable Vi is defined as above. As in the
other entropy measures, the normalization is measured through the number of unique deciles
that are spanned by the housing prices of individual i’s friends. Income entropy measures
socioeconomic diversity among i’s social network.
These entropy measures reflect the complexity of an individual’s network in terms of socioeconomic status and spatial coverage. We average the diversity measures over all individuals
who reside or work in each location. A high value indicates that the working or residential population at a particular location communicates with diverse sources of information. To examine
the importance of diversity, we regress the log of worker flow on the average entropy measures
at the location level. Our controls include the total call volumes, which, as shown above, is
an important predictor of worker flows; the number of individuals (subscribers of our data
provider) observed in a location, which captures the scale effect (that is, more populated areas
naturally have a higher job inflow); and neighborhood fixed effects. Hence our key parameters
are estimated from within-neighborhood across-location variation.
Columns 1 to 3 of Table 3 include one entropy measure at a time, while Column 4 stacks
all three measures together.9 Both social and income entropy, which reflect the socioeconomic
diversity of individuals’ information sources, have a sizable and significant impact on job inflow
conditional on the total number of calls, although the correlation between income entropy
and worker flows is stronger. A one standard deviation increase in social and income entropy
9

Here we limit our observations to locations that have at least five workers and five residents. Results are
similar if we use all locations or limit to those with at least ten observed workers and ten residents.

9

raises the worker inflow by 3% and 10%, respectively. Spatial entropy, on the other hand, is
insignificant with a negative sign. This might be because our sample consists of individuals
from the same city with limited spatial diversity.
Next we examine the relative importance of information possessed by the working vs. residential population at each location. Table 4 repeats the regressions in Table 3 but includes
the entropy measures for both the working and residential populations. As shown in Appendix
Table A1, the entropy measures for these two populations have similar distributions. However,
the information diversity of the working population has a much stronger correlation with worker
flows than that of residents in the same location. Once conditional on the entropy measure of
the working population, the coefficient associated with the residential population’s entropy is
insignificant and much smaller. While our analysis is descriptive, these results highlight the
heterogeneous values of information possessed by different social groups and reflect the fact
that information about jobs exists predominantly in the domain of the working population.
It is worth noting that our results are remarkably similar to the findings in Eagle et al.
(2010), who examines phone calls in UK in 2005 and relate communication flows to the socioeconomic well-being of communities. While the average number of monthly contacts is higher in
our context (24 vs. 10.1 in the UK, which reflects a denser social network in China), the average
minimum number of direct or indirect edges that connect two individuals is very similar (10.4
in our context vs. 9.4 in the UK). Moreover, as in our setting, there is a strong correlation
(varying from 0.58 to 0.73) between information diversity and the socioeconomic development
of communities in the UK. These results reflect common features of the role of information
diversity at play across different socioeconomic contexts, and it is unlikely that these features
are limited to specific markets or time periods.
Having illustrated the high correlation between information exchange and job flows, we
turn to the bulk of our empirical analysis that focuses on a specific channel of information at
work: information on job openings shared among social contacts. The existing literature has
documented that 30 to 60 percent of all jobs are typically found through informal contacts
rather than formal search methods (Topa, 2001; Burks et al., 2015); this is a universal pattern
that holds across countries, over time, and regardless of occupation or industry. Our calling
data provide superior coverage of information flow through social networks. We also bring in a
large number of complementary data sets. In the following, Section 3 describes in detail various
data sets assembled in this paper and Section 4 presents the core empirical analysis.

3

Data and Institutional Background

We have compiled a large number of data sets for our analysis. Besides data on phone records,
we have assembled auxillary data sets on residential housing prices, vacancies (job posting
10

data), and firm attributes (administrative datasets on firms registered in the same city).
Call Data Our anonymized call data consist of the universe of phone records for 1.6 million
mobile-phone users in a northern city in China from November 2016 to October 2017. The data
provider is a major telecommunication operator and mobile service provider in China (hereafter
Company A), which serves between 30-65% of all mobile phone users in the relevant city.10 Our
data set records activities of all of Company A’s subscribers in the city we study.11
Unlike social media, the cellphone penetration rate is very high in China. According to
the China Family Panel Studies, a nationally representative longitudinal survey of individuals’
social and economic status since 2010, 85% of correspondents sixteen years and older report
possessing a cellphone.
Cellphone usage records are automatically collected when individuals send a text message,
make a call, or browse the internet. These records include identifiers (IDs), location at the
time of usage, and the time and duration of usage. Our data are aggregated to the weekly
level and contain encrypted IDs of the calling party and the receiving party, call frequency and
call duration in seconds, whether or not a user is Company A’s subscriber, and demographic
information about the subscribers, such as age, gender, and place of birth. The birth county
enables us to distinguish migrants and non-migrants, which is analogous to ethnicity groups
commonly used in the literature. The existing literature has shown that migrants are much
more likely to refer and work with other migrants from their birth city and province (Dai et al.,
2018).
An important advantage of our data is that it includes geocoded locations at the time of use.
Whenever a user activates his mobile device, the serving tower station records a geographical
position in longitude and latitude that is accurate up to a 100-200 meter radius, or roughly the
size of a large building complex. For each individual and week, we observe the location that
has the most frequent phone usage between 9am and 6pm during the weekdays (which we call
a ‘work location’) as well as the location that has the most frequent usage between 10pm and
7am for the same week (which we call a ‘residential location’).12 These geocoded locations trace
out individuals’ spatial trajectories over time, allow us to construct diverse types of social ties
(including friends, neighbors, past and present coworkers, friends’ coworkers), and are unique
among social science studies, which typically lack fine-grained geographical information about
human interactions.
10

There are three major mobile service providers in China. We report a wide range of the market share to
keep company A anonymous.
11
For individuals with multiple phones, we observe usage on the most commonly used phone. If they subscribe
to services from multiple carriers (which is uncommon), we only observe activity within company A.
12
Phone usage during 7am-9am and 6pm-10pm is excluded because people are likely on the move during these
time intervals.

11

Constructing individuals’ workplaces histories using recorded geocodes is the most crucial
step of our analysis. Since we do not directly observe employment status or place of work, we
take a conservative approach that mitigates measurement errors in our work-related variables.
We focus on individuals with valid work locations for at least forty-five weeks – a period long
enough to precisely identify job switches. This gives us 560k individuals.13 After further restricting our sample to individuals who have at most two working locations throughout the
sample period (which excludes sales persons and people with out-of-town business travels and
family visits) and for whom we have complete demographic information, our final sample reduces to 456k users. We carry out the core empirical analysis using this sample and conduct
robustness checks in Section 4.5 using less stringent sample selection criteria.
We identify individual i as a job switcher if the following criteria are satisfied. First, as
shown in Figure 3, a job switcher is someone who has two work locations and is observed
in both locations for at least four weeks each. Locations that are visited during the working
hours on a daily basis for weeks in a row are likely to be a work location rather than shopping
centers or recreational facilities. Second, the distance between these two locations must be
at least 1 km. To reduce the possibility of erroneously identifying someone as a switcher, we
choose the cutoff of 1 km because individuals’ work locations are geocoded up to a radius of
100-200 meters.14 Among the 456k users in our final sample, 8% (38,102) are identified as job
switchers. Though constructed using different data sources, this on-the-job switching rate is
similar to that reported in the literature for China’s labor market, which is around 7% (Nie
and Sousa-Poza, 2017). China’s job-to-job mobility is lower than in Western countries (e.g.,
15-18% in the European Union as documented in Recchi 2009), partly because of the Hukou
system, which imposes significant restrictions on individuals’ moving across provinces or from
rural to urban areas (Ngai et al., 2017; Whalley and Zhang, 2007).
The city we study is divided into 1406 neighborhoods, or cells, that are delineated by major
roads. A cell is similar to but is smaller in size than a census block in the U.S. There are 917
cells in the city proper (i.e., the urban center of the city) and 589 cells in surrounding counties
(see Figure 2 for a section of the city map)15 . A lower level of geographical unit is a location,
or the geographic position returned by a tower station, which represents a building complex or
an establishment within a cell. The median and average number of distinct locations in a cell
is seven and thirteen, respectively. Our switchers found jobs in a total of 5,800 work locations
that are spread in 1,100 cells, about two-thirds of which are in the city proper; the reminder
13

Several factors contribute to sample attrition. China’s cellphone market is dynamic, with a high fraction
of subscribers switching carriers during each period. In addition, the location information is missing for weeks
when individuals travel out-of-town, experience frequent location changes (common for unemployed or parttime workers, salesman, etc.), or have limited phone usage (especially toward the end of a billing period for
subscribers on prepaid plans).
14
The average distance between cell centroids is 1km.
15
These cells are constructed by Company A for billing purposes.

12

are in surrounding counties.
Vacancy Data High quality data on vacancies and matches with workers are extremely hard
to find. To gauge the dynamics of local labor market conditions, we collect listings from the top
two largest online job posting websites, zhilian.com and 58.com, from August 2016 to Feburary
2018.16 These websites hold on average 10,000 job postings per month. We obtained a total of
121,055 postings and merge them to our call data based on locations.
Each posting reports the posting date, job title and description, full time or part time,
qualifications (minimum education and years of experience), monthly salary (in a range), firm
address, firm size (number of total employees), and firm industry. On the basis of the job title
and description, we group these postings into eight occupations using the 2010 U.S. occupation
code. Popular occupations include Professionals (26.70%), Service (26.61%), Sales and Office
administration (19.24%), and Management (17.47%), followed by Education, Legal, Arts and
Media (11.53%), Farming, Fishing, and Construction (6.44%), Production and Transportation
(2.29%), and Health related (1.45%). Industries are classified in ten sectors based on the 2012
US census codes (See Appendix A for more details).
Administrative Firm-Level Records Our vacancy postings report a wide salary range
(e.g., an annual salary of RMB 25k-40k). Using the mid-point of the reported salary range
delivers a rather flat wage profile across industries: jobs in the construction sectors are entitled
a salary that is similar to jobs in professional services. Missing salary information in postings is
also common. Finally, a sizable fraction of workers’ compensation consists of non-wage benefits,
including bonuses and commissions, paid vacations, health and unemployment insurance, etc.
(Cai et al., 2011).
We utilize two firm-level administrative datasets to obtain wages and benefits, local industry
composition, and firm attributes. The first is the annual National Enterprise Income Tax
Records from 2010 to 2015, which are collected by the State Administration of Taxation, which
contain firm ID, industry, ownership, balance sheet information (revenue, payroll, employee
size, etc), and tax payments. This database includes most large companies (major tax payers)
and a sample of small to medium-sized firms, covering about 85-90% of the city’s GDP. Location
information is obtained by merging these tax records with the Business Registration Database
that is maintained by China’s State Administration for Industry and Commerce. Our final data
set contains firm location, industry, ownership type (whether or not state owned), employee
16

Zhillian.com reported a 27.5% market share in the fourth quarter of 2017 and became the largest online
posting platform in the second quarter of 2018 (https://www.analysys.cn/article/detail/20018775). The
website 58.com is a close second, accounting for 26.5% of the market in the fourth quarter of 2017 and serving
more than four million firms (http://www.ebrun.com/20161230/208984.shtml).

13

size, revenue, wage payroll, and capital for a total of between five to ten thousand firms.17
In our sample most firms are private (85.6%), followed by state-owned (7.0%), foreign
(0.7%), and other ownership types (6.6%). Over 60% of firms belong to the manufacturing
sector, which is much higher than the national average of 32% (China’s National Statistic
Bureau), reflecting the industrial focus of the city. Using the average payroll as a measure of
job compensation, we find jobs in non-manufacturing firms are paid significantly higher than
those in manufacturing firms, demanding nearly a fifty-percent premium (the average annual
wage being RMB 32,005 vs. RMB 20,609).
Housing Price Our main data source does not contain individuals’ socioeconomic measures
such as wealth or income. To overcome this data limitation, we scrape housing data from
Anjuke.com, a major online real estate brokerage intermediary and rental service provider
in China that collects housing information for both residential and commercial properties.
For each residential complex, Anjuke.com reports its name, property type and attributes, the
monthly average housing price per square meter, year built, total number of units, average size,
and street address. About 64% of the cells in the city proper and 20% of cells in surrounding
counties can be merged with residential neighborhoods in Anjuke.com.
These data sources allow us to create a large number of attributes for each location and cell,
including the most common occupations among job postings, industry composition, number of
employees and vacancies, average wage, and housing price. For each individual in our final
sample, we observe his work and residential location, friends, neighbors, friends’ workplaces
and home locations, as well attributes for each location.
Chinese Labor Market China’s labor market has several noticeable features. Relative to
other developing countries, China has a high female labor participation rate. In response to
the employment pressure generated by its large population, China has instituted a mandated
(early) retirement age, which is 55 for female workers and 60 for male workers.
Established in the 1950s, China’s hukou system categorizes individuals as agricultural or
non-agricultural on the basis of their place of birth, and its goal is to anchor peasants to the
countryside. According to Zhang and Wu (2018), China’s urban labor market has a two-tier
system: urban cities and rural areas. The large divide that separates these two tiers in terms
of job opportunities, social benefits, and amenities (education, health care, etc.) has created a
high fraction of migrant workers in urban cities who take jobs with low wages and long working
hours and often are denied social benefits.
17

The exact number of firms is omitted to keep the city anonymous.

14

State owned enterprises (SOEs) account for a small fraction of the total number of firms,
but they constitute approximately 30 to 40 percent of China’s GDP and 20 percent of total
employment (State Assets Supervision and Administration Commission 2017). Many SOEs
appear in the Fortune Global 500 list and are among the largest conglomerates in the world.
Most private and foreign companies trail behind SOEs in terms of firm size and revenue.
Employment opportunities at SOEs are sought after for their job security, generous benefits,
and wages, which are sometimes higher wages than those in non-state sectors.
Similar to the U.S. and European countries, referrals are common among Chinese workers.
Figure 4 compares the popularity of different job search methods among Chinese and U.S.
workers; the red and blue bars represent data from the 2014 China Family Panel Studies and
the 2014 U.S. Current Population Survey, respectively. Workers in China are more likely to
rely on informal search methods (38% of workers in China find jobs through friends, compared
to 30% in the U.S.), while formal search methods (ads, job agencies, or contacting employers
directly) are more prevalent in the U.S.. In addition, referral is more important for young
workers in China, where a higher fraction of young correspondents cite referrals as their main
channel of landing a job.
Summary Statistics: Demographics and Social Ties Table 5a presents descriptive
statistics of the individuals in our sample. Thirty-six percent of users are female and ninety
percent of users are younger than sixty, reflecting the higher mobile phone penetration among
males and the younger population. Three quarters of our sample users are born in the local
province; the rest migrated from other provinces. Thirty-nine percent of users are born in the
city proper.
The bulk of our analysis focuses on job switchers and their social networks. Individual
i’s social contacts include everyone who makes a phone call to or receives a phone call from
individual i at least once during our sample period.18 As Table 5b illustrates, job switchers
bear demographics similar to those of non-switchers, except for age. Job switchers are more
likely to be in their thirties and on average are two years younger than non-switchers. They are
less likely to be migrants and have a smaller fraction of friends who use Company A’s mobile
service, although the magnitude of these differences is modest.
The call data consist of rich information on users’ social networks, but only report work
locations for Company A’s subscribers. On average, 50% of an individual’s friends are intrafirm connections. One might be concerned about potential sample selection bias if Company
A’s subscriber network over-represents certain demographic groups. This is unlikely to be a
18

They are also called ‘one-way’ contacts. An alternative definition requires a contact to make a phone call
to and receive a phone call from individual i at lease once during the sample period. These two definitions lead
to very similar results. Section 4.5 conducts robustness checks on the definition of social contacts.

15

major concern. First, company A’s network of users is geographically spread out and covers
all street-blocks of the city. Second, pricing and plan offerings are similar across mobile service
providers. To test the robustness of our results with respect to potential sample selection bias,
Section 4.2 separates individuals with the friend coverage above the median from those with
coverage below the median and documents similar findings.
To help interpret the magnitude of the coefficient estimates in Section 4 below, Appendix
Table A2 tabulates the summary statistics for key variables referenced in various regression
samples.

4

Empirical Analysis: Referral-Based Worker Flow

Throughout the section (except when noted otherwise), we limit an individual’s network to the
one formed prior to his job switch 19 . This avoids endogenous links formed after the job switch.
Among the 38,102 job switchers observed in our sample, 4,703 (12%) of them have missing
friend locations (Panel A of Table 6). Among the switchers with non-missing locations for
at least one friend, 25% find a job through a referral. Note that this should be interpreted
as a lower bound as we only observe friends’ locations if they have forty-five weeks of nonmissing work locations.20 As discussed in Section 3, forty-five weeks ensures the accuracy of
identified job switches, but it may under report the fraction of referred job moves. In Panel B,
we relax the friend sample to all social contacts with at least four weeks of non-missing work
locations. Among switchers with friend location information, 43% move to a friend. In light of
this difference, Sections 4.2 to 4.4 present estimates with our preferred friend definition, while
Section 4.5 repeats these analyses using friends for whom there is at least four weeks of work
information. The results are robust to this alternative friend definition.
One might be concerned that the referral definition in our sample suffers from confounding
factors, in particular, sorting or homophily. We proceed as follows. We first conduct an event
study on the time series variation of information exchange between job seekers and referral
vs. non-referral friends in Section 4.1. Then we perform a battery of regression analyses to
illustrate that our estimated referral effect is not driven by confounding factors in Section 4.2.
Finally, we evaluate the benefits of referrals to workers in Section 4.3 and benefits to firms in
Section 4.4.
19

Our analysis has also been performed when excluding social contacts formed up to three months prior to the
job switch since those might be formed for reasons related to the move. Results remain qualitatively unchanged.
20
In addition, we do not observe other types of networks (relatives, classmates, social contacts via WeChat,
etc.); hence our results are necessarily a lower bound.

16

4.1

Event Study

The detailed calling records allow us to examine communication patterns between a job seeker
i and his referral vs. non-referral friends over time. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first empirical analysis that directly measures information exchange between job seekers and
referrals.
We first show that individuals’ weekly number of contacts prior to their job change is stable.
Using all of job switchers’ friends (including inter-carrier contacts), Figure 5 illustrates that
there are no spikes in the number of friends communicated with during the weeks leading to the
job switch. The average number varies between twenty-three and twenty-five for most weeks,
with a modest decrease just prior to the switch. This suggests that social links established
prior to job switches are likely exogenous; otherwise we should expect a spike before the job
switch. The weekly number of contacts communicated with after the job switch is moderately
higher, which is intuitive and reflects new relationships formed at the new work place.
To examine the dynamics in information flow, we regress the phone call frequency between
individual i and his friends on the event window of eleven months before and ten months after
the job switch, with a rich set of fixed effects:21
Freqijt = c +

10
X
s=−11

γs Referralij [t = s] +

10
X

bs Non-Referralij [t = s] + λi + τt + ijt

s=−11

where Freqijt is the number of calls between caller i and his friend j in month t, Referralij
takes value one if switcher i moves to friend j’s workplace during the sample period and zero
otherwise, Non-Referralij takes value one when Referralij is zero, λi is an individual fixed
effect, and τt is a month fixed effect. The key coefficients {γs , bs } vary by event month s
relative to when the job switch occurs (s = 0 for the month of switch). Figure 6 plots the
regression coefficients and their confidence intervals for referral pairs (γs ) and non-referral pairs
(bs ) separately. Note that the confidence intervals are much tighter for bs because switcher-nonreferral pairs are more common: there are 4.9 million switcher-non-referral-month observations
relative to 253k switcher-referral-month observations.
The communication patterns between referral and non-referral pairs are distinct, even after
controlling for a rich set of fixed effects. First, switchers have more frequent calls with referral
friends than non-referral ones. Second, the intensity of information flow between switchers and
their referrals exhibits an inverted-U shape that peaks at the time of job change. In contrast, the
information flow between non-referral pairs remains stable throughout the sample period, with
no noticeable change in the months prior to the job switch. Importantly, non-referral friends
also include social contacts who live in the area but not work there. If all the communication
21

Running regressions separately for referral-pairs and non-referral-pairs delivers similar patterns.

17

were about local amenities one would expect no substantial difference between the two curves.
Lastly, communication intensity between referrals and referees remains elevated post job switch
and is noticeably larger than that between non-referral pairs. Information flow increases with
the dimensions of social interaction, as referrals and referees are friends before the job switch
and become friends and colleagues afterwards.
One might be concerned that individuals might share with friends news about their job offer,
which would also lead to intensified communication before they move to the new work place.
However, if this were true, we should expect to observe a spike in the communication volume
with both referral and non-referral friends. The fact that we do not see such an increase with
non-referral friends indicates that the communication between workers and referrals is unlikely
to be mainly driven by workers’ informing friends of their job change. Finally, some phone calls
between the referral pairs could be inquires about workplace amenities instead of job openings.
We regard all such calls as communication via referrals that facilitates a job switch.

4.2

Referrals and Work Location Choices

We turn to a regression framework to quantify the degree to which the referral effect shapes
job seekers’ location choices. Specifically, we compare the propensity for an individual to find a
job at a friend’s workplace with that of getting a job in a nearby location, we use the following
model:
K
X
βk Xki + λc + εil
(1)
Mil = βFriendil +
k=1

where Mil is one if i moves to location l. F riendil is a dummy variable for having at least
one friend working in location l, while λc denotes cell fixed effects that control for unobserved
location attributes (number of job vacancies, industrial composition, number of locations, etc.).
Demographic controls Xki , k = 1, ..., K consist of gender, migrant status, and age group categories (age 25-34, age 35-44, age 45-59, and above 60). We also include i’s total number of social
contacts (irrespective of carriers) to capture differences in personality and social outreach.
Note that we only consider job switchers (people who have found a job). Analyzing how
referrals affect the probability of looking for a job (the extensive margin) is interesting but it
lies outside the scope of our analysis. In addition, we restrict individual i’s choices to locations
within the cell c that contains his new workplace. This is done purposefully. Job location
choices are influenced by many factors, including industry composition and local labor demand,
commuting distance, local amenities, intra-household bargaining for married couples, many of
which cannot be directly controlled in our framework. Limiting an individual’s choices to
locations within the cell of his new workplace greatly reduces the extent of heterogeneity across
locations and allows us to better isolate the effect of referrals from competing explanations of
18

location choice.
The coefficient of interest is β, which captures the referral effect. There are two main threats
to a causal interpretation. First, a positive correlation can arise in a scenario with exogenous
worker flows from one area to another. For example, firms sometimes relocate, consolidate,
or open new plants at different locations. If employees are relocated in different time periods,
the estimated β could capture flows of workers who move to the work location of pre-existing
contacts (colleagues). We tackle this problem by adding the interaction of the origin and
destination cell fixed effects:
Mil = βFriendil +

K
X

βk Xki + λc̃,c + εil

k=1

where λc̃,c is a dummy for the pair of individual i’s previous (c̃) and current work cell (c).
This is a demanding specification wherein the key coefficient β is estimated from the within
origin-destination variation. We essentially compare individuals who have the same origindestination cell pair but different friend networks and examine their choice of locations in the
same neighborhood.
The second long-standing challenge in the literature using observational data is the difficulty
of distinguishing a referral effect from homophily and sorting. If individuals share similar
preferences and skills with their friends, then a positive β could be driven by sorting rather
than referrals. In addition, not all locations have desirable openings. An individual might
move to location l not because of referrals but because other locations lack appropriate job
opportunities. In other words, the friend dummy might simply proxy for locations specializing
in jobs that require similar skills that are shared by individual i and his friends.
Leveraging the richness and structure of our data, we propose the following battery of tests.
First, we limit our analysis to workers for whom there is at least one other location within
the same cell that has vacancy listings in the same occupation as the one that he takes.22 .
This mitigates the concern that individuals sort into friends’ locations that provide the only
employment opportunity in the area.
Second, we distinguish between friends who are currently working in location l and friends
who used to work there but moved away prior to the job switch. Given that sorting by unobserved preferences or skills should happen regardless of a friend’s current location, we would
expect to find similar β estimates for both types of friends if our finding is driven by sorting.
Third, we distinguish between friends who work vs. friends who live at location l. Larger estimates for friends who work in location l would be consistent with the referral effect: affiliation
with the workplace enables friends who work there to have an information advantage of jobs
22

The occupation of location l is the most common occupation among all postings. It is coded as missing if
the most common occupation accounts for less than 33% of all postings at the same location.

19

openings.
Results Table 7 reports the coefficient estimates for model (1). Column 1 only controls
whether there is a friend in a given work location. Column 2 adds demographic variables:
gender, a dummy for each age group, migrant status based on the birth county, and the total
number of friends prior to the job switch.23 Columns 3 and 4 repeat the first two columns with
cell fixed effects for the new workplace. Columns 5 and 6 further include 21k fixed effects for
the pair of old and new work cells.
The mean propensity to choose a location within a cell among the switchers is 0.09. The
coefficient for the referral effect, which ranges from 0.34 to 0.36, is economically large, precisely
estimated, and stable across all columns in Table 7. The probability of moving to location l increases by four times with a friend working there. Adding demographic controls and interaction
of origin-destination cell fixed effects has little impact on the key parameter estimate.
In Table 8, we conduct a goodness-of-fit exercise similar to that performed in an independent
study by Buchel et al. (2019), and we report the percentage of correct predictions (the second
to the last row). A correct prediction is one in which the observed location choice has the
highest fitted linear probability. Column 1 only includes pair fixed effects. Column 2 adds
Friendil . Column 3 further controls for the number of calls between individual i and location
l prior to the job change, echoing results documented in Section 2. Adding the friend dummy
in Column 2 boosts the R-squared by 2.5 times – from 0.07 to 0.14 for a sample of nearly one
million observations – which is remarkable. Correspondingly, the fraction of correct predictions
is 8.9% in Column 1 and jumps to 23.9% before further increasing to 30% in Columns 2 and 3,
respectively.
One might be concerned about sample selection bias given that information about work
location is missing for friends outside Company A’s subscriber network. Table 9, which splits
the sample based on whether the friend coverage is above or below the median (the cutoff is
48%), replicates Columns 2, 4, and 6 in Table 7. The difference in the friend coefficient is
modest (smaller than 0.02) and insignificant for our preferred specification.
To evaluate whether our finding is driven by sorting, we conduct in Table 10 the three
tests described above. All columns include the old and new work cell-pair fixed effects and
demographic controls. Columns 1 and 2 are limited to the subset of switchers who have at least
one alternative work location within the same cell that has openings in the same occupation as
the one the switchers take. This modestly impacts on the estimate: the coefficient of Friendij
changes from 0.35 to 0.34. Columns 3 to 6 use the same sample as that in Columns 1 and 2.
Columns 3 and 4 contrast friends currently in the new work location with friends who recently
moved away, while Columns 5 and 6 compare friends working vs. friends living there. In both
23

Friendship that is formed after the job switch is endogenous and excluded from all regressions.

20

cases, friends currently working in the new location have a much larger impact on the choice
probability: they are four times more influential than friends who recently moved away and
150% more effective than friends who live in the same location. The differences in parameter
estimates are statistically significant at the 1% level. These results cannot be reconciled with
sorting and provide evidence that referrals at work carry useful information that facilitates the
matching between workers and job openings.
Pathway The information channel operates through different mechanisms. For example,
current employees can share job opportunities with their social contacts (information to workers). Alternatively, employees can inform their employer of their friends’ work attitude and
labor market prospects (information to firms). Although we cannot disentangle these different
mechanisms, we test their common implication that referrals mitigate information frictions in
the hiring process. We thus examine whether referrals are more important when information
asymmetry is more severe.
Individuals who live far away from the new work location, have limited work experience, or
change industrial sectors are likely to be disadvantaged when it comes to obtaining information
about new openings. Similarly, employers are less likely to be knowledgeable about these
workers. In Table 11, we interact Friendil with the distance between the old and new work
place, the distance between home and the new work location, a dummy for young workers
(between 25 and 34), moving from rural to urban locations, and changing sectors.24 Referrals
facilitate job transitions in all these situations, especially for rural workers migrating to urban
areas and for people changing industry sectors. For these two groups of individuals, the point
estimate of the referral effect is 0.68 and 0.53, respectively, which is a significant boost above the
base estimate of 0.35. In Column 7 of Table 11, we interact Friendil with the demeaned number
of calls between individual i and friends in location l prior to the job-switch. The referral effect
increases with calling intensity: one hundred calls are associated with a two percentage point
increase in the probability of moving to a friend’s place, which is consistent with findings in
Gee et al. (2017), who examines the effect of strong social ties on job search using Facebook
friends.
The evidence in Table 11 also allow us to rule out two alternative explanations for our findings. One is that our results are simply driven by preferences: individuals enjoy the company
of friends and hence prefer to work at their place. However, the stronger referral effect when
information asymmetry is more severe, documented in Table 11, is inconsistent with this possibility. Similarly, could our estimates be mostly driven by nepotism, that is, friends and family
are hired instead of the best available candidates (Hoffman, 2017)? It is probably not so in our
24

The sample size drops in Column 6 because the dominant sector is undefined for a large number of locations
whose postings from the most common sector account for fewer than 33% of all postings.

21

case: such estimates would not predict that the effect is stronger when information asymmetry
is more severe. Moreover, as shown below, referrals are more common among people in the
same age range, whereas nepotism often involve individuals from different age groups (children
of relatives) (Wang, 2013; Foley, 2014).
Comparison with the Literature How do our results compare to the existing literature
that examines job referral effects? There are two common approaches of inferring referrals in
observational studies. The first, pioneered by Bayer et al. (2008), defines referrals as residential
neighbors. Using data from the Boston metropolitan area, they consider as friends individuals
who live in the same Census block. The second approach assumes that social interactions are
stronger within the ethnic group and it defines friends as co-workers who are members of the
same minority group (Bandiera et al., 2009; Dustmann et al., 2016). We re-estimate model
(1) using these two definitions of friendship and report the results in Table 12. ‘Residential
neighbor’ is a dummy variable that takes value one if individual i has a neighbor who shares
the same residential location as i and works in location l. Ethnicity, which is inapplicable in
China’s context, is replaced with birth county as the literature documents strong social ties
among individuals from the same birth region (Zhao, 2003).25 ‘Same birth county’ takes value
1 if individual i has a co-worker in location l who was born in the same county. Columns 1
and 2 only include these alternative definitions of friends. Column 3 contrasts neighbors with
friends who are not neighbors, while Column 4 compares coworkers who share the same birth
county with friends who work in the same location but have different birth counties.
The results shown in Table 12 confirm the findings in the literature that neighbors and
coworkers from the same birth counties are important. The coefficients on neighbors and
the same birth county are 0.21 and 0.10, respectively, when they are the only measure of an
individual’s social network. Given the average moving probability of 0.09, having a social tie
of either type more than doubles the probability of switching to location l. On the other hand,
friends dominate both types of social ties by a large margin. The difference in magnitude is
both statistically significant and economically sizable, and in the case of ‘same birth county’,
the effect of friends is three and half times as large. Our results confirm results in the literature
but suggest that they constitute a lower bound.
Attributes of Referrals and Referees To examine the characteristics of workers who find a
job through referrals and of friends who provide referral information, we use a dyadic regression
framework wherein the probability that individual i moves to friend j’s workplace is a function
25
In China, counties are a lower level of geographical unit and smaller than cities. Seventeen counties comprise
the city we study.

22

of their attributes:
Mij =

K
X
k=1

αk Xki +

K
X

βk Xkj +

k=1

K
X

γk Xk,ij + λc + εij

(2)

k=1

where Mij is one if i moves to friend j’s workplace and Xki and Xkj include gender, age, and
birth county dummies for switcher i and friend j. Xk,ij includes dummies for the same gender,
the same birth county, and an absolute difference in age. We limit the sample to all dyads
between job switchers and their friend links prior to the job switch. Thus, we are comparing
dyad {i, j}, wherein i moves to j’s work location, with dyad {i, m}, where i does not move to
m’s work location.
We limit the regression sample to the subset of switchers (8,518 individuals) who find a
job at some friend’s workplace. Column 1 of Table 13 includes all eligible dyads that have
non-missing demographic information, for a total of 93k observations. Column 2 only includes
switchers for whom there is at least another location within the same cell that has vacancy
listings in the same occupation as the one that the mover takes; here there are 88k observations.
Females and migrant workers are more likely to receive referrals. There are strong assortative
patterns in referral provision. Females on average are less likely to provide referrals but they
are more likely to provide referrals to other women. Similarly, workers are more likely to refer
other workers who are from the same hometown county. This is consistent with recent findings
that in China community networks based on birth county facilitate entry and the growth of
private enterprises (Dai et al., 2018). Finally, older workers are more likely to provide referrals,
whereas individuals of similar age are more likely to refer jobs to each other, although both
effects are modest. Given that females and migrant workers are disadvantaged in urban labor
markets (Gagnon et al., 2014; Blau and Kahn, 2017; Abramitzky and Boustan, 2017), these
results provide suggestive evidence that referrals improve labor market inequality.

4.3

Referral Benefits To Workers

In this section, we examine whether referrals improve referees’ labor market outcomes, conditional on finding a job. Our framework for analyzing the benefit of referrals is conceptually
similar to model (1):
Yilr = βFriendilr +

K
X

βk Xki + λc + αr + εilr

(3)

k=1

where Yilr denotes the labor market outcome of worker i who live in residential cell r and switch
to work location l in cell c. We control for the same set of demographic variables considered in

23

model (1). Because we do not observe individuals’ socioeconomic background, such as education
and wealth, we include in all regressions the residential cell fixed effect (αr ) as a proxy for one’s
socioeconomic status (luxurious complexes vs. low-income neighborhoods).
We construct five different measures of job quality. Our first measure is the expected wage
at the new job, measured by the average annual payroll (in thousand RMB) among firms in
the same location weighted by their number of employees.26
Wage dispersion is primarily driven by across-firm rather than within-firm differences (Card
et al., 2018) and an individual’s housing value is correlated with his labor income. Thus,
we use coworkers’ housing price as a second measure to proxy for monetary compensation.
Specifically, we construct the difference between the average housing price of co-workers at the
new workplace and that of co-workers at the previous job. Large positive differences are more
likely to be associated with increases in wages and other pecuniary benefits.
The other three measures of job amenities include whether the move is from a part-time job
to a full-time job, changes in the commuting distance, and whether the move is from a non-SOE
firm to a SOE because SOEs are sought after for their job security and pension benefits (Zhu,
2013). Although none of these measures of job outcomes is perfect, collectively they speak to
both the financial and non-financial aspects of job quality.
Results Because our labor market outcomes are constructed from different data sources,
the number of observations across specifications in Table 14 varies from 15,881 to 29,117 and
reflects the varying extent of missing observations. Referral jobs pay higher expected wages
than non-referral jobs. The point estimate of the wage premium is RMB 620, or about 2% of
the average wage reported in our sample.27 Turning to differences in coworkers’ home values in
the new vs. the old workplace, referral jobs are associated with a 0.5% higher housing price per
square meter where the average housing price in the city is RMB 13,000 ($2,000) per square
meters.
Having at least one friend at the new workplace helps to increase the probability of moving
from part-time to full-time jobs by one percentage point, which is a 2% increase in the likelihood
of working full-time.28 Thirty-one percent of job switches involve a shorter commute. Referred
jobs are associated with a 30% increase in the likelihood of working closer to home. Finally,
26

We assign each firm in the tax data to the nearest location in our sample and cap the distance at 500
meters. Firms that are farther away are dropped. For 79% of job switchers, the wage information is obtained
from a firm within 300 meters. The employment-weighted annual average payroll reflects more accurately the
average worker’s compensation.
27
The annual wage is measured in thousands RMB and the mean is 31.
28
Hours worked is measured by the duration of phone usage during a workday at the workplace. For example,
if an individual uses his phone at 10am and then at 4pm in the work location, then the hours worked is six.
This is likely to be an under-estimate of the actual hours worked. Part-time (full time) is defined as thirty
hours or less (more than thirty hours). On average, 57% of the switchers work full-time before the job change,
reflecting the conservativeness of our measure.

24

having a friend at a SOE firm raises the probability of moving there by one percentage point,
which is a 9% increase from the mean (0.11).29 To the extent that higher wages are an indication
of worker productivity and shorter commutes and full-time positions reflect better job amenities,
our results provide evidence that referrals lead to better matches between workers and vacancies
and improve workers’ labor market outcomes through mitigating information frictions in the
hiring process.

4.4

Referral Benefits To Firms

With a few exceptions, most empirical studies of job referral effects abstract away from analyzing firm outcomes because comprehensive data on the performance of both employees and
employers are hard to obtain.30 We merge our calling data with administrative firm-level data
based on locations and examine variation across a large number of firms in different industries.
We successfully merge between 5k and 10k firms, 67% of which are manufacturing firms
that require production facilities. Our main specification focuses on locations matched to large
firms that have more than one hundred employees, which represent about 20% of our sample.
While this choice significantly reduces the sample size, it mitigates measurement errors because
there could be multiple firms in the same location and it is difficult to match workers to firms.
The average employment for these large firms is 150; thus, it is likely that these firms occupy
an entire location, and consequently, reduce the likelihood of erroneously linking workers to
unrelated firms. In the rest of this section, we use “location” and “firm” interchangeably.
Appendix Table A3 reports results from replicating the analysis using all firms. The referral
effects are similar both statistically and economically, which is reassuring.
We compare the performance of firms that hire through referrals to firms that hire through
other channels via the following model:
Yi = γReferrali +

K
X

βk Zki + λc + εi

(4)

k=1

where i denotes a firm. We examine three measures of firm performance (Yi ): (1) net inflow of
workers; (2) match rate, measured by the number of hires over vacancies; and (3) firm growth
rate, measured by the number of hires over total number of employees.31 We use log(Y + 1) for
the net inflow to include observations that have zero values and convert the coefficient estimates
to semi-elasticities (the percentage change in firm outcomes when they hire through referrals.)
The last two measures are in logs; hence the coefficients are directly semi-elasticities. We limit
29

A workplace is classified as ‘SOE’ if the majority of workers at that location are employed by SOE firms.
A notable exception is Burks et al. (2015), who use data from nine large firms in three industries (call
centers, trucking, and high-tech) to analyze whether firms benefit from referrals .
31
Observations with negative net inflow are dropped.
30

25

our analysis to locations with at least one hiring, otherwise the estimate of γ will be inflated
artificially since the number of hires is at least one for locations with referrals by construction.
Referrali is a dummy variable that takes value one if at least one worker who switches to
firm i has a friend working there, while λc denotes cell fixed effects – the same as in model
(3). Variables {Zki , k = 1, ..., K} denote firm attributes and employee characteristics. Firm
attributes include firm age, the average number of employees (firm size), dummies for eighteen
different industries, large firms, and SOEs, and average real capital from 2010 to 2015. To
capture pre-existing trends, we also control for the average employment growth rate from 2010
to 2015. In addition, we include a firm’s referral network size, which is defined as the number
of unique social contacts owned by employees who work in firm i prior to the arrival of the new
hires.32 Worker attributes include the shares of female workers and migrants, the average age
of employees, and average housing price of the pre-existing employees.33
Results The parameter estimate γ captures the effect of using referrals on firms’ performance.
To the extent that firms that grow quickly are more likely to hire through employee referrals, our
estimate could be biased upward. To tackle this problem, we estimate model (4) by increasing
the set of variables that help to control for firm growth and employee quality. Nonetheless,
because we lack suitable instruments and only have a cross-section of data, our results in Table
15 are largely descriptive.
The Referrali coefficient estimates are remarkably similar across different sets of controls for
firm and worker attributes, indicating that our results are unlikely to be inflated by unobserved
firm or worker characteristics. Firms that hire through referrals are associated with more hires,
better matching rates, and a higher growth rate: using referrals increases a firm’s net labor
inflow by 73%, enhances the job matching rate by 86% (the average matching rate for large
firms is 0.76), and raises the firm growth rate by 45% (the median growth rate is 4% for large
firms). Results in Appendix Table A3 document similar patterns. Although our analysis in
this section is descriptive, the fact that the estimates are robust to a detailed set of firm and
worker controls raises our confidence that these estimates are not simply picking up unobserved
characteristics related to firm and employee quality.

4.5

Alternative definition of friends

We conclude our analysis with a few additional robustness checks. Our core analysis is thus
far limited to friends who have at least forty-five weeks of non-missing work locations. This
mitigates measurement errors in job locations (which alleviates the attenuation bias) but omits a
32
33

We exclude contacts established after the job switch.
The number of Company A’s users at each location is included in all regressions.

26

large fraction of friends for whom we observe fewer than forty-five weeks of location information.
The downside of this restriction is that the estimate of the key regressor, ‘Friendil ’, could be
biased toward zero. In this section, we examine the robustness of our results to alternative
sample selection criteria.
Appendix Table A4 replicates Table 7 yet includes all friends who have at least four weeks of
non-missing work locations. This enlarges the number of individual-friend pairs from 401,437
to 979,595. The estimated referral effect remains unchanged: having a friend in a location
increases the probability of moving there by 35 percentage points.
Using this alternative definition of friend, referral jobs are associated with a 1.3% increase
in wage premium, a 0.6% increase in job-related benefits (as proxied by coworkers’ housing
prices), and a 12% increase in the likelihood of working full-time (Appendix Table A5). These
effects are similar to those found in our base specification. The effect on the likelihood of
a shorter commute and transitioning to a SOE firm is nearly identical to that found in the
base specification. Turning to the referral benefit for firms, the alternative definition of friend
produces slightly more pronounced results than those reported in the base specification (Appendix Table A6). We have replicated our analysis with various other friend selection criteria
(e.g., including all friends who have at least three months or six months of work locations) and
obtained very similar results.
Finally, Appendix Table A7 repeats Table 7 but defines individual i’s friends as those who
both place at least one call to and receive at least one call from individual i (social contacts
with two-way communications). In addition, friends have at least four weeks of non-missing
work locations. The referral estimate is again very similar to that of our base specification.

5

Conclusion

This paper uses novel geocoded mobile phone records to study how information provided by
social contacts mitigates information asymmetry and improves the labor market performance.
Our study provides three broad lessons for future research. First, panel data with fine spatial
and temporal variation hold great potential for overcoming the challenges of causal inference
with observational data related to networks and markets. For example, in our context, the
ability to identify different types of social contacts in small geographical areas at overlapping
periods helps us tackle one of the most difficult challenges in empirical studies of referrals:
sorting. Second, big data from non-conventional sources complement traditional data sources
with socioeconomic outcome measures. In our analysis, merging in tax records and the business
registry is crucial to shedding light on how referrals benefit firms, a topic that is understudied in
the existing literature. Third, information exchange, and in particular, social and socioeconomic
diversity in communication help to shape job movements. In the future, studies on the exact
27

mechanism that governs how information exchange through referrals increases labor market
efficiency would be extremely valuable.

References
Abramitzky, R. and L. Boustan (2017, December). Immigration in american economic history.
Journal of Economic Literature 55 (4), 1311–45.
Akbar, P. A., V. Couture, G. Duranton, and A. Storeygard (2018, November). Mobility and
congestion in urban india. Working Paper 25218, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970, 08). The Market for “Lemons”: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
Mechanism*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84 (3), 488–500.
Alesina, A., J. Harnoss, and H. Rapoport (2016, Jun). Birthplace diversity and economic
prosperity. Journal of Economic Growth 21 (2), 101–138.
Arrow, K. J. and G. Debreu (1954). Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy.
Econometrica 22 (3), 265–290.
Ashraf, Q. and O. Galor (2011, December). Cultural diversity, geographical isolation, and the
origin of the wealth of nations. Working Paper 17640, NBER.
Aslund, O., L. Hensvik, and O. Skans (2014). Seeking similarity: How immigrants and natives
manage in the labor market. Journal of Labor Economics 32 (3), 405–41.
Athey, S., D. Blei, R. Donnelly, F. Ruiz, and T. Schmidt (2018). Estimating heterogeneous
consumer preferences for restaurants and travel time using mobile location data. AEA Papers
and Proceedings 108, 64–67.
Bai, J. (2018). Melons as lemons: Asymmetric information, consumer learning and quality
provision. Working paper.
Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2018). The economic effects of social networks:
Evidence from the housing market. Journal of Political Economy 126 (6), 2224–2276.
Baker, S. R. (2018). Debt and the response to household income shocks: Validation and
application of linked financial account data. Journal of Political Economy 126 (4), 1504–
1557.
Bandiera, O., I. Barankay, and I. Rasul (2009). Social connections and incentives in the workplace: Evidence from personnel data. Econometrica 77 (4), 1047–1094.
28

Bayer, P., L. R. Stephen, and G. Topa (2008). Place of work and place of residence: Informal
hiring networks and labor market outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 116 (6), 1150–96.
Beaman, L. (2012). Social networks and the dynamics of labour market outcomes: Evidence
from refugees resettled in the u.s. Review of Economic Studies 79 (1), 128–61.
Bjorkegren, D. and D. Grissen (2018). Behavior revealed in mobile phone usage predicts credit
repayment. World Bank Economic Review . Accepted.
Blau, F. D. and L. M. Kahn (2017, September). The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and
explanations. Journal of Economic Literature 55 (3), 789–865.
Blumenstock, J., G. Chi, and X. Tan (2019, March). Migration and the Value of Social Networks. CEPR Discussion Papers 13611, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Blumenstock, J. E., G. Cadamuro, and R. On (2015). Predicting poverty and wealth from
mobile phone metadata. Science 350, 1073–1076.
Buchel, K., M. V. Ehrlich, D. Puga, and E. Viladecans-Marsal (2019). Calling from the outside:
The role of networks in residential mobility. Working Paper wp2019-1909, CEMFI.
Burks, S. V., B. Cowgill, M. Hoffman, and M. Housman (2015, Feburary). The value of hiring
through employee referrals. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 805–839.
Cai, H., H. Fang, and L. C. Xu (2011). Eat, drink, firms, government: An investigation of
corruption from the entertainment and travel costs of chinese firms. The Journal of Law and
Economics 54 (1), 55–78.
Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, J. Heining, and P. Kline (2018). Firms and labor market inequality:
Evidence and some theory. Journal of Labor Economics 36 (S1), S13–S70.
Cingano, F. and A. Rosolia (2012). People i know: Job search and social networks. Journal of
Labor Economics 30 (2), 291–323.
Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas (2006). Elements of Information Theory 2nd Edition (Wiley
Series in Telecommunications and Signal Processing). Wiley–Interscience.
Dai, R., D. Mookherjee, K. Munshi, and X. Zhang (2018, August). Community networks and
the growth of private enterprise in china. VoxDev..
Donaldson, D. and A. Storeygard (2016, November). The view from above: Applications of
satellite data in economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (4), 171–98.

29

Dustmann, C., A. Glitz, and U. Schonberg (2016). Referral-based job search networks. Review
of Economics Studies 83, 514–546.
Eagle, N., M. Macy, and R. Claxton (2010). Network diversity and economic development.
Science 328 (5981), 1029–1031.
Edin, P.-A., P. Fredriksson, and O. Aslund (2003). Ethnic enclaves and the economic success of immigrants: Evidence from a natural experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 329–357.
Foley, M. (2014). JPMorgan Gives Regulators Evidence of Nepotism in China. Retrieved March
13, 2014, from https://www.cheatsheet.com/money-career.
Fruchterman, T. M. J. and E. M. Reingold (1991, November). Graph drawing by force-directed
placement. Software: Practice and Experience 21 (11), 1129–1164.
Gagnon, J., T. Xenogiani, and C. Xing (2014, Oct). Are migrants discriminated against in
chinese urban labour markets? IZA Journal of Labor & Development 3 (1), 17.
Gee, L., J. Jones, and M. Burke (2017). Social networks and labor markets: How strong
ties relate to job finding on facebook’s social network. Journal of Labor Economics 35 (2),
485–518.
Giltz, A. (2017). Coworker networks in the labor market. Labour Economics 44, 218–230.
Glaeser, E. L., S. D. Kominers, M. Luca, and N. Naik (2015, December). Big data and big
cities: The promises and limitations of improved measures of urban life. Working Paper
21778, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gonzalez, M. C., C. A. Hidalgo, and A.-L. Barabasi (2008, June). Understanding individual
human mobility patterns. Nature 453, 779.
Hastings, J. S. and J. M. Weinstein (2008, 11). Information, School Choice, and Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4), 1373–1414.
Hellerstein, J., M. McInerney, and D. Neumark (2011). Neighbors and coworkers: The importance of residential labor market networks. Journal of Labor Economics 29 (4), 659–95.
Hellerstein, J., M. McInerney, and D. Neumark (2014). Do labor market networks have an
important spatial dimension? Journal of Urban Economics 79 (4), 39–58.

30

Henderson, J. V., A. Storeygard, and D. N. Weil (2012, April). Measuring economic growth
from outer space. American Economic Review 102 (2), 994–1028.
Hoffman, M. (2017, June). The value of hiring through employee referrals in developed countries. IZA World of Labor .
Ioannides, Y. M. and L. D. Loury (2004). Job information networks, neighborhood effects, and
inequality. Journal of Economic Literature 42, 1056–1093.
Jeffers, J. (2018). The impact of restricting labor mobility on corporate investment and entrepreneurship. Working paper, SSRN.
Jin, G. Z. and P. Leslie (2003). The effect of information on product quality: Evidence from
restaurant hygiene grade cards. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (2), 409–451.
Kramarz, F. and O. Skans (2014). When strong ties are strong: Networks and youth labour
market entry. Review of Economic Studies 82 (3), 1164–1200.
Kreindler, G. E. and Y. Miyauchi (2019). Measuring commuting and economic activity inside
cities with cell phone records. Working paper.
Munshi, K. and M. Rosenzweig (2013). Networks, commitment, and competence: Caste in
indian local politics. Working Paper 19197, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ngai, L. R., C. A. Pissarides, and J. Wang (2017). Chinass mobility barriers and employment
allocations. Journal of European Economic Association. Forthcoming.
Nie, P. and A. Sousa-Poza (August 2017). What chinese worker value: An analysis of job satisfaction, job expectations and labor turnover in china. IZA Discussion Papers No. 10963 108.
Ottaviano, G. I. and G. Peri (2006, January). The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence
from US cities. Journal of Economic Geography 6 (1), 9–44.
Page, S. E. (2007). The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Better Groups, Firms,
Schools, and Societies (New Edition). Princeton University Press.
Recchi, E. (2009). Chapter 4: The social mobility of mobile europeans. Volume 1 of Pioneers
of European integration citizenship and mobility in the EU: Citizenship and mobility in the
EU, pp. 72 – 97. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz (1976). Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay
on the economics of imperfect information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (4),
629–649.
31

Saygin, P. O., A. Weber, and M. A. Weynandt (2018). Coworkers, networks and job search
outcomes. ILR Review . Forthcoming.
Schumutte, I. (2015). Job referral networks and the determination of earnings in local labor
markets. Journal of Labor Economics 33 (1), 1–33.
Schumutte, I. (2016). How do social networkds affect labor markets? IZA World of Labor October, 1–10.
Smith, V. K. and F. R. Johnson (1988). How do risk perceptions respond to information? the
case of radon. The Review of Economics and Statistics 70 (1), 1–8.
Spence, M. (1973). Job market signaling. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 87 (3), 355–374.
Topa, G. (2001). Social interactions, local spillovers and unemployment. Review of Economic
Studies 68 (261-295).
Topa, G. (2011). Labor markets and referrals. Handbook of Social Economics 1B, 1193–1221.
Wang, S. Y. (2013). Marriage networks, nepotism, and labor market outcomes in china. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (3), 91–112.
Whalley, J. and S. Zhang (2007). A numerical simulation analysis of (hukou) labour mobility
restrictions in china. 83 (2), 392–410.
Zhang, J. and J. Wu (2018). The chinese labor market, 2000–2016. IZA World of Labor (437).
Zhao, Y. (2003). The role of migrant networks in labor migration: The case of china. Contemporary Economic Policy 21 (4), 500–511.
Zhu, J. (2013). Chinese SOEs and “invisible benefits”.
https://www.ft.com.

32

Retrieved May 13, 2013, from

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Information Flow and Worker Flow Among Administrative Districts

Notes: Each node is an administrative district in the city. We plot randomly selected ten nodes out of a total
of 23. Blue (non-directional) edges correspond to the number of job switches among the pairs of nodes, with
the width of each edge scaled proportionately to the number of switches. Red edges denote the average number
of weekly calls, with a scaled edge-width as well. The graph is produced using the Fruchterman & Reingold
algorithm that aims to distribute vertices evenly. Source: Mobile Communication Data.

Figure 2: Map of Locations and Cells in the City

Source: the city is divided into 1,406 cells that are delineated by major roads (polygons in the map that are
separated by dark lines) and close to 17,881 locations (orange dots). The number in each polygon denotes the
area size in km2 .

33

Figure 3: Job Switch Timeline

Figure 4: Job Search Methods in China vs. in the U.S. (2014)

Notes: the horizontal axis reports different job search methods. The vertical axis displays the fraction of each
method used among job seekers. Red (blue) bars represent China (U.S.). Source: China Family Panel Studies
(2014) and U.S. Current Population Survey (2014).

34

Figure 5: Number of Social Contacts Per Week: Job Switchers

Notes: The figure plots the average number of social contacts (regardless of carriers) per week who communicated
with a switcher. The vertical line indicates the week of job switch. There are 37,099,345 switcher-friend-week
observations.

Figure 6: Event Study – Number of Calls to Referrals vs. Non-referrals

Notes: orange line represents calls between switchers and the referrals (Obs = 252,852). Blue line represents
calls between switchers and non-referrals (Obs = 4,915,656). Switcher fixed effects and month fixed effects are
included in the regression.

35

Table 1: Information Flow and Worker Flows
(a) At the Administrative District Level
All calls
Dependent variable:
Worker flow (i, j)
(1)

Information flow (i, j)

Obs.
R-squared
District i + District j fixed effects

Calls from/to job switchers before switch
Excluding calls within Excluding calls within
No exclusion 1 month of job switch 3 months of job switch
(2)
(3)
(4)

0.003***
(6.20e-05)

0.09***
(0.001)

0.10***
(0.001)

0.13***
(0.001)

253
0.90
Yes

253
0.97
Yes

253
0.97
Yes

253
0.97
Yes

(b) At the Location Level
All calls
Dependent variable:
Worker flow (i, j)
(1)

Calls from/to job switchers before switch
Excluding calls within Excluding calls within
No exclusion 1 month of job switch 3 months of job switch
(2)
(3)
(4)

Information flow (i, j)

5.30e-05***
(2.06e-08)

0.0006***
(1.70e-07)

0.0006***
(3.10e-07)

0.0007***
(3.97e-07)

Observations
R-squared
Location i + Location j fixed effects

159,856,140
0.04
Yes

159,856,140
0.07
Yes

159,856,140
0.03
Yes

159,856,140
0.02
Yes

Notes: In Panel (a), one unit of observation is a pair of administrative districts (i, j). In Panel (b), one unit of
observation is a pair of locations (i, j). There are 23 administrative districts and 17,881 locations in the city.
Dependent variable, “Worker flow (i, j)”, is the total number of workers moving between area i and area j. In
Column 1, “Information flow (i, j)” is the total number of calls between area i and j among all individuals. In
columns 2 to 4, it is the total number of calls between switchers and their pre-existing contacts. Standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

36

Table 2: Out-of-Sample Prediction for Worker Flows at the Neighborhood Level
Dependent variable: actual worker flow between (i, j)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Predicted worker flow (linear regression)

1.02***
(0.18)

1.02***
(0.002)

Predicted worker flow (linear spline)

0.97***
(0.16)

0.97***
(0.001)

Predicted worker flow (cubic spline)
Constant

0.01***
(0.001)

Observations
R-squared
Num. Knots
Neighborhood i + Neighborhood j FE

987,713
0.30

987,713
0.31

No

Yes

1.02*** 1.03***
(0.17) (0.002)
0.004**
(0.002)

0.01***
(0.001)
987,713
0.31
5
No

987,713
0.32
5
Yes

987,713
0.31
6
No

987,713
0.31
6
Yes

Notes: One unit of observation is pair of neighborhood cells. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. The training data consist of switches in the first six months. The prediction is based on
switches in the second six months. The table reports OLS regressions of the actual worker flow between cell i
and j on the predicted worker flow. All three prediction models include neighborhood i and neighborhood j
fixed effects. The linear prediction model uses the number of calls by switchers prior to the job change as a
key predictor. The linear spline model uses five knots and the cubic spline model uses six knots, both are
default options from STATA.

37

Table 3: Information Diversity and Worker Flows
Dependent variable: log inflow

Social entropy

(1)

(2)

0.95**
(0.41)
-0.58
(0.36)
0.70***
(0.23)
0.001***
(0.00)
6,161
0.64
Yes
1,183

-0.19
(0.32)

Income entropy

Observations
R-squared
Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

(4)

0.82**
(0.36)

Spatial entropy

Total call volume (x1000)

(3)

0.001***
(0.00)

0.001***
(0.00)

0.81***
(0.24)
0.001***
(0.00)

6,161
0.64
Yes
1,183

6,161
0.64
Yes
1,183

6,161
0.64
Yes
1,183

Notes: One unit of observation is a location with at least five workers and five residents. Standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. “Log inflow” is the log of the number of people moving to a
given location. Social entropy, spatial entropy, and income entropy are normalized Shannon entropies as
defined in the text. Total call volume is the total number of calls (in thousand) from or to a given location.
Number of carrier A users in each location is controlled in all specifications.

38

Table 4: Information Diversity and Worker Flows: Working vs. Residential Population
Dependent variable: log inflow
Working population’s
Social entropy

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.84**
(0.37)

Spatial entropy

-0.11
(0.32)

Income entropy

0.75***
(0.23)

Residential population’s
Social entrophy

-0.10
(0.28)

Spatial entrophy

-0.32
(0.29)

Wealth entrophy
Total call volume (x1000)

Observations
R-squared
Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

0.001***
(0.00)

0.001***
(0.00)

0.27
(0.18)
0.001***
(0.00)

6,161
0.64
Yes
1,183

6,161
0.64
Yes
1,183

6,161
0.64
Yes
1,183

Notes: One unit of observation is a location with at least five workers and five residents. Standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. “Log inflow” is the log of the number of people moving to a
given location. Social entropy, spatial entropy, and income entropy are normalized Shannon entropies as
defined in the text and constructed separately for the working vs. residential population. Total call volume is
the total number of calls (in thousand) from or to a given location. Number of carrier A users in each location
is controlled in all specifications.

39

Table 5: Summary Statistics
(a) All users

Female
Age 25-34
Age 35-44
Age 45-59
Age above 60
Age (midpoint)
Born in local province
Born in local city proper
Frac of social contacts in Company A
Job switch

Mean

SD

N

0.36
0.29
0.26
0.27
0.11
40.18
0.75
0.39
0.50
0.08

0.48
0.46
0.44
0.45
0.32
11.97
0.43
0.49
0.19
0.28

435,098
455,572
455,572
455,572
455,572
435,194
455,572
455,572
455,572
455,572

(b) Switchers vs. Non-switchers

Female
Age (midpoint)
Born in local province
Born in local city proper
Frac of social contacts in A

Non-switchers
N
Mean SD

Switchers
Mean SD
N

0.36
40.36
0.75
0.39
0.50

0.36
38.23
0.74
0.38
0.51

0.48
12.00
0.43
0.49
0.19

398,742
398,817
417,470
417,470
417,470

0.48
11.49
0.44
0.49
0.19

Diff.

36,356 -0.00
36,377 2.13∗∗∗
38,102 0.01∗∗∗
38,102
0.00
38,102 -0.00

t-stat
-0.45
32.49
3.62
0.70
-0.53

Notes: The sample is restricted to individuals with valid work information for at least 45 weeks during sample
periods. Number of users = 455,572. ‘Age’ uses the midpoint of each age range. ‘Frac of social contacts in A’ is
the fraction of individuals’ contacts who are company A’s customers. ‘Job switch’ is a dummy for job switchers,
who are identified based on the criteria described in the text. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

40

Table 6: Percentage of Job Switchers Switching to A Friend’s Workplace
Panel A: including friends with at least 45 weeks of location information
Percent
N. Individuals.
Switching to a friend
Switching to somewhere else
Missing all friends’ locations
All job switchers

0.22
0.65
0.12

8,518
24,881
4,703
38,102

135,866
265,571

Panel B: including friends with at least 4 weeks of location information
Percent
N. Individuals.
Switching to a friend
Switching to somewhere else
Missing all friends’ locations
All job switchers

0.40
0.54
0.06

N. dyads

15,374
20,417
2,311
38,102

N. dyads
487,678
487,126

Notes: Job switchers are identified based on the criteria described in the text. Panel A includes all friends
with a work location for at least 45 weeks. Panel B includes all friends with non-missing work locations for at
least 4 weeks. “Switching to a friend” takes value one if a switcher moves to a pre-existing friend’s workplace.
“Missing all friends’ locations” reports the number of switchers with no valid information for any pre-existing
friend. “N. dyads” is the number of switcher-friend pairs where friends only include social contacts existed
prior to the job switch.

Table 7: Referral Effects on Job Switchers
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j

Friend

Controls
Observations
R-squared
New work Cell FE
Old x New Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.36***
(0.003)

0.36***
(0.004)

0.34***
(0.02)

0.34***
(0.02)

0.35***
(0.01)

0.35***
(0.01)

No
1,151,676
0.08
No
No
NA

Yes
1,120,797
0.08
No
No
NA

No
1,151,676
0.14
Yes
No
1,111

Yes
1,120,797
0.13
Yes
No
1,107

No
1,151,676
0.14
No
Yes
21,250

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
No
Yes
20,811

Notes: One unit of observation is a switcher-location pair. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1. “Friend” is a dummy variable that equals one if there is at least one friend working at a
given location. Controls include gender, age, migrant, and network size measured by the number of
pre-existing social contacts (irrespective of carriers).

41

Table 8: Referral Effects on Job Switchers: % of Correct Predictions
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j

(1)

Friend

(2)

(3)

0.35***
(0.01)

Yes
1,120,797
0.07
Yes
20,811

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
Yes
20,811

0.30***
(0.01)
0.39***
(0.06)
Yes
1,120,797
0.15
Yes
20,811

8.9%

23.9%
170%

30.0%
25.5%

Num. calls to L (x1000)
Controls
Observations
R-squared
Old x New Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE
Correct predictions at location level
Percent increase w.r.t previous column

Notes: This table replicates Column 6 of Table 7 using model (1), except that Column 1 excludes the
“Friend” dummy and Column 3 adds “Num. calls to j”, the number of calls (in thousand) between switcher i
and location j prior to the job switch. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. A
correct prediction is one where the chosen location has the highest fitted linear probability.

Table 9: The Referral Effect: by Friend Coverage
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j

(1)
Above

(2)
Below

(3)
Above

(4)
Below

(5)
Above

(6)
Below

Friend

0.35***
(0.00)

0.37***
(0.01)

0.33***
(0.02)

0.35***
(0.02)

0.34***
(0.02)

0.36***
(0.01)

Observations
R-squared
Controls
New work Cell FE
Old x New Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

612,230 508,567
0.09
0.06
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
NA
NA

612,230
0.15
Yes
Yes
No
1,050

508,567
0.12
Yes
Yes
No
1,033

612,230
0.15
Yes
No
Yes
11,889

508,567
0.12
Yes
No
Yes
10,787

Notes: This table replicates Columns 2, 4, and 6 of Table 7. Odd columns use job switchers whose fraction of
social contacts in carrier A exceeds the median cutoff, or 48%. Even columns use job switchers whose fraction
of social contacts in carrier A is below the median cutoff. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

42

Table 10: The Referral Effect: Falsification Tests
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j

Friend

(1)

Individuals with similar job opportunities nearby
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

0.34***
(0.015)

0.34***
(0.015)

Friend moved before the switch

0.34***
(0.015)
0.08***
(0.021)

0.34***
(0.015)
0.08***
(0.022)

Friend working there
Friend living, not working there

Controls
Observations
R-squared
Old x New Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

No
1,134,849
0.12
Yes
20,062

Yes
1,104,171
0.12
Yes
19,644

No
1,134,849
0.12
Yes
20,062

(6)

Yes
1,104,171
0.12
Yes
19,644

0.30***
(0.013)
0.19***
(0.013)

0.30***
(0.013)
0.19***
(0.013)

No
1,134,849
0.13
Yes
20,062

Yes
1,104,171
0.13
Yes
19,644

Notes: This table uses the same specifications as in Table 7, except it limits to job switchers facing at least
one vacancy in the same occupation that are posted in alternative locations in the same cell. Columns 3 and 4
compare friends currently working in the new workplace with friends who moved away prior to the job switch.
Columns 5 and 6 contrast friends working there with friends living there. Standard errors in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

43

Table 11: Referral Effects and Information Asymmetry
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j

Friend

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.35***
(0.014)

0.33***
(0.015)
0.002***
(0.0003)

0.33***
(0.016)

0.33***
(0.015)

0.34***
(0.014)

0.26***
(0.015)

0.34***
(0.014)

Friend×Distance(job1, job2)
Friend×Distance(home, job2)

0.004***
(0.001)

Friend×Young (Age 25-34)

0.04***
(0.009)

Friend×Rural to urban

0.34***
(0.039)

Friend×Change sector

0.27***
(0.022)

Friend×Call intensity

Controls
Observations
R-squared
Old x New Work Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

0.0002***
(3.22e-05)
Yes
1,120,797
0.14
Yes
20,811

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
Yes
20,811

Yes
1,041,950
0.15
Yes
19,595

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
Yes
20,811

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
Yes
20,811

Yes
240,435
0.15
Yes
5,684

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
Yes
20,811

Notes: This table uses the same specification as that in Column 6 of Table 7 and interacts “Friend” dummy
with various measures on the extent of information asymmetry. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1. “Rural to urban” indicates switchers who move from outside the city proper into the city
proper. Six percent switchers move from the rural to urban part of the city. “Change sector” is one if the
switcher changes the sector. “Call intensity” is the demeaned number of calls between switcher i and friends
working at location j prior to the job switch. See Appendix Table A2 for summary statistics of key variables.
In Columns 2-6, we also control for the baseline level of the interacted variable.

44

Table 12: The Referral Effect: Comparison with the Literature
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j
Friend Definition
Residential Neighbor

(1)

(2)

0.21***
(0.01)

Same Birth County

(3)

0.18***
(0.01)
0.10***
(0.00)

Friend, not Neighbor

0.09***
(0.00)

0.25***
(0.01)

Friend, not Same Birth County

Controls
Observations
R-squared
New work Cell FE
OldxNew Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

(4)

0.35***
(0.02)
Yes
1,120,797
0.16
No
Yes
20,811

Yes
1,120,797
0.11
No
Yes
20,811

Yes
1,120,797
0.20
No
Yes
20,811

Yes
1,120,797
0.16
No
Yes
20,811

Notes: This table uses the same specification as that in Column 6 of Table 7. Standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. “Residential Neighbor” is a dummy that equals one if there is at least one
individual who works in the new work location and shares the same residential location as the job switcher.
“Same Birth County” is a dummy that equals one if there is at least one individual who works in the new
work location and shares the same birth county as switcher i.

45

Table 13: Attributes of Referrals and Referees via a Dyadic Regression
Dependent variable
Probability A switches to B

Female A
Female B
Both female
Age A
Age B
|Age A - Age B|
Migrant A
Migrant B
Both migrants with the same birth county

Observations
R-squared
B work Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

(1)

(2)

0.01**
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.03***
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.001***
(0.00)
-0.001***
(0.00)
0.01**
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.03***
(0.01)

0.01**
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.03***
(0.01)
0.00
(0.00)
0.001***
(0.00)
-0.001***
(0.00)
0.01*
(0.01)
-0.00
(0.00)
0.03***
(0.01)

93,196
0.10
Yes
1,176

88,207
0.09
Yes
941

Notes: One unit of observation is a switcher-friend pair. A denotes the referred person and B denotes the
referral. The dependent variable mean is 0.14. The sample restricts to switchers who eventually switch to
some friend’s workplace. Column 2 further restricts to switchers facing at least one vacancy in the same
occupation that are posted in alternative locations in the same cell. Standard errors in parentheses. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

46

Table 14: Referral Benefits to Workers
Income Effect

Job Quality
(4)
(5)
Closer to home Non-SOE to SOE

(1)
Wage at new job

(2)
∆Coworker HP

(3)
PT to FT

Friend

0.62***
(0.22)

0.07*
(0.04)

0.01**
(0.01)

0.09***
(0.01)

0.01***
(0.00)

Observations
R-squared
Residence Cell FE
New work Cell FE

17,615
0.79
Yes
Yes

23,323
0.53
Yes
Yes

19,431
0.11
Yes
Yes

29,117
0.12
Yes
Yes

15,881
0.56
Yes
Yes

Dependent variable

Notes: The sample includes all job switchers. Same demographic controls as in Table 7. “Wage at new job” is
the average annual payroll per worker in thousand RMB weighted by employee sizes among firms in the new
work location. “∆Coworker HP” is coworkers’ average house price (thousand RMB) in the new workplace
minus that in the old workplace. “PT to FT” is a dummy that equals one if the switcher works part-time (less
than 30 hours per week) before the switch and full-time (more than 30 hours) after the switch. “Closer to
Home” is a dummy that equals one if the commuting distance at the new workplace is shorter than before.
“Non-SOE to SOE” is a dummy that equals one if the new workplace is an SOE dominant location (with the
majority of employees working in SOE firms), while the previous job is not. Standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. See Appendix Table A2 for summary statistics of key variables.

47

Table 15: Referral Benefits to Large Firms with Positive Hirings
Dependent variable
Panel A: Log of Net Inflow
Referral
Semi-elasticities
Observations
R-squared
Panel B: Matching Rate
Referral
Observations
R-squared
Panel C: Firm Growth Rate
Referral
Observations
R-squared
Controls
Firm Attributes
Previous Growth Rate
Employee Attributes
Cell FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.52***
(0.11)
[0.71]
[600,1000]
0.57

0.51***
(0.12)
[0.70]
[600,1000]
0.58

0.51***
(0.12)
[0.71]
[600,1000]
0.58

0.53***
(0.12)
[0.73]
[600,1000]
0.59

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.91***
(0.24)
[400,1000]
0.85

0.88***
(0.26)
[400,1000]
0.87

0.88***
(0.26)
[400,1000]
0.87

0.86***
(0.27)
[400,1000]
0.87

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

0.49***
(0.11)
[600,1000]
0.76

0.45***
(0.10)
[600,1000]
0.83

0.44***
(0.10)
[600,1000]
0.83

0.45***
(0.11)
[600,1000]
0.83

No
No
No
Yes

Yes
No
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: One unit of observation is a location with at least one matched firm that has more than 100 employees
and positive hirings. Standard errors in round brackets. There are 239 cell fixed effects in Panel A, 190 in
Panel B, and 271 in Panel C. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. “Referral”
takes value 1 if there is at least one switcher moving to a friend in the firm. “Net inflow” is the number of
switchers moving in minus moving out. “Log of net inflow” is log(Y+1) to include observations with zero
values. In Panel A, “semi-elasticities” are reported in square brackets and are evaluated at the dependent
variable mean. “Matching rate” is defined as the inflow over the number of vacancies. “Firm growth rate” is
measured as the inflow over the employee size. Firm attributes include age, employee size, SOE dummy, and
average real capital from 2010 to 2015. Previous firm growth rate is the average annual employee growth rate
from 2010 to 2015. Employee attributes includes share of female, share of migrants, and the average age of
pre-existing employees. Firm network size, measured by the number of distinct contacts of the firm’s
pre-existing employees, as well as the number of carrier A’s users at each location is controlled in all columns.
See Appendix Table A2 for summary statistics of key variables.

48

A
A.1

Online Appendix
Occupancy Description

We use job descriptions and job titles and the US 2010 occupation codes to classify the occupation for each posting. Here are the occupations that we use:
1. Management – includes customer service manager, warehouse manager, production manager, hospital manager, human resource manager, CEO, retail shop manager and vice
manager, sales manager, education administrator, etc.
2. Professionals – includes business operation, finance operation, computer and science,
social science and non-training professionals; business related, including wholesale trader,
market research analyst, meeting and event planner, cost estimator, risk control worker,
customer relation, accountants and auditors; computer and science related, including
software developers, computer support specialists, database administrator, web developer,
network and computer systems administrators, architects, biomedical engineers, mining
and geological engineers, mapping technicians, nutritionists.
3. Education, legal, arts, design, and media – education includes training professionals,
preschool and kindergarten teachers, afterschool class teachers, teaching assistants, vocational training instructors, driving coach; legal includes lawyer and paralegals; arts,
design, and media include director, model, hosts, actors, writers, photographers, video
editors, news reporters, designers, magazine editors, webpage editors.
4. Service – includes cashier, customer service, front desk, fire fighter, nail polisher, cleaner,
massage, flight attendants, food server, cooks, laundry workers, counter attendants, security guards, surveillance control workers.
5. Sales and office administration – sales includes retail salesperson, insurance salesperson, real estate sales agents, pharmaceutical sales representatives; office administration
includes office secretary, file clerks, curriculum consultants (in private education organizations).
6. Health related – includes therapists, nurses, pharmacists, rehabilitation doctors, and surgeons.
7. Production and transportation – production includes printing press operators, layout
workers, general production workers, painting workers, cutting workers; transportation
includes sailors, cargo shipping drivers, drivers in general, warehouse workers, and material moving workers.
49

8. Farming, fishing, and construction – includes related natural resource, installation, maintenance, repair, welder, installation workers, computer repairers, maintenance workers,
gardeners, agricultural workers, forest workers, breeding workers, and livestock cultivators.
We combine the three smallest categories (Health related, Production and transportation,
and Farming, fishing, and construction) into ’other category’ in our empirical analysis.

A.2

Tables in the Appendix
Table A1: Summary Statistics of Diversity Measures
Variable
Social entropy (working population)
Social entropy (residential population)
Spatial entropy (working population)
Spatial entropy (residential population)
Income entropy (working population)
Income entropy (residential population)

Mean

SD

Median

Min

Max

0.67
0.67
0.71
0.72
0.46
0.46

0.03
0.05
0.04
0.05
0.11
0.10

0.67
0.67
0.70
0.72
0.46
0.46

0.40
0
0.40
0
0
0

0.83
0.95
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.92

Notes: Each entropy measure is the normalized Shannon entropy averaged across either the working or the
residential population at a given location. There are 6,161 locations in total.

50

Table A2: Summary Statistics of Key Variables in Regression Samples
Panel A: Switcher Attributes
Mean

SD

Median

N

0.09
0.26
10.45
8.58
0.06
0.36
0.61

0.16
0.44
15.72
12.95
0.24
0.48
0.49

0.00
0.00
3.95
3.29
0.00
0.00
1.00

33,399
33,399
38,102
34,927
38,102
38,102
10,116

Mean

SD

Median

N

31.47
-0.11
0.16
0.31
0.09

24.30
3.40
0.37
0.46
0.29

25.22
-0.06
0.00
0.00
0.00

17,615
23,323
19,431
29,117
15,881

Panel C: Large firms with Positive hirings
Mean

SD

Median

N

Net inflow
Matching rate
Growth rate
Firm network size (log)
Referral

6.35
0.38
0.06
1.90
0.50

1.00
1.00
0.02
6.13
1.00

[600,1000]
[600,1000]
[600,1000]
[600,1000]
[600,1000]

Pr(i switches to j)
Friend
Distance(job1, job2) in km
Distance(home, job2) in km
Rural to urban
Young (Age 25-34)
Change sector
Panel B: Job Benefits

Wage at new job (thousand RMB)
∆Coworker HP (thousand RMB)
PT to FT
Closer to home
Non-SOE to SOE

2.77
0.76
0.04
5.92
0.57

Notes: Panel A reports summary statistics for key variables in Table 11. Panel B reports summary statistics
for key variables in Table 14. Panel C reports summary statistics for key variables in Table 15.

51

Table A3: Referral Benefits to All Firms with Positive Hirings

Dependent variable

(1)
Net inflow

(2)
Matching rate

(3)
Growth rate

0.36***
(0.04)
[0.50]

0.57***
(0.11)
[0.57]

0.49***
(0.05)
[0.49]

Yes
[3000,5000]
0.44
Yes
651

Yes
[2000,5000]
0.79
Yes
526

Yes
[3000,5000]
0.70
Yes
707

Referral
Semi-elasticity
Controls
Observations
R-squared
Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

Notes: One unit of observation is a location with at least one matched firm and positive hirings. Same
controls as in Table 15. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table A4: Referral Effects with an Alternative Friend Definition
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j

Friend

Controls
Observations
R-squared
New work Cell FE
Old x New Cell FE
N. Cell FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.36***
(0.00)

0.36***
(0.00)

0.34***
(0.02)

0.34***
(0.02)

0.35***
(0.02)

0.35***
(0.01)

No
1,151,676
0.15
No
No
NA

Yes
1,120,797
0.15
No
No
NA

No
1,151,676
0.20
Yes
No
1,111

Yes
1,120,797
0.20
Yes
No
1,107

No
1,151,676
0.21
No
Yes
21,250

Yes
1,120,797
0.21
No
Yes
20,811

Notes: Same specification as in Table 7. Friends have at least four weeks’ of non-missing work locations.
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

52

Table A5: Referral Benefits to Workers with an Alternative Friend Definition
Income Effect

Job Quality
(4)
(5)
Closer to home Non-SOE to SOE

(1)
Wage at new job

(2)
∆Coworker HP

(3)
PT to FT

Friend

0.40**
(0.19)

0.08**
(0.03)

0.02***
(0.01)

0.09***
(0.01)

0.01**
(0.00)

Observations
R-squared
Residence Cell FE
New Work Cell FE

18,595
0.79
Yes
Yes

24,835
0.52
Yes
Yes

21,016
0.10
Yes
Yes

31,013
0.12
Yes
Yes

16,789
0.56
Yes
Yes

Dependent variable

Notes: Same specifications as in Table 14. Friends have at least four weeks’ of non-missing work locations.
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table A6: Referral Benefits to All Firms with an Alternative Friend Definition

Dependent variable

Referral
Semi-elasticity
Controls
Observations
R-squared
Cell FE
Num. of Cell FE

(1)
Net inflow

(2)
Matching rate

(3)
Growth rate

0.66***
(0.11)
[0.90]

0.73***
(0.27)
[0.73]

0.62***
(0.09)
[0.62]

Yes
[600,1000]
0.62
Yes
239

Yes
[400,1000]
0.87
Yes
190

Yes
[600,1000]
0.85
Yes
271

Notes: Same specifications as in Table 15. One unit of observation is a location with at least one matched
firm and positive hirings. Friends have at least four weeks’ of non-missing work locations. Standard errors in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

53

Table A7: Referral Effect with a Two-way Friend Definition
Dependent variable
Probability i switches to location j

Friend

Controls
Observations
R-squared
New work Cell FE
Old x New Cell FE
N. of Cell FE

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.39***
(0.00)

0.39***
(0.00)

0.37***
(0.02)

0.37***
(0.02)

0.38***
(0.02)

0.38***
(0.02)

No
1,151,676
0.08
No
No
NA

Yes
1,120,797
0.08
No
No
NA

No
1,151,676
0.14
Yes
No
1,111

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
Yes
No
1,107

No
1,151,676
0.14
No
Yes
21,250

Yes
1,120,797
0.14
No
Yes
20,811

Notes: Same specifications as in Table 7. Friends are those who both place a call to and receive a call from
individual i, or social contacts with two-way communications. Friends have at least four weeks’ of non-missing
work locations. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

54

