                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DEMOGRAPHIC ORIGINS OF THE STARTUP DEFICIT

                                        Fatih Karahan
                                       Benjamin Pugsley
                                        Ayşegül Şahin

                                      Working Paper 25874
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25874


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




We thank Rob Dent, Sam Kapon, Harry Wheeler, and René Chalom for their superb research
assistance. We are grateful for very helpful comments from Mark Bils, Steven Davis, Ryan
Decker, John Haltiwanger, Chris Huckfeldt, Henry Hyatt, Bill Kerr, Pete Klenow, Huiyu Li,
Giuseppe Moscarini, Emi Nakamura, Pietro Peretto, Petr Sedlacek, Juan-Carlos Suárez Serrato,
and numerous seminar and conference participants. We are also indebted to Felipe Schwartzman
for his insightful comments on a previous paper and his suggestion to consider the effect of labor
market shocks on firm entry. An earlier version of this paper circulated as “Understanding the 30
year Decline in Business Dynamism: a General Equilibrium Approach.” Pugsley gratefully
acknowledges financial support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Any opinions and
conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no
confidential information is disclosed.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Ayşegül Şahin. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit
Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Ayşegül Şahin
NBER Working Paper No. 25874
May 2019
JEL No. D22,E24,J11

                                         ABSTRACT

We propose a simple explanation for the long-run decline in the startup rate. It was caused by a
slowdown in labor supply growth since the late 1970s, largely pre-determined by demographics.
This channel explains roughly two-thirds of the decline and why incumbent firm survival and
average growth over the lifecycle have been little changed. We show these results in a standard
model of firm dynamics and test the mechanism using shocks to labor supply growth across
states. Finally, we show that a longer startup rate series imputed using historical establishment
tabulations rises over the 1960-70s period of accelerating labor force growth.


Fatih Karahan                                   Ayşegül Şahin
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                Department of Economics
33 Liberty Street                               University of Texas at Austin
New York, NY 10045                              2225 Speedway
yfkarahan@gmail.com                             Austin, TX 78712
                                                and NBER
Benjamin Pugsley                                aysegul.sahin@austin.utexas.edu
University of Notre Dame
Department of Economics
Notre Dame, IN 46556
bpugsley@nd.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25874
1       Introduction
For nearly four decades, the U.S. startup rate has been trending down. In 1979, the
startup rate—measured as the share of new employers as a fraction of all employers—
was 13 percent. In 2007, before the onset of the Great Recession, it was roughly 10
percent, an almost 25 percent decline.1 This “startup deficit” is also wide-ranging;
it is found nearly universally within geographic areas and industries. Remarkably,
the declining startup rate and its origins left little apparent effect on the survival or
average growth rates of incumbent firms, which have remained steady conditional on
firm age. These patterns have significantly shifted the firm age distribution, which is
a key determinant of the dynamics of aggregate employment and productivity.2
     We propose a simple and novel explanation for these patterns. The startup rate
is linked in general equilibrium to the pace of labor supply growth, which for reasons
largely pre-determined by demographics, slowed dramatically in the late 1970s. Why
should labor supply growth affect the startup rate at all? Ultimately, growing labor
supply requires growing labor demand, and this can only happen through a decline in
the real wage that allows incumbent firms to expand or through entry of new firms. A
lesson from models of firm dynamics, starting with Hopenhayn (1992), is that in the
long run, free entry ensures that shifts in labor supply are absorbed entirely at the
entry margin. Along the balanced growth path of a standard model of firm dynamics
extended to incorporate labor supply growth, slower growth in labor supply requires
slower growth in the number of firms and thus a lower startup rate.
     This explanation fits the data very well. The slowdown in U.S. labor supply growth
since the late 1970s explains roughly two-thirds of the declining startup rate; it ex-
plains the widespread declines across markets since the labor force growth slowdown
affected them nearly universally; and it explains the stability of average incumbent
    1
     See Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2007) who first documented declines in measures
of business dynamism, and Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2011, 2012) who first noted the
decline in the startup rate, in particular. More recently, work by Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin,
and Miranda (2014), Hathaway and Litan (2014a), and Pugsley and Şahin (2019) have shown the
declines are both persistent and pervasive across markets.
   2
     Bartelsman and Doms (2000), for example, find about 25 percent of within-industry gains in
TFP occurs from new entrants in the manufacturing sector. Lentz and Mortensen (2008) find a
similar share of aggregate TFP growth due to the entry margin in an estimated endogenous growth
model. Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2013) and Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda
(2014) show the importance of young firms, including startups, for aggregate job creation. Pugsley
and Şahin (2019) show firm age composition affects aggregate employment dynamics.



                                                1
dynamics conditional on their age. We show these results quantitatively in an equilib-
rium model of firm dynamics. Moreover, we validate the model’s implications using
demographic variation across states and in the aggregate time series.
    We first derive a simple formula that links the equilibrium startup rate to labor
supply growth and the aggregate exit rate by equating the inflow and outflow of
new firms per worker to keep the number of firms per worker constant. Intuitively,
new firms (gross entry) both replace exiting firms and expand the number of firms
(net entry) needed to keep pace with labor supply growth. This “flow-balance” link
explains between 1.6 to 2.0 percentage points (or 55 to 70 percent) of the decline
between 1979-81 and 2005-07, depending on the measure of labor supply growth.
Notably, this prediction relies on exogenous declines in both the labor supply growth
rate and the economy-wide exit rate in similar proportions. It also imposes a strong
assumption of homogeneous firms. Yet, its insights carry over to a more realistic
setting with firm heterogeneity and selection, where the aggregate exit rate declines
endogenously with a decline in labor supply growth.
    To show this, we extend the general equilibrium setting of Hopenhayn and Roger-
son (1993) to include labor supply growth. While we adopt this well-known setting for
its simplicity, the mechanism is present in richer environments that share its key in-
gredients of firm-level diminishing returns and a linear free entry condition. The first
generates downward sloping incumbent labor demand, and the latter allows the entry
margin to absorb any pressure on the real wage from shifting labor supply. Shocks
to labor supply growth put downward pressure on wages and create incentives for
incumbent firms to expand, but the increased profitability also creates opportunities
for potential entrants. Any effect on the startup rate depends on how shocks to the
labor supply are accommodated by expanding incumbents and new firms. Along the
balanced growth path, free entry of new firms make labor demand infinitely elastic.
    When the model is calibrated to match U.S. firm dynamics, the observed change in
the labor supply growth rate accounts for 40 to 70 percent of the change in the startup
rate between 1979-81 and 2005-07, again depending on the labor supply growth mea-
sure. These magnitudes are similar to the results from the simple flow-balance calcula-
tion, which relied on declines in both labor supply growth and exit for its prediction.
The model’s endogenous decline in the aggregate exit rate accounts for 55 to 100
percent of the observed change in the aggregate exit rate used in the flow-balance
calculation.


                                           2
    The equilibrium link between labor supply growth and the startup rate has two
channels. The first is the direct effect of the change in labor force growth that requires
a change in the net entry rate to maintain balanced growth. The second is an indirect
amplification through its effects on the aggregate exit rate. Since changes in the net
entry rate shift the share of new and young firms, which are significantly smaller
and more likely to exit, they alter the aggregate exit rate through a compositional
effect. These changes in aggregate exit then shift the replacement component of the
equilibrium (gross) startup rate. Viewed through the lens of the calibrated model,
three decades of declining labor supply growth have reduced the net entry component
of the startup rate, which through its compositional effects on the aggregate exit rate,
depressed the startup rate even further.3 Taken together, the equilibrium elasticity
of the startup rate to the labor supply growth rate is roughly 1.5. If decomposed into
the direct and indirect (vis-à-vis exit) effects of demographics, the quantitative model
mirrors the proportions of demographics and aggregate exit found using the simple
flow-balance model.
    Beyond its success in explaining declining firm entry, an appealing feature of this
mechanism is that it is also consistent with mostly stable incumbent survival and
growth by firm age over the same time period.4 Shifts in labor supply growth, unlike,
e.g., shifts in costs or frictions, have no direct effect on firms. Labor supply shifts
could only affect the dynamics of incumbent firms through changes in the equilibrium
real wage, but this is held fixed in the long run by free entry. Thus, changes in labor
supply growth should not affect the survival and growth of incumbent firms. Of
course, even with unchanged incumbent dynamics conditional on firm age, declines
in labor supply growth can still generate declines in aggregate exit through their
effects on firm age composition.
    As a further test of the demographic-based explanation, we use two separate IV
strategies to generate plausibly exogenous variation in labor supply growth U.S. states
and compare the changes in state-level firm dynamics. The first IV predicts labor
supply growth by 20-year lags of each state’s birthrate (births per thousand residents)
and the second IV exploits persistent historical migration patterns between states.
Specifically, the migration IV predicts own-state annual labor supply growth from the
historical birthplace distribution across other (non neighboring) states and the size
  3
      This is analogous to the behavior of investment in the neoclassical growth model.
  4
      See Pugsley and Şahin (2019).



                                                  3
of each other state’s labor supply growth for that year. We estimate a cross-sectional
startup rate elasticity of labor supply growth of roughly 1.2, which is consistent
with the model-based elasticity of 1.5. Moreover, elasticities for exit and growth
conditional on firm age using the same variation are statistically indistinguishable
from zero. These main results, which control for state and time effects, are robust to
further controls for industry and state-level trends.
    As a final test of the demographic explanation, we test the time-series implication
that the 1960s-70s period of rising labor force growth should coincide with an in-
creasing startup rate. Although data limitations preclude examining the startup rate
prior to the late 1970s, we develop a method to impute an establishment startup rate
using the Census Bureau’s static County Business Patterns (CBP) data that extends
back to 1965. Given that the establishment startup rate is highly correlated with
the firm startup rate over the entire period where we can measure both, the imputed
establishment startup rate will be informative about the historical firm startup rate.
To do this, we estimate a statistical model for the aggregate exit rate as a function
of the distribution of establishment characteristics measurable in the detailed CBP
cross sections. We then add the estimated aggregate exit rate to the net entry rate
measurable across CBP years to impute a measure of the startup rate. The imputed
establishment startup rate co-moves with the labor supply growth rates over their
rise and fall, consistent with the demographic hypothesis.
    Our paper contributes to an emerging literature on the causes and consequences of
declining entrepreneurship, first noted by Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2011)
and Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2012). Early descriptive work on the trend
decline in the startup rate had explored a myriad of potential explanations and doc-
umented cross-sectional correlations of the startup rate with changes in population
growth (Hathaway and Litan, 2014b; Pugsley and Şahin, 2019), business consolidation
(Hathaway and Litan, 2014b), and sectoral import competition (Pugsley and Şahin,
2019), as well as ruled out other possibilities such as changes in industrial composition
(Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda, 2014) and substitution from nonemploy-
ers (Pugsley and Şahin, 2019). We are the first, to our knowledge, to propose demo-
graphic changes in the growth rate of the labor supply as a causal explanation for the
trend decline in the startup rate as well as the first to quantitatively and empirically
evaluate the equilibrium mechanism.
    Beyond the labor supply growth channel, several recent papers have examined


                                           4
other potential causes of the decline in the startup rate using quantitative models.
Salgado (2017) and Kozeniauskas (2017) study the effects of skill-biased technical
change on entrepreneurship. Demographics can also affect the startup rate through
the age composition of the population. Liang, Wang, and Lazear (2018) and Engbom
(2019) find that incentives to start new businesses are diminished with an older work-
force. Bornstein (2018) shows that population aging depresses firm entry because
older consumers are less likely to demand new varieties.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the trends in demograph-
ics and startups and a simple framework to connect them. Section 3 evaluates the
demographic channel in a dynamic general equilibrium model. Section 4 uses cross-
state variation, and Section 5 uses an imputation method to further evaluate the
demographic channel. Section 6 concludes.


2       Demographic change and the startup deficit
In this section, after first describing our data, we document the decline in the U.S.
startup rate and show that it coincides with a significant slowdown in the growth
rate of the U.S. labor supply. We then introduce a simple framework to motivate why
parallel trends in firm dynamics and labor supply are related economically.


2.1     Trends in U.S. firm dynamics and labor supply
Throughout the paper we use confidential data on employer businesses from the
U.S. Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD). To facilitate replica-
tion, whenever possible, we rely on the public-use tabulations available in the Business
Dynamics Statistics (BDS). The LBD covers nearly all U.S. nonfarm private-sector
establishments with employees starting in 1976.5 We construct firm-level measures
by aggregating across each firm’s one or more establishments.6
    We identify startups and distinguish incumbents based on firm age, which, to be
consistent with prior literature, we calculate as the age of the firm’s oldest establish-
ment. To measure firm-level employment (our measure of firm size), we aggregate
    5
    The LBD is derived from the Census Bureau’s Business Register of all private-sector establish-
ments with paid employees that is then longitudinally-linked at the establishment level. Jarmin and
Miranda (2002) provide a detailed description of the linking procedure and LBD construction.
  6
    The Census Bureau defines firm boundaries by the highest level of operational control.


                                                5
employment across all establishments within a firm. Firm-level employment growth,
git , is measured as the employment-weighted average of establishment-level employ-
ment growth across all of firm i’s year t establishments. We also consider measures
defined at the age group cohort-, rather than firm-, level, where an age group cohort
is the set of firms that belong to an age group in a particular year.
      We measure firm exit in year t when all of a firm’s year t − 1 establishments
have 0 employment and are reported closed in year t. Similar to an age group’s
employment growth, we measure an age group’s exit rate, xat , as the number of exits
in year t for the age group a as a fraction of the year t − 1 number of firms. While
this measure is defined by age-group, we also compute the economy-wide exit rate,
Xt , as the total number of exits as a fraction of the total number of (operating)
firms in year t − 1. Following Pugsley and Şahin (2019), we refer to the measure of
an age group’s employment growth 1 + gta = Eta /Et−1  a
                                                         as the unconditional growth
rate, which we decompose as the product of a survival and conditional growth rate:
1 + gta ≡ (1 − xat )(1 + nat ).7

Changes in aggregate entry, exit and labor market growth. We first examine
the trends in the startup and exit rates over the 1979-2007 period, which pre-dates
any effects from the Great Recession.8 The startup rate has fallen almost 25 percent
since 1979, from an average of roughly 13 percent to around 10 percent in 2007
(Figure 1a). While not apparent from the aggregate data, the decline in startup
activity was widespread across sectors and locations, ruling out compositional shifts
as the main cause—a finding that resonates with Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and
Miranda (2014).9 The declining startup rate coincides with a decline in the economy-
wide exit rate, which declines about 10 percent (1 percentage point) over the same
period (Figure 1a). In contrast to the startup rate, lower exit rates are explained
almost entirely by compositional change, specifically in firm age. As we show below,
within age groups, the exit rate shows no comparable declines.
    Over the same period, there are also declines in measures of labor supply growth
   7
      For brevity, we include additional details in the data appendix (Appendix A).
   8
      While early work on the changes in the startup rate and job creation from new and young firms,
such as Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2011), Gourio, Messer, and Siemer (2014), and Davis
and Haltiwanger (2016), focused primarily on the Great Recession and its slow recovery, we focus
on the trend and examine the 1979 to 2007 period, before any influence from the Great Recession.
    9
      We show that within-sector and within-geography changes account for more than 100 percent
of the aggregate decline (Appendix C.1.2). We also show that entry declines are not specific to our
measure of the startup rate (Appendix C.1.3).

                                                 6
          .16




                                                                                                 .04
                                               Startup rate                                                     Working age population growth rate
                                               Average exit rate                                                Civilian labor force growth rate




                                                                        Labor supply growth rate
                  .14




                                                                                         .03
  Fraction of firms
         .12




                                                                          .01     .02
 .1       .08




                                                                                    0
                        1980   1985   1990   1995   2000     2005                                      1980   1985   1990   1995    2000    2005

                        (a) Startup and average exit rates                                               (b) Labor supply growth rates

Figure 1: Declines of startup, exit, and labor supply growth rates from 1979 to 2012


(Figure 1b). The growth rate of the working-age population (WAP) surges in the
1960s as the first post-WWII baby boom birth cohorts enter adulthood, and peaks
in the late 1970s.10 It then declines from almost 2 percent in 1979 to just over
1 percent by 2007. Importantly, this trend in labor supply growth was long pre-
determined by historical changes in fertility that were plausibly unrelated to the
business environment over the 1979-2007 period. Similarly, the growth rate of the
civilian labor force (CLF), which includes all individuals age 20 or older currently
employed or actively searching for a job, slows from about 3 percent in 1979 to 1
percent by 2007. The peak CLF growth rate is roughly 1 percentage point higher
than the WAP growth rate since it adds the effects of rising female participation.
After female participation levels off in the late 1990s, both measures grow at roughly
1 percent per year.11

Stability of other margins by firm age. In contrast to the economy-wide entry
and exit margins described above, other margins of firm dynamics are little changed
once conditioned on firm age. We now examine this stability.
   First, among startups, the distribution of employment size has been stable (Figure
2). Average startup size is procyclical but nevertheless remains centered around 6
     10
     We define working age as 20-64, which is slightly more expansive than the 25-54 “prime-age”
range. Participation among ages 20-24 and 55-64 is somewhat lower than prime-age, but it falls off
steeply outside of ages 20-64.
  11
     These patterns are a reversal of the rapid labor supply growth in the 1960s and 1970s driven by
“baby boomers” and women entering the labor force (Appendix C.1.1).


                                                                    7
                         2 3 45 10 20 4060 120
                                                                               Mean
                                                                               p50
                                                                               p75
                                                                               p90




                              Employment
                                                                               p99




                                   1
                                            1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005


                   Figure 2: Distribution of startup employment size
Note: Thin reference line plots 1979-2007 average of 6 employees. Log scale; tick marks are placed
for each employment size for 1 to 10 employees and in increments of 5 employees thereafter.


employees. This stability appears throughout the distribution. The median new firm
had 2 employees from 1979 through 2007, while the 75th percentile has remained 5
employees, except for 1981. Even the 90th and 99th percentiles have remained close
to their long-run averages of 11 and roughly 60 employees, respectively.
    Next, we examine selection and the average growth of incumbent firms by age.
The exit rate for firms age 1-10 (young) and firms 11 or more years old (mature) have
been stable (Figure 3a). This may seem puzzling given the decline in the aggregate
exit rate, but this decline reflects changes in composition; because mature firms have
significantly lower exit hazards, the increasing share of old firms has reduced the
economy-wide exit rate.
    Finally, we note similar stability in average employment growth (Figure 3b). For
both age groups, this conditional growth rate is procyclical, but there is no evidence
that it is systematically drifting over time.12 These patterns in exit and in employment
growth rates are robust even when grouping by size and age (Appendix C.1.4).

Taking stock. Over almost three decades, economy-wide entry and exit rates have
declined. These changes have been broad-based across sectors and geographic mar-
kets. Yet, conditional on firm age, exit and average employment growth have changed
  12
    By construction, this measure corresponds to the average growth rate of an age-group cohort.
While the average shows little or no change over time, Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda
(2016) show that for young incumbents, skewness has declined over time. We later show that
a decline in skewness, driven for example by increasing adjustment costs, has little effect on the
equilibrium startup rate.


                                                             8
        .15




                                                                           .05 .1 .15
                                                               Conditional growth rate
              .1
    Exit rate




                                                               -.05 0
 .05




                        Young (age 1-10)
                        Mature (age 11+)




                                                                          -.1
        0




              1985    1990    1995         2000   2005                              1985      1990     1995     2000      2005

                         (a) Exit rates                                                    (b) Conditional growth rates

Figure 3: Incumbent exit and conditional growth rates for young and mature firms


little, and the size distribution of startups has been stable. These patterns naturally
restrict the set of explanations for the startup deficit. For example, while rising entry
costs reduce the startup rate, they also alter the size and profitability of new entrants
and by extension their expected growth and survival. In contrast, declines in labor
supply growth generate broad-based declines in the equilibrium startup and exit rates
without altering other margins, except through changes in firm age composition. We
show these effects first in a simple framework with homogeneous firms, which satisfies
the stability restrictions by assumption. Later, in Section 3, we show the same effects
of changes in labor supply growth in an equilibrium model with heterogeneous firms
where the stability emerges endogenously.


2.2                A flow balance framework for the equilibrium startup rate
To see why changes in the growth rate of the labor supply might affect the firm
entry rate, it is helpful to start with a simple model. Consider an economy with
µt identically sized firms in year t and where Mt+1 firms enter between years t and
t + 1. The startup rate for this economy is SRt ≡ Mt /µt . Exit is exogenous at rate
x. Labor supply, Nt , is growing exogenously at constant rate η. At full employment,
the number of firms per worker, µ̄t ≡ µt /Nt , evolves as

                                                        1−x
                                              µ̄t+1 =       µ̄t + M̄t+1 .
                                                        1+η


                                                           9
Here, µ̄t+1 declines with increases in firm exit, x, and faster growth in the number of
workers, η. Existence of a balanced growth path with a constant measure of firms per
worker µ̄ requires that increases in labor demand equal the increases in labor supply,
which is assured here by the constant average firm size. From the law of motion, we
can determine that along such a balanced growth path, the startup rate must equal

                                                  η+x
                                          SR =        .                                         (1)
                                                  1+η

We refer to this as a “flow balance” startup rate, because it equates the inflow of
new firms per worker with the outflows per worker, where outflows are determined
both by the exit rate and by the growth in the number of workers.13 The faster the
labor supply expands (↑ η) the higher the required startup rate, since as labor supply
expands, the additional labor demand to clear markets must come from new firms.
This feature follows immediately because of the assumptions of constant firm size
and the exogenous exit rate, but as we will show in Section 3, it extends to a more
realistic equilibrium setting where we relax these assumptions on size and exit.
    In spite of its simplicity, this stylized framework is useful is assessing the quanti-
tative importance of the demographic channel. We use equation (1) to compute the
flow balance startup rates for the 1979-81 and 2005-07 periods using the average exit
rate and the average WAP (CLF) measure of labor force growth (Table 1).14 The
actual startup rate declined from its 1979-81 average of 13.0 percent to an average
of 10.1 percent for 2005-07, a decline of 2.9 percentage points. For the same period,
the flow balance startup rate from equation (1) using WAP (CLF) declined from 11.2
(11.7) percent to 9.7 (same) percent, a decline of 1.6 (2.0) percentage points. Looking
across labor supply growth measures, the flow balance calculations explain roughly
two-thirds of the decline in the startup rate.
    Accounting for the declining startup rate requires exogenous changes in both la-
bor supply growth and the exit rate. Changing only the labor supply growth rate
while keeping the exit rate at its 1979-81 average, the startup rate declines 0.7 (1.0)
  13
     This calculation is conceptually similar to the flow-balance employment calculation implemented
in Elsby, Michaels, and Ratner (2017). They impose balance of inflows and outflows for each
employment level in the establishment firm size distribution while we impose balance of the inflow
of new firms per worker to the outflow of firms per worker.
  14
     Average of HP filtered trends (λ = 6.25). Results are nearly identical if we instead predict
annual flow balance startup rates and average over 3-year periods (Table C.1). We plot the entire
time series for annual flow balance startup rates against the actual startup rate in Figure C.3.


                                                10
                  Table 1: Actual and predicted flow balance startup rates

                                                                          Startup Rate (%)
                             Labor Supply             Exit
                              Growth (%)              Rate                        Predicted
                                                      (%)         Actual
                           WAP           CLF                                 η =WAP      η =CLF
             1979-1981      1.9           2.5              9.5     13.0       11.2        11.7
             2005-2007      1.1           1.1              8.7     10.1        9.7         9.7
             Change       −0.8          −1.4         −0.9         −2.9        −1.6        −2.0
Note: Trend component of annual rates using HP filter and smoothing parameter 6.25 averaged
over 3-year time periods. Startup rate, exit rate, and labor supply growth rates for working age
population (WAP) and civilian labor force (CLF) measured as described in text. Predicted startup
rates use flow balance equation (1) with 3-year averages for η and exit.


percentage points–about half of the decline predicted when both labor supply and
exit are changed. Generally, the k-period startup rate change can be decomposed as

                                        ηt + xt−k ηt−k + xt−k     ∆k xt
                         ∆k SRt ≈                −            +          .                                  (2)
                                          1 + ηt    1 + ηt−k    1 + ηt−k

The first two terms account for the difference from changes in labor supply and
the last term accounts for the difference from changes in the exit rate.15 Applied
using the averages from Table 1, when the measure of labor supply growth is WAP
(CLF) the changes in labor supply alone account for 59% (46%) of the decline in the
startup rate, and the change in the exit rate accounts for 40% (53%). Collectively,
these calculations show the quantitative importance of changes in both labor supply
growth and exit in explaining the majority of the decline in the startup rate.
    While our simple framework quantifies the determinants of the declining startup
rate, it has some clear limitations. First, exit is exogenous, and empirically, the de-
clines in the exit rate are nearly as important as the declines in labor force growth
in the flow balance calculation. While the demographic driven decline in labor force
growth is plausibly exogenous, changes in exit are certainly not. Second, the assump-
tion of constant firm size necessarily rules out incumbent employment growth and,
by implication, any heterogeneity in age and size–all of which may interact with the
changes in labor supply. Motivated by the findings of our simple framework, we ex-
tend a standard Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993) model of equilibrium firm dynamics
                                          −∆k xt ∆k ηt
  15
       The residual “covariance” term   (1+ηt )(1+ηt−k )   ≈ 0 since both ∆k xt and ∆k ηt are close to 0.


                                                       11
that relaxes these restrictions by endogenizing the exit and employment growth mar-
gins. Ultimately, the conclusions of the flow balance calculation are little changed,
but the model reveals that the direct effects of the decline in labor force growth on
the startup rate are amplified by a completely endogenous decline in the exit rate
induced by a compositional shift towards older firms.


3        Firm dynamics with labor supply growth
In this section, we construct an equilibrium model of firm dynamics with endogenous
entry, exit and labor supply growth, extending the workhorse Hopenhayn and Roger-
son (1993) model, to demonstrate the significant effects of demographic changes in
labor supply growth on the equilibrium startup rate.


3.1      Model
Our model economy consists of a continuum of firms that operate in a closed econ-
omy owned by a representative household of growing size and who supplies labor
inelastically to the firms. Time is discrete, and there is no aggregate uncertainty.

Households. There is a representative household whose size is growing at rate
η.16 Each member has one unit of time and identical preferences over sequences of
per-capita consumption ct , so that household preferences are ordered by
                                       ∞
                                       X
                                 U=          [(1 + η)β]t log ct ,                           (3)
                                       t=0


where β is a time discount factor and (1 + η)t captures the cumulative growth in
household size, having normalized its initial size to 1. We use consumption as the
numeraire, and let w denote the price of labor. The household has access to a one
period bond with risk-free return of r. In anticipation of studying the balanced growth
path we have dropped time subscripts on equilibrium prices. Per-capita bond holdings
in period t are denoted by bt . Firms are owned by the households and all profits are
distributed immediately as per-capita dividend πt . The household supplies its full
    16
    As is customary, we model population growth as a growing representative dynastic household
rather than a growing population of fixed-size households. With an appropriately chosen discount
rate, this choice makes no difference along a balanced growth path.


                                                12
time endowment as labor and chooses consumption ct and savings bt to maximize (3)
subject to the following budget constraint

                                                 bt−1
                             ct + bt = (1 + r)        + w + πt .                             (4)
                                                 1+η

Incumbent firms. The economy is populated by a continuum of firms that use
labor as the only input to produce the consumption good. Each firm has access to a
decreasing returns to scale technology, f (a, st , nt ) = ea st nθt . Here, a denotes the per-
manent component of a firm’s productivity and st denotes the stochastic component,
which evolves exogenously according to an AR(1) process, log st = ρ log st−1 + εt+1 ,
where ε is normally distributed with mean zero and standard deviation σε .
    Firms pay a fixed cost cf each period that they operate. In addition, adjusting
employment from nt−1 to nt 6= nt−1 requires an adjustment cost of Φ(nt−1 , nt ). Both
costs are denominated in units of output.17 After production firms may exit, either
exogenously with some probability δ or by choice if the value of remaining operational
becomes negative. This exit choice is prior to learning next period’s productivity st+1 .
    Given real wage w and interest rate r, the value V of a firm with productivity
 a
e st , and employment nt−1 is given by the following Bellman equation

  V (a, st , nt−1 ) = max ea st nθt − cf − Φ(nt−1 , nt ) − wnt
                      nt
                                                    1−δ
                                               +           max {Est V (a, st+1 , nt ) , 0]} . (5)
                                                    1 + r X∈{0,1}

The inner maximization reflects the end of period exit decision. Let X (·) denote the
exit decision, which takes the value 1 if the firm decides to exit and 0 otherwise, and
let h (·) be the decision for labor demand, nt .

Entry. A perfectly elastic supply of potential new firms can enter the economy by
paying an entry cost of ce units of output. Upon paying ce , firms draw the fixed com-
ponent of productivity a from the distribution F and the initial stochastic component
from the distribution G, and produce in the same period. This implies that potential
  17
    We assume there is no aggregate trend in productivity growth, so that the choice of costs in
terms of output rather than labor makes no difference along the balanced growth path.




                                               13
entrants will choose to enter only when the following free entry condition holds:
                                     ˆ
                              ce ≤       V (a, s, 0) F (da)G (ds) .                                    (6)

This condition must be satisfied at equality in a balanced growth path with η > 0
since without entry the increases in labor demand needed to clear markets would
require a declining real wage.

Entrant and incumbent dynamics. Let µt (A, S, N ) be the measure of firms
producing in period t with productivity components a ∈ A (permanent) and s ∈ S
(persistent) and previous employment n ∈ N . This measure of firms includes new
entrants, Mt , with draws a ∈ A and s ∈ S, as well as incumbent firms with positive
prior employment n ∈ N that remained in business. We let µ̄ = µ/H and M̄ = M/H
denote these objects per-capita (equivalently, per-worker). In per-capita terms, the
measure of firms evolves according to
                             ˆ ˆ ˆ
                                                                              µ̄t (da, dst , dnt−1 )
µ̄t+1 (A, S, N ) = (1 − δ)                (1 − X (a, st , nt−1 )) P (S|st )
                                     h(a,st ,nt−1 )∈N                                1+η
                         a∈A st
                                                                  ¨
                                             + 1 {0 ∈ N } M̄t+1                   dF (a) dG (s) (7)
                                                                      (a,s)∈A×S


P (st+1 ∈ S|st ) is the conditional probability implied by the AR(1) process for pro-
ductivity. Previous period µt is scaled by 1/(1 + η) to express it in terms of this
period’s population (labor supply).

Closing the model. Using the per-capita measure above, aggregate profits per-
capita are given by
        ˚
             ea sh(a, s, n)θ − wh(a, s, n) − cf − Φ(n, h(a, s, n)) µ̄t (da, ds, dn) − M̄t ce
                                                                  
 πt =
                                                                                        (8)
This is the per-capita value of total production net of fixed, adjustment and entry
costs. This dividend is paid to the representative household who owns all firms. Im-
                                                               ˝
plicit in this definition is aggregate labor demand per-capita   h(a, s, n)µt (da, ds, dn),
which in equilibrium is equal to 1.




                                                  14
Balanced growth path. Given η > 0, a balanced growth path equilibrium consists
of a constant real wage w, interest rate r, per capita consumption c, per capita savings
b and per capita profits π, labor demand and exit policy functions h and X, measure
of firms per capita µ̄ and a positive number of entrants M̄ > 0 such that i) given w,
r and π that c and b are optimal given (3) and (4), ii) firm labor demand, h(·), and
exit, X(·), maximize firm value in (5), iii) the free-entry condition (6) is satisfied at
equality, iv) the per-capita measures of firms, µ̄(·), and entrants, M̄ , satisfy the law
of motion (7), and v) per-capita profits satisfy equation (8) (market clearing).


3.2       Calibration
We calibrate the model to match key annual statistics of firm dynamics averaged
over the 2005–2007 period. New entrants draw their permanent log-productivity
a from a normal distribution with a ∼ N (0, σa2 ). The initial condition s0 for the
stochastic component of productivity s is drawn from a lognormal distribution with
log s0 ∼ N (µ0 , σ02 ) and then evolves according to the AR(1) process. When computing
the solution, we discretize the state space for both the permanent and stochastic
components of productivity.18 Adjustment costs are quadratic with Φ(nt−1 , nt ) =
γ(nt /(nt−1 + 1) − 1)2 . Here, γ ≥ 0 controls their magnitude.
    Several parameters are set outside the model. We set the time discount rate to
0.96, which corresponds to an interest rate of around β −1 − 1 = 4.2%. We set the
curvature parameter of the production function θ to match the labor’s share of total
revenue. This requires setting θ to 0.64. We set η = 0.011 to match the annual
growth rate of the civilian labor force (and of the working age population) over the
2005–07 period. The remaining nine parameters are calibrated within the model.
These parameters are: the entry cost ce , the fixed operating cost cf , the adjustment
cost parameter γ, the exogenous exit rate δ, the productivity parameters σa , ρ and
σε and the parameters governing the distribution of startups µ0 and σ0 (Table 2).

                           Table 2: Internally calibrated parameters

                                          Parameter values
                ce      cf       γ       δ       σa          ρ       σε     µ0       σ0
              6.856   1.898    0.003   0.026    0.163      0.970   0.101   −0.097   0.111

 18
      For further details, please refer to Appendix B.1.


                                                  15
    We estimate their values by minimizing the squared distance between a set of
targets in the data and their model counterparts. We target exactly nine moments
of firm dynamics in the 2005-07 period: the startup rate, the average size of startups
and incumbent firms, and the exit and conditional growth rates of three year old firms
in three size categories: 0–49, 50–249, 250+. Consistent with the previous section, to
compute these moments in the data, we first HP filter each series with a smoothing
parameter of 6.25, and then take the 3-year average for the 2005-07 period of the
trend component. Our calibrated model captures the salient features of the U.S. firm
dynamics very well in the 2005-07 period (Table 3).

                      Table 3: Model fit to targeted moments

                              Moment                  Data    Model
                Startup rate, %                       10.1     9.8
                Average startup employment             6.0     5.9
                Average incumbent employment          22.5    23.0
                Young exit rate by size, %
                     1-49 employees                   12.1    11.9
                     50-249 employees                  2.5     2.6
                     250+ employees                    2.6     2.6
                Young conditional growth by size, %
                     1-49 employees                    4.3     4.4
                     50-249 employees                  3.0     3.0
                     250+ employees                   −4.9    −4.1




3.3    Equilibrium effects of changing demographics
We now use our calibrated model to provide a quantitative evaluation of the demo-
graphic channel.

Effects on the startup rate (and exit rate). Table 4 reports the effects on the
startup rate and exit rate in the calibrated model when annual labor supply growth, η,
is increased from 1.1%, its average over the 2005-07 period, to 1.9% (2.5%) to match
the average WAP (CLF) growth in 1979-81. In response, the startup rate increases
from 9.8% to 11.0% (11.9%), accounting for 41% (72%) of the actual change from
10.1% to 13.0%. This calculation is the structural model’s counterpart to the flow-
balance calculation in Table 1 using equation (1), except the change in the aggregate

                                         16
exit rate, xt , is now endogenous.

            Table 4: Effect of labor force growth on startup and exit rates

                                          Startup Rate (%)          Economy Exit Rate (%)
                   Labor Supply
                    Growth (%)                       Model                         Model
                                      Actual                        Actual
                 WAP        CLF                  WAP       CLF                WAP       CLF
   1979-1981      1.9        2.5       13.0      11.0      11.9       9.5      9.3       9.7
   2005-2007      1.1        1.1       10.1       9.8       9.8       8.7      8.8       8.8
   Change       −0.8       −1.4        −2.9     −1.2      −2.1      −0.9      −0.5     −0.9
Note: Actual labor supply growth rates, startup rate and economy exit rate from Table 1. Model
startup rates and economy exit rates in the 1979-81 period correspond to the balanced growth paths
with only the higher trend labor supply growth (WAP or CLF) and all other parameters unchanged.


    The simple framework from Section 2.2 assumed away heterogeneity in firm size
and age, and relied on an exogenous decline in exit. In effect, shocks to labor supply
growth could only be absorbed at the entry margin, since incumbent labor demand
was assumed to be fixed. Here, these strong assumptions are relaxed. Decreasing re-
turns generate downward sloping labor demand curves so that shifts in labor supply
growth could be absorbed by incumbents, given a decline in the real wage. Nev-
ertheless, free entry ensures that the real wage is fixed along the balanced growth
path. Any shift in the real wage also changes the profitability of potential entrants,
and entry adjusts to relieve any pressure on the real wage, ensuring the free entry
condition (6) is satisfied. Consequently, one can show equation (1) still holds.19
    In the model, unlike the simple framework, the exit rate declines endogenously
with the reduction in labor supply growth. The decline in the startup rate changes
the share of young firms. Since new and young firms are more likely to exit than older
firms, this changes the aggregate exit rate through its effects on firm age composition.
The model explains 55% (100%) of the observed decline in the exit rate using only
the change in WAP (CLF).
    Since the startup rate depends on the aggregate exit rate, the induced change
in exit amplifies the effect of changes in labor supply growth. To see this, one can
use equation (1) to calculate an elasticity in the structural model of the equilibrium
  19
    This follows from integrating the law of motion in equation (7) for the balanced growth path
over all firms. See Appendix B.2.



                                               17
response of the startup rate to changes in labor supply growth η:

                             dSR   1 − SR     1 dx
                                 =        +          .                             (9)
                              dη    1+η     1 + η dη

Here, the first term captures the direct effect of the change in labor supply growth
on the (net) growth rate in the number of firms, and the second term captures the
indirect effect through the endogenous change in the aggregate exit rate. When
calculated for the calibrated model, averaging across the early and late periods and
approximating the exit rate elasticity with the changes between periods, the model
elasticity is 1.5 (for both WAP and CLF). The direct effect accounts for 58% (59%)
with the indirect effect accounting for the other 42% (41%) of the elasticity, closely
matching the proportions from the simple framework.

Effects on other margins. Beyond the effects on the startup rate, the model also
has implications for the response of other margins to shifts in demographics. Exam-
ining these implications and confronting them with the data provide a more complete
evaluation of the demographic channel vis-à-vis other hypotheses for declining entry.
Figure 4 shows how key margins of firm dynamics are affected by labor supply growth
rate changes. The blue circle shows the 2005-07 calibration and the red square in-
dicates the value of each margin when labor supply growth is increased to exactly
match the 1979-81 startup rate.
    A stark implication of labor supply growth changes is that the size of entrants
and the expected growth and exit rates of incumbent firms conditional on age remain
intact. That is because a change in labor supply growth has no direct effect on the
value of a firm, and thus leaves the equilibrium wage unchanged. Firm employment
and exit decisions therefore remain unchanged. The decline in labor supply growth
is accommodated by a decline in entry of new firms, as opposed to a contraction of
existing firms. This implication of the model is indeed consistent with the stability
of these margins empirically (Section 2.1).

Effects on firm age composition. The stationarity of the exit margin may seem
at odds with the decline in the economy-wide exit rate that the model predicts.
However, this is easily reconciled by recognizing that declining firm entry tilts the
firm age distribution towards older ones and that exit rates decline with firm age.
Left panel of Figure 5 shows employment shares by firm age for different levels of η.

                                         18
                   Figure 4: Labor supply growth and firm dynamics
Note: Four panels show how various dimensions of firm dynamics change with labor supply growth,
η. Blue circle and red square correspond to values of η needed to exactly match the startup rate for
’05-’07 and ’79-’81 periods, respectively. Young small refers to age 3 firms with 1-50 employees.


The shift of employment to older firms is evident and consistent with the data.20
    A similar result holds for firm size by age. The stationarity of the conditional
employment growth rates suggest little change in firm size by firm age. However, the
average size of firms in the U.S. economy increased from 20.6 in 1979-91 to 22.6 in
2005-07. The intuition is identical to that of the exit rate. The shift in average firm
size is a reflection of the change in age distribution of firms.
    To summarize, our quantitative analysis has shown that the demographic channel
successfully accounts for 40-70 percent of the decline in the startup rate and 55-100
percent of the decline in the exit rate. In addition, the implications of the demographic
channel is remarkably in line with the stability of incumbent margins that have been
the feature of U.S. firm dynamics in the last three decades.
  20
    This implication of the model is consistent with Pugsley and Şahin (2019), who using a decom-
position framework show that the shift in firm age distribution in the data is the accumulated effect
of declining firm entry. The mechanism in the model is precisely the same.




                                                 19
          Figure 5: Effects of labor supply growth on firm age composition
Note: Comparative statics of calibrated model varying labor supply growth, η. Blue circle and red
square correspond to values of η needed to exactly match the startup rate for ’05-’07 and ’79-’81
periods, respectively.


3.4     Considering cost-based channels
While the demographic channel accounts for the majority of the decline in the startup
rate, changes in the cost structure could also depress the startup rate over time. A key
question is how to evaluate the plausibility of potential changes in the economy’s cost
structure. Unlike the labor supply growth rate, the parameters governing costs do
not have obvious empirical counterparts that are independent of the model structure.
Since we cannot directly measure the levels and changes of various costs, we adopt
the following indirect approach. Within the calibrated model, we ask how much of a
change in each cost parameter is required to explain the decline in the startup rate.
Then, given this required change, we examine whether the implications for startup
size and incumbent exit and growth by firm age are compatible with those observed
in the data for the 1979 to 2007 period. We consider changes in entry costs, fixed
operating costs, and adjustment costs.

Changes in the entry cost. Stricter regulations and institutional constraints that
make it harder for new businesses to enter could be responsible for the decline in the
startup rate. The model captures this channel as a rise in the entry costs, ce , and
the effects of its changes can be analyzed by computing the balanced growth path
equilibrium for a range of values around its calibrated value.
    In Figure 6 we plot the comparative statics of each margin to changes in ce ,


                                               20
analogous to Figure 4 for labor supply growth. As before, the blue circle indicates
the entry cost of the 2005-07 calibration and the red square indicates the entry cost
necessary to generate the higher 1979-81 startup rate. It is apparent that changes
in entry costs can match qualitatively the changes in the startup and aggregate exit
rate observed in the data, although quantitatively the change in the predicted exit
rate is significantly larger than observed in the data. This is a general feature: along
the balanced growth path with positive labor supply growth, any induced changes in
the startup rate increase the aggregate exit rate more than one for one.21
    Figure 6 also shows that the effects of changes in entry costs on other margins are
at odds qualitatively with the data. Unlike changes in labor supply growth, changes in
entry costs affect the choices of startup and incumbent firms in equilibrium. Rising
entry costs imply a declining real wage. While quantitatively the effects on firm
growth are small, a declining real wage would significantly increase the expected size
of new firms and decrease the expected exit rate of incumbent firms. Both of these
implications are inconsistent with the stability we documented in Section 2.1.




                         Figure 6: Entry costs and firm dynamics
Note: Four panels show how various dimensions of firm dynamics change with entry costs. Blue
circle and red square correspond to values of entry cost needed to exactly match the startup rate
for ’05-’07 and ’79-’81 periods, respectively. Young small refers to age 3 firms with 1-50 employees.
  21                                     dx
   An implication of equation 1 is that dSR = 1 + η, which holds in equilibrium even with both
SR and x are determined endogenously. Appendix B.2.



                                                 21
    Calculating the required change in the entry cost to explain the decline in the
startup rate is also useful in assessing the plausibility of this channel. This calculation
corresponds to the horizontal gap between the red square and blue circle. For entry
costs to explain the decline in entry, they should have been almost 33% lower in early
1980s (Table 5). This would also imply that the size of startups in 1979-81 would have
been 14% lower, and exit and growth rates of young and small incumbent firms would
have been 1.7 ppts and 0.1 ppts higher, respectively. Therefore, we conclude that the
rise in entry cost is unlikely to be the major driver of the decline in firm entry since it
has counterfactual implications for entrant size and incumbent exit rates. Moreover,
there is little empirical evidence of such a big rise in entry costs.22

               Table 5: Implications of cost driven factors for firm dynamics

                                             Entry cost   Operating cost      Adjustment cost
 Required change in parameter, %             −33.2              55.7                 NA
 Change in average startup size, %           −14.0              36.2                 NA
 Change in exit rate, ppts                     1.7               2.2                 NA
 Change in conditional growth, ppts            0.1               0.9                 NA

Note: Required change in each parameter (relative to 2005-07 calibration) to explain the 1979-81
startup rate of 13%, keeping all other parameters fixed.



Changes in the operating costs. Figure 7 conducts a similar exercise for fixed
operating costs, cf . For operating costs to explain declining entry, they should have
declined over time. An increase in operating costs would have pushed up the produc-
tivity for remaining in business thereby increasing the exit and startup rates. The
equilibrium effect is key for the result: without changes in labor supply growth, only
changes in the aggregate exit rate can alter the startup rate.
    As shown on Table 5, for operating costs to explain all of the decline in entry,
they should have been 56% higher in the early 1980s. If operating costs were indeed
that much higher, we also would have observed an average startup size that is 36%
higher, and exit and growth rates of young and small incumbent firms that are 2.2
ppts and 0.9 ppts higher, respectively. These implications are clearly inconsistent
with the stability of these margins. Furthermore, the required decline in operating
  22
       See Liang, Wang, and Lazear (2018).



                                               22
costs over time stands in contrast to evidence of increasing regulatory costs of running
a business in the U.S. (Davis and Haltiwanger, 2014).




                       Figure 7: Operating costs and firm dynamics
Note: Four panels show how various dimensions of firm dynamics change with operating costs. Blue
circle and red square correspond to values of operating cost needed to exactly match the startup rate
for ’05-’07 and ’79-’81 periods, respectively. Young small refers to age 3 firms with 1-50 employees.



Changes in adjustment costs. In Figure 8, we study the effect of adjustment
costs. While higher adjustment costs have a small effect on the size of new entrants,
quantitatively even 50 percent deviations in adjustment costs do not have a measur-
able effect on the average firm value and thus no effect on the equilibrium real wage.
They also have little if any effects on the exit or growth rates of incumbent firms.
Without any effect on firm exit, conditional on firm age and size, they cannot change
the startup rate vis-a-vis the aggregate exit rate. Even if empirically adjustment costs
have increased, as found by Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin, and Miranda (2018), this
should have had little effect, if any, on the startup rate.
    To sum up, our quantitative analysis has shown that changes in the entry and
operating costs can generate the observed change in the startup rate in the long run.
However, such explanations of declining entry also have sizable effects on the behavior
of incumbent firms. This is in contrast to the data where these margins are relatively


                                                 23
                     Figure 8: Adjustment costs and firm dynamics
Note: Four panels show how various dimensions of firm dynamics change with adjustment costs.
Blue circle corresponds to values of adjustment cost needed to exactly match the startup rate for
’05-’07. While a higher adjustment cost places a downward pressure on the startup rate, changes in
the adjustment cost alone cannot account for declining entry since the ’79-’81 period. Young small
refers to age 3 firms with 1-50 employees.


stable over time. Moreover, the required changes in these cost parameters are quite
large, for which no empirical evidence exists in the literature. Our analysis thus
concludes that cost-based explanations have counterfactual predictions for various
margins of firm dynamics. Demographic changes, however, keep those margins intact
and therefore provide a credible explanation for the declining startup rate.


4     Evaluating the mechanism in the cross section
In this section, we evaluate the central predictions of the model using geographic
variation in firm dynamics and demographics. Namely, we test whether (i) exogenous
declines in the growth rate of labor supply reduce the firm entry rate and (ii) the
change in entry rate absorbs the entire effect of the shift in labor supply growth, i.e.,
conditional on firm age, exit rates and employment growth are unaffected.




                                               24
4.1     Empirical strategy
To evaluate the model’s testable implications, our empirical analysis compares the
responses of startup rates and other key margins of firm dynamics to shifts in labor
supply growth across states.23 We estimate the following regression for margin yst in
state s in year t:
                             yst = αs + γt + βy gst + εst .                     (10)

The margins are identical to those in Section 2, i.e., the startup rate, startup size,
and the survival and growth rates of young firms, except now measured at the state
rather than national level.24 The terms αs and γt capture state s and year t fixed
effects, respectively, and εst other unobserved determinants of the state-level firm
dynamics margin yst . The coefficient βy is the (semi-) elasticity of margin y to changes
in labor supply growth gst . With the time-effect absorbing national changes in all
variables, the coefficient captures only the relative responses across states within a
year, and we refer to it as a cross-sectional elasticity.25 We estimate these elasticities
for each margin using the same proxies for labor supply growth, i.e. the growth rate
of the entire population ages 20-64 and the growth rate of the civilian labor force as
estimated by the BLS, also now measured at the state rather than national level.
    The challenge with estimating these cross-sectional elasticities via OLS is that,
even within a state, changes in the growth rate of labor supply are likely endogenous:
the same unobserved time-varying features of the business environment within εst
that affect firm dynamics may also influence labor supply. For example, states that
become more profitable for incumbent firms may both attract new firms and new
workers. A successful empirical strategy to measure the causal effects of labor supply
growth on each margin must rely on plausibly exogenous shifts in labor supply growth.
To generate variation in labor supply growth that is unrelated to other labor demand
  23
     Our choice of states as the unit of analysis requires mobility costs to be large enough to prevent
geographic mobility from completely equating differences across these segmented labor markets.
Drawing on Kennan and Walker (2011), who estimate an average moving cost of $312, 000 (in 2010
dollars), we argue this is likely the case. This cost encompasses psychic as well as monetary costs
and suggests that labor market differences across-states are unlikely to be offset by geographical
mobility. However, to the extent this is not true and mobility attenuates the local effects of labor
supply shocks, our cross-state estimates will likely understate the effects of demographics on startups
and incumbent dynamics.
  24
     See Appendix A.3 for additional detail on the state-level variable construction.
  25
     See the discussion of cross-sectional elasticities in Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) and references
therein.



                                                  25
related factors, we use two distinct instrumental variables identification strategies.

Fertility instrument. Our first IV identification strategy uses within-state vari-
ation in labor supply growth rates predicted by past fertility. Specifically, similar
to Shimer (2001) and Karahan and Rhee (2014), we instrument each state’s current
labor supply growth rate with 20-year lags of its birthrate. To the extent that young
adults enter the labor force in their state of birth, the state’s lagged birthrate will
affect future labor supply growth.26 We compute these annual state-level birth rates
for the years 1959-1987, which we use to instrument labor supply growth for the years
1979-2007, a 20-year lag. We show below that lagged birthrates are a strong predictor
of future labor supply growth, even after conditioning on state and year fixed effects.
    This strategy relies on the exclusion restriction that conditional on state and
year fixed effects, higher fertility or its determinants have no effect on future firms
except indirectly through their effect on labor supply growth. This requires that any
lagged economic conditions that had generated variation in past fertility rates are
uncorrelated with current business conditions. The assumption would be violated,
for example, if people in a given state had a higher fertility rate 20 years ago in
anticipation of persistently (but not permanently) stronger labor market conditions
relative to other states.27
    While we believe this to be a reasonable assumption, one potential caveat is that
changes in birthrates may also shift the age composition of the future workforce
together with the workforce growth rate, as the primary effect of increases in fertility
is an increase in the future inflow of young workers.28 This feature makes disentangling
the effect of labor supply growth versus an effect from worker age composition difficult.
To address this concern, we adopt a second strategy.

Migration instrument. We use an Altonji and Card (1991)-style instrument which
utilizes differences across states in the historical patterns of inter-state migration. We
  26
      These birthrates are measured in births per thousand residents and are available in the various
Statistical Abstracts of the United States. We are grateful to Rob Shimer for providing us with his
digitized data from the Statistical Abstracts for the period 1940–91. For additional details on the
fertility instrument construction, please refer to our data appendix, section A.3.2
   27
      We believe this is a reasonable assumption for business conditions far in the future although it
may be violated over a shorter horizon. At the national level Buckles, Hungerman, and Lugauer
(2018) find fertility to be a leading indicator of the business cycle for the 1990, 2001 and 2007
recessions and recoveries.
   28
      Fertility may also affect future labor supply composition through changes in female labor supply.
See, for example, Bloom, Canning, Fink, and Finlay (2009).

                                                  26
rely on the lagged distribution of individuals’ birthplaces within each state, which can
be measured using historical Decennial Census data. These lagged shares then serve
as weights for adding up “pushes” from other states’ labor supply growth. Changes
in the population growth of a state k will predict changes in the population growth
of state s 6= k if, historically, migrants out of state k tend to move to state s. We
implement this idea as follows:
                                                X
                                                         k
                                      m̂st =            ωst ∗ gkt ,                            (11)
                                               k∈C(s)
                                                /


         k                                                 ∗
Here, ωst  ∗ is the share of residents of state s in time t that were born in state k and

gkt is the growth rate of the working age population in k at time t. In computing m̂st ,
we exclude states in the same Census Bureau division C (s) since the labor supply
growth in neighboring states, gkt , may be related to state s business conditions. To
isolate the historical component of migration patterns, we use the birthplace shares
  k                             ∗29
ωst ∗ from 2 censuses ago, t        Thus, if t is a census year (those ending in 0) then
t = t − 10, and if t is an inter-censal year then t∗ is the census year from the previous
 ∗

decade, e.g. for t = 2005, then t∗ = 1990.
     The identifying assumptions implicit in the exclusion restriction are two-fold.
First, as with the fertility instrument, we assume that any changes in the lagged
distribution of birth states, conditioned also on future time effects, are unrelated to
differences across states in future business conditions and have no effect on firms ex-
cept through their effects on labor supply. Second, we must assume that the “push”
from source state k labor supply growth, gkt , is also unrelated to the current business
conditions in destination state s.30 That is, labor supply growth rates in states outside
of the same Census division are not driven in part by state s economic conditions.

First-stage regressions. We first examine the first-stage regressions for both in-
struments. The left panel of Figure 9 plots the variation in the working age popula-
tion growth rate against the fertility instrument, where each variable has already been
  29
     We use the IPUMS microdata for the long form responses to the 1970, 1980, 1990 Decennial
Censuses; see Ruggles, Genadek, Goeken, Grover, and Sobeck (2017). In 1979, the lag is 9 years
(t∗ = 1970 instead of 1960). See Appendix A.3.2 for additional details.
  30
     In appendix C.3.2, we consider alternative constructions of this instrument that relaxes this
assumption. For example, given that lagged birthrates are a predictor of future labor supply, we can
use state k lagged birthrates as an alternative “push” to state s. These alternative instruments are
weaker, but give very similar results in the second stage estimation of equation (10) (Table C.11).


                                                 27
purged of state and time fixed effects. The horizontal axis plots, for each year and
state, the state’s lagged fertility relative to its within-state average and the year’s
between-state average. Notably, even conditional on permanent differences across
states, there is considerable variation in residual birthrates.31 The vertical axis plots
the corresponding residual working age population growth rate for each state and
year. The positive correlation between these two measures confirms the relevance
of the instrument. The slope is equal by construction to the coefficient on the in-
strument in the first-stage regression; a 10 percentage point increase in the lagged
birthrate predicts a 1.4 percentage point increase in the growth rate of the working
age population (Column (1) of Table 6). The birthrate instrument is also strong, with
an F statistic of roughly 33.
 WAP Growth (aged 20-64, %)




                                                                             WAP Growth (aged 20-64, %)
                          4




                                                                                                      4
                    2




                                                                                                2
               0




                                                                                           0
         -2




                                                                                     -2
    -4




                                                                                -4




                                                     slope = 0.14                                                             slope = 1.04
 -6




                                                                             -6




                                 -4     -2      0       2      4    6                                     -1   -.5        0         .5       1
                                      Birthrate per 1,000 Persons                                              Migration Instrument


                              Figure 9: First-stage regressions of WAP growth rate on each instrument

    Turning to the second instrument, the right panel of Figure 9 plots the varia-
tion in the working age population growth rate against the migration instrument,
both residualized in a similar fashion by regressing on state and year dummies. The
migration instrument, even after removing state and year fixed effects, varies signifi-
cantly and predicts differences in states’ working age population growth rates. A one
percentage point increase in the migration “push” instrument (a weighted average of
other-state working-age population growth) predicts a 1.04 percentage point increase
in own-state working-age population growth (Column (2) of Table 6). Although,
not as strong as the birthrate instrument, the migration instrument is still a good
predictor of working-age population growth.
   31
    In appendix Figure A.1 we plot this residual variation in birthrates (averaged across decades)
on a map of U.S. states.


                                                                        28
        Table 6: Regression of startup rate on working-age population growth

                                   First Stage             OLS         IV1        IV2      IV1 &IV2
                           (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)
 WAP Growth (%)                                             0.61       1.09       1.27        1.19
                                                           (0.05)     (0.32)     (0.22)      (0.22)
 Birthrate IV              0.14                   0.11
                          (0.02)                 (0.02)
 Migration IV                          1.04       0.87
                                      (0.30)     (0.28)
 N                        1,421      1,421       1,421     1,421      1,421      1,421       1,421
 R2                        0.64       0.64        0.65      0.90       0.87       0.85        0.86
 F -test                  32.65      11.83       17.48
 p-value of J-test                                                                            0.55
Note: Standard errors are clustered on state. Regressions contain state and year fixed effects and
cover years 1979-2007 and 48 contiguous states plus D.C.


    The migration instrument also contains independent information for the growth
rate of working age population. Column (3) of Table 6 shows that each instrument
has predictive power conditional on the other. Further, the migration instrument does
not have any systematic effect on the age composition. The partial R2 of including
the migration instrument in a regression of the 20-34 year old share of the working age
population on state and year fixed effects is only 0.005.32 Both instruments perform
equally well in predicting growth of the civilian labor force (Appendix Table C.5).


4.2     Labor supply growth and the startup rate
We now turn to our main results evaluating the role of shifting labor supply growth in
declining startup rates. To this end, we estimate equation (10) on pooled state-level
data for the period of 1979-2007. Our benchmark estimates use the growth rate of the
working age population as a proxy for labor supply growth, but they are robust to the
alternative civilian labor force growth measure.33 All specifications include state and
year fixed effects. Where possible, we utilize the publicly-available data from the BDS
  32
     See Appendix Table C.10 for the regression of the share of young workers on each instrument
and their combination.
  33
     For brevity, we present the full set of results using the civilian labor force growth as our proxy
for labor supply growth in Appendix C.2.1



                                                  29
so that others can easily replicate the results; we turn to the confidential micro data
from the LBD when necessary to include detailed industry controls.34 Throughout,
standard errors are clustered by state.
    We start by presenting the OLS estimate. Column (4) of Table 6 shows that a one
percentage point increase in labor supply growth is associated with a 0.61 percentage
point increase in the startup rate. This is a nonnegligible effect. Over our sample
period, the startup rate declined by 2.9 percentage points. If the elasticity is applied
to the aggregate changes, the OLS estimate implies that the 0.8 percentage point
decline in working-age population growth explains 16.8 percent of the decline in the
startup rate. As we discussed, a major concern with a causal interpretation of the
OLS estimate is that the realized labor supply growth rates may be correlated with
state-level demand shocks. To identify the causal effect of declining labor supply
shifts, we turn to our instrumental variables estimates.
    Column (5) of Table 6 presents the results using the lagged birthrate instrument.
According to this estimate, a one percentage point reduction in the working age
population growth rate leads to a 1.09 percentage point decline in the startup rate.
In terms of the aggregate changes over the period, the estimate implies that the 0.8
percentage point decline in the working age population growth rate can explain 30.1
percent of the decline in the startup rate.
    One concern is that this estimate may reflect both the effects of a labor supply
growth shift and the effects of any follow-on changes in the worker age composition.
Because changes in fertility will predict future labor supply growth primarily through
changes in the inflow of young workers, it may also change the age composition of the
labor supply. Although we see little evidence of this (Appendix Table C.10), to the
extent that it is the case, then our estimates could also reflect any effect of the aging
population on business formation and may either under- or over-state the effects of
shifts in labor supply growth.
    To avoid contaminating our estimates of labor supply growth effects with any
effects from an aging workforce, we utilize the migration instrument discussed in
Section 4.1. We re-estimate equation (10) now instrumenting labor supply growth
rates with the migration instrument, which we report in column (6) of Table 6, and
  34
    Special sworn researchers may request the replication files to be transferred from Census project
908 if the analysis as well as LBD and SSL databasese are within the scope of their Census project.
See Appendix A.1 for additional details.



                                                 30
with both the migration and lagged birthrate instrument in column (7). The point
estimates for both specifications point to somewhat larger effects, although they are
statistically close to those using just the birthrate IV. Using the migration IV alone,
the elasticity is 1.27 (explains 35.0 percent of the aggregate startup rate decline) and
when combined with the birthrate IV, the elasticity is 1.19 (explains 32.8 percent of
the aggregate startup rate decline). Incorporating two instruments also permits a J
test of over-identifying restrictions, which we would fail to reject at any level below
0.55. Given the similarity of the estimates, going forward, we take the results using
both IVs, Column (7), as our benchmark.35 This benchmark estimate of roughly 1.2
is smaller but consistent with the elasticity of 1.5 in the quantitative model.
    The statistical significance of the estimates and their quantitative stability across
alternative sources of variation are a robust feature of the data. We consistently
find an elasticity slightly larger than 1, which when multiplied by the roughly 0.8
percentage point decline in the aggregate working age population growth rate explains
about one-third of the aggregate decline in the startup rate. We explore here the
robustness of this result to several choices and report three main robustness checks:
allowing for detailed industry controls, using the civilian labor force growth as the
labor supply growth measure, and allowing for state-specific trends.36

Industry controls. Our benchmark results are based on cross-state variation pooled
over time to measure the responsiveness of the startup rate to demographic shocks.
Demographic shocks, in theory, could also affect the industry composition of pro-
duction in a state and change the state’s startup rate purely through an industry
compositional shift. Instead of supporting evidence for the equilibrium entry mech-
anism, it is possible that our results might only reflect demographic shocks shifting
economic activity towards high-entry industries, such as those common in the service
sector. In contrast, our mechanism would predict an across the board decline in entry
  35
      It may seem puzzling that the estimated effects on the startup rate by OLS are roughly half
as large as those estimated using the two instruments individually or in conjunction. However, this
finding is consistent with the predictions of the model. If uninstrumented growth in the labor force
within a state is driven both by labor supply shocks and labor demand shocks, then the startup rate
elasticity should be smaller, since labor demand shocks will also affect the survival and growth of
incumbents and reduce the required change in the equilibrium startup rate.
   36
      We present additional analyses in a robustness appendix including: the full set of results using
CLF (Appendix C.2.1), allowing for spatial correlation (Appendix C.2.2), establishment level startup
rates (Appendix C.2.3), alternative time periods (Appendix C.2.4), and alternative IV construction
(Appendix C.3.2).



                                                 31
in response to a demographic shock, i.e., an effect within industry.
    To address this concern, we use data from the confidential Census Bureau Lon-
gitudinal Business Database (LBD), which provides detailed industry information at
the firm level. We aggregate these data to form startup rates by year, state, and
4-digit NAICS industry.37 Now using these detailed data, Panel A of Table 7 reports
the estimated response of the startup rate to demographic shocks when including
4-digit industry dummies in addition to the state and year fixed effects. The first
column reports the OLS estimate, and the next three columns report the estimates
using the fertility, migration, and combined instruments, respectively. In all cases,
the estimates are very similar to the ones without detailed industry controls, which
is in line with the implications of our theoretical framework. Since the effects are
present even within detailed industry, our estimates do not reflect changes in indus-
trial composition that may have coincided with shifts in labor supply growth.

Different measure of labor supply. Our main proxy for labor supply, working-
age population, counts people regardless of labor force status. While demographic
change is one important factor in driving long-run changes in labor supply, another
important margin is change in labor force participation, especially among women.
Since the 1960s, female participation has increased, at first sharply and then more
gradually, eventually leveling off by the late 1990s. Our state-level analysis might yield
biased results if changes in female labor force participation across states are correlated
with the changes in working age population growth predicted by the instruments. To
evaluate this possibility, Panel B of Table 7 reproduces the same analysis using the
growth rate of the civilian labor force as the main dependent variable. The estimates
using the IV strategy are similar to those in Table 6 and in the case of the benchmark
estimate using both instruments, nearly identical. For brevity, we provide the full set
of results across all margins using civilian labor force as the labor supply proxy in
Appendix C.2.1.

State-specific trends. Another concern is that the elasticity we estimate may
actually reflect state-level secular trends in business dynamics unrelated to demo-
graphics affecting both the startup rate and the instruments. For example, a state
could have persistent long-run declines in both the startup rate and fertility. State
  37
    We use the Fort-Klimek measure of NAICS industry (Fort and Klimek, 2016). For additional
details on industry assignment, please refer to Appendix A.1.2.


                                            32
       Table 7: Robustness of effect of labor supply shocks on the startup rate.

                                        (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)
                                        OLS           IV1       IV2      IV1 & IV2
                              Panel A. Detailed industry controls
                WAP Growth (%)           0.62          0.89      1.14       1.06
                                        (0.06)        (0.25)    (0.20)     (0.20)
                N                      300,000    300,000      300,000    300,000
                R2                       0.51       0.51         0.50       0.51
                J-test p-value                                              0.25
                          Panel B. Alternative labor supply measure
                CLF Growth (%)           0.23          1.38      1.14       1.21
                                        (0.04)        (0.61)    (0.28)     (0.28)
                N                       1,421         1,421     1,421      1,421
                R2                       0.87          0.44      0.60       0.56
                J-test p value                                              0.70
                                 Panel C. State-specific trends
                WAP Growth (%)           0.58          1.11      1.57       1.32
                                        (0.05)        (0.21)    (0.29)     (0.19)
                N                       1,421         1,421     1,421      1,421
                R2                       0.92          0.89      0.82       0.86
                J-test p-value                                              0.10
Note: Standard errors clustered on state. All regressions use specification and sample from Table 6
with the following change: Panel A is industry by state by year startup rate and includes industry
(NAICS4) fixed effects (and only years 1980-2007); Panel B uses the civilian labor force growth rate
in place of working age population growth rate; Panel C includes state-level linear trends.


fixed effects would control for the permanently low startup rates and fertility, but not
for continuued declines in both. Our empirical strategy would interpret the within
state parallel declines as evidence of a positive elasticity. To examine whether our
results may be affected by state-level secular trends, we consider an additional speci-
fication where we allow the state effect to have a linear trend, i.e. we replace the state
fixed effect αs in equation (10) with time varying αst = α0s + α1s t. To the extent that
α1s 6= 0 for any state, we now estimate the elasticity β by comparing each state’s
changes relative to their linear trends of the startup rate and the (instrumented) la-
bor supply growth rate. The time effects already remove any aggregate trends in the
variables.


                                                 33
    We re-estimate (10) allowing for state fixed effects and state-specific linear trends
and report the estimates in Panel C of Table 7. The OLS estimate is nearly identical
to the benchmark in Table 6. When estimated using the instrumented labor supply
growth, the elasticities are slightly larger than the corresponding benchmarks.
    Collectively, these robustness analyses paint a consistent picture of the effects of
changes in labor supply growth on the startup rate. Across all specifications, when
interpreted in terms of the aggregate changes, labor supply growth explains between
10 and 60 percent of the decline in the startup rate. Looking just at the range
of instrumented estimates, this range narrows considerably to between 35 and 60
percent. As we show below, the cross-sectional evidence also supports the model’s
predictions for additional margins of firm dynamics.


4.3       Effects on incumbent exit and growth
The model implies that changes in labor supply growth rates should not affect the
growth and survival rates of incumbent firms. These predictions are the flip side of
the strong effect on the startup rate; the free entry condition implies all adjustment to
a labor supply growth rate shift is on the entry margin and thus relieves any pressure
on real wages that would otherwise shift incumbent dynamics or the labor demand
of new firms.
    We test these predictions for incumbent selection and growth by estimating equa-
tion (10) using several additional margins of firm dynamics as outcomes. We find
that shifts in labor supply growth have no statistically significant effect on startup
size or on survival and employment growth rates, conditional on firm age. We present
these results in Table 8. It is helpful to start with Column (2), which estimates labor
supply growth elasticity for each margin using differences across states in labor supply
growth rates predicted only by past fertility. For average startup size (Panel A), the
exit rate of young firms (Panel B) and their conditional growth rate (Panel C) the
estimates are statistically indistinguishable from zero.38
    Even economically the point estimates are small. The average startup size in
a state with 1 percentage point faster labor supply growth would fall by about 0.3
employees, which is about 5% below the average of about 6 employees across all states
and years. The same 1 percentage point faster labor supply growth would increase
 38
      The conditional growth rate refers to the within cohort growth in average firm size (Section 2.1).



                                                   34
          Table 8: Effects of labor supply shocks on additional firm margins

                                         (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)
                                         OLS           IV1       IV2      IV1 & IV2
                             Panel A. Average startup employment
                 WAP Growth (%)           0.03     −0.27        −0.05      −0.15
                                         (0.04)     (0.18)       (0.15)     (0.14)
                 N                       1,421         1,421    1,421       1,421
                 R2                       0.45          0.41     0.45        0.43
                 J-test p-value                                              0.20
                               Panel B. Young firm exit rate (%)
                 WAP Growth (%)         −0.37           0.12    −0.21      −0.01
                                         (0.04)        (0.21)    (0.21)     (0.15)
                 N                       1,029         1,029    1,029       1,029
                 R2                       0.74          0.68     0.73        0.71
                 J-test p value                                              0.34
                       Panel C. Young firm conditional growth rate (%)
                 WAP Growth (%)           0.75     −0.84        −0.11      −0.54
                                         (0.19)     (0.65)       (1.07)     (0.75)
                 N                       1,029         1,029    1,029       1,029
                 R2                       0.41          0.33     0.39        0.36
                 J-test p-value                                              0.45
Note: Standard errors clustered on state. Young firms (ages 1-10) do not include startups. All re-
gressions use RHS specification and sample from Table 6 with the following additional LHS margins:
Panel A is average employment size of startup firms; Panel B is the survival rate in percent of young
firms; Panel C is the young firm within-cohort percent growth in average firm size. Panels B and C
of young incumbents use years 1987 to 2007, because of birth year censoring.


the exit rate of firms ages 1 to 10 in the state by about 0.1 percentage points (less
than 1 percent of the average exit rate of 11 percent), and reduce their conditional
growth rate by 0.8 percentage points (a little less than 10 percent below the average of
8.9 percent). We condition on firm age since in the presence of the long-run declines
in entry, the overall age composition is slowly shifting towards older firms. The
incumbent regressions use data starting in 1987, which is the first year where we can
identify firms ages 1 to 10 because of birth year censoring.39
  39
    The shorter 1987 to 2007 time span has no effect on the main results. See the discussion in our
robustness appendix, Section C.2.4.



                                                  35
    When estimated using differences in labor supply growth predicted only by the
migration instrument (Column (3)) or both the fertility and migration instrument
(Column (4)), the results are even closer to zero. The point estimates for average
startup size and the conditional growth rate remain positive; the estimated elasticity
for the exit rate actually changes sign. For startup size, exit, and growth, the results
are quantitatively and statistically insignificant for a test of any reasonable size.40
For the benchmark results in Column (4) the p-values of a zero elasticity null are
0.29, 0.94 and 0.47, respectively. The insignificant cross-state responses to exogenous
shifts in labor supply growth are consistent with the aggregate response predicted by
the model in Section 3.
    The small, or non-existent, effects we find using exogenous shifts in labor supply
growth, however, stand in contrast to those estimated using all variation across states
(Column 1). While the effect on startup size is still zero, the exit rate for young
firms declines and the conditional growth rate increases. Since OLS uses variation
in labor market growth that may also be determined by local economic conditions,
these results are unsurprising. If labor markets are growing due to increases in local
profitability, which increase labor demand, incumbent firms would be less likely to
exit and more likely to expand. These patterns also help explain the consistently
smaller elasticity of the startup rate estimated via OLS found throughout Tables 6
and 7; the additional increases in incumbent labor demand from less exit and more
growth require a smaller response along the entry margin. Incumbents respond in
this case because of the direct effects of the boost in profitability, whereas shifts in
labor supply growth affect incumbents indirectly through short-run changes in the
real wage.
    Overall, the cross-state evidence supports the labor supply growth mechanism in
the model both qualitatively and quantitatively. When using plausibly exogenous
shifts in labor supply growth identified via historical fertility or inter-state migration
patterns we estimate an elasticity for the startup rate that accounts for one-third to
one-half of the aggregate decline. Admittedly, while the product of the estimated
cross-sectional elasticity of the startup rate and the aggregate decline in labor supply
growth is a helpful reference point, and it provides one estimate for the aggregate
effects of the demographic change, there are important caveats. First, our identifi-
cation by construction suppresses general equilibrium effects by looking at variation
 40
      These patterns are identical for the Civilian Labor Force proxy of labor supply growth.


                                                 36
across states within each year. Second our estimation may not necessarily identify
the long-run effects as it uses year-to-year variation.
    Finally, as implied by the model, the same shocks have no significant effect on the
size of new entrants, nor the average survival and growth patterns of incumbent firms,
conditional on firm age. Beyond a test of the benchmark model in Section 3, these
cross-state regressions also provide empirical restrictions to evaluate more intricate
models of firm dynamics. Next, we consider the aggregate time-series predictions of
the benchmark model.


5          Evaluating the mechanism in the time-series
As a final test of our hypothesis, we assess the principal time-series implication of
the mechanism. Namely, the startup rate should co-move with the labor supply
growth rate, including the roughly two decades since 1960 marked by increases in
both measures of labor supply growth. The difficulty with examining this implication
directly is the absence of longitudinal firm-level data over this entire period.
    To address this challenge, we provide a novel method to impute an aggregate
startup rate over the longer time span. Although we lack comprehensive longitudinal
data prior to 1977, the Census Bureau has collected annual tabulations of estab-
lishments by county and size since 1964 as part of its County Business Patterns
program.41 These static data do not contain any measures of entry, but we propose
a methodology to impute a historical aggregate entry rate series from these detailed
cross sections. Essentially, we recover the number of startup establishments or “gross
entry” by summing the net change in the stock of establishments with the number of
exiting establishments. Since the latter cannot be observed, we predict exits using a
simple statistical model based on the establishment size distribution.

Imputing the startup rate. Our imputation methodology begins with a simple
law of motion for the total number of establishments et

                                        et = (1 − xt )et−1 + st ,
    41
         For further details on the CBP data, see Appendix A.4




                                                   37
where xt is the average establishment exit rate and st is the number of startup es-
tablishments. Given annual establishment counts and an average establishment exit
rate, we could trivially recover the number of startup establishments using the law
of motion. While the establishment counts are readily available in the CBP, to our
knowledge, there are no measures of U.S. establishment exit rates prior to the LBD.
    Instead, we propose to predict exit using the annual state-level employment size
distributions observable in the CBP. The aggregate exit rate can also be written as
an establishment-share weighted average across states s and size groups j
                                                           sj
                                                       sj et−1
                                             XX
                                      xt =            xt       .
                                             s    j
                                                          et−1

We condition on both size group and state, since both characteristics are also easily
measured in the LBD and BDS data. We estimate a model for each xsj        t “in sample”
                                                sj
using the longitudinal data and then predict x̂t “out of sample” in the CBP. With
these predicted values in hand, we plug the predicted exit rate into the law of motion.
When normalized by et−1 to express in terms of rates, this procedure imputes the
establishment startup rate as
                                                                   sj
                                 ŝt   ∆et X X sj et−1
                                     =      +     x̂t      .                                    (12)
                                et−1   et−1   s j
                                                      et−1

That is, we recover a “gross” entry rate or startup rate from summing the “net” entry
rate (the growth rate of the number of establishments) with our predicted aggregate
exit rate.
    To implement the imputation from equation (12) we use six size categories {1-
19, 20-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500+} and all 50 states plus the District of
Columbia.42 In the absence of observed exit rates by state and size category for
the CBP, we estimate exit rates by size group and state in the BDS for the years 1980
to 2007 using a simple linear time trend

                                     xsj    sj  sj    sj
                                      t = x̄ + λ t + εt .                                       (13)

We then predict x̂sj
                  t for the CBP using the fitted values from 1980 to 2007 and holding
  42
   Our choice of 500+ as the largest category is not restrictive since average exit rates vary little
among large firms.


                                                 38
exit rates constant at their predicted 1980 values, x̂sj
                                                      1980 , for 1965 to 1979.
                                                                               43
                                                                                  We discuss
some alternative assumptions below, and our results are qualitatively unchanged.

Historical startup rate. The imputed establishment startup rate confirms the
central prediction of our mechanism. To see this we start with Figure 10, which plots
the imputed establishment startup rate for 1965-2007 and the actual establishment
startup rate for 1979 to 2007 measured from the BDS. The imputed establishment
entry rate increases throughout the period of increasing labor supply growth. Al-
though the annual data are noisy, a linear trend estimated from 1965 to 1979 shows
a significant upward trend in the entry rate over the exact period of increases in our
two measures of labor supply growth. This is exactly the time-series prediction of
our mechanism where shifts in the growth rate of labor supply are accommodated
primarily along the firm entry margin.


                                                                                     Actual
                              .16




                                                                                     CBP imputation
                                         .15
                 Establishment startup rate
                    .12   .13 .11
                              .1 .14




                                         1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005


 Figure 10: Imputed historical establishment entry rates and the BDS entry rate.
Note: Actual establishment startup rate measured in the BDS. CBP establishment startup rate
imputed using equation (12) and interpolated across dropped years 1974 and 1983.


    There are two additional features to note. First, the establishment startup rate
declines significantly over the 1979-2007 period. One limitation of the CBP is that we
can only impute an establishment entry rate. However, since the vast majority of new
establishments are also new firms, the declines in establishment and firm startup rates
  43
    We drop years 1964, 1974, and 1983 from the imputation because of significant data quality
problems.


                                                                     39
are very similar.44 Second, for the period in which they overlap, the imputed startup
rate tracks on average the path of the BDS establishment startup rate relatively well.
Linear trends estimated over the 1979-2007 period for both series are very close,
confirming that the method for predicting exit rates performs reasonably well.
    The hump shaped pattern in the imputed establishment entry rate is robust to
alternative assumptions on the path of establishment exit. Our baseline imputation
holds the exit rate by size and state constant before 1979. The hump shape persists
whether we use a constant average exit rate by size or even extrapolate the downward
trend to the pre-1980 period (Appendix C.4). The trend controls for the gradual
declines in exit rate within size-group from changes in age composition induced by
changes the declines in entry. If anything, a higher establishment entry rate over the
earlier period would increase average exit from the same age composition channel. If
we were instead to extrapolate exit over the earlier period by reversing the sign on
the trend term, the hump shaped pattern would be even more pronounced.
                              .04




                                                                                                   .16
                                                       Working age population growth rate
                                                       Civilian labor force growth rate
                                                       CBP imputed startup rate (RHS)



                                                                                                   Establishment startup rate
                                        .03




                                                                                                                         .14
                   Labor supply growth rate
                             .02




                                                                                                             .12
                   .01




                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                   .08
                              0




                                              1950   1960   1970    1980    1990     2000   2010


  Figure 11: Imputed historical startup rate and measures of labor supply growth
Note: WAP is ages 20 to 64. CLF is measured for the adult (20+) civilian non institutional
population. Establishment startup rate is imputed from the CBP using equation (12). Growth rates
and startup rate are HP filtered with a smoothing parameter of 6.25, consistent with Ravn and
Uhlig (2002) for annual data, to estimate the trend component.


       Collectively, the time series evidence strongly supports the labor supply growth
  44
    Over the 1979-2007 period, the firm startup rate declines from roughly 13 to 10 percent, whereas
the establishment startup rate declines from roughly 14 percent to 12 percent.


                                                                      40
mechanism. To see this most clearly, in Figure 11 we apply an HP filter to the annual
data for both measures of labor supply growth and the imputed establishment startup
rate and plot the trend components. Here, the comovement of startup rate with the
measures of labor supply growth is clear. The decline in the startup rate is a reversal
of its earlier increases, mirroring the hump-shaped patterns for labor supply growth.45


6        Conclusion
The startup rate has been trending down since the series begins in the late 1970s, rais-
ing some alarm over the decline in U.S. entrepreneurship. In this paper, we identify
declines in the growth rate of the labor supply–long preordained by demographics–as
the leading cause the startup rate’s decline, explaining 50 to 70 percent of the decline,
depending on the measure of labor supply growth. In fact, the underlying equilibrium
link between labor supply growth and the startup rate, although previously unexam-
ined, is an inherent feature of standard models of firm dynamics. The explanation fits
the data remarkably well, as we show in three independent ways: (i) quantitatively,
in an equilibrium model of firm dynamics calibrated to match the U.S. economy, (ii)
across U.S. states, using plausibly exogenous variation in labor supply growth, and
(iii) in the aggregate time series, using a startup rate series extended to include the
period of increasing labor supply growth. Moreover, this labor supply growth-based
account of the startup deficit explains both the widespread nature of the declines in
entry and the relative stability of incumbent survival and growth conditional on firm
age.
     The demographic origins of the decline in the startup rate should not dimin-
ish its macroeconomic significance. If anything, the decline in the startup rate and
the implied shift in the age distribution of firms have far-reaching macroeconomic
effects. An emerging literature has already started to explore these consequences.
Glover and Short (2018) and Hopenhayn, Neira, and Singhania (2018) link the de-
mographic channel to the decline in the labor share; Pugsley and Şahin (2019) show
that the emergence of jobless recoveries can be traced back to the decline in firm en-
try and subsequent aging of firms; Alon, Berger, Dent, and Pugsley (2018), Atkeson,
Burstein, and Chatzikonstantinou (2018) and Peters and Walsh (2019) link the de-
    45
    Using the firm startup rate, we can only observe the same comovement over the period of
declining labor supply growth (Figure C.1).


                                            41
mographic driven declines in entry to the slowdown of aggregate productivity growth;
and Crump, Eusepi, Giannoni, and Şahin (2019) argue that the demographic channel
is an important driver of the secular downward trend in unemployment. If present
trends in fertility and immigration continue, the startup rate will remain near its
current levels, and understanding the equilibrium implications of slowing labor force
growth will be especially relevant.


References
Alon, T., D. Berger, R. C. Dent, and B. Pugsley (2018): “Older and Slower: The
  Startup Deficit’s Lasting Impact on Productivity Growth,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics, 93, 68–85.
Altonji, J. G., and D. Card (1991): The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
  Outcomes of Less-skilled Nativespp. 201–234. University of Chicago Press.
Atkeson, A., A. Burstein, and M. Chatzikonstantinou (2018): “Transitional Dy-
  namics in Aggregate Models of Innovative Investment,” Discussion paper, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Bartelsman, E. J., and M. Doms (2000): “Understanding Productivity: Lessons from
  Longitudinal Microdata,” Journal of Economic Literature, 38(3), 569–594.
Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, G. Fink, and J. E. Finlay (2009): “Fertility, Female Labor
  Force Participation, and the Demographic Dividend,” Journal of Economic Growth, 14(2),
  79–101.
Bornstein, G. (2018): “Entry and Profits in an Aging Economy: The Role of Consumer
  Inertia,” mimeo.
Buckles, K., D. Hungerman, and S. Lugauer (2018): “Is Fertility a Leading Economic
  Indicator,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Crump, R., S. Eusepi, M. Giannoni, and A. Şahin (2019): “A Unified Approach to
  Measuring u*,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Davis, S., and J. Haltiwanger (2016): “Dynamism Diminished: The Role of Housing
  Markets and Credit Conditions,” mimeo.
Davis, S. J., and J. Haltiwanger (2014): “Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Perfor-
  mance,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2007): “Volatility and
  Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,”
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, 21, 107–156.
Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014): “The Role of En-
  trepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 28(3), 3–24.
         (2018): “Changing Business Dynamism and Productivity: Shocks vs. Responsive-
  ness,” Working Paper No. 24236, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Decker, R. A., J. Haltiwanger, R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2016): “Where has
  all the skewness gone? The decline in high-growth (young) firms in the US,” European
  Economic Review, 86, 4–23.

                                           42
Elsby, M. W., R. Michaels, and D. Ratner (2017): “The Aggregate Effects of Labor
  Market Frictions,” mimeo.
Engbom, N. (2019): “Firm and Worker Dynamics in an Aging Labor Market,” mimeo.
Fort, T. C., and S. D. Klimek (2016): “The Effects of Industry Classification Changes
  on US Employment Composition,” mimeo, Dartmouth University.
Glover, A., and J. Short (2018): “Demographic Origins of the Decline in Labor’s Share,”
  mimeo.
Gourio, F., T. Messer, and M. Siemer (2014): “A Missing Generation of Firms?
  Aggregate Effects of the Decline in New Business Formation,” mimeo.
Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2011): “Historically, Large Decline in
  Job Creation from Startup and Existing Firms in the 2008-2009 Recession,” Business
  Dynamics Statistics Briefing 5, Kauffman Foundation.
         (2012): “Where Have All the Young Firms Gone?,” Business Dynamics Statistics
  Briefing 6, Kauffman Foundation.
Haltiwanger, J., R. S. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2013): “Who creates jobs? Small
  versus large versus young,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347–361.
Hathaway, I., and R. E. Litan (2014a): “Declining Business Dynamism in the United
  States: A Look at States and Metros,” mimeo, Brookings Institution.
Hathaway, I., and R. E. Litan (2014b): “What’s Driving the Decline in the Firm For-
  mation Rate? A Partial Explanation,” Discussion paper, Brookings Institution.
Hopenhayn, H., J. Neira, and R. Singhania (2018): “From Population Growth to Firm
  Demographics: Implications for Concentration, Entrepreneurship and the Labor Share,”
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hopenhayn, H., and R. Rogerson (1993): “Job turnover and policy evaluation: A
  general equilibrium analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, pp. 915–938.
Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992): “Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium,”
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 1127–1150.
Jarmin, R. S., and J. Miranda (2002): “The Longitudinal Business Database,” Working
  Paper CES-02-17, US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies.
Karahan, F., and S. Rhee (2014): “Population Aging, Migration Spillovers and the
  Decline in Interstate Migration,” FRB of New York Staff Report.
Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker (2011): “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual
  Migration Decisions,” Econometrica, 79(1), 211–251.
Kozeniauskas, N. (2017): “What’s Driving the Decline in Entrepreneurship,” mimeo, New
  York University.
Lentz, R., and D. T. Mortensen (2008): “An Empirical Model of Growth Through
  Product Innovation,” Econometrica, 76(6), 1317–1373.
Liang, J., H. Wang, and E. P. Lazear (2018): “Demographics and Entrepreneurship,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 126(S1), S140–S196.
Nakamura, E., and J. Steinsson (2018): “Identification in macroeconomics,” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 32(3), 59–86.
Peters, M., and C. Walsh (2019): “Declining Dynamism, Increasing Markups and Miss-
  ing Growth: The Role of The Labor Force,” mimeo.
Pugsley, B. W., and A. Şahin (2019): “Grown-up Business Cycles,” The Review of
  Financial Studies, 32(3), 1102–1147.


                                          43
Ravn, M. O., and H. Uhlig (2002): “On adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott filter for the
  frequency of observations,” Review of economics and statistics, 84(2), 371–376.
Ruggles, S., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobeck (2017): “Inte-
  grated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 7.0 [dataset],” Minneapolis: University of
  Minnesota.
Salgado, S. (2017): “Technical Change and Entrepreneurship,” mimeo, University of Min-
  nesota.
Shimer, R. (2001): “The Impact of Young Workers on the Aggregate Labor Market,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116, No: 3 (Aug., 2001), 969–1007.




                                          44
