                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  EXCESSIVE ENTRY AND EXIT IN EXPORT MARKETS

                                      Hiroyuki Kasahara
                                         Heiwai Tang

                                      Working Paper 25878
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25878


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2019




We thank Pietro Montanarella for excellent research assistance and participants in the NBER-
TCER-CEPR Conference on “Globalization and Welfare Impacts of International Trade”,
especially our discussant, Daisuke Fujii, for comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hiroyuki Kasahara and Heiwai Tang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Excessive Entry and Exit in Export Markets
Hiroyuki Kasahara and Heiwai Tang
NBER Working Paper No. 25878
May 2019
JEL No. D8,F1,F2

                                         ABSTRACT

Using transaction-level data for all Chinese firms exporting between 2000 and 2006, we find that
on average 78% of exporters to a country in a given year were new exporters. Among these new
exporters, an average of 60% stopped serving the same country the following year. These rates
are higher if the destination country is a market with which Chinese firms are less familiar. We
build a simple two-period model with imperfect information, in which beliefs about their foreign
demand are determined by learning from neighbors. In the model, a high variance of the prior
distribution of foreign demand induces firms to enter new markets. This is because the profit
function is convex in perceived foreign demand due to the option of exiting, which insures
against the risk of low demand realization. We then use our micro data to empirically examine
several model predictions, and find evidence to support the hypothesis that firms' high entry and
exit rates are outcomes of their rational self-discovery of demand in an unfamiliar market.


Hiroyuki Kasahara
University of British Columbia
Department of Economics
997 - 1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
Canada
hkasahar@mail.ubc.ca

Heiwai Tang
Johns Hopkins University
1740 Massachusetts Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20036
hwtang@jhu.edu
1        Introduction
Research shows that firms’ turnover (entry and exit) rates are much higher in foreign mar-
kets than in domestic markets.1 This suggests that firms face considerable uncertainty
in new foreign markets. Existing theoretical studies postulate that firms can learn about
idiosyncratic demand by experimenting with exports to new markets themselves. In prac-
tice, however, firms typically attempt to acquire as much information as possible from
other firms before undertaking any risky decisions (Hausmann and Rodrik, 2003), espe-
cially when this exploration of foreign markets can entail significant sunk costs.2 While
economists have studied how learning from neighbors determines individuals’ decisions
(e.g., Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995, 2010; Conley and Udry, 2010; Moretti, 2011), it has
not received the same level of attention in the study of export dynamics.
        This paper studies the roles of information and learning from others in shaping firms’
export dynamics. We first establish several stylized facts using transaction-level trade data
for the universe of Chinese exporting firms over the period of 2000-2006. We find that

    1. The majority of firms exporting to foreign countries are new exporters (78% on
          average across 180 countries).

    2. Among these new exporters, on average 60% did not continue to serve the same
          country the following year.

    3. Firms’ exit and entry rates are strongly and positively correlated across destination
          countries.

    4. These entry and exit rates are particularly high for exports to new markets, especially
          to markets with which Chinese exporters are less familiar, like those in Africa (where
          83% of exporters on average are new, and among which 68% stopped exporting to
          the same country the following year).

    5. Both firms’ entry and exit rates are negatively correlated with destination countries’
          GDP.
    1
     According to Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2009), the average turnover (entry + exit) rate
in the domestic market is 5-10%, and is several order of magnitude bigger in foreign markets, as shown by
Eaton et al. (2008), Albornoz et al. (2011), and Blum et al. (2013).
   2
     Research in international trade has emphasized how high sunk costs of exporting shape export patterns.
Das et al. (2007) and Dickstein and Morales (2018), among others, have provided sizeable estimates of those
costs. Notice that high sunk costs could explain low export entry rate, but not the marjority of small firms
among export starters.


                                                     2
   6. Both firms’ entry and exit rates are positively correlated with the distance from
         destination countries.

    These facts are intriguing. One can argue that as fast-growing firms are often seeking
new markets, the high entry rates in many foreign markets among Chinese exporters may
not be surprising given the rapid growth of both the Chinese economy and its firms during
the sample period. That said, it is surprising to see such high firms’ exit rates after their
first year of exporting. If sunk costs are high, as is commonly assumed in heterogeneous-
firm models in trade, embedding the standard Melitz-type model in a dynamic setting with
firms’ perfect knowledge about future productivity or demand shocks will not be sufficient
to explain such high exit rates (see, for instance, Ruhl and Willis, 2017). To do so, we will
need a model that features ex-ante uncertainty in firm-specific demand.
    One may propose two intuitive reasons to rationalize such high firms’ entry and exit
rates. The first is that new destinations are characterized with high risks but high returns.
A dispersed distribution of firm-specific demand with a thick right tail (e.g., a log-normal
distribution of firm export sales) may induce firms to rationally enter a new market when
the expected sum of profits exceeds the sunk cost of entry. Ex post, however, only a small
fraction of firms survive, with some making large profits. The second potential reason is
simply that firms are irrationally optimistic about the market’s demand, relative to its true
level.
    To guide our empirical analysis of the reasons behind firms’ excessive entries and exits
in foreign markets, we develop a simple two-period model of firms’ export decisions when
the true individual demand in foreign markets are unknown to the firms. At the beginning
of the first period, a firm decides whether to export to a foreign market or not, given the
prior distribution of the true demand. If it decides to export, it will learn about the true
demand at the end of the first period. In the second period, it will decide whether to
continue exporting to or exit from the foreign market.
    Our model predicts that not only high expected demand but also a large variance of
the prior distribution, can induce firms’ to enter new markets. It is obvious that a higher
expected demand is associated with larger expected profits and therefore more market
entries. The reason why a high variance of perceived market demand will also encourage
firm entry is less clear. In the model, given the option of exiting from the market as a
result of low realized demand, the profit function in the second period is convex in perceived
foreign demand. By Jensen’s inequality, a higher degree of uncertainty in foreign demand


                                              3
translates to a higher expected value of profit in the second period, which encourages more
firms to enter foreign markets in the first period. Thus, our model rationalizes “optimism”
based on a standard rational agent model, without any specific assumptions about the
distribution of demand factors or firms’ irrational behavior.
       To sharpen our point that information flows shape firms’ excessive entries and exits, we
also discuss how firms’ observations of neighboring firms’ export performance in a market
change their priors. Based on information inferred from neighbors’ export performance in a
market, a firm updates its prior about the part of the market demand that is common across
firms. However, the signals about foreign market demand are noisy, as observed neighbors’
export performance could be affected by individual firms’ unobserved product appeals,
more so for differentiated products. The model shows that a firm’s export decision and
post-entry performance depend not only on the number of neighboring exporters serving
a particular market, but also the levels and heterogeneity of their export sales, as well as
the firm’s own prior knowledge about the market. While more neighbors may offer a more
precise signal about a foreign market’s demand, the strength of the signal—the average
performance of the neighbors in the market—also matters. A larger number of neighbors
selling in a foreign market will raise the rate of firms’ entry into the same market only if
the signal is positive, whereas it will actually deter entry when the signal is negative. Our
model suggests that to identify potential information spillover in trade, in addition to the
stand-alone measures of the number of neighbors serving a foreign market (defined as a
country-sector pair) and their average performance in the market, an interaction between
the two should be included as a regressor.
       Using export transaction-level data for all Chinese exporting firms, we find evidence
supporting the main theoretical predictions. We first show that across countries, firms’
entry and exit rates are both positively correlated with the distance from the countries,
but negatively correlated with their GDP.3 Moreover, the number of exporters in a market,
which presumably provides information about its demand, is negatively correlated with
both the entry and exit rates in the market. This negative correlation is even stronger for
homogeneous goods than differentiated goods. These results are consistent with the model
predictions that exploratory entry and exit are more intense in unfamiliar markets, and
   3
    The entry rate of a country in year t is defined as the fraction of exporters that did not sell there in
year t − 1, but started selling in the country in year t. The exit rate of a country in year t + 1 is defined as
the ratio of the number of new exporters in a country in year t that ceased exporting to the same country
in year t + 1. These facts are robust to alternative definitions that partially address the phenomenon of
one-off exporting. See Section 3 below.


                                                       4
information from other firms is more useful for predicting post-entry export performance
in homogeneous product markets.
       We then show, at the city-sector-country level, that the exit rate is higher on average in
markets that are farther away, even after sector-year and exporting-city-year fixed effects
are controlled for. The exit rates for distant markets are lower for differentiated goods,
consistent with the idea that firms’ decisions are less responsive to new information from
neighbors if market demand is more idiosyncratic.
       We then use a restricted sample of all Chinese firms exporting to Sub-Saharan Africa
to test the model predictions about firms’ entries. The choice of this regression sample is
partly due to the computational constraints of using the full sample, and partly due to the
fact that the continent, which has received rapidly growing imports from China, offers an
interesting case for our study. We find that a firm is more likely to enter a new market
(a country-sector pair) in Sub-Saharan Africa if the strength of the signal—measured by
the average demand factor of the market revealed by existing exporters in the same city
exporting to same market—is stronger, more so if the number of such neighbors is higher.
These correlations are found even with the inclusion of firm-year fixed effects to control for
firms’ supply shocks, city-sector-year fixed effects to control for city-level supply shocks,
country-sector-year fixed effects to control for countries’ demand shocks, and city-country
fixed effects to control for historical linkages between a city and a country.4
       Finally, we find evidence for the option value of waiting. Specifically, we find that
the number of future entrants (in years t+1 and t+2) in a market—our proxy for firms’
(expected) option value—is negatively correlated with firms’ entry rates in a market af-
ter controlling for the contemporaneous number of entrants in the same market and an
exhaustive set of fixed effects.
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the literature. Section 3
describes the data. Section 4 establishes some stylized facts. Section 5 introduces a simple
model to guide the empirical analysis. Section 6 presents the results of our empirical
analysis. The final section concludes.
   4
    In particular, city-country fixed effects capture all path-dependent factors that may simultaneously
determine new exporters’ sales dynamics and neighbors’ export performance, avoiding the common “reflec-
tion” problem often encountered in the literature on information or technology spillover.




                                                   5
2        Related Literature
This paper relates to various strands of literature. First, our paper applies the influential
theoretical work on social learning (e.g., Jovanovic, 1982; Banerjee, 1992; Bikhchandani,
Hirshleifer and Ivo, 1992) to the study of international trade. It also contributes to the
empirical studies that use micro data to test those theories (Foster and Rosenzweig, 1995;
Conley and Udry, 2010; Moretti, 2011).5
        Second, it adds to a recent literature on firms’ export dynamics (Eaton, et al., 2008;
Albornoz et al., 2012, among others) by showing the low survival rates of exporters in a
new market.6 The related theoretical literature incorporates self-learning in trade models
to rationalize these findings (Rauch and Watson, 2003; Freund and Pierola, 2010; Iacovone
and Javorcik, 2010; Albornoz et al., 2012; Nguyen, 2012; Eaton et al., 2014; Timoshenko,
2015; Berman, Rebeyrol, and Vicardm, forthcoming, among others),7 whereas we focus on
learning from other firms’ experience, which is a significant departure from existing studies.8
As such, our paper offers a theoretical model as a guide to interpret the findings in the
literature about information spillover in trade (e.g., Chen and Swenson, 2008; Greenaway
and Kneller, 2008; Koenig et al., 2010, Kamal and Sundaram, 2016).
        Third, our paper relates to the early empirical studies on the determinants of exporters’
entry and survival (Aitken et al., 1997; Clerides et al., 1998; Bernard and Jensen, 2004).
Our work is different from recent research that also uses transactions-level trade data
(Alvarez et al., 2008; Cadot et al., 2011)9 by focusing on the effects of information flows
    5
      See Foster and Rosenzweig (2010) for an extensive review of other micro evidence of technology adop-
tion.
    6
      For instance, Eaton et al. (2008) show that over half of new exporters in Colombia do not survive into
the next year, but survivors account for a significant share of the country’s aggregate exports. Albornoz
et al. (2012) find that in Argentina only about half of new exporters continue into the second year of
exporting. Freund and Pierola (2010) find high entry and exit rates in export markets among Peruvian
agricultural exporters. Blum et al. (2013) find that one-third of Chilean exporters enter into and exit from
exporting multiple times in a 19-year panel.
    7
      For example, Albornoz et al. (2012) build a model that predicts firms’ “sequential exporting” strategy,
which arises when a firm realizes its export profitability through exporting and then decides whether to serve
other destinations based on its past export performance. Nguyen (2012) develops a model that features
uncertain foreign demands that are correlated across markets.
    8
      A notable exception is Segura-Cayuela and Vilarrubia (2008), who develop a dynamic general equi-
librium model, which features uncertainty and learning about country-specific fixed costs. By observing
existing exporters’ profits in foreign markets, firms update prior beliefs about fixed costs. We focus instdead
on learning about foreign demand.
    9
      Alvarez et al. (2008) find firm-level evidence from Chile that the probability of exporting in a new
market (product or destination) increases with the prevalence of other exporters in the same market. Cadot
et al. (2011) find evidence for four Sub-Saharan African countries that the probability of export survival


                                                      6
firms’ entries and exits in foreign markets. In addition, by exploring information spillover
across destination countries within firms, we can include an exhaustive set of fixed effects
to control for unobserved shocks that drive a firm’s export decisions. It is worth noting
that similar to this paper, Fernandes and Tang (2014) also use the same data set to explore
the presence of information spillovers in firms’ exporting. The main difference between the
two papers is that we take the option value of waiting more seriously in both the theoretical
and empirical analyses, and also highlight firms’ excessive entries and exits in unfamiliar
markets.
    Finally, given the reliance on the spatial distribution of existing firms serving different
markets, our paper is naturally related to the new economic geography literature (Krug-
man, 1991; Krugman and Venables, 1995; and Duranton and Puga, 2004).10


3       Data
The raw data we use in this paper covers monthly export transactions of the universe
of Chinese firms between 2000 and 2006. For each transaction, the data set reports the
value (in US dollars) and quantity at the product level (over 7000 HS 8-digit categories)
to/from each country (over 200 destination and source countries).11 The data set also
offers information on a firm’s ownership type (domestic private, foreign, and state-owned)
and trade regime (processing versus non-processing) in which it registered, as well as the
prefecture city it is located. We study learning from neighboring exporters in the same
city. There are on average 425 cities plus municipalities, according to China’s Customs’
definition.12
    We aggregate all observations to the annual frequency to alleviate measurement issues
related to infrequent trade that varies across products or countries. In the empirical analy-
sis, we will focus on learning about demand in a market, which is defined as a country-HS2
pair.
    All firms in China engaged in international trade are required by Chinese law to register
as either processing exporters or non-processing (ordinary) exporters.13 The majority of
increases with the presence of other firms’ exporting the same product to the same country. Our model,
together with that of Fernandes and Tang (2014), offer theoretical insights to rationalize their findings.
  10
     See Ottaviano and Puga (2004) for a survey of the new economic geography literature.
  11
     Example of a product: 611241 - Women’s or girls’ swimwear of synthetic fibres, knitted or crocheted.
  12
     The number of cities in our sample increses from 408 in 2000 to 425 in 2006.
  13
     Since the beginning of economic reforms in the early 1980s, the Chinese government has implemented



                                                    7
processing exporters have long-time committed foreign buyers (e.g. Foxconn has Apple as
the single most important long-time customer). One would be concerned that for processing
exporters, the room for learning about foreign demand is limited, as the related information
is often provided directly by the foreign partner. Without a convincing way to separate out
information provided by foreign buyers, we will exclude all processing firms and trading
companies (e.g., wholesale-retail firms) from the sample used in the empirical analysis
below.


4     Stylized Facts
Our empirical analysis relies on the fact that firms enter and exit foreign markets ac-
tively. Table 1 presents summary statistics about the number of countries served by (non-
processing) exporters. The average number of countries served by an exporter ranges
between 5 and 6, with the median fluctuating between 2 and 3. The large number of multi-
country exporters permits us to examine the within-firm variation in export performance
across countries, even after we control for firm-year fixed effects in the regressions.
    We first document several stylized facts about Chinese firms’ exporting dynamics. The
first set of facts are about the very high entry and exit rates into different foreign markets
among Chinese exporters. As reported in the first row of Table 2, we find that across
the 180+ countries in our sample over 6 years (2001-2006), the entry rates, defined as the
fraction of exporters selling in a country in year t that did not sell there in year t − 1,
average around 78%.14 Among these new exporters, a majority of them stopped exporting
to the same market the following year. Specifically, the second row shows that the exit
rates, defined as the fraction of new exporters that ceased exporting to the same country in
the year right after the year of entry, average around 60% across all countries and years.15
various policies to promote exports and foreign direct investment. Most notable of all is the exemption of
tariffs on imported materials and value-added tax for processing plants, which assemble inputs into final
products for foreign buyers. Readers are referred to Naughton (1996), Feenstra and Hanson (2005) and
Fernandes and Tang (2012) for more details about the regulatory regimes governing processing firms in
China.
  14
     The average entry rate is computed as the mean of the average entry rates cross years, with the average
entry rate per year computed first as a mean entry rate across destination countries in that year. The
entry rate for 2000, the first year in our sample, is excluded in the calculation as it is always equal to 1 by
definition.
  15
     Using Danish firm-level monthly data, Geishecker et al. (2019) find that 33 percent of firm-product-
destination export spells last less than one month. They argue that such “one-off exporting” events are
due to unsolicited buyer-side driven exporting.



                                                      8
   One may be worried that the high rates are driven by a few outlying markets that are
recently served only by a few firms, which might enter and drop out immediately after
some experimentation. In the third and fourth rows, we show comparably high entry and
exit rates even for the median country in each sample to invalidate this concern.
   We report in Panel B the same set of statistics by focusing on the sample of firms that
export to Sub-Sahara Africa, in which Chinese firms’ economic engagement has increased
substantially. The entry and exit rates are even higher for this restricted sample of firms.
In particular, the entry rates and exit rates of a Sub-Sahara Africa country average around
83% and 68% across years, respectively. These findings are consistent with the prior that
many Chinese firms are less familiar with the African markets than other markets.
   One may also be concerned that our results simply reflect the phenomenon of occasional
exporting (e.g., Blum, Claro and Horstmann, 2013 and Geishecker et al., 2019). It is
possible that our identified new exporters might have already sold in a market in year
t − 2 or even before, but somehow stopped exporting to the market for one year in t − 1.
Similarly, our identified exiters might somehow stop exporting to a market for one year in
t + 1, but then came back in year t + 2 or any future years. To examine the potential issues
related to this occasional exporting, we report in Table 3 the entrants in a market in 2001,
that exited in 2002, and re-entered in subsequent years. Across all country-HS2 markets,
there were 133,972 new export transactions by firms that did not serve those markets in
2000. Of those 133,972 transactions, 64% exited from the markets in 2002, but 5%, 2.4%,
1.3%, and 0.9% re-entered the same markets in 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006, respectively.
While the percentage of exits that lasted for only one year were not trivial, the cumulative
rate of re-entry between 2003 and 2006, among those that exited for one year in 2002 is
only 15%. It is unlikely that the patterns shown in Table 2 and in the rest of the paper
are largely driven by occasional export entries and exits.
   To alleviate the concerns for occasional exporting, in all empirical analyses in the rest
of the paper, we use a more restrictive way than the standard approach to define entries
and exits. In particular, an entry is defined as a firm’s export transaction in a market (a
country or a country-sector) in year t but not in years t − 1 and t − 2. Symmetrically, an
exit is defined as a firm’s export transaction in a market that is observed in year t but
not in years t + 1 and t + 2. Because of the data requirement to observe a firm’s export
status 2 years before an entry, the sample we use to analyze entries is a reduced panel with
2002 as the first sample year. Likewise, since we need two years of observations after an
entry to define exits, the sample we use to analyze exits is an even a shorter panel that

                                             9
covers only three years from 2002 to 2004. It is worth noting that all our empirical results
below remain robust to using a longer panel of firms with firms’ entries and exits defined
in the standard way, which only require information on a firm’s export status either the
year before or after the year of the firm’s first year of exporting to a market.
         Using the cohort of entrants in 2003 with the restrictive definitions of entries and exits,
we show in Figure 1 a tightly positive relationship between firms’ entry and exit rates
across countries (for 2003). Figure 2 shows the same positive relationship across countries
for differentiated and homogeneous products, using the classifications proposed by Rauch
(1999).16 The positive correlation appears to be higher for differentiated products, sug-
gesting that for the same entry rate per market, a larger fraction of firms exit. To the
extent that differentiated goods are intuitively associated with more firm-specific idiosyn-
cratic demand factors, the degree of ex ante uncertainty should be higher, which will be
associated with higher ex-post exit rates.
         These facts are, to the best of our knowledge, novel relative to those documented in the
literature. High entry rates may not be surprising as the Chinese economy and its firms are
growing during the sample period. However, it is surprising to see such high exit rates in
those markets. If sunk costs are high, the standard dynamic heterogeneous-firm model in
trade, say the dynamic extension of Melitz (2003) that features stochastically growing firm
productivity and perfect information, cannot rationalize such high exit rates. To guide our
empirical exploration of the reasons behind these intriguing stylized facts, we introduce a
simple two-period model with imperfect information next.


5         A Simple Model
The facts documented above motivate us to develop a model in which firms face ex-ante
uncertainty in demand, and form expectations about market-specific demand when making
export decisions. We develop a two-period model in which firms do not know the exact
level but only the distribution of a foreign country’s market demand. At the beginning
of the first period, a firm decides whether it exports to a foreign market or not given the
prior distribution over the true demand; if it decides to export, then it will learn about
the true demand at the end of the first period. It can always wait for a period and decides
    16
    Specifically, the product differentiation indicator is set to 1 for a sector (HS2) if at least half of the HS
4-digit products within that HS2 are classified by Rauch (1999) as differentiated goods. A concordance is
used to map each SITC 4-digit (Rev 2) to multiple HS 4-digit categories.



                                                       10
to export in the second period when the signal about the foreign market’s demand may
become more precise. In the second period, for those that decided to export in the first
period, a firm will decide if it will continue to export or exit from the foreign market.

5.1     Setup and notations
To focus on the main mechanisms at work, we make a number of simplifying assumptions.
Consider a set of firms with heterogenous productivity. Each firm is endowed with firm-
specific productivity ϕ, which is known to the firm and remains constant over time. The
density function of ϕ for the firms that are not exporting at the beginning of first period
is given by g(ϕ).
    The true demand in a foreign market, denoted by x∗ , is fixed and non-stochastic. A
firm does not know the value of x∗ at the beginning of the first period, and holds a prior
belief that x is distributed normally with mean µ and variance σ 2 :

                                            x ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ).

    Given the productivity ϕ and the demand level x, the per-period profit of exporting to
foreign market is given by
                                         π(x, ϕ) = x + ϕ − f

where x + ϕ is interpreted as the gross profit while f is interpreted as the per-period fixed
cost of exporting.17
    Denote the firm’s export decision in the period t by dt ∈ {0, 1} for t = 1, 2., where
dt = 1 indicates that a firm exports in period t.

5.2     The second period after exporting in the first period
At the end of the first period, the true value of foreign demand x∗ is revealed to the firms
who exported in the foreign market. A firm will export in the second period if π(x∗ , ϕ) ≥ 0,
i.e.,
                                      d2 = 1     if x∗ + ϕ ≥ f.
  17
     Unlike in Fernandes and Tang (2014), we specify the per-period profit function, π(x, ϕ), to be linear
in the demand level x so that the per-period profit function is not strictly convex in x. In our model, an
option to exit is the reason why the profit function in the second period is convex.




                                                   11
In this case, a firm with ϕ < ϕ∗2 := f − x∗ will exit from the foreign market in the second
period. Note that the value of ϕ∗2 does not depend on the prior belief.

5.3   The first period
In the first period, given the prior belief x ∼ N (µ, σ 2 ), a firm’s subjective expected profit
from the second period is given by
                                           Z
        V (ϕ) := Ex [max{π(x, ϕ), 0}] =        max{x + ϕ − f, 0}(1/σ)φ((x − µ)/σ)dx,

                √
where φ(t) = (1/ 2π) exp(−t2 /2).
   A firm will receive zero profit in both periods if it decides not to export. On the other
hand, the discounted sum of subjective expected profits from the two periods when a firm
decides to export is Ex [π(x, ϕ)] + βV (ϕ), where β ∈ (0, 1) is a discount factor. Therefore,
a firm will export in the first period if Ex [π(x, ϕ)] + βV (ϕ) ≥ 0, i.e.,
                                      Z
        d1 = 1     if µ + ϕ − f + β       max{x + ϕ − f, 0}(1/σ)φ((x − µ)/σ)dx ≥ 0.

In this case, a firm with ϕ ≥ ϕ∗1 will export in the first period, where ϕ∗1 is uniquely defined
by µ + ϕ∗1 − f + β max{x + ϕ∗1 − f, 0}(1/σ)φ((x − µ)/σ)dx = 0.
                    R

   The following proposition states that, as the value of µ or σ increases, a firm with lower
productivity will be induced to export in the first period and that some firms decide to
export in the first period even when the expected per-period profit in the first period is
negative.

Proposition 1. (a) ϕ∗1 is strictly decreasing in µ and σ 2 and is independent of x∗ . (b)
µ + ϕ∗1 − f < 0.

   Part (a) of Proposition 1 implies that when a firm is more optimistic (higher value
of µ) or is more uncertain about foreign demand (higher value of σ 2 ), it has a stronger
incentive to export. The fact that a firm is more likely to export when it is more optimistic
about foreign demand is intuitive. The effect of σ 2 on an incentive to export is related
to the option of exiting from the foreign market in the second period when demand turns
out to be low. Because a firm has an option to exit, the profit function in the second
period, max{x + ϕ − f, 0}, is a convex function of x. As illustrated in Figure 9, by Jensen’s


                                                12
inequality, a higher degree of uncertainty in x translates into the higher expected value of
max{x + ϕ − f, 0}, leading to a stronger incentive to export in the first period.
   Part (b) of Proposition 1 implies that firms with ϕ ∈ (ϕ∗1 , ϕ̄) decide to start exporting
in the first period although their expected first-period profit is negative, where ϕ̄ is defined
by the zero-profit condition µ + ϕ̄ − f .
   In sum, our model shows that the high exit rates in the second period arise when the
mean and the variance of the prior distribution over the true demand in the initial period
are high. In the model, the high mean value of the prior distribution induces entries due
to “optimism” and will lead to exits after learning the true demand. A high variance of
x also results in more entries in the first period because a firm has an incentive to learn
about the true demand in a foreign market by hoping that the true demand is really high
while insuring against the risk of low true demand by keeping the option to exit from the
foreign market.

5.4   Exit rates in the second period
Consider a set of firms who have different productivity ϕ ∼iid g(ϕ) but share a common
prior belief over the true demand. We now analyze how the average exit rates in the second
period among firms who start exporting in the first period depends on their prior belief
characterized by the value of µ and σ 2 .
   We impose the following assumption to exclude a trivial case that all firms continue to
export in the second period.

Assumption 1. ϕ∗2 > ϕ∗1 .

   Figure 10 illustrates a firm’s entry and exit decision as well as the determination of
exit rate. The density function of ϕ among firms who decided to export in the first period
is given by g(ϕ)/(1 − G(ϕ∗1 )) if ϕ ≥ ϕ∗1 and 0 if ϕ < ϕ∗1 , where G(ϕ) is the cumulative
distribution function of ϕ. Because any firm whose productivity is below ϕ∗2 will exit in
the second period, the fraction of firms exiting in the second period (the exit rate) among
the firms that start exporting in the first period is given by

                                              G(ϕ∗2 ) − G(ϕ∗1 )
                                exit rate =                     .                           (1)
                                                1 − G(ϕ∗1 )

   Because ϕ∗2 is independent of µ and σ 2 , together with G(ϕ∗2 ) < 1, the following is a
direct consequence of Proposition 1 and (1).

                                              13
Proposition 2. Suppose that Assumption 1 holds and x∗ is finite. Then, the exit rate in
the second period among the firms that start exporting in the first period, as defined in (1),
is increasing in the value of µ and σ 2 .

   In an extreme case, as x∗ → −∞ so that exporting becomes not profitable to any firms,
the exit rate in the second period approaches 1 while some firms will choose to export in
the first period as long as their prior mean µ is finite.

5.5   Learning from neighbors
Let us now extend the model to incorporate learning from neighboring firms, in an attempt
to show how firms respond to available information. Realistic learning implies that firms
will never be able to learn the true demand within finite time. As such, we need to introduce
some frictions in learning in the form of firm-specific demand factor. Specifically, let us
suppose that the per-period profit of exporting to foreign market is now given by

                                   π(x, ϕ) = x + ϕ + z − f

where z ∼ N (0, σz2 ) is a firm-specific demand attribute, which is unknown to the firm when
it makes an export decision.
   Different from most existing papers on learning to export that focuses on learning
from one’s own experience, we focus on learning from neighboring firms instead (see also
Fernandes and Tang, 2014). A firm updates its subjective distribution of x by observing
neighboring firms’ (indexed by j) export sales in the same market. Suppose that the firm
knows each neighbor’s productivity. It can then extract a signal for x from its revenue
from selling in the same market as

                                  ζj := x + zj = ln Rj − ϕj .

   In Section 6 below, we will discuss how to compute ϕj and thus ζj based on this formula,
using only trade data.
   Given the subjective mean and variance (µ0 , σ02 ) in the initial period, the updated sub-
jective mean and variance (µ, σ 2 ) at the beginning of next period, after observing neigh-
boring firms’ exports, are determined by the number of new exporters n in neighborhood
in the current period and the signal ζ̄ := n1 nj=1 ζj . Specifically, in the way proposed by
                                             P



                                              14
DeGroot (2004), the posterior mean and variance are

                                                                   nσ02
                           µ = δ ζ̄ + (1 − δ)µ0    with   δ=              ,                   (2)
                                                               σz2 + nσ02
                                     σz2 σ02
                           σ2 =              .
                                  σz2 + nσ02

   Comparative static exercises show that

          ∂µ               ∂2µ           nσ02              ∂2µ              nσ02
               = δ > 0,           =                > 0,             = −                < 0,   (3)
          ∂ ζ̄            ∂n∂ ζ̄    (nσ02 + σz2 )2        ∂σz2 ∂ ζ̄     (nσ02 + σz2 )2
          ∂σ 2          nσ04              ∂σ 2        nσ 2
                =−      2         < 0,        2 =     2          > 0,                         (4)
          ∂n        (nσ0 + σz2 )2         ∂σ0      (nσ0 + σz2 )2
                 ∂σ 2               ∂σ 2
            lim       = 0,     lim     2 = 0.                                                 (5)
          σz2 →∞ ∂n          σz2 →∞ ∂σ0


   Because a higher µ will induce a firm to start exporting, the comparative static result
in (3) implies the following proposition.

Proposition 3. The likelihood of a firm’s starting to export to a foreign market is in-
creasing in the strength of the signal about the market’s demand (high ζ̄) inferred from
neighbors’ exports, and more so if the signal is revealed by more exporting neighbors (high
n) and less so if the product is differentiated (high σz2 ).

   In view of Proposition 1, equation (4) implies that, conditioning on the strength of the
signal, an incentive to export is smaller when the number of exporting neighbors (n) is
larger or when the initial uncertainty (σ02 ) is smaller. Furthermore, equation (5) implies
that the effect of the number of exporting neighbors or the initial uncertainty on export
decision approaches zero as the value of σz2 increases.

Proposition 4. Conditional on the strength of the signal, the likelihood of a firm’s starting
to export to a foreign market is decreasing in the number of exporting neighbors and in-
creasing in the initial uncertainty, but these effects can be arbitrarily small for sufficiently
differentiated products.

   In view of Proposition 2, the exit rate among new exporters is related to µ and σ 2 at
the time of entry as implied by Propositions 3-4. Therefore, Propositions 2-4 lead to the
following predictions.

                                                  15
Prediction 1 (Exit Rates)          The exit rate among firms that start exporting to a for-
eign market is increasing in the expected level (µ) and uncertainty (σ 2 ) about the market’s
demand. The relationship between the exit/entry rate and uncertainty is stronger for ho-
mogeneous goods than for differentiated goods, as learning is less effective for the latter.

Prediction 2 (Strength of Signals and Entry Decisions)                 The entry rate among
the firms that have not exported before increases with the strength of the signal (high ζ̄),
especially so when the number of exporting neighbors is large and when the product is
homogeneous.

5.6    The model with one-time sunk cost and the option value of waiting
Now suppose that, in addition to the per-period fixed cost f , a firm has to pay one-time sunk
cost K to start exporting. In such a case, a firm has an incentive to wait for exporting if it
anticipates that the value of x will be revealed through learning from exporting neighbors.
    Consider two extreme cases. In the first case, a firm anticipates that no neighbors start
exporting (n = 0) so that no additional learning happens in the second period. Then, a
firm will export in the first period if the expected sum of profits over two periods is greater
than 0, i.e.,
                         µ + ϕ − f − K + βEx [max{x + ϕ − f, 0}] ≥ 0.                      (6)

Let ϕ̄0 be the value of ϕ such that (6) holds with equality so that a firm will export in the
first period iff ϕ ≥ ϕ̄0 .
    In the second case, a firm anticipates that it will perfectly learn the value of x with
n → ∞. Then, a firm will export in the first period if the expected sum of profits over
two periods when it starts exporting in the first period is greater than the expected sum
of profits if a firm does not export in the first period and it decides to export or not in the
second period after learning the value of x, i.e.,

         µ + ϕ − f − K + βEx [max{x + ϕ − f, 0}] ≥ βEx [max{x + ϕ − f − K, 0}].            (7)

Let ϕ̄∞ be the value of ϕ such that (7) holds with equality so that a firm will export in
the first period iff ϕ ≥ ϕ̄∞ .

Proposition 5. ϕ̄∞ > ϕ̄0



                                              16
    Therefore, due to the option value of waiting, a firm with ϕ ∈ (ϕ̄0 , ϕ̄∞ ) will not export
in the first period when it anticipates perfect learning while it will do so when no learning
on the value of x is anticipated.
    We examine the following prediction empirically.

Prediction 3 (Option Value of Waiting) (a) The option value of waiting (i.e., post-
poned entry) is higher when a firm anticipates that more neighbors start exporting next
period. (b) The option value of waiting is lower for differentiated products.

    Part (a) of Prediction 3 is an implication of Proposition 5. While we do not offer an
explicit theoretical analysis on part (b), the logic behind this prediction is in line with
the result of Proposition 5: The incentive to enter a new market is higher for differen-
tiated goods than for homogeneous goods because the option value of waiting is higher
for homogeneous goods than for differentiated goods. In an extreme case of no learning
from neighbors in differentiated goods, a firm producing differentiated goods can only learn
about market demand by entering into a new market, leading to higher entry rates. This
implies that, other things equal, entry rates are higher for differentiated goods than for
homogeneous goods because firms producing differentiated goods have less incentive to
wait for entry.


6     Empirical Evidence
6.1    Suggestive Evidence
Guided by the model predictions, we first establish a few more facts before presenting our
regression results. Given that σ 2 is not directly observed in the data, we use three proxies
for uncertainty about a market’s demand. The first proxy is the (log) distance between
the destination country and China, based on the idea that distance impedes information
flows and communication. The second proxy is the (log) number of Chinese entrants to
a market. If other firms offer information about a market, the measure of uncertainty
about the market should be a decreasing function of the total number of entrants into a
market. The third proxy is the (log) GDP of a destination country. The basic idea is that
information about larger economies should be more abundant.
    Figure 3 shows a positive and significant (with a t-stat of 2.16) cross-country correlation
between the entry rate and the destination country’s distance from China for the year

                                              17
2003. Figure 4 shows instead a positive and significant (with a t-stat of 2.73) cross-country
correlation between the exit rate and a destination country’s distance from China. The
results in both figures are consistent with our model prediction that uncertainty about a
country’s demand will encourage seemingly excessive firms’ entries and thus exits.
     Next we explore the relationship between firms’ rates of entry into a country and
the number of existing Chinese exporters selling there the year before. To address the
concern that the relationship is simply capturing the market size effect, we partial out (log)
GDP of the destination country by first regressing the (log) number of Chinese exporters
in a country on (log) GDP of the same country, and then taking the residuals as our
dependent variable of interest.18 Our model predicts that both the entry and exit rates
will be negatively correlated with the (log) number of existing exporters, and the slope is
expected to be steeper for homogeneous than differentiated goods. Indeed, Figure 5 shows
a statistically significant and negative relationship between the country-specific entry rate
and the number of existing exporters in a market (after partialling out the correlation with
destination countries’ GDP). The relationship is stronger for homogeneous goods than
differentiated goods. Through the lens of our model, the idea is that if demand for firms
producing differentiated products is more idiosyncratic, information about a market from
other firms is less useful.
     Figure 6 shows that the rate of firms’ exit from a country is negatively correlated with
the (log) number of existing exporters (after partialling out the correlation with destination
countries’ GDP) to the country. Since entry and exit rate are highly correlated and are
essentially affected by information asymmetry in the same way, it is not surprising to see
such negative correlation, based on the reasons we used to explain the patterns in Figure
5.
     Figures 7 and 8 plot the entry and exit rates on the (log) GDP across countries for
the year 2003. Both rates are strongly and negatively correlated with the market size of
countries. While GDP can be correlated with many other economic fundamentals, the
usual conjecture that firms are less likely to enter smaller markets contrasts sharply with
the negative correlation we find here. The idea that firms know more about large markets,
either because they are more visible or there have been many existing exporters offering
information about the market, is consistent with the negative correlation between entry
(exit) rates and market size across countries.
  18
     The pattern is robust to simply using the (log) number of Chinese firms without partialling out the
correlation with countries’ GDP.


                                                  18
   To sum up, we find that the majority of exporters are new exporters in many countries
(78% on average across 180 countries). Among these new exporters, a majority of them
(60% on average) did not continue to serve the same country the following year. The entry
and exit rates are positively and significantly correlated across destination countries. They
are particularly high for exports to small and developing countries, especially those in Africa
(83% of exporters on average are new; with 68% of the entrants stopped exporting to the
same country the following year). Both firms’ entry and exit rates are negatively correlated
with the GDP of destination countries, but positively correlated with the distance from
them. These are suggestive evidence so far, and we now come to the firm-level regression
analysis, which can tackle various usual suspects behind the suggestive evidence.

6.2     Empirical Analysis
This section aims to empirically verify Predictions 1 to 3.

6.2.1    Exiting decisions in the first year of exporting

Prediction 1 states that the exit rate, defined as the fraction of new exporters that exit
from a market, should be increasing in the expected level and uncertainty of the market’s
demand, but less so for differentiated goods than homogeneous goods, as learning from
others is more effective for the latter.
   To empirically verify Prediction 1 and to confirm more systematically the patterns
documented in Figures 4 and 6 about the average exit rate for each market, we estimate
the following regression specification:

                                  2                    2
                                                          
            Exitc,m,s,t = α + βp σm,s   + δDif fs × p σm,s   + {F E} + c,m,s,t ,          (8)

where the dependent variable, Exitc,m,s,t , stands for the fraction of firms that enter country
m and sector s (a HS 2-digit category) from Chinese city c in year t, but stop exporting in
the same country-sector market in years t + 1 and t + 2.
                                 2
                                     
   The regressor of interest, p σm,s   , is a proxy for uncertainty about market m, s. It is
equal to either the (log) distance between China and country m (in that case, the sector
subscript s is redundant) or the (log) number of Chinese existing exporters in market
m, s in year t. {F E} includes sector-year fixed effects to control for all global supply and
demand shocks in a sector; and city-year fixed effects to control for any supply shocks


                                              19
coming from the region where the firm is located. c,m,s,t is the residual.
   The variable Dif fs represents product differentiation of sector s. As a proxy, we use
the indicator for product differentiation, constructed based on the classification by Rauch
(1999), as discussed in Section 4.
   A drawback of using Rauch’s product differentiation indicators is that it captures not
only the importance of firm-specific product appeals that affect demand, but possibly also
the inverse of market competition. To the extent that competition can be less intense in dif-
ferentiated product markets, any positive correlation we find between firms’ entries or exits
and Rauch’s production differentiation indicators may be independent of the information
story. To this end, we propose a second measure of Dif fs , based on our model. According
to our model, we can use estimated σz2 , the standard error of firm-specific product appeals
(z) in each market (country-sector) and year, as a direct measure of Dif fs . To estimate
σz2 , we need to first discuss how to use customs transaction-level data to construct the
measure of firms’ productivity in each sector.

Estimating firm productivity in each sector and product appeal in each market
We can estimate firm i’s productivity in sector s and year t (φi,s,t ) by estimating the
following specification:
                              ln Ri,m,s,t = φm,s,t + φi,s,t + i,m,s,t ,                      (9)

where ln Ri,m,s,t is the log of firm i’s export sales to country m in sector s in year t,
while φm,s,t is a dummy to absorb the demand factor of the same market in year t, which is
common to all firms. We estimate this equation using the sample of export sales to countries
outside of Africa, and take the estimated φi,s,t , φbi,s,t , as the estimated productivity of firm
i in sector s. The residual from the estimation i,m,s,t will be the empirical counterpart to
the firm’s product appeal in the market in year t.
   Using a firm’s sector-specific productivity estimate and its market-specific sales, we can
then construct a measure of the signal for sector s in country m from every neighboring
firm that exports to the same market. The idea is to partial out a firm’s (j) sector-specific
productivity from its sales in market m and year t, as ζj,m,s,t = ln Rj,m,s,t − φ̂j,s,t . The
average value of the signals among the set of neighboring exporters can be computed as

                                                1            X
                              ζ̄c,m,s,t =                              ζj,m,s,t ,            (10)
                                            |Nc,m,s,t |
                                                          j∈Nc,m,s,t




                                                    20
where Nc,m,s,t is a set of existing firms that export from city c to market m, s in year
t. Firms’ individual product appeals i,m,s,t will be averaged out to 0 empirically, as the
underlying distribution is assumed to have mean 0.
   Finally, for each market-year (m, s, t), we can construct a measure of model-based
                                2
idiosyncrasy of firms’ demand (σz(m,s,t) ) by computing the standard error of the estimated
signal ζj,m,s,t ’s from the set of exporters selling in the same market as:

                                                                             1
                   s X                                                                   X
    σ̂z(m,s,t) =              (ζj,m,s,t − ζ̄m,s,t )2   with   ζ̄m,s,t =                            ζj,m,s,t ,   (11)
                                                                          |Nm,s,t |
                   j∈Nm,s,t                                                           j∈Nc,m,s,t


where Nm,s,t is the set of exporters to market m, s in year t.

Regression Results            As described in Section 6.1, we use the restrictive panel that in-
cludes all country-sector pairs in which Chinese firms ever started exporting in a new
market since 2002, but did not export in the previous two years. Since we need two years
after a firm’s initial exporting to define exits in a restrictive way, our panel is further
reduced to the period between 2002 and 2004.
   The results of estimating equation (8) using the restrictive sample are reported in
Table 4. Standard errors are clustered by city. In column (1) when we use (log) distance
                                      2 ), we find that after controlling for sector-year
as the proxy for demand uncertainty (σm,s
and city-year fixed effects, there is a statistically significant positive correlation between
the (log) distance and the rate of firms’ exits from the market. In column (2), when
we use the (log) number of firms in the same city (neighbors) that export to market
(m, s) to proxy for market uncertainty, we find results that are consistent with those in
column (1). Specifically, we find a statistically significant and negative coefficient on (log)
number of neighboring firms, suggesting that more neighbors, presumably by providing
more information about market m, s to potential entrants, may lower the post-entry exit
rates.
   We also find that the correlations between the two proxies for market uncertainty and
the city-market specific exit rates are weaker for differentiated product markets. Specifi-
cally, when we use Rauch’s differentiation indicators as proxies for product differentiation
in columns (3) and (4), we find a negative and significant coefficient on the interaction term
             2          2
                           
Dif fs × p σm,s   if p σm,s   is proxied by (log) distance; and a positive though insignificant
                                            2
                                               
coefficient on the interaction term if p σm,s     is proxied by the (log) number of neighbors


                                                       21
exporting to the market m, s in the same year.
   In columns (5) and (6), when Dif fs is measured by our constructed σ̂z(m,s,t) , the
                                                  2
                                                      
coefficients on the interaction terms Dif fs × p σm,s   take the same signs (positive when
    2
        
p σm,s is log distance and negative when it is (log) number of neighbors) and become
statistically more significant. Table A1 in the appendix shows entirely consistent results
when we repeat all exercises reported in Table 4 by using provinces, rather than cities, to
define neighborhoods. In sum, the results in Table 4 support Prediction 1.

6.2.2    Learning from neighbors

Our next exercise is to empirically verify Prediction 2, which is about how learning from
neighbors affects firms’ entry decisions.

Entryi,c,m,s,t = α+β ζ̄c,m,s,t +θζ̄c,m,s,t ×nc,m,s,t +δnc,m,s,t +γ ln(T F Pi,c,s,t )+{F E}+i,c,m,s,t .
                                                                                                  (12)
    The dependent variable, Entryi,c,m,s,t , is an indicator for the entry of firm i from city
c in market m, sector s in year t. It is equal to 1 if the firm reports exports to country m
in sector s and year t, 0 otherwise. Since we are gauging the effects on firms’ propensity
to enter a market, we drop all existing exporters in a market (i.e., all firms that already
exported to market m, s in year t−1). As explained in the introduction, we use a regression
sample that includes all potential markets only in the 46 Sub-Sahara African countries to
avoid the computational constraints.
    The regressors of interest are the number of neighbors exporting to country m, sector
s in year t (nc,m,s,t ) and its interaction term with the signal from the neighbors ζ̄c,m,s,t ,
computed based on (10). Following our comparative statics (3)-(5), we use nc,m,s,t instead
of its log version although the results remain qualitatively identical when we use the log
of nc,m,s,t . Proposition 2 predicts that the propensity to enter a new market, among the
firms that have not been exporting in the same market before, increases with the strength
of the signal, especially when there are more existing neighboring firms exporting to the
same market. Thus, β > 0, θ > 0, γ > 0, while the sign of δ is ambiguous.
    By exploiting variation in export performance across countries and years within firms,
we can include an exhaustive set of fixed effects ({F E}) to control for many unobserved
determinants of new exporters’ export dynamics. In particular, in all the regression specifi-
cations, we always include city-country fixed effects, which control for the bilateral distance



                                                  22
between a city and a country, as well as physical distance and any unobserved city-market-
specific determinants of export performance and dynamics, such as historical linkages that
may affect the available information and infrastructure for exports from a city to a country.
In addition, we control for city-sector-year, country-sector-year, and firm-year fixed effects,
respectively. Country-sector-year fixed effects control for any aggregate shocks that may
affect the general attractiveness of a market, such as time-varying demand, exchange rates,
and economic policies in the importing countries. City-sector-year fixed effects control for
any supply shocks, such as government policies, which affect all exporters in a city. Firm-
year fixed effects further control for firm productivity shocks. Importantly, by focusing
on the within-firm cross-country correlation between new exporters’ performance and the
prevalence of neighbors’ export activities, we address the potential sample selection bias
that arises from the endogenous entry decisions that vary across heterogeneous firms.
    In addition to the firm-year fixed effects which already capture any firm-specific pro-
ductivity shocks, we can also control for a firm’s sector-specific total factor productivity
(TFP), which is estimated based on (9). Including ln(T F Pi,c,s,t ) as a control comes with
considerable cost in terms of a significant reduction in sample size, as we can only estimate
TFP for firms that export to both Africa and non-African nations within a sector.
    Table 5 reports the results of estimating equation (12). Standard errors are clustered
at the city-destination level. The results remain robust to clustering by other groups.
As shown in column (1), after controlling for country-sector-year fixed effects, city-sector-
year fixed effects, and city-sector-country fixed effects, we find that a firm’s probability of
entering a market is positively correlated with the strength of the signal, ζ̄c,m,s,t , inferred
from the same-market export performance of neighbors in the same city. The learning
effect is stronger if there are more neighboring exporters revealing the signal, as suggested
by a positive coefficient (θ) on ζ̄c,m,s,t × nc,m,s,t . The coefficient (δ) on the number of
neighbors serving the same market (nc,m,s,t ) is actually negative, but our model has no
specific prediction about its sign. This set of results remains robust to the inclusion of
firm-year fixed effects (column (2)) and firms’ sector-level TFP (column (3)).19
    Next we empirically verify the last part of Prediction 2 about the smaller learning
potential for differentiated products. To this end, we include in addition to the baseline
regressors, the corresponding interaction terms between the estimated σ̂z(m,s,t) and each
of the following regressors: ζ̄c,m,s,t , ζ̄c,m,s,t × nc,m,s,t , and nc,m,s,t . Column (4) shows that
  19
     When we repeat the same set of regressions but with a neighborhood defined as a province rather than
a city, we find consistent and significant results.


                                                   23
while the interaction term σ̂z(m,s,t) × ζ̄c,m,s,t is insignificant, the coefficient on the triple
interaction σ̂z(m,s,t) × ζ̄c,m,s,t ×nc,m,s,t is negative and significant, suggesting that conditional
on a positive signal inferred from a fixed number of neighbors, the learning effect is weaker
for the more differentiated products (high σ̂z(m,s,t) ).20 The last two columns confirm the
robustness of these results by including firm-year fixed effects and firms’ sector-level TFP
sequentially.

6.2.3    Option value of waiting

Our final exercise is to examine Prediction 3, which is about the option value of waiting
(i.e., postponed entry). To this end, we estimate the following specification

                 Entryi,c,m,s,t = α + βnec,m,s,t+n + δnec,m,s,t + {F E} + i,c,m,s,t ,                 (13)

where Entryi,c,m,s,t is the same dependent variable as in equation (12). For the same
computational constraints about the feasible size of the regression sample discussed in
the previous section, the regression sample includes only potential markets in Sub-Sahara
African countries. As in the previous analysis on firm entry, we drop firms that have
already exported to market m, s in year t − 1.
    The first task is to find a way to construct a proxy for the option value. In our model
with perfect foresights, we can approximate the option value by the realized number of
entrants (not logged) in the future. We therefore use the number of entrants, nec,m,s,t+n , in
the following two years as a proxy for the option value of waiting.21
    As reported in Table 6, we find in column (1) a negative and significant coefficient on
the number of future entrants (the total number of entrants in year t + 1 and t + 2) in a
market, after controlling for the number of contemporaneous entrants in the same market
(nec,m,s,t ) and the identical set of fixed effects reported in Table 5. There results are robust
to the control of the firm’s sector-specific TFP (column (2)).
    In columns (3) and (4), we add in addition to the regressors described in (13) the
interaction terms between each of the regressors and our estimate of product differentiation,
σ̂z(m,s,t) . We find no significant coefficient on the interaction term between the number of
  20
     Notice that the stand-alone σ̂z(m,s,t) is absorbed by the country-sector-year fixed effects. The number
of observations drops when σ̂z(m,s,t) is used in interaction terms as there are city-market-years in which
there’s only one existing exporter (i.e., σ̂z(m,s,t) = 0).
  21
     The regression results remain robust to using the number of entrants in the following one year to proxy
for the option value of waiting.


                                                    24
future entrants in the same market and σ̂z(m,s,t) . In sum, even we find significant evidence
about the option value of waiting on average, which supports Prediction 3, there is no
systematic difference in the option value between homogeneous and differentiated product
markets.


7    Conclusion
This paper studies the surprisingly high entry and exit rates among Chinese firms selling
in foreign markets. We first use a data set that covers all export transactions from Chinese
firms to all countries over the 2000-2006 period to document several stylized facts that
are new to the trade literature. We find that a majority of exporters to a country are
new exporters. More surprisingly, over half of the new exporters in a market stop serving
the same market the following year. We also find that a destination country’s entry rate,
defined as the fraction of exporters that are new, is positively correlated with its exit rate,
defined as the fraction of new exporters that stopped exporting in the following years. Both
entry and exit rates are negatively correlated with destination countries’ market size, but
positively correlated with their distance from China.
    We build a simple two-period model with imperfect information about foreign demand,
in which firms’ beliefs about their foreign demand are determined by learning from neigh-
bors. The model predicts that a high variance of the prior distribution of foreign demand
induces firms to enter new markets, as the profit function is convex in perceived foreign
demand due to the option of exiting. We then use our micro data to empirically examine
several model predictions, and find supporting evidence that firms’ high entries and exits
are outcomes of their rational self-discovery of demand in an unfamiliar market.
    In research in progress, we extend the model to a dynamic one and structurally esti-
mate the key parameters in the model. The goal is to quantitatively assess the value of
information offered by neighboring firms and the option value of waiting to enter different
foreign markets.




                                              25
8     Reference
    1. Aitken, B., G. Hanson and A. Harrison (1997) “Spillovers, foreign investment, and
      export behavior,” Journal of International Economics, 43, 103-132.

    2. Albornoz, F., H. Calvo-Pardo, G. Corcos, and E. Ornelas (2012) “Sequential Export-
      ing,” Journal of International Economics, 88, 1, 17–31.

    3. Alvarez, R., H. Faruq, and R. Lopez (2008) “New Products in Export Markets:
      Learning From Experience and Learning from Others,” Mimeo, Bank of Chile.

    4. Banerjee, A. (1992) “A simple model of herd behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
      nomics 107 (3), 797–817.

    5. Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2009) “Measuring and Analyzing
      Cross-country Differences in Firm Dynamics,” in Producer Dynamics: New Evidence
      from Micro Data, ed. T. Dunne, J. Bradford, and M. Roberts.

    6. Berman, Nicolas, Vincent Rebeyrol, and Vincent Vicard (2019) “Demand learning
      and firm dynamics: evidence from exporters.” Review of Economics and Statistics
      101, no. 1: 91-106.

    7. Bernard, A. and B. Jensen (2004) “Why some firms export,” The Review of Eco-
      nomics and Statistics, 86(2), 561–569.

    8. Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. and Welch, I. (1992) “Theory of Fads, Fashion, Cus-
      tom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades?” Journal of Political Economy,
      100, 992? 1026.

    9. Blum, B.S., S. Claro, I.J. Horstmann (2013) “Occasional and Perennial Exporters”,
      Journal of International Economics, 90(1), 65–74.

10. Cadot, O., L. Iacovone, D. Pierola and F. Rauch (2013) “Success and Failure of
      African Exporters,” Journal of Development Economics, 101, pp. 284–296.

11. Chen, H. and D. Swenson (2008) “Multinational Firms and New Chinese Export
      Transactions.” Mimeo, University of California, Davis.




                                               26
12. Clerides, S., S. Lach, and J. Tybout (1998) “Is Learning by Exporting Important?
    Micro-dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco,” Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, 113(3), 903–947.

13. Conley, T. and C. Udry (2010) “Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in
    Ghana,” American Economic Review, 100(1): 35-69.

14. Das, S. and M. Roberts, and J. Tybout (2007), “Market entry costs, producer het-
    erogeneity, and export dynamics,” Econometrica, 75 (3), 837-873.

15. DeGroot, M.H. (2004) Optimal statistical decisions. vol. 82. Wiley-Interscience.

16. Dickstein, Michael and Eduardo Morales (2018) “What do Exporters Know?” Quar-
    terly Journal of Economics, Volume 133, Issue 4, 1 November 2018, Pages 1753–1801.

17. Duranton, G. and Puga, D. (2004) “Micro-foundations of urban agglomeration economies,”
    Henderson, J.V., Thisse, J.F. (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
    vol. 4. 2063-2117.

18. Eaton, J., M. Eslava, M. Kugler (2008) “The Margins of Entry into Export Markets:
    Evidence from Colombia,” in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thierry Verdier,
    eds., The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
    University Press, 2008.

19. Eaton, J., M. Eslava, C. J. Krizan, M. Kugler, and J. Tybout (2014) “A Search and
    Learning Model of Export Dynamics,” Penn State University mimeo.

20. Fernandes, A. and H. Tang (2012) ”Determinants of Vertical Integration in Export
    Processing: Theory and Evidence from China,” Journal of Development Economics,
    99(2), 396-414.

21. Fernandes, A. and H. Tang (2014) ”Learning to export from neighbors” Journal of
    International Economics, 94 (1), pp. 67-84.

22. Feenstra R. and G. Hanson (2005) “Ownership and Control in Outsourcing to China:
    Estimating the Property-Rights Theory of the Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, 120(2), 729-761.




                                          27
23. Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig (1995) “Learning by Doing and Learning from Others:
    Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political Economy,
    103(6), 1176-1209.

24. Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig (2010) “Microeconomics of Technology Adoption,”
    Annual Review of Economics, Vol. 2: 395-424.

25. Freund, C. and Pierola M.D. (2010), “Export entrepreneurs: Evidence from Peru,”
    World Bank Working Paper.

26. Geishecker, I., Schröder, P. J. H., and A. Sørensen (2019) “One-off Export Events,”
    Canadian Journal of Economics 52(1), 93–131.

27. Greenaway, David, and Richard Kneller (2008) ”Exporting, productivity and agglom-
    eration.” European Economic Review 52, no. 5, 919-939.

28. Hausmann, R. and Rodrik, D. (2003) “Economic Development as Self-discovery,”
    Journal of Development Economics, 72(2), pp. 603–633.

29. Iacovone, L and B. Javorcik (2010) “Multi-product exporters: product churning,
    uncertainty and export discoveries,” Economic Journal, 120 (544), 481–499.

30. Kamal, Fariha and Asha Sundaram (2016) “Buyer-Seller Relationships in Interna-
    tional Trade: Do Your Neighbors Matter?” Journal of International Economics,
    September 2016, Vol. 102, 128-140.

31. Koenig, P. F. Mayneris and S. Poncet (2010) “Local Export Spillovers in France,”
    European Economic Review, 54, 622-641.

32. Krugman, P. (1991) “Increasing Returns and Economic Geography,” Journal of Po-
    litical Economy, 99(3), 483-499.

33. Krugman, P. and Venables, A.J. (1995) “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 857–880.

34. Melitz, M. (2003) “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
    industry productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

35. Moretti, E. (2011) “Social Learning and Peer Effects in Consumption: Evidence from
    Movie Sales,” Review of Economic Studies, 78(1), 356-393.

                                          28
36. Naughton, B. (1996) “China’s emergence and prospects as a trading nation,” Brook-
   ings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 273–343.

37. Nguyen, Dan (2012) “Demand Uncertainty: Exporting Delays and Exporting Fail-
   ures,” Journal of International Economics, 86, 336-344.

38. Ottaviano, G., & Puga, D. (1998) “Agglomeration in the global economy: A survey
   of the ‘New Economic Geography,” World Economy, 21(6), 707–731.

39. Rauch, J. E. (1999) “Networks versus markets in international trade.” Journal of
   International Economics, 48(1), 7-35.

40. Rauch J. and Watson M. (2003) “Starting small in an unfamiliar environment,”
   International Journal of Industrial Organization, 21(7), 1021-1042.

41. Ruhl, KJ, JL Willis (2017) “New exporter dynamics,” International Economic Re-
   view, 58(3), 703-726.

42. Segura-Cayuela, R., Vilarrubia, J. (2008) “Uncertainty and Entry into Export Mar-
   kets,” Bank of Spain Working Paper.

43. Timoshenko, O. (2013) “Product Switching in a Model of Learning,” George Wash-
   ington University Working Paper.




                                           29
9     Appendix
9.1     Proof of Proposition 1
Using a change of variable x = µ + σ, we have
          Z
V (ϕ) =       max{µ + σ + ϕ − f, 0}φ()d = (µ + ϕ − f )Φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) + σφ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ).

    Define W (µ, σ, ϕ) = µ + ϕ − f + β(µ + ϕ − f )Φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) + σφ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ).
Taking a derivative of W (µ, σ, ϕ) with respect to ϕ, µ, (1/σ), while noting the property of
the standard normal density function φ0 (t) = −tφ(t), we have

∂W (µ, σ, ϕ)
             = 1 + βΦ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) + ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ)φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) − ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ)φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ
    ∂ϕ
                = 1 + βΦ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) > 0,
∂W (µ, σ, ϕ)
             = 1 + βΦ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) > 0,
    ∂µ
∂W (µ, σ, ϕ)
             = (µ + ϕ − f )2 φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) − σ 2 φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) − (µ + ϕ − f )2 φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ)
  ∂(1/σ)
                = −σ 2 φ((µ + ϕ − f )/σ) < 0.

                                                ∂W (µ,σ,ϕ)
Note that the last equation implies that             ∂σ    > 0.
    Define ϕ∗1 (µ, σ) implicitly by   W (µ, σ, ϕ∗1 (µ, σ)) = 0. It   follows from the implicit function
theorem and ∂W/∂ϕ, ∂W/∂µ, ∂W/∂σ > 0 that we have ∂ϕ∗1 /∂µ = −(∂W/∂µ)/(∂W/∂ϕ) <
0 and ∂ϕ∗1 /∂σ = −(∂W/∂σ)/(∂W/∂ϕ) < 0. 

9.2    Proof of Proposition 5
Note that µ + ϕ − f − K + βEx [max{µ + ϕ − f, 0}] is strictly increasing function of ϕ.
Then, the stated result follows from βEx [max{µ + ϕ − f − K, 0}] > 0.




                                                   30
                              Fig 1: Firms' Entry and Exit Rates by Country (2003)



        1
                                                                                            PLW         GRD
                                                                                      VUT                SYC
        .8


                                                                                                         ERI
                                                                                                  LSO SWZ
                                                                                                       MCO
                                                                                        ZMB RWA    CPVSLB
                                                                                                  BWA
                                                                                       MRT                GNB GNQ
                                                                                                 SOM
                                                                                                COG
                                                                         BFA          ALB  AFG
                                                                                       BOL MOZ GABMWI
   Exit Rate




                                                                                    MDV
                                                                                   BRN
                                                                                 GMB
                                                                          DJI    SUR    MDGLUX
                                                                                      UGA
                                                                                    AGO       TJKBLZ
                                                                                   MNG
                                                                                   COD
                                                                                    FJITGO
                                                                                     NAM
                                                                                   GUY
       .6




                                                                                  ZWE
                                                                                CMR                 NER
                                                                         IRQ             BDI
                                                                            TZAFSM
                                                                             PNG TKM
                                                                                UZB
                                                                                GHA   ISL LBY
                                                                                     GIN
                                                                                    AZE               MDA
                                                                   BHS
                                                                   BEN  CUBLAO
                                                                          QAT
                                                                           TUN   MUS
                                                                       ETH NIC
                                                                          JAM
                                                                           SENLCALVA    KGZ                TON
                                                               WSMLBR
                                                                  BHRNPL
                                                                   MMR
                                                                NGAOMN  CIV
                                                                       SVK   MLT  HND   MLI
                       BTN                                            URY
                                                                        BRB
                                                                        SDN  KEN
                                                                             SVN SLEARM       EST
                                                             PRKKHM    DOM
                                                                        SLV
                                                                         CRI
                                                                         YEM
                                                                   DZA IRL
                                                                              TTO      PRY
                                                                                      KAZ
                                                             CZEHUN JOR BGR
                                                                  KWT
                                                                AUT         MKD            BLR
                                                               CHE
                                                               LBN
                                                             ROU  CYPPER
                                                                     UKR
                                                            PHL
                                                             PRT      LTU
                                                              FIN
                                                               GTM
                                                                ECU
        .4




                                                      PANHTIMEX
                                                          NOR
                                                         CHL   MAR
                                                             NZL
                                                             VNMRUS
                                                                 COLARG                      GEO
                                                      BGDSAU
                                                          DNK
                                                         IDN EGY
                                                           POL
                                                         LKA   SYR IRN
                                                  MYSISR
                                                      THAZAF
                                                SGP SWE
                                                   ARE
                                                 BEL   PAK
                                                       VENBRA
                                                        INDTUR
                                                FRA
                                                 GRC
                                                CAN
                                              KOR
                                               AUS                                                KIR
                                            NLDGBRESP
                                            ITA
                                           DEU
                                  JPN                             VCT
                                                                  TCD
                  MHL                USA
        .2




                      .5                 .6               .7                .8                .9              1
                                                           Entry Rate


Note: Entry rate = Number of new exporters in t/ Total number of exporters in t. Exit rate = Number
of new exporters that exit in t+1 / Number of new exporters in t. Re-entrants after exits are not
considered as true exits.



                              Fig 2: Firms' Entry and Exit Rates by Country (2003)
        1




                                                                                                         GRD COD DMA
                                                                                                           TLS VUT
                                                                                                                 SRB
                                                                                                               IRQ
                                                                                                 LSO MLI          HRV
                                                                                                    GAB
                                                                                                   BWA
        .8




                                                                                    SLB     PNG NAM
                                                                                                 COGGRD
                                                                                                  DJI MDV
                                                                                                      CPV
                                                                               PLW
                                                                               VUT
                                                                             ATG        ZMB  MOZ
                                                                                            MRT
                                                                                           SURAGO   PRK
                                                                                                    WSM
                                                                                     MHL
                                                                                       MRTTZALUXBWA
                                                                                           ALB
                                                                                           BRN
                                                                                         FJI       SYC SLB
                                                                                                 TON
                                                                                                  UGA
                                                                                 SLESEN       LCA   MCO
                                                                 SOM BLZBRBARM          ETH
                                                                                       ZWE
                                                                                        GHA
                                                                                              MDG
                                                                                            CMR
                                                                                           TJK
                                                                                           GEO
                                                                                           LBY
                                                                                               AZE
                                                                                             GMB
                                                                                            RWA
                                                                                              COG
                                                                                              AFG UZB
                                                                                                   GAB
                                                                                                 TGO
                                                                                                  MWIBOL ERIGNQ
                                                                               YEM
                                                                                 LBR
                                                                                  ROUBRNALB
                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                        TUN MOZ
                                                                                            MNG  BLZ
                                                                       FSM
                                                                     BFA TGO      GIN
                                                                                  NIC
                                                                                DZA NER
                                                                                  BEN
                                                                                    URY
                                                                                  LBN    MDG
                                                                                        UGA
                                                                                       HND   SOM
                                                                                             BFA
                                                                                           ZWE  ZMB        ISL
                                                                    LSO    JAM
                                                                           MDA
                                                                          NGA  MDV
                                                                             MKD
                                                                             BHR KEN
                                                                                 MUS
                                                                               MWI SUR
                                                                                 GUYCOD
                                                                                  SDN
                                                                                KWT
                                                                                  PRT  BOL
                                                                                     FJI
                                                                                     AGO
                                                                                   MLTSVK
                                                                                        QAT     TJK
            .6




                                                                     DJI GUY
                                                                          HTI
                                                                          JOR   IRQ
                                                                                NPL BDI
                                                                                  PRY   LUX AFG GNB
                                                                                      BLR
                                                                                      KAZ
    Exit Rate




                                                                     BEN  VEN
                                                                          PAN
                                                                          CRI  NAM
                                                                             AUT
                                                                             MARTTO
                                                                                PNG
                                                                              FIN  BHS
                                                                                 LVA
                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                CZE   SVN
                                                                                      EST
                                                                                      ISL
                                                               GMB   OMN
                                                                    SAU
                                                                     KHM ECU
                                                                         CYPIRL
                                                                           HUN
                                                                            CUBSEN
                                                                                 CUB
                                                         BHS IRN
                                                           MYS
                                                                   SYR
                                                                   NZLGTM
                                                                     KHM
                                                                      ISR
                                                                     WSM
                                                                     MMR
                                                                      LAO
                                                                    CHL
                                                                   CHE
                                                                   EGY
                                                                         UKR
                                                                       GRC
                                                                       DNK JAM
                                                                          TZA
                                                                          SLV
                                                                           NIC
                                                                         DOM
                                                                       BHR
                                                                         LTUTUN
                                                                          QAT
                                                                        NOR  BRB
                                                                              KGZ
                                                                              LBR
                                                                                  GHALVA LBY
                                                                                    UZB
                                                                                     MUS
                                                                                    MNG
                                                                                     LCA   GIN                 TON
                                   AND                      SGP
                                                           PHLARE
                                                              ERICOL
                                                                 NGA
                                                               PER  ETH
                                                                    SWE
                                                                  RUSURY    KEN
                                                                           BGR MLT
                                                                              TTO
                                                                               SVN  HND  KGZ
                                                         MEX
                                                       IDN
                                                      PAK THAZAF
                                                           AUS
                                                            FRA
                                                            LKA
                                                           BRA  LAOARG
                                                                    POL
                                                                    OMN
                                                                    SVK
                                                                    DZA
                                                                  TUR
                                                                  NPL   CIV
                                                                          CRISLV
                                                                           MKD
                                                                          SDN
                                                                           FSM AZE         EST
                                                        ESP
                                                        GBR
                                                      MMR  BEL
                                                            PRK
                                                          VNM
                                                        CAN
                                                        BGD        DOM
                                                                   JOR
                                                                  KWT   IRL
                                                                          YEM   SLE    ARM
                                                                                       TKM
                                                                                     PRY       MLI
                                                      IND
                                                    USA ITA
                                                      DEUVCTCZE
                                                              PHL
                                                               HUN
                                                               LBN CHE
                                                                  GTM
                                                                  VNM UKR
                                                                    PER  BGR        KAZ        BLR  GEO
                                                           BGD
                                                         ROU   AUT
                                                             MEX CYP
                                                                  LTU
   .4




                                                NLD PAN
                                               KOR      CHLFIN
                                                             IDN
                                                            NZL
                                                           PRT
                                                          LKA
                                                           MAR
                                                            EGY ECUCOLIRN
                                                                 RUS
                                                               BRA      ARG
                               KIR     JPN          ISR
                                                    MYS SAU
                                                         THA
                                                         NOR
                                                         ZAF
                                                          POL
                                                        DNK     SYR
                                                              IND
                                                 SGP ARE
                                                   SWE
                                                     VEN
                                                   KOR
                                                  BEL    PAK
                                                          TUR
                                                 CAN
                                                 FRA
                                                NLD
                                                GRC
                                                AUS
                                                GBR ESP VCT
                                                          HTI                            KIR
                                           JPN
                                             ITA
                                              DEU
                           MHL            USA                                                   MDA
        .2
        0




                                                                          TCD

                 .4                               .6                             .8                           1
                                                           Entry Rate

                                    Differentiated                    Fitted (Differentiated)
                                    Homogeneous                       Fitted (Homogeneous)


Note: Entry rate = Number of new exporters(t)/ Total number of exporters (t); Exit rate = Number of
new exporters that exit in t+1 / Number of new exporters in t. Re-entrants after exits are not
considered as true exits.
                       Fig 3: Firms' Entry and Distance by Country (2003)


         1                                                                      ERI
                                                                                SYC
                                                                                    TON
                                                                                            GNB
                                                                           MDASLB               GRD
                                                                                          SWZ
         .9

                                                                                         NER
                                                                                 SOM MWI   BWA
                                                                                          GAB
                                                                                          COG BLZ
                                                               TJK                     RWA
                                                                       GEOEST LUX         MOZ
                                                                AFG       BLR LBY
                                                                                  VUT  BDI
                                                                                      MDGZMB
                                                            KGZ                            MLI
                                                                                           TGO
                                                                                           MRT       BOL
                                                                                                      PRY
                                                           KAZ         ARM ALB
                                                                      AZE
                                                                       MDV
                                                                                ISL UGA
                                                                                     FJI ZWENAM
                                                                                            GIN
                                                                                           AGO
                                                                                            GUY
             .8




                                         MNG                  BRN         LVA       MUSCMR  GMBHNDSUR
                                                                   TKM                       SLE
   Entry Rate




                                                              UZB                          GHALCA
                                                                         PNG   SVN MLT
                                                                                     KEN         TTO
                                                        LAO                    MKD
                                                                              BGR  TUNTZA SEN   NIC
                                                                        QAT
                                                                         IRQSVKDJI
                                                                              YEM  SDNCRI  BFA JAM
                                                                                               SLV
                                                                                  IRL        CUB
                                                                                            CIVDOM
                                                          NPL             LTU ETH
                                                                          UKR                       PERARG
                                                                                                       URY
                                                          MMR         IRN
                                                                      OMN    JOR DZA   TCDBENBHSCOL
                                                                                             LBR
                                                           KHM          BHR
                                                                         KWTCYP
                                                                              HUN
    .7




                                                                       RUS  LBN
                                                                            SYRAUT        NGA
                                                                                 CHE MAR GTM      ECU
                             PRK                     VNMPHL              FIN  CZE
                                                                               EGY PRT   NZLMEX
                                                                            TUR
                                                                            POL
                                                                              DNK
                                                                            NOR                     BRA
                                                             IND    IDN
                                                                    LKA
                                                                   PAK     SAU                ZAF
                                                                                               HTI
                                                                                                 VEN CHL
                                                         BGD
                                                           THA               ISR                 PAN
                                                                        ARESWE
                                                                MYS            GRC   ESP
                                   KOR
                                                                 SGP                AUSCAN
                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                 GBR
         .6




                                                                                NLD
                                                                              DEUITA
                                                                                        USA
                                                   JPN
         .5




                                                         BTN


                  6                7                    8                      9                       10
                                                  ln(distance)


Note: Entry rate = Number of new exporters in t/ Total number of exporters in t. ln(distance) is the
log of distance between China and each destination country.



                      Fig 4: Firms' Exit Rate and Distance by Country (2003)
         1




                                                                                              GRD
                                                                                  AND
                                                                                SYC
                                                                                 VUT
         .8




                                                                                ERI   SWZ
                                                                             SLB RWA      BWA
                                                                                        ZMB
                                                                                           GNB
                                                                                          MRT
                                                                                SOM COG
                                                                AFG           ALB         BFA
                                                                                       MWI          BOL
   Exit Rate




                                                              BRN      MDV               GAB
                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                           GMB
                                                               TJK            DJI
                                                                               LUX   MDG
                                                                                     UGA  AGOBLZ SUR
                                         MNG                                        FJI TGOGUY
                                                                                           NAM
       .6




                                                                                        ZWE
                                                                                        NER
                                                                                        CMR
                                                                        IRQ           BDI
                                                              UZB TKM     MDA  ISLLBYTZA GHA
                                                                                           GIN
                                                        LAO             PNG
                                                                      AZE
                                                                        QAT                 BHS
                                                                                            CUB
                                                                         LVA ETH   MUS BEN
                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                   TON         NIC
                                                                                              JAM
                                                            KGZ
                                                          NPL
                                                          MMR           BHR  SVK  MLT NGA  SEN
                                                                                          MLI
                                                                                            LBR
                                                                                           CIV LCA
                                                                                              HND
                                                        BTNKHM         ARM
                                                                         EST
                                                                      OMN SVN       KEN
                                                                                  SDN       SLE      URY
                                                                                                TTO PRY
                             PRK                           KAZ                       CRI      DOM
                                                                                              SLV
                                                                             YEM
                                                                             BGR
                                                                             CZE IRLDZA
                                                                         BLR
                                                                        KWT JOR
                                                                             HUN
                                                                              MKD
                                                                              AUT
                                                                           CYP
                                                                         UKR
                                                                           LBN  CHE                PER
                                                        PHL              LTU          PRT
                                                                        FIN                   GTMECU ARG
         .4




                                                     VNM BGD           GEO
                                                                       RUS  NOR        MAR
                                                                                        NZLMEX  PAN
                                                                                              HTICOL CHL
                                                                      IRN
                                                                    IDN
                                                                    LKA   SAU
                                                                           POL
                                                                           SYREGY
                                                                             DNK
                                                           THA              ISR              ZAF
                                                             INDMYS
                                                                 SGP
                                                                   PAK ARESWE
                                                                           TUR                  VENBRA
                                 KOR                                          GRCFRA
                                                                                   AUSCAN
                                                                                GBR
                                                                                ITAESP
                                                                               NLD
                                                                             DEU
                                                   JPN                                 TCD
                                                                                         USA
         .2




                  6                7                    8                      9                       10
                                                  ln(distance)


Note: Exit rate = Number of new exporters that exit in t+1 / Number of new exporters in t.
Reentrants after exits are not considered as true exits. ln(distance) s the log of distance between
China and each destination country.
                 Fig 5: Firms' Entry Rate and log Nb of Existing Exporters by Country (2003)



                1
                                                                                           TON
                                                           GNQ
                                                                        ERI
                                                                                     SLB
                                                            GEO
                                                          MCO             CPV
                                                          GNB GRDGAB
                                                                LSO TJK
                                                               MDA            MWIBLZ
                                                                            BWA               TGO
                                                   BLR       AFG   MLI              COG
                                                                RWA        ZWE
                                                                          LBY  MOZ  GIN
                                                                               ESTKIR        MNG GMB
                                                      LUX                KGZ
                                                                       ALB      ZMB
                                                                               UGA     MDG
                                                            ISLARMBOL LCA AGO   PRY
                                                                                     MRT FJI
                                                                                   LVA
                                                                                   BRN          MUS
                .8


                                                         KAZ UZB
                                                               BDI         CMR  HND          GHA SUR
                                                    IRQ AZE                SLESVNMDV
                                                                             NAM
                                                                             SEN    PNG
                                                                                     PLW   MLT  GUY
                                                                                               VUT
                                                                             TTO SLV    LBR
   Entry Rate




                                                               FSM CUB QAT
                                                                        MKD BRB
                                                                              NIC
                                                                               SDNTUN KEN
                           TCD                                 ARG IRL LAO  CIV
                                                                              IRNBGR CRI
                                                                                    TZA      YEM
                                                           BFA                       BHR
                                                                                     UKR
                                                                                       URY DJI
                                                                     OMN WSM
                                                                    SVK        PER
                                                                               DZA ETH
                                                                                  DOM            BEN
                                                                                                  KHM
                                                                    CHE
                                                                  BRA
                                                                           COL
                                                                         RUS  NPL   GTMKWT
                                                                                       ECU  CYP
                                                                                          NGA
                                                                                          SYR    VNM JOR
                                                                   AUTMEXINDCZEHUNNZL    IDN
                                                                                          EGY    PHLLBN
                                                             BHS       VCTPRT
                                                                          HTI
                                                                            TUR
                                                                             POLFIN MAR
                                                                                     BGDPAK    LKA
                                                                                              THA
                                                                        NOR   DNK      ZAF
                                                                                       SAUCHL            PAN
                                                                              VEN
                                                                            SWE
                                                                             ESPBEL KOR     ISR    ARE
                                                                                                    MYS
                                                                       FRAGBRCAN  NLD
                                                                                   GRC AUS             SGP
                .6




                                                                           DEU
                                                                           ITA
                                                                         USAJPN
                           slope (Homog): -.033 (t-stat = -4.96)
                           slope (Diff): -.027 (t-stat = -3.96)
                                                                                   MHL
                .4




                      -4                         -2                      0                      2                      4
                                                          ln(N) partialled out ln(GDP)

                                          Differentiated                     Fitted (Differentiated)
                                          Homogeneous                        Fitted (Homogeneous)



Note: Entry rate = Number of new exporters in t/ Total number of exporters in t.. ln(N) partialled out
ln(GDP) is the log of number of existing exporters to each country in the previous year, after the
correlation with each destination's GDP partialled out in a first-stage regression.



                     Fig 6: Firms' Exit Rate and log Nb of Existing Exporters by Country (2003)
                1




                                                                          slope (homogeneous): -0.048 (t-stat = -4.87)
                                                                      COM slope (differentiated): -.031 (t-stat = -3.06)

                                                                    LSO
                                          SWZ TKM
                .8




                                                                   GRD        CPV         PLW VUT
                                              SMR                               BWA ZMBMRT
                                                             MCO                         SLB
                                                            GNQ AFG  GABATG
                                                                   RWA                 COG       TGOGMB
                                                                            ERI MWIBRN
   Exit Rate




                                                                          ALB      MOZBLZ       MNG
                                                              BFA                  UGA
                                                                               ZWE MDV     MDG
                                                                      BOL
                                                                       TJK        AGO          FJI  SUR
                                                                                                   GUY
                                                                                                 DJI
       .6




                                                         LUX GNB
                                                       IRQ
                                                              NER
                                                               ISL
                                                                  BDI           NAM PNG
                                                                               CMR
                                                                 UZB CUB LBY
                                                                BHS             SEN    TZA         BEN
                                                                                                     KHM
                                                                               WSM
                                                                             LAO  NICTUN
                                                                                BRB    GIN
                                                                                      LVA       GHA
                                                                                                  MUS
                                                                          QAT
                                                                            LCA         BHR
                                                                                      ETHKENLBRTON
                                                                             KGZTTO
                                                                                SVN HND   URYMLT
                                                                                            NGA
                                                            AZE ARMFSM  OMN
                                                                       SVK      CIV
                                                                           MKD NPLSDNSLV
                                                                                   EST
                                                                                   DZA CRI
                                                                      IRL            DOM
                                                      BLR   KAZGEO CHE
                                                                      MLI      SLE  PRY
                                                                                  CZE
                                                                                    BGR
                                                                                   PER UKRKWTYEM   PHL
                                                                                                         JOR
                                                                     AUTMEX           HUN
                                                                                       GTM
                                                                                        BGD   CYP VNMLBN
                                                                                   FIN MAR IDN
                .4




                                                                 ARG         COL
                                                                            RUS
                                                                             PRT IRN      ECU
                                                                                           NZL
                                                                    BRA NOR  INDPOL
                                                                                DNK      ZAF
                                                                                            CHL
                                                                                            EGY
                                                                                          SAU
                                                                                            SYR THA MYS PAN
                                                                                              ISR
                                                                                                 LKA
                                                                              TUR
                                                                               SWEVENBEL   PAK
                                                                                         KOR         ARE SGP
                                                                           VCT
                                                                         FRA       CAN
                                                                               ESPNLD
                                                                              HTI      KIR
                                                                                      GRCAUS
                                                                             GBR
                                                                               JPN
                                                                             ITA
                                                                             DEU
                                                                          USA          MHL
                                                                  MDA
                .2




                      -4                         -2                      0                      2                      4
                                                          ln(N) partialled out ln(GDP)

                                          Differentiated                     Fitted (Differentiated)
                                          Homogeneous                        Fitted (Homogeneous)


Note: Exit rate = Number of new exporters that exit in t+1 / Number of new exporters in t.
Reentrants after exits are not considered as true exits. ln(N) partialled out ln(GDP) is the log of
number of existing exporters to each country in the previous year, after the correlation with each
                       Fig 7: Firms' Entry and log GDP by Country (2003)


         1                             TON
                                                        GNQ
                                          GNB
                                            SYC
                                              ERI
                                        SLBGRD        MCO
                                                    MDA
                                                   SWZ
         .9

                                            CPV      NER
                                 KIR           LSO
                                             BLZ MWICOG     BWA
                                                            GAB
                                    PLW            RWA
                                                  TJK   GEO
                                                        MOZ   EST LUX
                                                        AFG        BLRLBY
                                        VUT BDI        MDGZMB
                                                  TGO
                                                 MRT    MLI
                                                   KGZ ALB BOL
                                                           PRY
                                                           UGA ISL     KAZ
                                              MDV   GIN
                                                      ARM
                                                    FJI  NAMAZE   AGO
                                            GUYSUR
             .8




                                           GMB    MNG MUSZWEBRN
                                                           HND LVA
                                                SLE       TKM   CMR
   Entry Rate




                                      FSM LCA                 UZB
                                                            GHA
                                                         MLT TTO
                                                       PNG      KEN  SVN
                                           DJI     LAOBFA  SENTZA
                                                         MKD
                                                         NIC   YEM BGR
                                                                    TUN
                                                                     QAT
                                                      BRB ETH    CRI
                                                                SLV
                                                                CIV IRQ
                                                                  SDNCUB
                                                                    DOM        IRL
                                                                URY     SVK
                                                                         PER   ARG
                                                      BEN NPLJOR    OMN   UKR IRN
                                          VCT
                                          LBR          TCDBHS   CYP        DZA
                                                        KHM BHR          KWT COL
                                                                           HUN
    .7




                                         WSM                         ECU
                                                                   GTM
                                                                 LBN
                                                                   SYR    NGA
                                                                        MAR       AUT
                                                                                   CHERUS
                                                                       VNM  CZE
                                                                            NZL
                                                                          EGY  FIN
                                                                               PRT TURMEX
                                                                           PHL    POL
                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                  NOR  BRA
                                                       HTI        LKA BGD   CHL
                                                                            VEN
                                                                           PAK   ZAF
                                                                                 IDN
                                                                                  SAU IND
                                                              PAN             THA
                                                                             ISR
                                                                              ARE  SWE
                                                                             MYS BEL ESP
                                                                            SGPGRC AUS  CANFRA
                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                       KORITA
         .6




                                                                                      NLD    DEU
                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                 JPN
         .5




                                              BTN
                                   MHL

                  15                     20                          25                            30
                                                    ln(GDP)


Note: Entry rate = Number of new exporters in t/ Total number of exporters in t.




                       Fig 8: Firms' Entry and log GDP by Country (2003)
         1




                                        COM
                                    PLW GRD
                                        VUT SYC
         .8




                                              ERI SWZ
                                               LSO MCO
                         TUV                 CPV
                                        SLB ATG RWAGNQ      BWA
                                                          ZMB
                                          GNB MRT
                                                         COG
                                                         AFG
                                                        BFA
                                                          ALB
                                              MDV MWI MOZ  BOL
   Exit Rate




                                           GMB              GAB
                                                            BRN
                                           DJIBLZ TJK MDG
                                                SUR        UGA       LUX
                                            GUY     FJI NAM AGO
                                                  MNG
                                                  TGO
       .6




                                               SMR NERZWE CMR
                                              BDI                   IRQ
                                      FSM          MDA
                                                    GINPNGTKM  ISL LBY
                                                               TZA
                                                              UZB
                                                            AZE
                                                            GHA
                                                   LAOBEN BHS
                                                         MUS         QAT
                                                                     CUB
                                                                    TUN
                                      TON    LCA   KGZ   NICETH
                                                           SEN LVA
                                         WSM
                                          LBR            MLT
                                                          NPL
                                                        MLIHND BHR
                                                                CIV     SVK
                                                                          NGA
                                            BTNSLE BRBARM
                                                        KHM     KEN
                                                                URY
                                                              EST
                                                               TTOSDN
                                                                    OMN
                                                                     SVN
                                                           PRY  SLV
                                                                 CRIDOMKAZDZAIRL
                                                               YEM BGR      CZE
                                                             JOR
                                                         MKD CYP   BLR   KWT
                                                                           HUN    AUT
                                                                 LBN       PHL PRTCHE
                                                                         PER
                                                                          UKR
                                                                   GTM
                                                                     ECU       FIN
         .4




                                                         GEO PAN        MAR NZL
                                                       HTI
                                                                  LKA
                                                                       VNM  CHL
                                                                          EGY
                                                                   SYR BGDISR
                                                                               ARG
                                                                             COL
                                                                              IRN SAU RUS
                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                 DNK
                                                                                 IDN
                                                                                  POL
                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                ZAF
                                                                              THA
                                                                             MYS
                                                                           PAKARE SWE
                                                                            SGP
                                                                            VEN    TUR
                                                                                   BEL BRA
                                                                                      IND
                                 KIR                                            GRC AUS CANFRA
                                                                                       KOR   GBR
                                                                                        ESP
                                                                                      NLD  ITADEU
                                          VCT          TCD                                      JPN
                                  MHL                                                                   USA
         .2




                  15                     20                          25                            30
                                                    ln(GDP)


Note: Exit rate = Number of new exporters that exit in t+1 / Number of new exporters in t. Re-
entrants after exits are not considered as true exits.
Figure 9: Jensen’s Inequality and the Expected Profit under an Option of Exiting
Figure 10: Entry, Exit, and Determination of Exit Rate
    Table 1: Summary Statistics of China's Customs Data
Panel A: Firm level
Number of destinations
                              2001        2003      2005
Mean                            5           6         6
Median                          2           2         3
Stand. Dev                      7           8         9

Exports (thousands US$)
Mean                              1011         1258         1462
Median                            196          251          298
Stand. Dev                        8893         9926        13816

Panel B: Aggregate Level
Number of firms                   27740       45471       82836
Number of destinations             173         182         195
Exports (US$ millions)            28044       57202       121102
China's Customs transaction-level trade data (2001-2005). Only non-
processing (ordinary) exporters are included. Trading companies
(wholesale-retail firms) are all excluded.
                                        Table 2: Average Firms' Entry and Exit Rates by Year
                                                                                                                             Average
Year                            2001            2002            2003           2004            2005            2006        across years
Panel A
Mean Entry Rate                80.86%          79.27%         76.59%          77.81%          80.59%         71.65%           77.79%
Mean Exit Rate                 60.90%          58.49%         57.56%          61.00%          67.70%         55.36%           60.17%
Median Entry Rate              80.89%          77.91%         75.18%          77.40%          79.55%         71.29%           77.04%
Median Exit Rate               59.20%          55.56%         56.25%          59.09%          65.77%         53.19%           58.18%
Number of Countries             181             183            185             183             189            186              185

Panel B: Africa
Mean Entry Rate                84.43%          82.45%         82.24%          83.73%          85.51%         77.25%           82.60%
Mean Exit Rate                 64.99%          63.16%         66.61%          71.24%          75.42%         63.67%           67.52%
Median Entry Rate              84.62%          81.62%         81.74%          82.55%          84.56%         75.37%           81.74%
Median Exit Rate               62.07%          60.69%         65.87%          69.82%          74.39%         61.54%           65.73%
Number of Countries              53              53             53              53              53             53               53
China's Customs data and authors' calculation. The mean and median entry rates are both equal to 1 in 2000 as it is the first year in our
sample. Those observations will be dropped in our regressions below.
                                      Table 3: Firms that Entered in 2001, Exited in 2002 and Re-entered in the Future
                                                                                    Exit in 2002-2003 Exit in 2002-2004 Exit in 2002-2005                2002 that re-
                             Number Entrants Exit from the       Exit in 2002 but but re-enter in      but re-enter in   but re-enter in                 enter in 2003-
                                in 2001        market in 2002 re-enter in 2003             2004              2005              2006                          2006
Across Markets                  133,972            64.04%              4.99%               2.38%             1.33%             0.89%                        14.97%
Differentiated Sectors           97838             64.86%              4.94%               2.36%             1.32%             0.87%                        14.62%
Homogeneous Sectors              36134             61.83%              5.12%               2.44%             1.36%             0.94%                        15.96%
Distant Destinations             56035             64.68%              4.94%               2.52%             1.32%             0.99%                        15.12%
Nearby Destinations              77937             63.59%              5.02%               2.28%             1.33%             0.82%                        14.86%
The sample contains firms that first started exporting to a market (a country-HS2 pair) in 2001, but not in 2000. A sector (HS2) is considered differentiated based on
Rauch's (1999) classification (see Section 4 for details). Countries that have distance from China above the sample median are considered distant countries, while those
with distance below the median are considered nearby destinations.
                                  Table 4: Information Asymmetry, Learning, and Exit Rates
                                               (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
Dep Var                                            Rate of exit among firms exporting to a market from a Chinese city
Measure of product differentiation              -              -                 Rauch                      Estimated σz
ln(dist)                                  0.0311***                     0.0422***                    0.0377***
                                            (17.179)                     (15.302)                     (20.520)

ln(nb neighbors in the same city)                               -0.150***                         -0.125***                        -0.145***
                                                                 (-15.808)                         (-14.572)                        (-8.553)

Diff x ln(dist)                                                                 -0.0173***                       -0.00787***
                                                                                  (-5.326)                         (-20.824)

Diff x ln(nb neighbors)                                                                            0.00525                         0.0187**
                                                                                                   (1.008)                          (2.222)

HS2-Year Fixed Effects                               √               √                √               √                √                √
City-Year Fixed Effects                              √               √                √               √                √                √

Nb. Of Obs.                                      293863           302005          293863           295890          282563           289191
R-squared                                          .1              .173             .1              .249             .1               .24
The sample includes all city-country-sector pairs in which Chinese firms ever started exporting in a new market during the 2002-2004 period,
but did not export in the previous two years (i.e., t-1 and t-2). The sample is constructed in a way eliminate temporal exiters that
immediately re-entered in t+1, in light of the findings in Table 3. A market is defined as a country-sector pair, while a firm's neighborhood is
defined as the city in which it operates. Standard errors are clustered by city and are robust to clustering at other levels. T-statistics are
reported in parentheses.
                                         Table 5: Learning from Neighbors and Firm's Entry
                                               (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)          (5)                       (6)
Dep Var                                                           A firm's entry dummy (country-sector)

Signal (city-country-hs2)                    0.102***       0.0981***         0.115***        0.108***        0.106***        0.0705***
                                             (44.129)        (41.681)         (37.193)        (16.056)        (15.425)          (7.819)

Nb. of neighbors x Signal                   0.0289***       0.0279***        0.0408***       0.0575***        0.0558***       0.0800***
                                             (22.662)        (21.821)         (25.120)        (16.088)         (15.359)        (16.898)

Nb. of neighbors (city-country-hs2)          -0.321***      -0.309***         -0.438***       -0.596***       -0.579***       -0.772***
                                              (-25.586)      (-24.496)         (-28.427)       (-20.147)       (-19.229)       (-20.024)

Estimated TFP (firm-sector level)                                            0.00907***                                      0.00895***
                                                                               (11.888)                                        (11.390)

σz x Signal                                                                                   -0.0106**       -0.0123**       0.0278***
                                                                                               (-2.251)        (-2.505)         (4.399)

σz x Nb. of neighbors x Signal                                                               -0.0227***      -0.0222***       -0.0298***
                                                                                              (-10.150)        (-9.709)         (-9.959)

σz x Nb. of neighbors                                                                         0.222***        0.218***         0.257***
                                                                                              (11.162)        (10.780)         (10.113)

City x hs2 x year fixed effects                  √               √                 √               √               √               √
Country x hs2 x year fixed effects               √               √                 √               √               √               √
City x country fixed effects                     √               √                 √               √               √               √
Firm-year fixed effects                                          √                 √                               √               √

Nb. Of Obs.                                   735876          732444           121836          711361          707869           118887
R-squared                                      .687            .703             .867             .69            .705             .871
The sample considers markets in the 46 Sub-Saharan African countries. The restricted sample includes all new country-sector pairs in which
Chinese firms could potentially enter during the 2002-2006 period, but did not sell in the previous two years (i.e., t-1 and t-2). Existing
exporters are dropped from the sample, so that a firm's entry propensity is compared with "no entry". Standard errors are clusterd at the
city-destination level, and are robust to clustering at other levels. T-statistics are reported in parentheses.
                                    Table 6: Option Value of Waiting
                                                (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
Dep Var                                             A firm's entry dummy (country-sector)

Nb. entrants t                                0.0986***         0.154***         0.140***         0.235***
                                               (12.886)         (13.887)          (4.013)          (5.816)

Nb. entrants t+2                              -0.0114***       -0.0256***       -0.0158**       -0.0294***
                                                (-4.814)         (-6.286)        (-2.433)         (-2.759)

σz x Nb. entrants t                                                              -0.0376         -0.0722**
                                                                                 (-1.402)         (-2.158)

σz x Nb. entrants t+2                                                            0.00342          0.00308
                                                                                 (0.831)          (0.373)

Estimated TFP (firm-sector level)                              0.0167***                         0.0175***
                                                                (19.425)                          (18.161)

Firm x year fixed effects                          √                √                √                √
City x hs2 x year fixed effects                    √                √                √                √
Country x hs2 x year fixed effects                 √                √                √                √
City x country fixed effects                       √                √                √                √

Nb. Of Obs.                                    2022857           132253          1715670           119300
R-squared                                       .0956             .386              .1               .39

The sample considers markets in the 46 Sub-Saharan African countries. The restricted sample includes all
new country-sector pairs in which Chinese firms could potentially enter during the 2002-2006 period, but
did not sell in the previous two years (i.e., t-1 and t-2). Existing exporters are dropped from the sample, so
that a firm's entry propensity is compared with "no entry". Standard errors are clusterd at the city-
destination level, and are robust to clustering at other levels. T-statistics are reported in parentheses.
                   Table A1: Information Asymmetry, Learning, and Exit Rates (Provinces as Neighborhoods)
                                               (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
Dep Var                                          Rate of exit among firms exporting to a market from a Chinese province
Measure of product differentiation              -               -                 Rauch                  Estimated Sigma
ln(dist)                                   0.0437***                    0.0552***                   0.0481***
                                            (12.381)                     (11.440)                    (11.494)

ln(nb neighbors in the same province)                               -0.118***                        -0.0853***                       -0.107***
                                                                     (-9.721)                          (-8.801)                        (-5.837)

Diff x ln(dist)                                                                     -0.0192***                      -0.00784***
                                                                                      (-4.030)                        (-17.959)

Diff x ln(nb neighbors)                                                                               0.00204                          0.0192**
                                                                                                      (0.355)                           (2.523)

HS2-Year Fixed Effects                                   √               √                √               √                √               √
Province-Year Fixed Effects                              √               √                √               √                √               √

Nb. Of Obs.                                          139843           144275          139843           137651          128897           131560
R-squared                                             .0857            .182            .0859            .335            .0896            .317
The sample includes all province-country-sector pairs in which Chinese firms ever started exporting in a new market during the 2002-2004 period,
but did not export in the previous two years (i.e., t-1 and t-2). The sample is constructed in a way eliminate temporal exiters that immediately re-
entered in t+1, in light of the findings in Table 3. A market is defined as a country-sector pair, while a firm's neighborhood is defined as the
province in which it operates. Standard errors are clustered by province and are robust to clustering at other levels. T-statistics are reported in
parentheses.
