                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  RECLASSIFICATION TO AVOID CONSUMER COST-SHARING IN GROUP HEALTH
                               PLANS

                                      Olesya Fomenko
                                      Jonathan Gruber

                                     Working Paper 25870
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25870


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2019




We are grateful to John Ruser of WCRI for his support and helpful comments. Gruber
acknowledges financial support from WCRI. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Olesya Fomenko and Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Reclassification to Avoid Consumer Cost-Sharing in Group Health Plans
Olesya Fomenko and Jonathan Gruber
NBER Working Paper No. 25870
May 2019
JEL No. H51,I18,I28

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine how consumers respond to being effectively double insured under two systems:
group health (GH) and workers’ compensation (WC). Many GH plans have substantial consumer
cost-sharing burden, while WC coverage has no cost-sharing for medical services for work-
related injuries. As a result, a consumer facing a large deductible under their group health plan
will have a strong financial incentive to make a claim under WC instead. We use a unique data
set of claims under both GH and WC to study how “case shifting” to WC responds to GH
deductibles for the most common set of injuries that are covered under both types of insurance.
We identify the impact of case shifting by using interactions of deductible levels and previous
spending. We find that a typical claim is about 1.4 percentage points (5.3%) more likely to be
filed as a WC claim when facing an average deductible (about $630) compared to a plan with no
deductible, and that total WC costs in the U.S. are more than $1.2 billion higher as a result. At the
same time, we find that consumers do not appear to be forward looking, focusing on the “spot
price” rather than the full “end of year price” in deciding whether to claim under WC.


Olesya Fomenko
Workers Compensation Research Institute
955 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02460
ofomenko@wcrinet.org

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
        The past decade has seen a dramatic growth in the use of consumer cost-sharing as a

mechanism of cost-control by health insurance plans. According to the Annual Survey of

Employer Health Benefits conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, the share of covered

workers in plans with a general annual deductible increased from 59% in 2007 to 81% in 2017,

while the percentage of workers enrolled in high deductible (more than $1,000) plans

quadrupled from 12% in 2007 to 51% in 2017. The average deductible amount, among those

with a deductible, rose from $616 in 2007 to $1,505 in 2017.1

        The goal of such an increase is, ideally, to deter cost-ineffective medical care. There is

now a large body of evidence showing that more consumer cost-sharing does deter use of care

across a wide variety of contexts—but whether that is only cost-ineffective care, and not also

cost-effective care, is unclear.

        But there is another margin of response to more consumer cost sharing that has not

been widely explored by previous literature: shifting the claim out of the group health

insurance to other sources of coverage. For a wide variety of medical claims in the U.S.,

consumers are effectively double covered. This includes any medical claim which arises out of

workplace injuries, through the workers’ compensation (WC) program, and any medical claim

which arises out of auto injuries, through auto insurance. This is a non-trivial share of medical

spending in the U.S. Medical spending by the WC program is $31.4 billion, while medical

spending through auto insurance claims is about $2 billion.2


1
  2017 Employer Health Benefits Survey, https://www.kff.org/health-costs/report/2017-employer-health-benefits-
survey/.
2
  WC data from National Academy of Social Insurance estimates based on data received from state agencies, the
U.S. Department of Labor, A.M. Best, and the National Council on Compensation Insurance; auto data from
http://www.naic.org/prod_serv/AUT-PB-14.pdf.
        When consumers are double covered, they may face very different financial incentives

to make claims through one form of insurance or another. For example, state WC programs as a

rule do not have consumer cost sharing for medical care received under the program. As a

result, a consumer facing a large deductible under their group health plan will have a strong

incentive to make “shift” their case to WC instead.

        Whether consumers can, or are willing to, do so is unclear. Technically, there is a clear

distinction between which system should be used based on the nature of the injury. Practically,

it may be very hard for insurers to distinguish whether a particular injury is or is not related to a

workplace injury or auto accident. If consumers do actively substitute between forms of

insurance in their claims, then it could have important implications for the role of consumer

cost sharing, and for the benefits of integrating health care coverage across multiple sources.

To illustrate the potential importance of case-shifting for workers’ compensation, if just 1

percent of group health cases with soft tissue conditions (including non-specific back pain) were

shifted to workers’ compensation, workers’ compensation costs in a state like Pennsylvania

could increase by nearly $35,000,000. 3

        In this paper, we investigate whether consumers facing greater cost-sharing of their

group health plans substitute between different sources of insurance coverage, by shifting

cases to workers’ compensation. We do so by using novel data that, for a large sample of

workers, incorporates claims data under both their group health and WC coverage. We focus on

a set of injuries—soft tissue injuries and traumatic injuries—which represent the majority of



3
 To obtain the cost impact estimates, we used average medical and income benefit payments per soft tissue claim
and the share of soft tissue injuries among workers’ compensation injuries in a particular state.
WC claims, and for which there is a significant share of claims that are filed under group health

plans, so that there is a plausible substitution margin between the sources of coverage.

           Importantly, there is significant variation across workers in our sample in the

deductibles that they face under their health plans. Our identification comes from the

interaction between enrollee spending and plan deductibles. We incorporate this in two ways:

through spot prices and end of year prices. For spot prices, we measure the remaining

deductible at the point in time when the enrollee files their claim. That is, two enrollees who

have the same level of spending at a point in time will face different incentives to shift a claim

to WC depending on their deductible; likewise, two enrollees who have the same deductible

will have different incentives based on their spending at that point in time. This allows us to

control for rich controls for both plan characteristics (plan fixed effects) and individual

spending, identifying solely by their interaction.

           Of course, if individuals are fully forward looking, it should not be the spot price which

determines whether they file a WC claim—it should be the end of year price. An individual who

knows with certainty that they will exceed the deductible has no incentive to shift a claim to

WC even if the injury hits before they have yet exceeded the deductible. On the other hand,

individuals may not be fully forward looking. A variety of studies in the health insurance context

show that patients consider both the spot and end of year prices in making their health care

consumption decisions; the same distinction likely applies to the decision to claim in WC or

GH. 4 In addition, while the spot price is known with certainty, the end of year price must be

projected with some uncertainty.


4
    See for example Finkelstein, Einav and Schrimpf (2015) or Abaluck, Gruber and Swanson (2017).
       We therefore augment our models with end of year prices. This is of course difficult

since the actual spending during the year will depend on whether the episode in question is

filed as GH or WC. We address this potential endogeneity by creating an instrument that is a

function of last year’s total spending.

       We find that patients are sensitive to price incentives in their decision to claim injuries

under WC. In our richest specification, we find that a typical claim is about 1.35 percentage

points more likely to be claimed as WC at the average remaining deductible compared to no

deductible at the time of injury. Compared to a mean WC claiming rate of 26%, this implies that

that typical deductible plan shifts about 5% of claims from GH to WC. At the same time, we do

not find any sensitivity to end of year prices, suggesting that consumers are not forward looking

in their WC filing decision.

       We also explore two dimensions of heterogeneity which support our interpretation of

the results. First, we show that our findings are much stronger for sprains and strains, which are

easier to reclassify as work-related, then for traumatic injuries. Second, we show that our

findings are much stronger in states where employees have free choice in picking their

providers.

       Our paper proceeds as follows. Section I describes the WC program and the relevant

previous literature. Section II describes our data and empirical methods. Section III shows our

results, while Section IV concludes.
                           Part I: Background on WC and Literature Review

        The Workers’ Compensation Program is the nation’s oldest, and one of its largest, social

insurance programs. It covers all medical expenses and a portion of lost wages of those injured

on the job. The employer pays these benefits for injuries “arising out of and in the course of

employment” under no fault agreement, while injured worker releases the right to sue for

additional compensation. Most workers are covered for their non-work related injury through a

group health insurance plan, while work-related injuries are covered through their employers’

workers’ compensation insurance plans.

        In this work, we examine workers’ incentives to classify an injury as work-related.

Workers are responsible for informing their doctor about whether they believe the injury to be

work-related. If the doctor agrees, she submits a bill to the individual’s workers’ compensation

insurer. Workers are also responsible for notifying their employer and filing a WC claim. The WC

payer sometimes disagrees with the provider’s classification of an injury and disputes whether

the injury is work-related. In this case, the worker may either ask the provider to bill the GH

insurer, or file a request for an administrative hearing from the state regulatory agency. In

some states, where employers control choice of medical providers, workers will have to file

their claim before getting medical care. In this case, a claim adjuster will direct a worker to their

choice of physician for evaluation and treatment.

        For many injuries, the work-relatedness is an open question as demonstrated in the

“Monday effect literature”. 5 In particular, in support of the “Monday effect” hypothesis, Smith



5
  Since weekend presents more opportunities for off the job injuries, then one might expect that hard-to-diagnose
injuries will be disproportionately reported on Mondays compared to other regular workdays. This hypothesis is
referred to as “Monday effect”.
(1990) showed that a greater proportion of sprains and strains relative to fractures and cuts

were reported earlier in the work week and work shift; on the other hand, Card and McCall

(1996) and Campolieti and Hyatt (2006) did not find evidence suggestive of “Monday effect”. If

a worker’s group health plan features cost sharing, she may decide to claim injuries are work-

based and get treated with no cost-sharing through WC.

           At the same time, previous literature offers abundant evidence that a sizable proportion

of injured workers with work-related injuries does not file a WC claim. 6 In particular, Biddle and

Roberts (2003) merged Michigan WC administrative data with a sample of workers who were

identified by physicians as having work-related injuries. They found that only 30% of all injured

workers filed a WC claim, 55% of injured workers with time away from work filed a claim, and

72% of injured workers with more than 7 days of lost time filed a WC claim. These substantial

non participation rates suggest that WC filing is not free. Among costs associated with filing are

lack of information about filing and availability of WC, employer discouragement of filing for

WC benefits, stigma, and loss of bonuses/overtime pay. Workers with access to health

insurance with low-cost sharing burden and various other wage-replacement benefits may be

unwilling to bear the filing costs. In particular, about one-third of all non-participants reported

that one of the reasons of not filing was availability of other sources of health insurance

coverage (Biddle and Roberts, 2003).




6
    Biddle and Roberts (2003), Fan et al. (2006), and Ruser and Pergamit (2004).
        The previous literature on this topic reports mixed results for the correlation between

the availability of alternative sources of health coverage and rates of WC claiming. 7 These

mixed results are likely due to the fact that firms that offer insurance are different in a number

of ways that might impact WC filing decisions; e.g., white collar firms with low rates of on-the-

job injury will be most likely to offer group health. We therefore extend this literature in a new

direction: exploring the relationship between cost-sharing in group health insurance and the

decision to file a WC claim. As described below, in doing so we are able to control for fixed

differences across firms while still identifying the financial incentives to file under WC. Like the

previous literature, however, we will be unable to distinguish whether the claims that are, for

example, promoted to WC by higher GH cost sharing are “truly” work related (and just

previously underreported due to hassle costs) or not.

        A related literature on financial incentives in classification of claims as work-related

focuses on provider incentives, which is different from the focus of this work on financial

incentives facing patients. Initial evidence in Ducatman (1986) undertook a cross-sectional

examination of eight federal shipyards with varying degrees of HMO penetration, and found

that WC costs were higher at the shipyard with a larger HMO penetration. Butler et al. (1997)

show that higher HMO penetration across states increases the incidence of WC claims,, using

data from one firm. They also find that workers’ compensation claims are higher for workers

enrolled in an HMO plan. Additionally, Fomenko and Gruber (2017) document that there is

significant reclassification of injuries from group health plans into WC when the financial



7
 Biddle and Roberts (2003) finds that having group health coverage is associated with lower WC claiming rates,
while Lakdawalla et al. (2007) found that employers offering health insurance have higher WC claiming rates.
incentives to do so are strongest. In particular, they exploited differences in financial incentives

as shaped by capitated group health plans (such as HMOs) vs. non-capitated plans, as well as

differences in WC reimbursement fees for medical services across states.

           An important aspect of our investigation is considering whether individuals myopically

focus just on spot prices, or whether they take a more forward-looking perspective in their

health care claims filing decisions. Some recent studies have investigated this question in

another context by modeling how health care consumption responds to spot vs. end of year

prices. Brot-Goldberg et al. (2017) find that consumers substantially reduce their spending on

medical services facing higher spot prices, but find no evidence of consumers’ responsiveness

to the true end of year price. Previous research by Einav et al. (2013a), Dalton et al. (2015) and

Abaluck et al. (2015) on price responsiveness in the context of Medicare Part D prescription

drug coverage also shows that consumers respond overwhelmingly to spot prices. On the other

hand, Aron-Dine et al. (2012) and Finkelstein et al. (2012) find support of forward looking

behavior by consumers facing non-linear insurance contract and conclude that consumers

respond to both spot and true end of year prices in making health care consumption decisions.



                                      Part II: Data and Empirical Strategy

Data

           This analysis relies principally on workers’ compensation and group health medical data

coming from the Truven Health MarketScan Commercial Claims Database, Health and

Productivity Management Database and Benefit Plan Design (BPD) Database. 8 In general the


8
    Copyright® 2015 Truven Health Analytics Inc. All rights reserved.
Truven Health MarketScan® Research Databases capture patient-level utilization of medical

services, and payments associated with the medical services provided, for a wide range of services

including outpatient, inpatient, prescription drug, and carve-out services. These data also include

GH enrollment and plan design information, including enrollment dates for each employee and

detailed cost-sharing profile of the employer-provided plan of the enrollment. The data come from

a selection of large employers, health plans, and government and public organizations and are

frequently used in peer-reviewed published health policy research studies (e.g., Fomenko and

Gruber, 2017; Dor, Grossman, and Koroukian, 2004; Berndt et al., 2002).

       The Truven databases used in this analysis are based on a large convenience sample of

patients where the data was provided by health insurers and self-insured employers. The data

include individuals employed by mostly large employers and insured or administered by one of

approximately 100 group health plans. The data are unique in that, for a given employee, it

shows whether a given medical encounter (visit) was paid for by group health or workers’

compensation. This is key for the study since it provides the basis for determining which

treatments were paid under which insurance policy.

       The strength of these data are their size and the unique availability of both GH and WC

data supplemented by wealth of information on GH plan characteristics; these are the only

national data of which we are aware that provides this information. The weakness is that this is

a convenience sample. There is no reason, however, to think that the particular convenience

sample employed here would in any way bias our estimates of claims-shifting.

       For the sampled employees, the group health section of the database, Truven Health

MarketScan Commercial Claims, contains patient information including demographic
characteristics (e.g., age, gender, and geographic location), employment information (e.g.,

employment status and industry), and group health plan enrollment details (e.g., dates of

coverage and type of private insurance plan). This database links patient information with

detailed medical transaction (i.e., encounter) level data for all services reimbursed under group

health plans regardless of the setting (i.e., outpatient or hospital) or provider type. The medical

transaction data contains detailed information for each medical encounter, including the type

of services provided during the encounter, medical diagnosis recorded, and payment amounts

for each rendered service.

         The Truven Productivity Management Database includes workers’ compensation claim

data for most of the same individuals, if they had a WC claim. Unlike group health medical

encounter data, workers’ compensation data do not contain detailed encounter level

information for medical services paid by workers’ compensation insurance; instead, workers’

compensation data contains aggregated workers’ compensation claim (i.e., episode) level data.

For example, the diagnostic and payment information for all services provided to an injured

worker and compensated by workers’ compensation insurance is summarized at the claim

(episode) level, with information on primary diagnosis (or injury type) and total medical

payments for all services provided and paid as of the time of data collection. 9

         The Truven Health MarketScan Benefit Plan Design (BPD) Database contains a wealth of

information characterizing GH health plans, including deductibles, coinsurance, copayments,

and maximum out-of-pocket amount. In this analysis, we focus on the GH plan deductible



9
 That is, in the nomenclature of WC, a “claim” is equivalent to a medical episode, and includes all services
associated with that episode.
amount that captures the amount the enrollee pays before the plan begins to pay for medical

coverage during a plan year.

        We also rely to some extent on the Detailed Benchmark/Evaluation (DBE) database

collected by the Workers Compensation Research Institute (WCRI). 10 We used these data to

examine descriptive statistics on the distribution of office visits per workers’ compensation

claim (for comparison with group health data); we use these data because unlike the workers’

compensation data in the main database, these data contain detailed data on the date and type

of services rendered.



Sample Definition

        We select a sample of workers who had one of two types of injuries which are frequent

sources of workers’ compensation claims. The first type of injury includes certain soft tissue

conditions, such as back pain, knee pain, and shoulder pain. The second type of injury includes

injuries by trauma, including fractures, lacerations, and contusions. According to our data,

these two sets of diagnoses comprise more than 70% of workers’ compensation claims; the vast

majority of the remaining injuries in the database are not well specified occupational or

cumulative injuries.

        We select a sample of workers with one of these two types of injuries that occurred

over the 2008–2014 period. To identify a worker as having a particular medical condition, for




10
  The DBE data were from 26 large insurers, self-insurers, state funds, and third-party administrators in the study
states. Other WCRI studies show that the DBE database is reasonably representative of the state systems studied,
but not in all states. For methods used to assess the representativeness of sample data in the DBE database, please
refer to CompScope™ Benchmarks, 15th Edition (Belton et al., 2015).
patients whose care was paid for by the group health insurers, we relied on the primary

diagnosis code associated with the first and second office visits or emergency room visits (we

discuss the restriction to two visits below). For workers’ compensation patients, we used injury

type assigned by the workers’ compensation claims adjuster since the available data do not

have visit-level diagnosis records. In these cases, medical condition was assigned using standard

WC industry codes for type of injury when available (for about 90 percent of the injuries). 11 In

other cases, it was assigned using the International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision (ICD-

9) codes in the billing data, which were available for about 70 percent of injuries. For the

overwhelming majority of WC claims, both sources of identification of injury type result in

consistent injury definitions.

           We restrict the analysis sample to full-time workers (about 86 percent of these injuries).

We exclude employees who were older than 65 since they may also be covered by Medicare.

We also exclude patients who may be undergoing ongoing treatment for an existing injury, in

order to focus on new injuries. To do so we exclude from the sample patients who received

treatment for the same medical condition in the 24 months prior to the first claim that we

observe during our study period. Doing so also ensures that we are focusing on the extensive

margin of categorizing the initial WC claim, and not the intensive margin of further coding

additional medical as work related. Further, to ensure that we are excluding patients who had

such earlier care but were covered by another payer outside of the database or were

uninsured, we exclude patients who did not have continuous medical insurance coverage with

an employer captured in the database. Hence, we include workers with continuous group


11
     Standard WC industry codes for type of injury are also known as WC insurance organization codes.
health insurance coverage and without treatment for the same medical conditions for the two

years prior the onset of an episode; as a result the data used in this analysis covers years

between 2006 and 2015. After these exclusions, the final sample consists of 102,328

observations.



Dependent variable: did the patient file a workers’ compensation claim?

        We focus on the patient’s decision to file a workers’ compensation claim or not. Since we

do not directly observe the patients’ decisions, we infer the decision from whether a patient’s

care was paid under workers’ compensation or group health. If the medical care was paid by

workers’ compensation, we assumed that the worker decided to claim an injury as work-related.

We assume that decision to file a WC claim gets settled pretty early in the claim. For the purposes

of this study, we therefore examine whether the first two visits were paid by workers’

compensation or group health. Hence we excluded patients that had fewer than 2 visits with

diagnoses of one of the medical conditions of interest.

        The use of a 2 visit threshold confirms the diagnosis that serves as our sample selection

criterion. In addition, we found only a very small share of WC cases with only one visit, so

restricting to those with two or more GH visits imposes more uniformity on the samples.12

        Table 1 shows the sample by type of injury and type of payer in our sample. In the full

sample, 74% of claims are for soft tissue conditions, while 26% are for traumatic injuries,




12
   Comparing the means and medians for the number of visits by those with WC and GH, we find that they match
much better when restricting to at least 2 GH visits. For example, the mean number of visits for patients with
injuries by trauma under WC is 2.9, and the median is 2. Looking at all GH patients, the mean is 1.3 and the
median is 1. But if we restrict to patients with a least two visits, the mean is 2.6 and the median is 2.
divided roughly equally into contusions, fractures/dislocations, and lacerations. Not

surprisingly, there is a much higher share of traumatic injuries in the workers’ compensation

sample—about 50 percent of workers’ compensation injuries versus 18 percent among group

health injuries. On the other hand, soft tissue conditions are only 50% of WC paid claims, while

they are 82% of the GH paid claims.



Independent Variables of Interest

         The key independent variables for our analysis are two price measures relevant for WC

claiming decisions: spot price and end of year price. Spot price captures the remaining

deductible at the point in time when the enrollee decides whether to file their injury as a WC

claim or not, so it combines information on enrollee’s actual out of pocket deductible spending

during this enrollment year up to the time of injury (A), and her plan deductible (D). To capture

the out-of-pocket health care costs, we focus on the deductible amounts, since the consumer

faces the full price of her health care consumption with some exceptions.13 In some plans, cost-

sharing remains when the deductible is reached, in the form of remaining copayments or co-

insurance, but the marginal cost impacts are modest relative to deductibles.

To the extent that cost-sharing remains in place after the deductible, we bias our coefficients

downwards (since we are measuring a gap in cost sharing upon meeting the deductible that is

too large). 14


13
   Most plans cover preventive services before the deductible is met, and some plans also reimburse for office
visits with primary care providers and even specialty care providers when the enrollee is still under the deductible.
14
   In our sample, 39% of workers faced coinsurance requirement for at least some services with average
coinsurance rate of about 22%. Also, about 20% of workers had coinsurance for office visits with average rate of
17%. About 67% of the sample had copayment requirement of cost-sharing structure of their group health plans
with an average copayment amount of about $20 for primary care and about $30 for specialty care.
       In our analysis, we use two measures to capture non-linearity of the spot prices. The

first spot price measure (𝑃𝑃1𝑠𝑠 ) is a dummy variable taking on value one if this year’s actual

deductible spending prior to the injury is below this year’s plan deductible and zero otherwise

(Equation 1). The second spot price measure (𝑃𝑃2𝑠𝑠 ) reflects a difference between deductible

amount and actual deductible spending that is capped at zero when the plan deductible is met

(Equation 2).

                             𝑃𝑃1𝑠𝑠 = 1 if A < D or 𝑃𝑃1𝑠𝑠 = 0 if A ≥ D (1)

                          𝑃𝑃2𝑠𝑠 = D − A if A < D or 𝑃𝑃2𝑠𝑠 = 0 if A ≥ D (2)

       The end of year price is a measure of where the individual expects to be relative to their

deductible by the end of the year. As noted earlier, forward looking consumers should pay

attention to this measure, and not the spot price, in making their WC claiming decisions. For

example, if a consumer is below the plan deductible at the time of the injury, but knows with

high certainty that they will have sufficient group health spending to put them above the

deductible before the end of the year, then there is no financial incentive to shift the injury to

workers’ compensation. Once again, there may be smaller unobserved additional cost-sharing

beyond the deductible. In the case of end of year price, this would lead to an upward bias to

our estimate (since we are measuring an end of year price that is too low).

       Similarly to the spot price measure, we define two end of year spending variables
  𝑦𝑦       𝑦𝑦
(𝑃𝑃1 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑃𝑃2 ) that compare the end of previous year deductible eligible spending (Sy) and the

                                                                            𝑦𝑦
current year plan deductible (D). First, we define a dummy variable (𝑃𝑃1 ) on whether by the end

of the year plan deductible is expected to be exceeded or not (see Equation 3). Second, we

compute a difference between the plan deductible and the end of previous year deductible
eligible spending measure, equated to zero when deductible is met or exceeded (see Equation

4).
                               𝑦𝑦                     𝑦𝑦
                              𝑃𝑃1 = 1 if 𝑆𝑆 𝑦𝑦 < D or 𝑃𝑃1 = 0 if 𝑆𝑆 𝑦𝑦 ≥ D (3)
                         𝑦𝑦                                𝑦𝑦
                        𝑃𝑃2 = D − 𝑆𝑆 𝑦𝑦 if 𝑆𝑆 𝑦𝑦 < D or 𝑃𝑃2 = 0 if 𝑆𝑆 𝑦𝑦 ≥ D (4)



Empirical Strategy

       The goal of our empirical strategy is to assess whether the worker facing greater

financial burden of cost sharing under his GH plan is more likely to shift the claim out of the

group health insurance and file a workers’ compensation claim.

       To estimate the effect of greater deductible on the likelihood of the worker to file a WC

claim, we run regressions of the form:

(1)    WCep= α + βPSep + λPyep + μSsep + νSyep + δXe + πp + εep

       Where e indexes episode, and p indexes GH plans. WC is a dummy for whether episode

e for an individual enrolled in GH plan p is categorized as a workers’ compensation claim. PSep is

the spot dummy/price, while Pyep is the end of year dummy/price. We also include a rich set of

control variables for each patient’s episode (X). This includes age (dummies for ages 18-34, 35-

44, 45-54 and 55-64), gender, medical condition treated, injured body part, dummies for each

state of residence, and dummies for injury month.

       As noted above, we consider two different measures of spot and end of year prices. The

first is the amount of deductible remaining, either at the point of the claim or at the end of the

year. The second is a dummy which measures whether the employee has not yet exceeded the

deductible, either at the point of the injury or by the end of year. In both cases, larger values (or
a positive dummy variable) indicate a larger financial incentive to file a claim as WC rather than

GH. So if claims shifting responds to financial incentives, we expect positive coefficients on the

incentive measures.

       There are two major concerns with this empirical framework. The first is selection bias,

on both the employer and employee side. Employers offering high deductible plans may also be

associated with different propensity for claiming WC. For example, the firms that have the

highest deductible plans may also have more dangerous workplaces where the marginal claim

is more likely to be due to a work-related injury; alternatively, the firms offering high deductible

health plans may also be discouraging their injured workers from filing workers’ compensation

claims. These considerations emphasize importance of workplace characteristics in shaping

propensity of claiming WC. To address this concern, we include health care plan fixed effects

(πp), so that we fully absorb any differences across workers in not just deductibles, but any

other health care plan or firm characteristics correlated with that deductible.

       In addition, workers who have low medical spending and therefore are unlikely to

exceed their deductible may be different in their propensity to have a work-related injury. For

example, employees in good overall health that is reflected in low medical spending may be the

ones for whom a given injury is more likely to be work related and less likely due to overall poor

health. We address this identification concern by controlling for spending levels. We control for

differences in spending levels in a rich way, by including deductible eligible medical spending at

the time of the injury (Ssep) and over the entire previous year (Syep). In particular, for both

variables, we define categories with $250 step for spending between $0 and $5,000, $500
interval for spending between $5,000 and $8,000, $1,000 between $8,000 and $15,000, and the

remaining category includes spending amounts of $15,000 or more.

       By including both of these controls, we address concerns about identification from plan

differences or worker spending differences. Our identification comes instead from the

interaction of the two—that is, by comparing high and low spending employees within the

same plan deductible, while controlling in general for how being a high or low spending

employee might change your propensity to make a WC claim.

       The second major concern with this framework is the endogeneity of the forward-

looking measure of end of year price to the current decision on whether or not to claim an

injury as GH or WC. If a worker files the current claim as WC, for example, that reduces the

odds that they actually exceed their deductible. Therefore, higher rates of WC claiming are

associated with a larger remaining end of year deductible, raising the risk of reverse causality

for our end of the year measures.

       To address this endogeneity, we instrument the end of year price measures by the same

measure computed based on last year’s expenditures. So long as last year’s spending is a good

predictor of this year’s spending (which it is), then this allows us to avoid the endogeneity that

arises due to current claiming effects on end of year prices. As noted earlier, we control richly

for last year’s spending in the regression framework as well.



Descriptive Statistics

       Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics for our sample, separately for those claims under

WC and those under GH. Roughly three-quarters of the claims are classified as Group Health.
WC patients are slightly younger and more likely to be male than GH patients. There are also

some differences in prevalence of body parts impacted and medical conditions between two

groups. Injuries to spine are more frequent among GH patients, while upper extremity injuries

are more common among WC patients. WC patients are also slightly more likely to be under

deductible at the time of the injury as well as at the end of the year based on spending over the

entire previous year. Additionally, GH patients have somewhat higher year to date deductible

eligible spending and total end of year deductible eligible spending.




                                         Part III: Results

Basic Results

       Table 3 presents our basic results. We begin in column 1 by showing results for the

specification that includes only the remaining current deductible, expressed in $100. We

estimate a significant positive coefficient of 0.0016, which means that for every $100 of

remaining deductible, individuals are 0.16 percentage points more likely to claim workers’

compensation as the payer (rather than group health). The second panel of the table interprets

our findings. Since 26% of injuries are paid by WC at baseline, this suggests that each $100 of

remaining deductible leads to 0.6% more injuries being shifted to WC. At the mean of $555

remaining deductible, the spot price effect amounts to the 3.48% of the WC claim volume.

       In the second column, we replace the remaining deductible amount with a dummy

variable for whether you are currently below the deductible. As expected, this is also positive:

individuals who are below the deductible are more likely to claim workers’ compensation for
their injury. The estimate implies that being below the deductible at the time of your injury

raises the odds of claiming WC by roughly 1%, or about 3.5% of the mean.

        In the third column, we combine the two coefficients. In this case, the coefficient on the

dummy variable captures whether being below the deductible in general impacts WC claiming,

while the remaining deductible captures the marginal impact of having additional dollars below

the deductible. The coefficients are largely unchanged when the variables are included

together, although the coefficient on the dummy variable becomes only marginally significant.

        In our sample, 74% of individuals face a non-zero deductible at the time of their injury,

and among those individuals the mean deductible is $555. This implies that at the mean there is

an effect of spot price of 0.78*0.74 + 0.0014*555 = 1.35%. That is, on average, individuals being

injured are shifting 1.35% of their claims to WC, which amounts to about 5% of all WC claims.

        These effects are fairly small in percentage point terms, but amount to large dollars. As

noted earlier, total medical costs of WC amounted to $31 billion. So given that 80 percent of

workers in 18-64 age category have private health insurance, we conclude that over $1.2 billion

in claims each year are shifted to WC due to financial incentives facing patients. 15

        From these regressions we conclude that individuals who are facing financial exposure

to the costs of their claims in their group health plan are more likely to shift that claim onto

workers’ compensation. The next three columns then consider whether individuals are forward

looking in these claiming decisions by using end of the year values of our key financial incentive

measures (instrumented by last year’s values). As with columns 1-3, we first consider the




15
  The estimate of working-age employed adults by health insurance type are published by US Census Bureau
(https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/demo/tables/p60/264/tablea_2.pdf).
amount remaining below the deductible, then a dummy for being below the deductible, and

then finally both combined.

       The coefficients here are uniformly insignificant—and for the dummy variable even

wrong signed. This is inconsistent with the notion of individuals being forward looking; rather,

individual decisions to claim through WC appear focused on the spot price. This conclusion is

somewhat tempered by the larger standard errors on the end of year price, however.

Heterogeneity

       To confirm our findings, we explore two sources of heterogeneity. The first is variation

by injury type. There are strong incentives to shift claims regardless of injury type, but it may be

easier to do so for sprains and strains. For example, determining if a condition is work-related is

relatively straightforward for a patient who presents with a fractured tibia—the cause of the

fracture is usually identified with a specific event, and determining whether or not that event

was work-related is also relatively straightforward. By contrast, the cause may be less certain

for a patient presenting with a soft tissue condition (e.g., non-specific back pain or strain/sprain

of knees or shoulders). For example, the medical literature shows that there is often little

consensus about identifying the precise cause of back pain in a specific individual. Some cases

of back pain are said to be caused by a specific event (e.g., lifting a heavy object); others are

said to be caused by repetitive motion that wears down parts of the back architecture; still

other cases are believed to be caused by the wear and tear of the aging process; and others are

thought to result from latent congenital defects in the architecture of the back that emerge at

some point in time. Overall, about half of acute injuries (i.e., fractures, laceration, and

contusions) are coded as WC, while fewer than 20% of sprains and strains are coded as WC.
        In Table 4, we show the spot price and end of year price effects separately by injury

type. The coefficient for remaining deductible at the time of injury is larger for sprains and

strains (and statistically significant) than for acute injuries, while the coefficient on the dummy

for having a remaining deductible is similar across two types of injuries (and only marginally

significant for sprains and strains). Combining the coefficients at the typical likelihood of being

below the deductible and amount of deductible remaining at the time of injury, we find that

there is a 1.8 percentage point impact on shifting sprains and strains to WC that is equivalent to

the almost 10 percent increase in the volume of the WC soft tissue conditions. The effect is

statistically significant at 1% significance level. For acute injuries, the impact is smaller at 1.4

percentage points and not statistically significant, or only 2.8% of the increase in the baseline

number of the WC claims for acute injuries. Therefore, as we hypothesized, the impact of case-

shifting is much larger for soft tissue conditions than acute injuries. In other words, the effect is

large where it may be easier to substitute between two programs or reclassify claims as work

related or not.

        We also investigate whether the effect of higher deductibles on the decision to file an

injury as work-related is intensified in states where workers control the choice of initial medical

provider. Our hypothesis for this analysis is that flexibility of staying with the worker’s own

doctor when getting treatment for work-related injury lowers the cost of filing for workers’

compensation coverage and, therefore, may have a positive effect on propensity to file for WC

in states where workers control the choice of initial provider. Also, the process of filing for WC

coverage is different depending on the provider choice policy. In the states where regulation

allows workers to choose their provider, workers are responsible for informing their doctor
about whether they believe the injury to be work-related. If the doctor agrees, he/she submits

a bill to the individual’s workers’ compensation insurer. In other states, where employers

control choice of medical providers, workers will have to file their claim before getting medical

care. In this case, a claim adjuster will direct a worker to their choice of physician for evaluation

and treatment.

         Provider choice policies vary across states, defining not only initial choice of medical

provider but also circumstances under which workers can change their provider. We focus on

initial provider choice policies to examine potential differences in filing WC injuries when

workers have greater flexibility of choosing their initial provider versus when employers have

control over the choice of initial provider. We classified states into two categories: (1) workers’

choice of provider states, where workers have control over their choice of initial provider, or

their choice of initial provider is limited to providers within a network; and (2) employers’

choice of provider states, where employers control the choice of initial provider or the choice is

limited to a panel of providers. 16 For this analysis, we estimate the same model described

earlier separately for each group of states. Also, as part of our sensitivity analysis to make sure

that our results are not sensitive to our definition of workers’ choice of provider policies, we

excluded states from the workers’ choice group where the initial choice of medical provider is

limited to providers within managed care networks. Our results are robust to such changes in

the classification definition.




16
  These classification decisions are informed by state statutes, WCRI and IAIABC (2009), and Tanabe (2010, 2011,
2012, 2013).
        It is important to recognize that both categories of provider choice policies have

substantial variation in policy formulation. In some states, the regulations are more

straightforward regarding the choice of initial provider (e.g., Indiana and Iowa are employer

choice states), while in other states, provider choice policies discuss various circumstances

shaping control over the initial provider. In particular, in California, the choice of the initial

physician is limited to medical treatment networks that were introduced by Senate Bill (SB) 899

effective January 1, 2005, allowing employers to establish medical treatment networks.

However, the employer arranges the initial medical evaluation, after which the worker can

choose a new provider from the network. Since initial evaluation of the injury is the focus of

this study, we classified California as one of the employer choice states.

        Table 5 shows that workers are even more responsive to out-of-pocket costs of health

care in states where they can choose their initial provider, and workers are non-responsive to

cost-sharing in states where employers control the choice of initial provider. In Columns 1, 2

and 3, we show the spot price and end of year price effects for states with workers’ choice of

initial provider, where Column 1 presents results for all injuries and Columns 2 and 3 present

results for soft tissue conditions and injuries by trauma, respectively. Columns 4, 5, and 6

summarize results for states where employers control the choice of initial provider.

        Comparing results between the two groups of the states, the effect is concentrated in

the states where workers have more control over the choice of the initial provider. The overall

effect of the spot price, combining the coefficients on remaining deductible and on the

indicator for having a remaining deductible at the average deductible level observed in the

sample, is a 3.6 percentage point increase in case-shifting to WC that is equivalent to the 14
percent increase in the volume of WC cases. For soft tissue conditions, the spot price effect is

even larger—about 4 percentage points at the average, or an almost 21 percent increase in the

volume of WC soft tissue conditions. On the other hand, the impact is smaller for injuries by

trauma, amounting to an 11 percent increase in the baseline number of WC claims for injuries

by trauma. The estimated spot price effects are not only sizable but also statistically significant.

Also, across all specifications, the end of year price effect remains insignificant.

        In contrast, for the states where the employer controls the choice of initial provider, the

coefficient on the remaining deductible at the time of injury becomes immaterial and

statistically insignificant, while the coefficient on the dummy for having a remaining deductible

is also small and becomes negative. Additionally, the spot price effect becomes small and

statistically insignificant, and the end of year price effect remains statistically insignificant.

Therefore, the impact of case-shifting is larger and statistically significant in states, where

workers have more control over the choice of initial medical provider.



                                            Part IV: Conclusions

        While much attention is rightfully focused on the $1 trillion private health insurance

market, 17 another important component of the U.S. health care system is workers’

compensation insurance, which featured $31 billion in health claims in 2017. Importantly, there



17
  The estimate for private health insurance market is based on personal health care expenditures comprising of
health care goods and services purchased directly by or for individuals, excluding health expenditures for
government administration and net cost of health insurance, government public health activities, research, and
structures and equipment. Data retrieved from https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-
Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/NationalHealthAccountsHistorical.html
(accessed April 16, 2019).
is often not a cleanly identified distinction between whether injuries occur on the job or not.

And individuals in high deductible plans have a strong financial incentive to claim these costs as

work-related, shifting their costs from financially burdensome group health plans to cost-free

workers’ compensation coverage.

       Indeed, we demonstrate in this paper that such substitution between insurance systems

exists: when workers face higher financial burdens under group health, they are more likely to

file their claims as WC claims. At the same time, workers do not appear to be forward looking,

focusing on the spot price facing them under group health plans rather than the end of year

price. We also find that workers with soft tissue conditions are substantially more responsive to

cost-sharing burden of their group health plans than those with acute injuries, and that these

responses are stronger when individuals can choose the doctor for their initial (evaluative) visit.

       As individuals increasingly become responsible for greater share of their health care

costs under group health coverage, our findings indicate that workers’ compensation will see a

greater number of injuries shifting from group health. In particular, the share of covered

workers in plans with a general annual deductible increased from 59 percent in 2008 to 81

percent in 2017, while the average deductible amount, among those with a deductible, rose

from $735 in 2008 to $1,505 in 2017. In addition to estimating the spot price effect at the mean

of our analysis sample, we also computed the effect of spot prices for the deductible levels

observed in 2008 and 2017. Table 6 summarizes the percentage increase in the volume of WC

claims filed in response to the deductible levels observed in 2008 and 2017 (or spot price

effect). For example, to compute 2017 numbers, we use the 2017 enrollment percentage in

plans with an annual deductible and the average deductible level as reported by KFF and
individual medical spending observed in our analysis data; we estimate that 78 percent of

individuals would still be under the deductible at the time of the injury with an average

remaining deductible of about $1,380. This level of GH cost-sharing would result in a 6.5

percent increase in the likelihood of filing an injury under workers’ compensation, compared

with workers with no deductible at the time of the injury. Since 26 percent of these injuries are

filed as WC claims, this effect amounts to about a 13 percent increase in WC volume. Similar

computations conducted for 2008 show that WC volume is estimated to have increased by 6

percentage points due to cost-sharing growth observed between 2008 and 2017.

       The increase in the propensity to file for WC coverage for patients with soft tissue

conditions is even more sizable, resulting in about 14 percentage points growth from about

13.7 percent of WC volume of soft tissue conditions in 2008 to 27.6 percent in 2017. The

increase in filing for patients with injuries by trauma in response to growing deductibles is

smaller and not statistically significant, yielding a 1.2 percentage point increase in the number

of WC injuries by trauma between 2008 and 2017. These examples illustrate the size of the

impact of increasing cost-sharing on the propensity to file an injury for WC coverage rather

than group health. It shows that facing substantial financial burden of the GH plan deductibles,

injured workers are more likely to turn to WC coverage in attempt to avoid greater out-of-

pocket payments for medical care associated with their GH plans.

       Our analysis leaves a number of questions unanswered. In particular, we have assumed

that it is workers who are shifting their cases from GH to WC, but providers could actually be

doing the reclassification. As we showed in our earlier work (Fomenko and Gruber, 2017),

providers do undertake such reclassification in response to their own financial incentives. Our
results are not biased by the response to provider financial incentives, since we are considering

individuals in the same plan who simply have different levels of spending. But it is possible that

altruistic providers could be encouraging patients to shift their cases when the patients’ GH

cost sharing is high.


       In addition, as we noted earlier, there is evidence of under-claiming of work-related

injuries due to the hassle costs of the WC program. We cannot tell from our results whether the

financial incentives we study are reducing under-claiming by those injured at work, or whether

they are inducing a shift to WC among those not truly injured at work who have what might be

considered work-related injuries. Welfare analysis of this topic would likely require an

assessment of which types of claims are impacted by consumer cost-sharing.
                                          References

Abaluck, J., Gruber, J., & Swanson, A. (2015). Prescription Drug Use under Medicare Part D: A
        Linear Model of Nonlinear Budget Sets. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper.
Belton, S., R. Dolinschi, E. Radeva, K. Rothkin, B. Savych, C. Telles, and R. Yang. 2015.
        CompScope™ benchmarks, 15th edition. 15 vols. Cambridge, MA: Workers
        Compensation Research Institute.
Berndt, E. R., A. Bir, S. H. Busch, and R. G. Frank. 2002. The medical treatment of depression,
        1991–1996: Productive inefficiency, expected outcome variations, and price indexes.
        Journal of Health Economics 21 (3): 373–396.
Butler, R., H. Gardner, and N. Kleinman. 2013. Workers’ compensation: Occupational injury
        insurance’s influence on the workplace. In G. Dionne (ed.), Handbook of insurance (pp.
        449–469). Springer-Verlag New York.
Butler, R., R. Hartwig, and H. Gardner. 1997. HMOs, moral hazard and cost shifting in workers’
        compensation. Journal of Health Economics 16 (2): 191–206.
Biddle, Jeff, Karen Roberts (2003), Claiming Behavior in Workers’ Compensation, Journal of Risk
        and Insurance, vol 70, no 4, pp. 759–780.
Biddle, Jeff, Karen Roberts, Kenneth Rosenman, Edward Welch (1998). What Percentage of
        Workers with Work-Related Illnesses Receive Workers’ Compensation Benefits? Journal
        of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, April 1998, vol 40, no 4, pp. 325–331.
Brot-Goldberg, Z., A. Chandra, B. Handel, and J. Kolstad. 2017. What does a deductible do? The
        impact of cost-sharing on health care prices, quantities, and spending dynamics. The
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3): 1,261–1,318.
Card, D., and B.P. McCall (1996). Is Workers’ Compensation Covering Uninsured Medical Costs?
        Evidence from the ‘Monday Effect’. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 49 (4): 690–
        706.
Christina M. D., G. Gowrisankaran, R. Town (2015) Salience, Myopia, and Complex Dynamic
        Incentives: Evidence from Medicare Part D. NBER Working Paper No. 21104 Issued in
        April 2015, Revised in May 2018.
Dor, A., M. Grossman, and S. M. Koroukian. 2004. Hospital Transaction Prices and Managed-
        Care Discounting for Selected Medical Technologies. The American Economic Review 94
        (2): 352–356.
Ducatman, A. 1986. Workers’ compensation cost shifting: A unique concern of providers and
        purchasers of prepaid health care. Journal of Occupational Medicine 28 (11): 1,174–
        1,176.
Liran E., A. Finkelstein and P. Schrimpf (2015). The Response of Drug Expenditure to Nonlinear
        Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
        130 (2): 841-899.
Finkelstein, A., S. Ryan, P. Schrimpf, and M. Cullen (2013) Selection on Moral Hazard in Health
        Insurance, American Economic Review, 103 (1), 178–219, February 2013.
Fan, Z. J., David K. B., M. P. Foley, B. A. Silverstein (2006). Underreporting of Work-Related
        Injury or Illness to Workers’ Compensation: Individual and Industry Factors. Journal of
        Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 48 (9): 914–922.
Fomenko, O. and Gruber, J., 2017. Claims-shifting: The problem of parallel reimbursement
        regimes. Journal of Health Economics, 51 (2017), 13–25. The Kaiser Family Foundation
        and Health Research and Educational Trust. 2017. Employer health benefits, 2017
        annual survey. Menlo Park, CA and Chicago, IL.

Lakdawalla, Darius N., Robert T. Reville, and Seth A. Seabury (2005). How Does Health Insurance
        Affect Workers’ Compensation Filing? RAND Institute for Civil Justice Working Paper, ER-
        205-1-ICJ.
Pransky G., Snyder T., Dembe A., Himmelstein J. 1999. Under-Reporting of Work-Related
        Disorders in the Workplace: A Case Study and review of the Literature. Ergonomics
        42:171–182.
Ruser, J.W., and M.R. Pergamit (2004). Workers’ Compensation Reforms and Benefit Claiming.
        Third International Conference on Health Economics, Policy and Management, Athens,
        Greece.
Smith, R.S. (1990). Mostly on Mondays: Is Workers' Compensation Covering Off-the-Job
        Injuries? Benefits, Costs, and Cycles in Workers' Compensation, P.S. Borba and D. Appel
        eds., Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 115–128.
Zwerling, Craig, James Ryan, and E. John Orav (1991). Workers’ Compensation Cost Shifting: An
        Empirical Study, American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 19, 317–325.
Table 1: Sample Size and Composition, by Type of Injury and Type of Payer
                                                       Workers' Compensation
                          Group Health Paid                                                 Full Sample
                                                                Paid
Medical Conditions     Number                          Number                         Number
                          of       Percentage             of        Percentage           of       Percentage
                       Patients                        Patients                       Patients
Contusion                1,863          2%              4,598          21%             6,461          6%
Fracture/dislocation     8,905         12%              2,574          7%              11,479         11%
Laceration               3,309          4%              5,365          23%             8,674          8%
Soft tissue
conditions              62,052         82%             13,662          49%             75,714         74%
Grand total             76,129         100%            26,199         100%            102,328        100%

Notes: This summary of group health and workers' compensation patients is based on the analysis sample, which
includes cases of care arising between 2008 and 2014. Also, cases with other medical diagnoses are excluded
from the sample. For more information on the construction of the analysis sample, refer to the “Data” section.
Table 2: Descriptive Summary of the Analysis Variables
                                                                   GH                   WC
                                      Variable                          St.                  St.
                                                           Mean                 Mean
                                                                        dev                  dev


Remaining year to date deductible (in 100s)                 5.68         6.67    5.16         5.59
Remaining end of year deductible (in 100s)                  5.64         6.63    5.03         5.57
Dummy for whether year to date spending below deductible    0.47         0.50    0.52         0.50
Dummy for whether end of year spending below deductible     0.33         0.47    0.35         0.48
Year to date spending                                       4.55         9.01    3.30         7.23
Previous year total spending                                7.45        11.17    6.63        10.68
Demographics
Age: 18–34                                                  0.15         0.35    0.18         0.38
Age: 35–44                                                  0.26         0.44    0.26         0.44
Age: 45–54                                                  0.38         0.48    0.36         0.48
Age: 55–64                                                  0.22         0.41    0.19         0.39
Male                                                        0.63         0.48    0.70         0.46
Female                                                      0.37         0.48    0.30         0.46
Medical condition
Contusion                                                   0.02         0.15    0.18         0.38
Fracture/dislocation                                        0.12         0.32    0.10         0.30
Laceration                                                  0.04         0.20    0.20         0.40
Sprain and strain                                           0.82         0.39    0.52         0.50
Body part
Spine                                                       0.39         0.49    0.22         0.41
Upper extremity                                             0.20         0.40    0.27         0.45
Lower extremity                                             0.27         0.44    0.26         0.44
Head & face                                                 0.01         0.11    0.06         0.23
Multiple and other                                          0.03         0.16    0.06         0.24
Unspecified body part                                       0.10         0.30    0.12         0.33
Table 3. Estimated Spot Price and End of Year Price Effects on Workers' Compensation Filing for Multiple Specifications
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)

                                              0.0016**                    0.0014**      0.0014                      0.0018
Remaining deductible amount (in $100s)
                                              (0.0006)                   (0.0006)      (0.0009)                    (0.0012)


Dummy for whether year to date spending                     0.0103*       0.0078                      0.0103*       0.0095
below plan deductible                                      (0.0057)      (0.0057)                    (0.0056)      (0.0061)


Remaining end of year deductible (in                                                    0.0006                      0.0039
$100s)                                                                                 (0.0019)                    (0.0027)


Dummy for whether end of year spending                                                               -0.0003       -0.0660
below plan deductible                                                                                (0.0268)      (0.0489)
                                              26%          26%           26%           26%           26%           26%
% of cases paid by WC (vs. group health)

                                              3.48%**      2.92%*        5.31%**       3.03%         2.92%*        6.58%**
Spot price effect on the % of WC cases

End of year price effect on the % of WC                                                0.01%         -0.00%        0.02%
cases

Demographics
                                              -0.0114**    -0.0114**     -0.0114**     -0.0114**     -0.0114**     -0.0120**
Age: 35–44
                                              (0.0039)     (0.0039)      (0.0039)      (0.0039)      (0.0039)      (0.0039)


                                              -0.0171**    -0.0171**     -0.0171**     -0.0170**     -0.0171**     -0.0182**
Age: 45–54
                                              (0.0037)     (0.0037)      (0.0037)      (0.0037)      (0.0038)      (0.0039)


                                              -0.0226**    -0.0227**     -0.0227**     -0.0225**     -0.0227**     -0.0243**
Age: 55–64
                                              (0.0041)     (0.0041)      (0.0041)      (0.0041)      (0.0042)      (0.0044)


                                              0.0175**      0.0175**      0.0175**      0.0174**      0.0175**      0.0185**
Male
                                              (0.0026)     (0.0026)      (0.0026)      (0.0026)      (0.0027)      (0.0027)
Body part
                                              0.0435**      0.0435**      0.0435**      0.0436**      0.0435**      0.0433**
Upper extremity
                                              (0.0035)     (0.0035)      (0.0035)      (0.0035)      (0.0035)      (0.0035)


                                              0.0220**      0.0219**      0.0219**      0.0220**      0.0219**      0.0217**
Lower extremity
                                              (0.0030)     (0.0030)      (0.0030)      (0.0030)      (0.0030)      (0.0031)


                                              0.0698**      0.0697**      0.0698**      0.0699**      0.0697**      0.0694**
Head and face
                                              (0.0092)     (0.0092)      (0.0092)      (0.0092)      (0.0092)      (0.0093)


                                              0.3642**      0.3651**      0.3644**      0.3640**      0.3651**      0.3733**
Skin
                                              (0.0768)     (0.0766)      (0.0767)      (0.0766)      (0.0766)      (0.0774)
Table 3. Estimated Spot Price and End of Year Price Effects on Workers' Compensation Filing for Multiple Specifications
(continued)
                                                     (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)

                                                 0.0892**       0.0891**      0.0892**       0.0891**       0.0891**       0.0898**
Multiple and other
                                                 (0.0081)      (0.0081)       (0.0081)      (0.0081)       (0.0081)       (0.0082)


                                                 0.0760**       0.0759**      0.0759**       0.0760**       0.0759**       0.0765**
Unspecified body part
                                                 (0.0039)      (0.0039)       (0.0039)      (0.0039)       (0.0039)       (0.0039)
Medical condition
                                                 -0.4062**     -0.4062**      -0.4062**     -0.4059**      -0.4062**      -0.4093**
Fracture/dislocation
                                                 (0.0065)      (0.0065)       (0.0065)      (0.0066)       (0.0068)       (0.0072)


                                                 -0.0918**     -0.0918**      -0.0918**     -0.0918**      -0.0918**      -0.0927**
Laceration
                                                 (0.0071)      (0.0071)       (0.0071)      (0.0071)       (0.0071)       (0.0072)


                                                 -0.4509**     -0.4510**      -0.4509**     -0.4510**      -0.4510**      -0.4514**
Soft tissue conditions
                                                 (0.0057)      (0.0057)       (0.0057)      (0.0057)       (0.0057)       (0.0058)


                                                  0.6153        0.6161         0.6103        0.5683**       0.5969**       0.5591**
Constant
                                                 (0.0254)**    (0.0256)**     (0.0257)**    (0.0415)       (0.0437)       (0.0418)

Plan fixed effects                               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
State fixed effects                              Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Injury month fixed effects                       Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Year to date spending                            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Previous year total spending                     Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations                                     102,328       102,328        102,328       102,328        102,328        102,328
R-squared                                        0.278         0.278          0.278         0.278          0.278          0.278
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * statistically significant at the 10% level, ** statistically significant at the 5%
level.
Table 4. Estimated Spot Price and End of Year Price Effects on WC Filing for Multiple Specifications, by Injury Type
                                  Soft tissue conditions    Injury by trauma        Soft tissue conditions     Injury by trauma

Remaining deductible amount        0.0020**                 0.0009                  0.0030**                    0.0006
(in $100s)                        (0.0006)                  (0.0014)                (0.0013)                   (0.0025)

Dummy for whether year to          0.0084                   0.0115                  0.0101                      0.0083
date spending below plan
deductible                        (0.0062)                  (0.0122)                (0.0066)                   (0.0129)


Remaining end of year                                                               0.0049*                    -0.0085
deductible (in $100s)                                                               (0.0028)                   (0.0068)


Dummy for whether end of year                                                       -0.1012*                    0.1182
spending below plan deductible                                                      (0.0527)                   (0.1078)
% of cases paid by WC (vs.        18%                       48%                     18%                        48%
group health)

Spot price effect on the % of WC 9.74%**                    0.028%                  13.41%**                   0.02%
cases

End of year price effect on the                                                     -0.01%                     -0.04%
% of WC cases

Demographics
                                  -0.0208**                 0.0124                  -0.0220**                   0.0128*
Age: 35–44
                                  (0.0043)                  (0.0076)                (0.0045)                   (0.0074)


                                  -0.0371**                 0.0363**                -0.0393**                   0.0370**
Age: 45–54
                                  (0.0041)                  (0.0073)                (0.0044)                   (0.0072)


                                  -0.0454**                 0.0385**                -0.0485**                   0.0400**
Age: 55–64
                                  (0.0046)                  (0.0081)                (0.0050)                   (0.0082)


                                   0.0153**                 0.0099*                 0.0169**                    0.0083
Male
                                  (0.0028)                  (0.0055)                (0.0030)                   (0.0057)
Body part
                                   0.1113**                 -0.3144**               0.1119**                   -0.3094**
Upper extremity
                                  (0.0039)                  (0.0093)                (0.0040)                   (0.0118)


                                   0.0712**                 -0.3364**               0.0712**                   -0.3319**
Lower extremity
                                  (0.0032)                  (0.0092)                (0.0033)                   (0.0112)


                                   0.5788**                 -0.2464**               0.5919**                   -0.2418**
Head and face
                                  (0.0490)                  (0.0120)                (0.0484)                   (0.0139)
 Table 4. Estimated Spot Price and End of Year Price Effects on WC Filing for Multiple Specifications, by Injury Type
 (continued)
                                    Soft tissue conditions Injury by trauma            Soft tissue conditions       Injury by trauma

                                     0.5517**                 0.0307                   0.5669**                     0.0212
Skin
                                    (0.0761)                  (0.0597)                 (0.0963)                     (0.0737)


                                     0.3172**                 -0.3793**                0.3214**                     -0.3738**
Multiple and other
                                    (0.0115)                  (0.0124)                 (0.0119)                     (0.0145)


                                     0.0545**                 0.1637**                 0.0554**                     0.1638**
Unspecified body part
                                    (0.0038)                  (0.0133)                 (0.0039)                     (0.0132)
Medical condition
                                                              -0.4473**                                             -0.4414**
Fracture/dislocation
                                                              (0.0068)                                              (0.0102)


                                                              -0.1032**                                             -0.1017**
Laceration
                                                              (0.0069)                                              (0.0069)



Soft tissue conditions



                                     0.1351**                 0.9185**                 0.0864*                      0.8679**
Constant
                                    (0.0266)                  (0.0449)                 (0.0448)                     (0.0845)


Plan fixed effects                  Yes                       Yes                      Yes                          Yes
State fixed effects                 Yes                       Yes                      Yes                          Yes
Injury month fixed effects          Yes                       Yes                      Yes                          Yes
Year to date spending               Yes                       Yes                      Yes                          Yes
Previous year total spending        Yes                       Yes                      Yes                          Yes
Observations                        75,714                    26,614                   75,714                       26,614
R-squared                           0.174                     0.426                    0.150                        0.435
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * statistically significant at the 10% level, ** statistically significant at the 5%
level.
Table 5. Estimated Spot Price and End of Year Price Effects on Workers' Compensation Filing for Multiple Specifications, by
Provider Choice Policy Type
                                                 Worker Choice of Medical Provider         Employer Choice of Medical Provider
Initial Provider Choice Policy                                 Soft Tissue    Injury by                  Soft Tissue     Injury by
                                                All Injuries                              All Injuries
                                                               Conditions      Trauma                    Conditions       Trauma
                                                 0.0026         0.0028        0.0044       0.0008         0.0026       -0.0012
Remaining deductible amount (in $100s)
                                                (0.0017)       (0.0018)      (0.0044)     (0.0016)       (0.0018)      (0.0031)

Dummy for whether year to date spending          0.0282**       0.0295**      0.0353**    -0.0182*       -0.0196*      -0.0276
below plan deductible                           (0.0079)       (0.0085)      (0.0178)     (0.0097)       (0.0107)      (0.0194)

                                                 0.0061         0.0071*      -0.0092       0.0000         0.0014       -0.0112
Remaining end of year deductible (in $100s)
                                                (0.0039)       (0.0040)      (0.0102)     (0.0040)       (0.0041)      (0.0100)

Dummy for whether end of year spending          -0.0645        -0.0599       -0.0054      -0.0295        -0.0935        0.2020
below plan deductible                           (0.0720)       (0.0766)      (0.1681)     (0.0681)       (0.0724)      (0.1575)

                                                26%            18%           48%          26%            18%           48%
% of cases paid by WC (vs. group health)

                                                13.65%**       20.74%**      10.49%**     -0.03%         0.00%         -0.06%
Spot price effect on the % of WC cases

                                                0.07%          14.76%        -0.13%       -0.04%         -0.12%        -0.02%
End of year price effect on the % of WC cases

Demographics
                                                -0.0144**      -0.0237**      0.0133      -0.0061        -0.0157**      0.0150
Age: 35–44
                                                (0.0053)       (0.0060)      (0.0105)     (0.0060)       (0.0068)      (0.0110)

                                                -0.0224**      -0.0395**      0.0229**    -0.0103*       -0.0360**      0.0536**
Age: 45–54
                                                (0.0052)       (0.0059)      (0.0101)     (0.0059)       (0.0068)      (0.0107)

                                                -0.0263**      -0.0465**      0.0331**    -0.0181**      -0.0466**      0.0496**
Age: 55–64
                                                (0.0059)       (0.0067)      (0.0114)     (0.0066)       (0.0076)      (0.0122)

                                                 0.0238**       0.0190**      0.0233**     0.0122**       0.0133**     -0.0042
Male
                                                (0.0038)       (0.0040)      (0.0081)     (0.0041)       (0.0045)      (0.0082)
Body part
                                                 0.0365**       0.0970**     -0.2873**     0.0506**       0.1244**     -0.3378**
Upper extremity
                                                (0.0048)       (0.0055)      (0.0175)     (0.0052)       (0.0059)      (0.0171)

                                                 0.0136**       0.0609**     -0.3196**     0.0309**       0.0826**     -0.3495**
Lower extremity
                                                (0.0042)       (0.0044)      (0.0158)     (0.0046)       (0.0049)      (0.0171)

                                                 0.0774**       1.0181**     -0.2128**     0.0620**       0.5649**     -0.2798**
Head and face
                                                (0.0133)       (0.0370)      (0.0201)     (0.0132)       (0.0309)      (0.0205)

                                                 0.6068**       0.8372**      0.1161**     0.3242**       0.4665**     -0.0233
Skin
                                                (0.1331)       (0.0737)      (0.0477)     (0.0753)       (0.0303)      (0.1279)

                                                 0.0718**       0.2810**     -0.3565**     0.1061**       0.3585**     -0.4049**
Multiple and other
                                                (0.0114)       (0.0163)      (0.0214)     (0.0121)       (0.0175)      (0.0203)
Table 5. Estimated Spot Price and End of Year Price Effects on Workers' Compensation Filing for Multiple Specifications, by
Provider Choice Policy Type (continued)
                                                 Worker Choice of Medical Provider            Employer Choice of Medical Provider
                                                                 Soft Tissue    Injury by                     Soft Tissue     Injury by
                                                  All Injuries                                 All Injuries
                                                                 Conditions      Trauma                       Conditions       Trauma
                                                  0.0679**        0.0440**      0.2697**       0.0848**        0.0658**      0.0697**
Unspecified body part
                                                 (0.0053)        (0.0052)      (0.0191)       (0.0059)        (0.0060)      (0.0191)
Medical condition
                                                 -0.4114**                     -0.4381**      -0.4005**                     -0.4503**
Fracture/dislocation
                                                 (0.0102)                      (0.0153)       (0.0104)                      (0.0143)

                                                 -0.1250**                     -0.1373**      -0.0631**                     -0.0689**
Laceration
                                                 (0.0104)                      (0.0103)       (0.0100)                      (0.0097)

                                                 -0.4440**                                    -0.4610**
Soft tissue conditions
                                                 (0.0084)                                     (0.0081)

                                                  0.5293**       0.065          0.8199**       0.7129**        0.2316**      1.1746**
Constant
                                                 (0.0592)        (0.0667)      (0.1167)       (0.0616)        (0.0678)      (0.1277)

Plan fixed effects                               Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
State fixed effects                              Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Injury month fixed effects                       Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Year to date spending                            Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Previous year total spending                     Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes
Observations                                     53,855          40,090        13,765         46,193          33,906        12,287
R-squared                                        0.239           0.136         0.400          0.307           0.184         0.460

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses; * statistically significant at the 10% level, ** statistically significant at the 5% level.
Reported effects were estimated using the linear probability model of the likelihood of an injury being classified as work-related.
See the section “Evaluation of the Estimates’ Sensitivity to the Choice of Explanatory Variables” for definitions of the
specifications.
Table 6. Trend in Propensity of Filing for Workers' Compensation as Cost-Sharing Continues to Grow: 2008 and 2017

Increase in Workers' Compensation Volume                                           2008a                  2017b

                                                                                   6.4889**             12.5931**
All injuries
                                                                                  (2.7664)              (4.1092)

                                                                                  13.7434**             27.5932**
Soft tissue conditions
                                                                                  (4.3501)              (9.3569)

                                                                                   1.7096                 2.9504*
Injury by trauma
                                                                                  (3.1107)               (6.7864)

Notes: * statistically significant at the 10% level, ** statistically significant at the 5% level.
These numbers were obtained using estimates reported in Table 3.1 and cost-sharing statistics presented in the Annual
Survey of Employer Health Benefits by the Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF). In particular, the share of covered workers in
plans with a general annual deductible increased from 59 percent in 2008 to 81 percent in 2017, while the average
deductible amount, among those with a deductible, rose from $735 in 2008 to $1,505 in 2017.
a Under the 2008 deductible levels as reported by KFF, we estimated that 57 percent of individuals were still under the
deductible at the time of the injury, with an average remaining deductible of about $632.
b Under the 2017 deductible levels as reported by KFF, 78 percent of individuals were still under the deductible at the

time of the injury, with an average remaining deductible of about $1,390.
