                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ON THE EQUIVALENCE OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC MONEY

                                    Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                         Dirk Niepelt

                                       Working Paper 25877
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25877


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




For comments and discussions, we thank Ricardo Reis, an anonymous referee, Joseph Abadi,
Hans Gersbach, Martin Gonzalez-Eiras, Ricardo Lagos, Sebastian Merkel, Edward Nelson,
Christian Wolf, and conference and seminar participants at the Graduate Institute Geneva, the
JME-SNB-SCG conference on money creation and competition, Princeton University, the
Riksbank, the Universities of Chicago, Cologne, and Maryland. Brunnermeier acknowledges
research support from MFM. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25877.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Markus K. Brunnermeier and Dirk Niepelt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On the Equivalence of Private and Public Money
Markus K. Brunnermeier and Dirk Niepelt
NBER Working Paper No. 25877
May 2019
JEL No. E40,E41,E42,E44,E51,E52,E58,G21

                                        ABSTRACT

We develop a generic model of money and liquidity that identifies sources of liquidity bubbles
and seignorage rents. We provide sufficient conditions under which a swap of monies leaves the
equilibrium allocation and price system unchanged. We apply the equivalence result to the
"Chicago Plan,'' cryptocurrencies, the Indian de-monetization experiment, and Central Bank
Digital Currency (CBDC). In particular, we show why CBDC need not undermine financial
stability.


Markus K. Brunnermeier
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08544
and CEPR
and also NBER
markus@princeton.edu

Dirk Niepelt
Study Center Gerzensee
Neues Schloss
3115 Gerzensee
Switzerland
and University of Bern
dirk.niepelt@szgerzensee.ch
        On the Equivalence of Private and Public Money∗
                     Markus K. Brunnermeier†                   Dirk Niepelt‡
                                         May 22, 2019


                                             Abstract
            We develop a generic model of money and liquidity that identifies sources of liq-
        uidity bubbles and seignorage rents. We provide sufficient conditions under which a
        swap of monies leaves the equilibrium allocation and price system unchanged. We
        apply the equivalence result to the “Chicago Plan,” cryptocurrencies, the Indian
        de-monetization experiment, and Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). In par-
        ticular, we show why CBDC need not undermine financial stability.

        Keywords: Money creation, monetary system, inside money, outside money, equiv-
        alence, CBDC, Chicago Plan, sovereign money


1       Introduction
Modern economies rely on public—central-bank issued—and private media of exchange.
The latter are in the spotlight: FinTechs and BigTech do not only reshape the payment
system as consumers increasingly bank on payment apps and mobile phones, but they also
supply new digital monies; in China, the new entrants have relegated traditional banks
to secondary role. This structural change occurs against the background of tightening
regulation, with governments discouraging cash transactions in order to fight tax evasion
and money laundering.
   Whether central banks or private entities should be the principal issuers of (digital)
money has been the subject of a long-standing debate. Proponents of a strong govern-
ment role fear that private money creation breeds instability and shifts seignorage rents
    ∗
     For comments and discussions, we thank Ricardo Reis, an anonymous referee, Joseph Abadi, Hans
Gersbach, Martı́n Gonzalez-Eiras, Ricardo Lagos, Sebastian Merkel, Edward Nelson, Christian Wolf, and
conference and seminar participants at the Graduate Institute Geneva, the JME-SNB-SCG conference
on money creation and competition, Princeton University, the Riksbank, the Universities of Chicago,
Cologne, and Maryland. Brunnermeier acknowledges research support from MFM.
   †
     Princeton University; CEPR; CESifo; NBER. Princeton, NJ, 08544, USA. markus@princeton.edu,
https://scholar.princeton.edu/markus.
   ‡
     Study Center Gerzensee; University of Bern; CEPR; CESifo. P.O. Box 21, CH-3115 Gerzensee,
Switzerland. dirk.niepelt@szgerzensee.ch, https://www.niepelt.ch.



                                                 1
to shareholders. In the “Chicago Plan” of the 1930s and the recently rejected Swiss ref-
erendum proposal on “Vollgeld” (sovereign money), they suggest to severely restrict or
even ban money creation by anyone except the central bank. Less drastic proposals aim
at electronic Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) for use by non-banks.1 Skeptics,
on the other hand, warn against the replacement of private media of exchange. In their
view, a reduction of bank-issued money could undermine credit extension, with negative
implications for growth; and the introduction of CBDC could encourage depositor runs
and threaten financial stability.
     To assess the validity of these arguments, we develop a general model of money, liq-
uidity, and financial frictions. Within that framework, we identify sources of liquidity
bubbles and seignorage rents, and we augment the standard asset pricing formula with
a “liquidity kernel.” Moreover, we establish conditions for the equivalence of different
monetary systems. Finally, we apply our results and show how they overturn the con-
ventional wisdom: Contrary to frequently made arguments, a swap of public for private
money need not choke off credit or crowd out investment, and the introduction of CBDC
need not undermine financial stability.
     Our first contribution is to develop a generic framework that nests many—and most
standard—models of money, liquidity, and financial frictions. We show, second, how the
relaxation of means-of-payment constraints introduces “liquidity payoffs” of securities.
These liquidity payoffs make bubbles on “liquid” securities—that is, securities which re-
lax means-of-payment constraints—more likely because the standard stochastic discount
factor (SDF) is augmented with a liquidity kernel that enlarges the SDF, effectively shrink-
ing the discount rate. The liquidity payoffs generate seignorage rents for the issuers of
liquid securities unless competition shifts the rents to customers.
     Our framework suggests that some frequently-made arguments in the policy debate
are questionable. In particular, it is unclear why the issuance of CBDC should reduce
credit, crowd out investment, or undermine financial stability. Whether this would indeed
be the case depends on the monetary policy accompanying the issuance of CBDC and
on the strength of the central bank’s commitment to serve as lender of last resort. With
a strong commitment, a transfer of funds from deposit to CBDC accounts would give
rise to an automatic substitution of one type of bank funding (deposits) by another one
(central bank funding)—the issuance of CBDC would simply render the central bank’s
implicit lender-of-last-resort guarantee explicit. By construction, a swap of CBDC for
deposits thus would not reduce bank funding; it would only change the composition of
bank funding.
     Figure 1 illustrates this “pass-through” mechanism: When households expand their
CBDC (“money”) holdings and lower their deposit holdings (as indicated by the arrows on
the asset side of the household sector’s balance sheet), then the central bank’s liabilities
expand correspondingly (indicated by the arrows on the liabilities side of the central
bank’s balance sheet). In exchange for the CBDC, the central bank acquires claims vis-
à-vis the banking sector (indicated by the arrows on the asset side of its balance sheet).
That is, the central bank automatically provides substitute funding for banks, effectively
   1
   Monetary authorities in several countries evaluate the introduction of such “Reserves for All;” the
Banco Central del Uruguay has successfully tested a CBDC.


                                                  2
                                    A      Gov. & CB         L
                                                                 A      Households   L


          A       Banks      L
                      B-Debt            B-Debt       Money           Money

                      Deposits                                       Deposits




                         Figure 1: Pass-through funding of banks.

intermediating between non-banks and banks.
    Of course, this balance sheet arithmetic does not prove that households, firms, and
banks find it optimal to maintain their initial equilibrium choices rather than adjusting
consumption, production, funding, or investment plans in response to the swap. After
all, the swap might redistribute wealth (by shifting seignorage rents), change portfolio
payoffs, and alter the liquidity services of portfolios. Our third contribution is to clarify
these effects and to prove an equivalence result. We establish sufficient conditions under
which a swap does not alter the equilibrium allocation and price system, even if the swap
involves monies with different liquidity and payoff characteristics (e.g., due to differential
run risk).
    Equivalence follows from wealth and liquidity neutrality (as well as an invariant asset
span); that is, it follows if the swap does not change the wealth distribution nor tighten
or relax means-of-payment constraints. As long as the swap does not alter the marginal
liquidity contribution of securities and the monies being swapped are minimally substi-
tutable, liquidity neutrality follows, as we show. We argue that this requirement is met
in many models, at least to the first order, but we also offer a counter example. Liquidity
neutrality implies wealth neutrality, as we also show. The equivalence condition thus
reduces to a simple and transparent requirement that relates to the means-of-payment
constraints. In monetary models without such constraints (e.g., the standard overlapping
generations (OLG) model), equivalence can always be guaranteed.
    To also replicate the contingent portfolio payoffs in the equilibrium prior to the in-
tervention the swap may have to be accompanied by contingent transfers of zero market
value. These transfers are only needed if non-banks are sufficiently heterogeneous and
their fiscal exposure differs from their exposure to the swap. No contingent transfers are
required, for example, if the direct payoff effects of the swap are offset by indirect effects
from changes in tax burdens, similarly to the offset of current and future taxes underlying
the Ricardian equivalence logic (Barro 1974).


                                                 3
    The equivalent monetary policy that accommodates the swap completely insulates the
banking sector: The central bank provides pass-through funding at the same conditions
as the deposit funding by non-banks. Effectively, the central bank replicates the deposit
supply schedule in the initial equilibrium, and this preserves the choice sets of banks,
independently of whether they are competitive or not. By funding the banks rather
than purchasing bank assets, the central bank avoids to interfere directly with the credit
allocation mechanism—only banks screen and monitor investment projects.
    Since a wealth- and liquidity-neutral swap in combination with the appropriate fiscal-
monetary policy implies unchanged choice sets of households, firms, and banks, it also
guarantees equivalence in general equilibrium. Subject to unchanged equilibrium prices,
households and firms maintain their consumption and production decisions; national sav-
ing and its sectoral components remain unchanged; and there is no crowding out. A key
assumption for this result is that public and private liquidity creation generates the same
social costs; that is, the monies involved in the swap enter the resource constraint sym-
metrically. This is a weaker assumption than the usual assumption that the social cost
of liquidity creation equals zero (Friedman 1969).
    Our equivalence theorem constitutes a theoretical benchmark result that may or may
not be plausible in specific contexts. Its main objective is to identify the key conditions
for equivalence and thus, the sources of possible non-equivalence. In this sense, our
research strategy is inspired by Modigliani & Miller (1958), Barro (1974), and the many
other equivalence results in the economics literature. In line with these contributions, we
conduct our analysis in the context of a rather general framework; accordingly, we derive
sufficient conditions for equivalence.
    These conditions are easy to apply. Our fourth and final contribution is to discuss
the implications of our analysis in the context of four applications. We start with two
proposals for monetary reform: CBDC and the more drastic “Chicago Plan.” We find
that the introduction of CBDC would not change macroeconomic outcomes if it were
accompanied by a pass-through policy—independently of whether deposits are subject to
bank runs or not. If bank runs are a feature of the current system (and CBDC is risk free)
then the equivalent fiscal-monetary policy involves state-contingent transfers between the
private sector and the central bank; if it does not, for instance due to a generous deposit
insurance scheme, then no such transfers are needed.
    Naturally, CBDC in combination with a pass-through policy would not undermine
financial stability because a depositor run into CBDC would automatically trigger pass-
through funding. If the central bank did not accept bank deposits in exchange for the
CBDC it issues, then equivalence would no longer be guaranteed although the run would
automatically be stopped. We also argue that with pass-through funding, the introduction
of CBDC could well strengthen financial stability rather than undermining it because
CBDC and pass-through funding could turn the central bank into a large depositor.
Unlike small depositors, such a large depositor internalizes run externalities and has the
means to eliminate run equilibria.
    Regarding the Chicago Plan, we also find that the conditions for equivalence are met
provided that banks receive appropriate compensation for lost seignorage rents. An im-
portant motivation for the “Vollgeld” proposal, however, was that banks should relinquish

                                            4
these rents. This would transfer seignorage from bank shareholders to taxpayers, under-
mining wealth neutrality.
    Two further applications we consider relate to the introduction of cryptocurrencies and
the recent Indian de-monetization experiment. Our equivalence result does not apply to
cryptocurrencies operating on blockchains with proof-of-work algorithms because these
currencies require substantial resources—typically in the form of electricity—to ensure
correct record keeping. In the context of other cryptocurrencies, our sufficient conditions
for equivalence may well be satisfied. As for the Indian de-monetization experiment, we
find that it likely violated the sufficient conditions for equivalence because some cash-
based transactions at black-market prices could no longer be conducted.

Related Literature Fisher (1935) offers one of the first discussions of the Chicago plan.
Gurley & Shaw (1960) introduce the distinction between inside money issued by banks
and outside money supplied by the government.2 Tobin (1963, 1969, 1985) discusses the
fractional reserve banking system and proposes a precursor to CBDC.
    Wallace (1981) derives an equivalence result in a deterministic OLG economy; he
shows that it is irrelevant whether households hold physical capital directly or indirectly,
via their money holdings at a central bank invested in capital. Bryant (1983) summarizes
important equivalence results. Chamley & Polemarchakis (1984) establish that open-
market operations are neutral when money does not serve as a medium of exchange.
Sargent (1987, 5.4) presents results on equivalent fiscal-monetary policies in the opposite
case.
    Andolfatto (2018) studies the macroeconomic consequences of banks’ money creation
in an OLG framework. Benes & Kumhof (2012) set up a New Keynesian DSGE model and
argue that banks’ money creation ex nihilo destabilizes the economy. Faure & Gersbach
(2018) develop a model of banking and contrast the welfare under a fractional reserve
banking architecture and an architecture with 100% reserve banking. Niepelt (2018,
2020) discusses CBDC and offers an informal analysis of the conditions under which a
substitution of outside for inside money does not affect macroeconomic outcomes.

Structure of Paper The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays
out a general model of a monetary economy with a wide range of possible monetary and
other frictions. Section 3 analyzes the effects of an asset’s “liquidity” on its equilibrium
price. Section 4 derives and explains the main equivalence result. In Section 5, we apply
our findings to Central Bank Digital Currency, the Chicago Plan, cryptocurrencies, as
well as the Indian de-monetization experiment. Section 6 concludes.


2         Model
We consider a dynamic, stochastic economy with unit measures of possibly heterogeneous
households, firms, and banks, as well as a consolidated government sector. Time is discrete
and indexed by t ≥ 0. All variables dated t are measurable with respect to the history up
    2
        Money-multiplier analysis, on which the distinction draws, dates back at least to the 1940s.


                                                       5
to and including date t, except otherwise noted. Households, firms, and banks are indexed
by h, f , and b, respectively. The government does not consume nor invest; it only issues
and acquires securities and collects taxes or pays transfers. We use the terms “central
bank” and “government” interchangeably; a superscript c denotes “central bank.”

2.1     Households
Each household h chooses consumption-leisure and portfolio sequences to maximize life-
time utility. Formally, the household maximizes
                         X j,h j X j,h j                  X n,h
        U h (x·,h ) s.t.    at p t =   at−1 (pt + ztj ) −  xt qtn − τth (x·,h , q) ∀t,
                             j              j                            n

                           Lht ({aj,h j       j,h   j
                                  t pt }j , {at−1 (pt   +   ztj )}j , p, x·,h , q)   ≥ (=) 0 ∀t,

and a no-Ponzi game condition. Function U h denotes household h’s lifetime utility func-
tion which is smooth, concave, and strictly increasing (decreasing) in all arguments that
generate utility (disutility). The function encompasses household h’s probability filtra-
tion, which may differ across households, for instance due to asymmetric information.
     We index commodities (not contingent on date or history) by n and denote household
h’s consumption of commodity n at date t by xn,h   t . When we omit time subscripts (e.g.,
xn,h ) then we refer to the sequence over time and histories, and when we replace the
superscript n by a dot (e.g., x·,h
                               t ) then we refer to the vector containing all n. The price of
commodity n at date t is denoted qtn ; qt denotes the price vector at date t, and q denotes
the price vectors at all dates. The numeraire at each date is the “first” good, qt1 = 1.
Vector x·,h
          t includes, for example, consumption of goods and services, labor supply, or
leisure.3
     We index securities (not contingent on date or history but possibly on the issuer) by j
and denote a security of type j held (positive position) or issued (negative) by agent i by
aj,i
  t . As with commodities, we refer to sequences over time when we omit time subscripts
and to vectors when we replace the first superscript (indicating the type of security) by
a dot. For example, a·,h t  denotes all security exposures of household h at date t. The
price of security j at date t is denoted pjt ; pt denotes the price vector at date t and p
denotes the price vectors at all dates. Note that this formulation allows for time varying,
stochastic prices of securities including monies; the stochasticity allows to capture bank
runs in a reduced-form way.4 The payoff of security j at date t, expressed in units of the
numeraire, is denoted ztj .
   3
     If we treat leisure rather than labor supply as a commodity then the budget constraint also includes
a time endowment.
   4
     To represent bank runs, let bank deposits be investor specific and let the history include information
about which households and firms are first to arrive at a specific bank when this bank is subject to a run.
Histories that only differ with respect to who is early in the queue and who is late, are equally likely.
Ex-ante, deposits at the bank are identical but ex post, conditional on history, the payoff on deposits at
the bank differs for different households and firms; households and firms in the front of the queue receive
the promised payoff and price while latecomers only receive the bankruptcy value of the bank.



                                                    6
    The first constraint in the household’s program
                                                 P j,hrepresents   the budget constraint. It
                                                           j    j
states that the household’s portfolio payoff, j at−1 (pt + zt ), finances commodity pur-
chases net of sales; tax payments net of received transfers; and securities purchases net
of issuances. Function τth denotes a tax (net of transfers) function. Asset markets may
be incomplete and they may also be segmented; that is, different households may have
access to distinct sets of securities (to avoid unnecessary notation, we do not formalize
this). The second constraint captures restrictions that relate to the medium-of-exchange
function of money or other types of financial frictions that we discuss below.
    This framework captures a wide variety of models of money and liquidity.5 First,
overlapping generation (OLG) models à la Samuelson (1958), in which households of
a certain generation, h say, derive utility, U h , from consumption in specific periods.6 In
such an economy no Lht -constraints are present, but money may emerge in the form of a
bubble if the risk-free interest rate is lower than the growth rate of the economy (Wallace
1980).7 Similar results hold in the turnpike model (Townsend 1980).
    Second, models with incomplete markets à la Brunnermeier & Sannikov (2016),
where agents demand money-like assets because these assets constitute useful hedges or
a safe store of value. Again, no Lht -constraints are present in these models.
    Third, models with a medium-of-exchange function of money that we represent by
means of the Lht -constraints. Our general formulation relates portfolio positions (both
inherited and new), security prices, the household’s commodity vector, and commodity
prices to each other. A prime example of a medium-of-exchange friction that the Lht -
constraint captures is a cash-in-advance (CIA) constraint (Clower 1967, Grandmont
& Younes 1972, Lucas 1980, 1982, Svensson 1985, Lucas & Stokey 1987). The literature
distinguishes between two timing conventions:
Example 1 (Lucas (1982)-CIA-constraint model). Suppose households hold central bank
money as medium of exchange to purchase consumption goods. Asset markets open at
the beginning of the period so that households can adjust their portfolios after observing
the state, just before purchasing consumption goods. The CIA constraint at date t for
the numeraire consumption good reads

                                            aM,h
                                             t   pM    1,h
                                                  t ≥ xt ,

where we let j = M denote the security index for central bank money. This CIA constraint
can be represented as

                            Lht (aM,h
                                  t   pM    1,h    M,h M
                                       t , xt ) ≡ at  pt − x1,h
                                                            t   ≥ 0 ∀t.

Example 2 (Svensson (1985)-CIA-constraint model). Suppose alternatively that asset
markets open at the end of the period so that households have to adjust their portfolios,
   5
      In many of these models, the household and firm sectors are consolidated.
   6
      See Shell (1971) on the interpretation of a cohort in an OLG economy as an infinitely lived household
with preferences over consumption in only a few periods.
    7
      Wallace (1981) derives an important equivalence result in a deterministic OLG setting: Central
bank purchases of physical capital which are funded by money issuance do not change the equilibrium
allocation.


                                                    7
a·,h
 t−1 , in the period before they observe the state and purchase consumption goods. Since
the value of central bank money at the beginning of date t equals the cum-dividend-price,
pM       M
 t + zt , the CIA constraint can be represented as

                  Lht (aM,h   M    M     1,h    M,h M      M      1,h
                        t−1 (pt + zt ), xt ) ≡ at−1 (pt + zt ) − xt   ≥ 0 ∀t.

When money does not pay interest, the ztM term equals zero. Note that money holdings
chosen at date t−1, aM,h
                     t−1 , appear in several constraints at date t, one for each continuation
history.

    Another example of a model with a medium-of-exchange friction is the classic transac-
tion cost model of Baumol (1952) and Tobin (1956) in which the household infrequently
acquires stocks of low-interest bearing money to economize on a fixed acquisition cost.
The Lht -constraint can represent this relationship by combining a CIA constraint and a
relationship between increases in money holdings and an expenditure term in the budget
constraint.
    A so-called shopping-time model (Saving 1971, McCallum & Goodfriend 1987) fol-
lows when leisure constitutes one of the commodities and money holdings reduce the time
it takes to purchase goods.

Example 3 (Shopping-time model). Suppose that the household has a time endowment
of unity which it may consume as leisure, x2,h
                                             t , or use to purchase goods. Time spent
shopping is a strictly increasing (decreasing) function, ϕh , of goods purchases (money
holdings). This constraint can be represented as

                 Lht (aM,h
                       t   pM    1,h  2,h        2,h  h 1,h M,h M
                            t , xt , xt ) ≡ 1 − xt − ϕ (xt , at pt ) = 0 ∀t.

    Since the money-in-the-utility-function specification (Sidrauski 1967) augmented
by preferences for leisure is formally equivalent to a shopping time specification (Feenstra
1986, Croushore 1993) our formulation also captures models with money in the utility
function. Yet another model with a medium-of-exchange friction that the Lht -constraint
may represent in reduced form is a “New Monetarist” setup in the tradition of Kiyotaki
& Wright (1993) and Lagos & Wright (2005) in which agents meet bilaterally. The
friction may relate to security transactions and various securities may serve as mediums
of exchange (Rocheteau & Nosal 2017).8
    Fourth, our framework captures models with incomplete markets and borrow-
ing constraints where agents hold liquid assets as a precaution against random spend-
ing/investment needs since their future borrowing is constrained. In Bewley (1980) agents
hold money (the only asset) because after a negative income shock the disposable resources
do not suffice to smooth consumption. In Woodford (1990) and Kiyotaki & Moore (2012)
agents demand a safe store of value such as government bonds or money because they are
borrowing constrained when an investment opportunity arises. Similarly, agents in Holm-
ström & Tirole (1998) hold liquid assets because the continuation of long-term investment
   8
   Note that the liquidity constraints in these models may depend on future security prices, as these
might affect the bargaining outcome. The Lht -constraint includes future security prices as arguments.


                                                  8
projects requires random funding but moral hazard frictions limit future borrowing. Our
Lht -constraint can represent the borrowing constraints in these models.9 In Kiyotaki &
Moore (2012), money coexists with other financial assets and physical capital both of
which have limited market liquidity that is, they may only slowly be sold; this restric-
tion can be captured by an additional Lht -constraint.10 More generally, we note that the
Lht -constraints may be vector valued.11

2.2     Firms
Firms are subject to budget constraints, production possibilities sets, and medium-of-
exchange constraints, Lft , which parallel the Lht -constraints of households. Price (or wage)
setting may be constrained, for instance à la Calvo (1983), as in the prototypical “New
Keynesian” model (Clarida et al. 1999, Woodford 2003, Galı́ 2008). In the appendix
we provide a detailed description of a productive sector with a unit measure of profit
maximizing, possibly heterogeneous firms.
    The key objects in our equivalence result—budget constraints, medium-of-exchange
restrictions, and Euler equations or asset pricing conditions—have the same structure
for households and firms. As a consequence, our main results would be unchanged if we
abstracted from firms altogether and considered an endowment economy instead.

2.3     Banks
Banks are owned by households. They choose portfolio sequences to maximize bank value
or equivalently, the market value of their dividend streams (Fisher 1930).12
     We allow for limited competition in the market for deposits, which are bank liabilities
that enter the medium-of-exchange constraints of households and firms. To accommodate
the possibility that a non-competitive bank chooses the price and payoff of its deposits we
introduce an additional type of constraint, denoted by Ctb . This “competition constraint”
reflects the equilibrium relationship between the quantity of bank b’s deposits and the
deposit price and rate, conditional on the choices made by other banks.
     When we write b for the type of security then we refer to the equity of bank b. E.g.,
 b,·
at denotes bank b’s shares outstanding at the end of date t, and ztb denotes bank b’s
   9
     Note that while the borrowing constraint and the medium-of-exchange restriction in the Svensson
(1985)-CIA-constraint model (Example 2) are very similar, the CIA constraint is tighter in states with a
positive income shock whereas the reverse holds true for the borrowing constraint.
  10
     Strictly speaking, we need to assume that dividends are paid out in the form of the asset itself in
order to directly map the sales restriction in Kiyotaki & Moore (2012) into the Lht -constraint.
  11
     Also, Lht -constraints may depend on the total exposure to a given security or to components of it.
For example, in an extension of Example 1 with multiple consumption goods, multiple Lht -constraints
could restrict the components of money holdings that are spent on different goods. We do not introduce
notation to distinguish such different components but adopt the convention that a security is defined on
the “component level.” For instance, in the suggested extension of Example 1, we would interpret the
household to hold multiple monies (all with identical risk and return characteristics), a different one for
purchases of each good.
  12
     The optimal timing of dividend payouts is indeterminate (Modigliani & Miller 1958).



                                                    9
dividends. Without loss of generality we normalize the total shares of each bank to unity.
We denote the security index of deposits issued by bank b by j = Db .13
   Letting µt,s denote the date-t stochastic discount factor for payoffs at date s, bank b
                 b     b
chooses a·,b , pD , z D , and z b to maximize
                 X                     X j,b j X j,b j
                      E0 µ0,t ztb s.t.              at−1 (pt + ztj ) − ztb ∀t,
                                 
                                           at p t =
                    t                        j6=b          j6=b
                                                        Db      Db
                                             Ctb (a·,b                  b
                                                   t , pt , zt+1 , statet ) ≤ (=)   0 ∀t,
                                             Lbt ({aj,b  j
                                                      t pt }j , p) ≥ (=) 0 ∀t,

and a no-Ponzi game condition. The term “statebt ” denotes factors that the bank takes
as given. When the bank is a price taker, the competition constraint Ctb is not present in
                                            b                             b
the program and the price of deposits, pD , as well as their payoff, z D , do not constitute
choice variables. Banks might have access to different securities than households and
firms, as in Brunnermeier & Sannikov (2016).
    The restriction Lbt can represent regulatory constraints, for instance a minimum reserve
requirement; restrictions implied by the functioning of interbank markets; or balance sheet
restrictions that reflect incentive constraints (see, for example, Calomiris & Kahn 1991,
Diamond & Rajan 2001). Our specification assumes that the ownership structure of the
bank’s liabilities is irrelevant for Lbt .

2.4     Central Bank
The central bank manages a balance sheet and collects taxes subject to the budget con-
straint           X j,c j X j,c j                 Z
                                             j
                     at p t =    at−1 (pt + zt ) + τth (x·,h , q)dh ∀t,
                        j6=c          j6=c                        h

where the security index j = c denotes central bank equity, which is “owned” by tax
payers. The central bank is subject to a no-Ponzi game constraint.
    The model does not impose assumptions as to how central bank money comes into
existence. The central bank could inject money by purchasing securities from banks or
other private sector agents (open-market operations) or by transferring money and paying
interest on money (“helicopter drops”). In either case money creation by the central bank
implies that the consolidated government eventually transfers resources to the private
sector unless the interest rate on central bank money exceeds the rate of return on central
bank assets.

2.5     Equilibrium
In equilibrium, goods markets clear. We assume that securities do not enter resource
constraints (Friedman 1969).14 Moreover, changes in the quantities of outstanding securi-
  13
     Households may also issue deposits. We do not discuss this possibility but our analysis allows for it.
At a minimum, a household may be the sole owner of a bank and thus indirectly issue deposits.
  14
     This assumption can be relaxed; we need the securities involved in a swap to generate symmetric
resource costs. Using the notation introduced in the appendix, the assumption about goods market


                                                     10
ties reflect their payoffs as well as new issuances and redemptions, and the aggregate net
demand for each security equals zero: Letting i index both households and firms,
                              Z          Z
                                 at di + aj,b
                                  j,i                j,c
                                             t db + at = 0 ∀j, t.
                                  i           b

Definition 1. A competitive equilibrium conditional on the policy (a·,c , {τ h }h ) is an allo-
cation (including {x·,h }h and firm production); a vector of prices and payoffs, (p, q, {z j }j );
a set of stochastic discount factor processes, {µi0,t }t,i ; and a sequence of portfolios, ({a·,h }h ,
{a·,f }f , {a·,b }b ) such that households, firms, and banks solve their programs for given pol-
icy, prices, payoffs, and stochastic discount factors; markets clear; and the stochastic
discount factors reflect the optimal household and firm choices.15
    A non-competitive equilibrium consists of the same objects; each non-competitive bank
takes the competition constraint Ctb and statebt rather than the price and payoff of its
deposits as given; and statebt is consistent with equilibrium behavior of households, firms,
and other banks.


3     Liquidity and Value
When analyzing the consequences of a swap—of public money for private money, say—we
need to account for differences in the securities’ payoffs and in their effects on Lht -, Lft -,
and Lbt -constraints (Lt -constraints for short). In this section, we lay the groundwork for
this.
      We establish that security prices, payoffs, and effects on Lt -constraints are tightly
connected as the price of a security reflects its (i) fundamental payoffs; (ii) liquidity
payoffs; and possibly, (iii) bubble component. An entity which creates money potentially
reaps seignorage rents by issuing a security whose value primarily derives from (ii) and
(iii) while generating no or only minor payoff obligations (i). Throughout, we refer to
securities which enter Lt -constraints as “liquid” and those which do not as “illiquid;”
similarly, we refer to changes in portfolio positions or transfers that are without effect on
Lt -constraints as “illiquid.”
      Consider the portfolio choice problem of a household h with exposure to security j
(parallel conditions apply for a firm). Let µ̃ht and λ̃ht denote the (non-negative) Lagrange
multipliers in the household’s program that are attached to the date-t budget constraint
and Lht -constraint, respectively. The Euler equation for security aj,h          t  reads
                                                             "                                          #
                                                  h                                          h
      j               j      j        j       ∂L  t             j      j                  ∂L t+1
µ̃ht pt = Et µ̃ht+1 (pt+1 + zt+1 ) +pt λ̃ht              + Et (pt+1 + zt+1 )λ̃ht+1
                                 
                                                                                                          .
                                            ∂(aj,h
                                               t   p j
                                                     t )                           ∂(aj,h  j     j
                                                                                      t (pt+1 + zt+1 ))
                                    |                                 {z                                }
                                                                         j,h
                                                                   ≡µ̃h
                                                                      t `t

It states that the household balances costs and benefits. The costs, represented on the
left-hand side, arise from the outlays for the security purchase at date t. The benefits,
clearing can be represented as h x·,h
                               R           R ·,f      ·,f            R f
                                   t dh = f (yt − ιt )df ∀t and f κt df = 0 ∀t where we suppress
endowments to simplify the notation.
   15
      When markets are complete the stochastic discount factors of households and firms coincide.


                                                   11
on the right-hand side, derive from the gain in purchasing power at date t + 1 as well as
from the relaxation of the Lht - and Lht+1 -constraints.16 We denote the latter component
by µ̃ht `j,h
          t .
     Define λht ≡ λ̃ht /µ̃ht and note that the stochastic discount factor (SDF) satisfies µht,t+1 ≡
                                                                                  j
µ̃ht+1 /µ̃ht . We may then write the Euler equation as pjt = Et µht,t+1 (pjt+1 + zt+1 ) + `j,h
                                                                                      
                                                                                             t  or
                                         h                             i
                                 pjt = Et µht,t+1 Λj,h     j      j
                                                   t,t+1 (pt+1 + zt+1 ) ,                        (1)
                                                        
                                     ∂Lh                               h
                                                                             
                                                                h ∂Lt
where   Λj,h
         t,t+1   ≡ 1 + λht+1 ∂(aj,h (pj t+1+zj       ))
                                                         / 1 − λt ∂(aj,h pj ) is the one-period “liquidity
                                   t     t+1   t+1                   t   t

kernel.”17 Iterating the Euler equation (1) forward yields
                           " T                     #
                             X                              h                  i
              j                   h      j,h    j             h      j,h    j
            pt = lim Et          µt,t+s Λt,t+s zt+s + lim Et µt,t+T Λt,t+T pt+T ,                         (2)
                        T →∞                                     T →∞
                                   s=1
                                                                              Qt+s−1 j,h
where µht,t+s denotes the standard multi-period SDF and Λj,h         t,t+s ≡     τ =t Λτ,τ +1 is the
multi-period liquidity kernel.
    Equation (2) indicates that the equilibrium security price has three components. First,
the fundamental value  hPreflecting the fundamental
                                           i           payoffs represented in the standard pric-
                            T    h      j
ing term, limT →∞ Et        s=1 µt,t+s zt+s . Second, the liquidity payoffs, that is the liquidity
                                                   hP                               i
                                                       T     h      j,h        j
value of the fundamental payoffs, limT →∞ Et           s=1 µt,t+s (Λt,t+s − 1)zt+s . And third, a
bubble component which is given by the last term in Equation (2).
    The bubble component may differ from zero for two reasons. First, in a setting with-
out Lht -constraints (Λj,h
                        t,t+T = 1), because consumption is volatile and the shadow value
of income and hence the SDF µht,t+T are convex in contingent consumption, as in the in-
complete markets model of Brunnermeier & Sannikov (2016). By Jensen’s inequality, the
expected value of µht,t+T then is sufficiently high for the bubble component to be bounded
away from zero as T → ∞. Second, in a setting with binding Lht -constraints, because the
standard SDF is multiplied by a liquidity kernel which exceeds unity sufficiently strongly
for the bubble component to remain strictly positive in the limit.
Example 4 (Lucas (1982)-, Svensson (1985)-CIA-constraint, or shopping-time model).
Consider any of the models discussed in Examples 1–3 where either ∂Lht /∂(aM,h      t   pM
                                                                                         t ) > 0
       h      M,h M        M                        M,h
or ∂Lt+1 /∂(at (pt+1 + zt+1 )) > 0 such that Λt,t+1 > 1. From Equation (1), the required
rate of return on money, rM say, thus may fall short of the economy’s growth rate, g, even
if the required rate on an illiquid security, r say, exceeds g. For instance, in a deterministic
setting without inflation, we may have
                        rM = (µht,t+1 ΛM,h
                                       t,t+1 )
                                               −1
                                                  − 1 < g < (µht,t+1 )−1 − 1 = r.
  16
     We assume that aj,ht  enters in at most one Lht -constraint and at most one Lht+1 -constraint in each
history. Otherwise, sums of derivatives of Lht - and/or Lht+1 -constraints would appear in the Euler equation.
  17
     A specific form of such a liquidity kernel also emerges in the liquidity-based asset pricing model of
Holmström & Tirole (2001) (with borrowing frictions) and in Lagos & Wright (2005) or Lagos (2010)
(with money as a medium of exchange).


                                                         12
That is, by lowering the interest rate on money the liquidity payoff may render (deter-
ministic and stochastic) “money bubbles” possible even outside of an OLG setting.
     The partition of the security price into its three components clarifies how the creation of
money entails the creation of (seignorage) rents. A central bank issuing a bubble security
reaps seignorage rents because the sale of the bubble creates value without forcing the
bank to produce fundamental payoffs. Similarly, a private bank earns rents by financing
illiquid assets with high fundamental payoffs through the issuance of liquid inside money
with low fundamental payoffs but high liquidity or bubble payoffs.
     While the bank’s assets and liabilities have the same market value, their fundamental
values differ—illiquid assets have a higher fundamental value than liquid liabilities. The
difference between the fundamental values contributes to the bank’s (intangible) franchise
value, which in turn is reflected in its equity market value. Competition among banks can
erode this franchise value as competitive banks have incentives to issue more money and
grant more loans, driving the deposit interest rate up and the loan interest rate down.
     Our discussion highlights that substituting public (outside) money for private (inside)
money—or vice versa—may reallocate seignorage rents and thus, redistribute wealth (in
addition to possibly having inflationary or deflationary effects). To obtain neutrality of a
private-public money swap, we must design the swap, or measures complementing it, so
as to neutralize any wealth effects. In addition, we need to assure that the swap does not
give rise to liquidity effects.


4     Equivalence
In this section we establish monetary equivalence classes: We derive conditions under
which a swap of central bank liabilities against private bank liabilities is “irrelevant” in
the sense that it does not affect the equilibrium allocation or prices—that is, the swap
does not have wealth or liquidity effects nor does it affect prices in general equilibrium.
    For brevity, and without pre-committing to any specific interpretation, we refer to
central bank liabilities as “cash” and to bank liabilities as “deposits.” Let ∆x denote
the change of a generic variable x relative to the initial equilibrium value and recall that
j = M and j = Db , respectively, denote the security indexes denoting cash and deposits
issued by bank b. Moreover, let I denote the set of households and/or firms (indexed by
i) whose portfolios change as a consequence of the swap.
Definition 2. A one-period swap with agents i ∈ I at date t is an exchange of cash for
                    Db ,i
deposits, {∆aM,i
              t , ∆at     }i∈I , that is reversed after one period, in all continuation histories,
such that ∆as = 0, j = M, Db , ∀i ∈ I, ∀s 6= t.
             j,i


   Without loss of generality we restrict attention to one-period swaps. Persistent or
other, more complicated swaps can always be decomposed into elementary one-period
swaps. Our notation presumes that the swap involves deposits at a single bank, b. The
extension to the case with many banks is immediate; it only involves adjustment of
notation to handle the larger set of financial institutions. With small (competitive) banks,
any interesting swap necessarily involves a measure of financial institutions.

                                               13
    Our approach to demonstrating equivalence is based on a comparison of choice sets.
We establish that under broad conditions certain swaps (possibly accompanied by sup-
porting measures) leave the choice sets of all private sector agents unchanged and also
satisfy the government’s budget constraint. The logic of the argument then is simple:
If for given prices and payoffs, all agents in the private sector have the same choice sets
“before” and “after” the swap then their relevant choices remain unaltered as well and
the initial equilibrium allocation continues to constitute an equilibrium allocation after
the swap. Our equivalence conditions can be applied without knowledge of the specific
equilibrium conditions in a particular model; accordingly, they are sufficient rather than
necessary.18
    The swaps and supporting measures that we consider are open-market operations with
transfers:

Definition 3. An open-market operation with compensating transfers with agents i ∈ I
at date t (conditional on a SDF and security prices and payoffs) is

   1. at date t, an open-market operation with each i ∈ I, consisting of a one-period swap
      as well as changes in the portfolio positions in a third, illiquid security, j = s,
                                                                     b      b
                                                  pM ∆aM,i + pD    D ,i
                                                               t ∆at
                                        ∆as,i
                                          t     =− t   t
                                                                        ;
                                                           pst

   2. at date t + 1, contingent, illiquid transfers to/from each i ∈ I such that the transfers
      together with the open-market operation leave financial wealth in all continuation
      histories at date t + 1 unchanged,
                                                                                             
             i                          M,i      Db      Db     Db ,i                     s,i
           Tt+1 = − (pM  t+1 + z M
                                t+1 )∆a t   + (p t+1 + zt+1 )∆a t     + (p s
                                                                           t+1 + z s
                                                                                  t+1 )∆a t     .

    Three remarks are in order. First, an open-market operation with compensating trans-
fers does not necessarily involve a security s. If the market value of agent i’s swap equals
zero then ∆as,i t = 0 as well. Second, an open-market operation with compensating trans-
fers does not necessarily involve transfers either. If the fundamental portfolio payoffs
before and after the open-market operation are unchanged across all histories and for all
i ∈ I, that is if
                                                                              
                                                          Db      Db     Db ,i
    (pst+1 + zt+1
              s
                  )∆as,i
                     t   = −   (p M
                                  t+1 + z M
                                         t+1 )∆a M,i
                                                 t   + (p t+1 + zt+1 )∆a t       ∀i ∈ I, ∀t + 1|t,

then there is no need for contingent transfers to offset effects on the wealth positions at
date t + 1.
    Finally, we may interpret security s very broadly, specifically as an implicit claim vis-à-
vis other agents. Consider for example an economy with a representative household. This
household “owns” the government because it is the residual claimant (tax payer). Explicit
changes in the household’s financial position vis-à-vis the government (e.g., an increase of
  18
       This also holds true for standard equivalence results as in Modigliani & Miller (1958) or Barro (1974).


                                                      14
explicit government debt) therefore are irrelevant as long as they are mirrored by changes
in future taxes (Barro 1974); if the implicit government debt or assets were securitized
then changes in the government’s funding policy constituted open-market operations.
    The same logic applies here. In a representative household economy, an open-market
operation with compensating transfers need not involve an explicit ownership change of a
security s nor transfers because the swap necessarily involves accompanying changes in the
household’s implicit claims vis-à-vis the government which exactly neutralize the financial
consequences of the swap. Rather than conducting an open-market operation, the central
bank thus could institute the swap through lump-sum transfers (helicopter drops). The
same holds true when households are heterogeneous as long as the consolidated fiscal
exposure of each household (i.e., its direct exposure as well as its indirect exposure through
firm ownership) mirrors its consolidated exposure to the swap.19 What matters is that
the intervention leaves the wealth distribution unaltered in general equilibrium, not in
partial equilibrium.
    Throughout the analysis, we assume that the open-market operation leaves the asset
span for all agents unchanged, i.e., it does not render markets “more or less complete.”

4.1     Wealth Neutrality
A key element determining the choice set of a household or firm is the agent’s wealth.
By construction, an open-market operation with compensating transfers does not change
agents’ financial wealth at date t + 1, in any history, unless they further adjust their
portfolios. However, the intervention might change an agent’s wealth at date t. This
is the case if and only if the market value of the contingent transfers differs from zero.
And this, in turn, is the case if and only if the swap affects total liquidity payoffs, as the
following lemma shows.

Lemma 1 (Wealth Neutrality). Conditional on the SDF, security prices, and fundamental
payoffs, an open-market operation with compensating transfers with agents i ∈ I at date
t does not change date-t financial wealth of any i ∈ I if and only if the swap does not
change the liquidity payoffs of portfolios, that is if and only if for all i ∈ I
                                          M,i        D   b      b ,i
                                     `M
                                      t ∆at   + `D
                                                 t ∆at                 = 0.

Proof. The SDF, µt,t+1 ; security prices; and fundamental payoffs imply liquidity payoffs
                                       Db
for cash and deposits, `M    t and `t     (recall from Section 3 the equilibrium condition pjt =
Et [µt,t+1 (pjt+1 + zt+1
                     j
                         )] + `jt ).20 The open-market operation with compensating transfers
changes financial wealth of agent i at date t by
                   M,i        Db      b ,i
              pM
               t ∆at   + pD
                          t ∆at              + pst ∆as,i              i                   i
                                                     t + Et [µt,t+1 Tt+1 ] = Et [µt,t+1 Tt+1 ],

  19
     For example, wealth neutrality would hold if only a particular group paid taxes and the central bank
swapped securities exclusively with that group.
  20
     The implied liquidity payoffs are unique even if incomplete markets make the SDF non-unique.




                                                       15
where we use the definition of an open-market operation as well as the fact that transfers
are illiquid. By definition of an open-market operation with compensating transfers,
                      M,i      b         b  D    b ,i
      (pM      M
        t+1 + zt+1 )∆at   + (pD      D
                              t+1 + zt+1 )∆at           + (pst+1 + zt+1
                                                                    s
                                                                        )∆as,i   i
                                                                           t + Tt+1 = 0 ∀t + 1|t.

Accordingly, financial wealth changes by
                                     X
                            i
               Et [µt,t+1 Tt+1 ] = −                 Et [µt,t+1 (pjt+1 + zt+1
                                                                          j
                                                                              )]∆aj,i
                                                                                  t
                                         j=M,Db ,s
                                             X                                    b     b ,i
                                   = −               pjt ∆aj,i  M   M,i
                                                           t + `t ∆at   + `D   D
                                                                           t ∆at
                                         j=M,Db ,s
                                          M,i        D ,i b     b
                                   = `M
                                      t ∆at   + `D
                                                 t ∆at    ,

where we use the fact that security s is illiquid and that we consider an open-market
operation.
    Lemma 1 implies that an open-market operation with compensating transfers does
not change agents’ financial wealth if it does not alter liquidity payoffs. The market value
of the contingent transfers equals zero in this case and the transfers take the form of
a date-t futures contract with positive and negative payoffs balancing each other across
continuation histories. A setting with risk-free cash, deposits, and security s constitutes
a simple example where no transfers are needed at all.

4.2      Liquidity Neutrality
For a swap not to change the choice sets of households and firms it does not suffice that
the open-market operation with compensating transfers is wealth neutral (and security
prices as well as the asset span do not change). In addition, the swap must be “liquidity
neutral” for any consumption-portfolio or production-portfolio plan in the choice set of a
household or firm—that is, the contribution (both total and marginal) of each security to
relaxing Lit - and Lit+1 -constraints must remain the same.

Definition 4. A one-period swap with agents i ∈ I at date t is liquidity neutral (con-
ditional on commodity prices, security prices, and fundamental payoffs) if starting from
any consumption-portfolio or production-portfolio plan in any agent’s choice set, the swap
does not change the Lit - or Lit+1 -function values, nor the first-order derivatives.

     In the appendix we state a condition, Condition 1, that guarantees liquidity neutrality.
The condition relates to the functional forms of Lit and Lit+1 as well as to the relative
                          b
size of ∆aM,i
            t    and ∆atD ,i . Intuitively, the condition stipulates that the isoquants of the
Lit - and Lit+1 -constraints in cash-deposit space (conditional on the quantities of other
securities) must be linear, i.e., each agent’s marginal rate of liquidity substitution between
cash and deposits must be constant—but not necessarily equal to one, or uniform across
agents; moreover, the swap must leave the total liquidity contribution of cash and deposits
unchanged for each i ∈ I.

                                                     16
                                                                                                             b
   In many applications, liquidity neutrality imposes only very mild conditions. If (aM,i
                                                                                       t , at
                                                                                             D ,i
                                                                                                  )
                                                        i        i
only enters once (rather than multiple times) in the Lt - and Lt+1 -constraints and if cash
and deposits are at least minimally substitutable, which seems very plausible, then there
                                     b
always exists a ∆aM,i
                   t   for every ∆atD ,i such that the pair locally satisfies Condition 1.21

Example 5 (Modified Lucas (1982)-CIA-constraint or shopping-time model). Consider
the model discussed in Example 1, modified to have the weighted sum of cash and deposits
enter the date-t CIA constraint,
                                                   b        b   b
                                   aM,h
                                    t   pM    D ,h D D
                                         t + at   pt vt ≥ x1,h
                                                           t

                      b
with “velocity” vtD > 0. This model satisfies Condition 1. Similarly, the model discussed
in Example 3, modified to have the weighted sum of cash and deposits enter the shopping-
time constraint, satisfies Condition 1.
                      b
   When (aM,i    D ,i
            t , at    ) enters the Lit - and/or Lit+1 -constraints multiple times, however, then
the requirements for liquidity neutrality are strong and generically impossible to satisfy.

Example 6 (Modified Svensson (1985)-CIA-constraint model). Consider the stochastic
model discussed in Example 2, modified to have the weighted sum of cash and deposits
enter the CIA constraints
                                              b    b    b
                              aM,h  M    D ,h D D
                               t−1 pt + at−1 pt vt ≥ x1,h
                                                      t   ∀t|t − 1
         b
with vtD > 0. This imposes several constraints on cash and deposits held between dates
t − 1 and t which cannot, in general, all remain satisfied after the swap. Condition 1 thus
                                                                   Db Db
generally is violated. However, Condition 1 is satisfied if pMt /(pt vt ) is constant across
all histories t|t − 1.

   To accommodate models without Lit - and Lit+1 -constraints we adopt the convention
that such models satisfy liquidity neutrality.

4.3     Equivalence
We can now state our main result. It holds for arbitrary combinations of open-market
operations with compensating transfers, as defined in Definition 3, as long as they are
both liquidity neutral, as defined in Definition 4, and “span neutral,” i.e., do not change
the asset span.

Theorem 1 (Equivalence). Consider an equilibrium with cash and deposits conditional
on the policy (a·,c , {τ h }h ). Let there be liquidity and span neutral open-market operations
with compensating transfers. The central bank can always assure that these operations
implement an equilibrium with the same allocation and price system as in the initial
equilibrium.
  21
   This follows from the fact that for a small swap, the function Lit (or the function Lit+1 ) can well be
approximated to the first order.


                                                   17
Proof. We prove the theorem for a single date-t open-market operation with compensating
transfers. The result for combinations of elementary operations follows directly.
    We conjecture that the open-market operation with compensating transfers does not
alter prices or fundamental payoffs. Under this conjecture, i.e., in partial equilibrium, we
show that households’ and firms’ choice sets—and thus, their choices—remain the same.
Moreover, we identify the central bank response, which conforms with the open-market
operation with compensating transfers and maintains the choice sets of banks. Finally,
we verify that prices remain unchanged in general equilibrium.

Partial Equilibrium Liquidity neutrality guarantees wealth neutrality in the non-
bank sector because, by Lemma 1, the liquidity payoff of the swap, and thus of the
open-market operation with compensating transfers, equals zero for each i ∈ I, i.e.,
       M,i      b    Db ,i
`M
 t ∆at     + `D
              t ∆at        = 0. Since the asset span is unchanged and due to liquidity neu-
trality, the consumption-portfolio and production-portfolio plans of households and firms
in the initial equilibrium remain budget feasible and consistent with the Lit - and Lit+1 -
constraints. Hence, the effective choice sets of households and firms do not shrink.
    Nor are these choice sets enlarged as a consequence of the compensating transfers.
This follows from the fact that each contingent transfer replicates a specific cash-deposit
portfolio (which households and firms can purchase); and that, due to liquidity neutrality,
the transfer can be undone by shorting the replicating cash-deposit portfolio without
affecting the Lit - and Lit+1 -constraints. Households and firms thus face the same effective
choice sets over consumption and production plans. Hence, maintaining the original
choices (except for cash, deposits, and security s) remains optimal for them.
    Turning to banks, suppose first that the swap involves cash issuance in exchange for
deposits. The central bank acquires claims vis-à-vis the banking sector in this case22 and
the funds transferred from deposits into cash are immediately passed through back to
banks. By providing the pass-through funding at the conditions of the deposit funding
prior to the swap—that is, by replicating the initial deposit supply schedule—the central
bank assures that the choice sets of private banks are unaltered.23 Hence, the initial
equilibrium choices of banks remain optimal. In the opposite case, in which the swap
involves cash redemptions in exchange for deposits, the central bank issues deposit-like
claims to households and firms, thereby also insulating banks from the swap.
    The central bank serves as counterparty of banks and non-banks, and it pays or receives
contingent transfers at date t + 1 whose date-t market value equals zero. Since the swap
must be liquidity neutral, its market price may differ from zero; in this case, the central
bank also gives/receives security s to/from households and firms in order to ensure wealth
neutrality.

General Equilibrium The unchanged consumption and production plans remain fea-
sible since portfolio changes do not affect resource constraints. Since all security positions
except those for cash, deposits, and security s are unchanged, and since the markets
 22
      By assumption, the central bank must not back monetary liabilities with gold or other commodities.
 23
      By assumption, the ownership structure of deposits does not affect Lbt -constraints.


                                                   18
for cash, deposits, and security s clear, all securities markets continue to clear. Due to
unchanged multipliers in the programs of households and firms as well as liquidity neu-
trality (the derivatives of the Lit - and Lit+1 -constraints are unchanged), the security prices
in the initial equilibrium continue to constitute equilibrium prices. The initial commodity
prices, too, continue to clear markets at the unchanged marginal rates of substitution.
We have verified the initial conjecture, determined the central bank response, and proved
the result.

Example 7 (Modified Lucas (1982)-CIA-constraint model). Consider the model discussed
                                                       Db
in Example 5. Without loss of generality, let pM t = pt . The CIA constraint at date t
reads                                  b ,h    b
                             aM,h
                              t   + aD
                                     t      vtD ≥ x1,h
                                                   t /pt
                                                        M

         b                                                                        b                     b
with vtD > 0. Let ∆aM,h t    > 0. Liquidity neutrality requires ∆aD
                                                                  t
                                                                    ,h
                                                                       = −∆aM,h
                                                                            t   /vtD .
    D b                                                                        s,h
If vt 6= 1 the swap is accompanied by transactions in security s, namely ∆at =
                   b
−∆aM,h
     t  (1 − 1/vtD )pM    s
                     t /pt . When deposits are more (less) liquid than cash then the
household sells (buys) security s to (from) the central bank.

4.4     Multiple Equilibria
Theorem 1 applies to models with multiple equilibria. Suppose that realizations of a
“sunspot” process determine how agents coordinate their behavior; that is, past and
present sunspot realizations are an element of the economy’s history on which outcomes
are conditioned. Theorem 1 implies that any history contingent equilibrium allocation
and price system prior to the open-market operation with compensating transfers remains
an equilibrium outcome after the intervention as long as the central bank replicates the
deposit supply schedule of households and firms. If the central bank does not replicate
that schedule, other equilibria may emerge.24 In Section 5, we return to the question of
bank-run risk in the context of Central Bank Digital Currency.


5      Applications
5.1     Central Bank Digital Currency and Run Risk
Would a substitution of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) for bank deposits change
the equilibrium allocation?25 Plausibly, CBDC would have the same liquidity properties
as deposits and a swap therefore would be liquidity neutral. Moreover, the payoff char-
acteristics of CBDC would likely match those of a portfolio of existing securities such
  24
     For example, rather than letting its pass-through funding replicate run-prone deposit financing from
“small” depositors, the central bank could implement a different equilibrium, without contingent bank-
run equilibrium allocations, by acting as a large player that internalizes run externalities and avoids
runs.
  25
     The proposal to make central bank issued digital money accessible to the general public dates back
at least to Tobin (1985, 1987). For an overview over recent discussions as well as an informal equivalence
proposition, see Niepelt (2018, 2020).


                                                   19
that the asset span would remain unchanged. Theorem 1 then implies that an appro-
priate open-market operation with compensating transfers and a corresponding central
bank pass-through policy would not change the equilibrium allocation; and if deposits and
CBDC traded at equal prices, the open-market operation would not require an additional
security s.
    Whether equivalence would require transfers between the private sector and the central
bank depends on the payoff characteristics of deposits and CBDC. If the initial equilibrium
featured nominally risk free deposits and CBDC were risk free as well then the swap would
not change portfolio payoffs and no transfers would be needed.26 If, in contrast, deposits
bore nominal risk but CBDC were risk free then equivalence would require new contingent
transfers between the private sector and the central bank; these transfers would guarantee
that portfolio payoffs (including transfers) in the private sector remained unchanged.27
    It is frequently argued that CBDC could increase run risk, due to the low cost of
withdrawing deposits and transferring them to CBDC accounts, and thereby undermine
financial stability. But this neglects the fact that the very act of transferring funds from
bank to central bank accounts would amount to an automatic substitution of one type
of bank funding (deposits held by households and firms) by another one (central bank
funding for banks). By construction, a depositor run for CBDC therefore would not reduce
bank funding and undermine financial stability; it would only change the composition of
bank funding.28
    In fact, it seems plausible that the introduction of CBDC could reduce run risk rather
than increasing it. After a large swap coupled with pass-through funding, the central
bank would become a large, possibly the largest, depositor at private banks. If it pur-
sued an optimal policy (not necessarily the equivalent one) it would internalize the run
externalities and might refrain from running itself. As a consequence, the incentives for
small depositors to run might also vanish. In addition, CBDC and pass-through funding
would bestow the central bank with an informational advantage relative to conventional
runs into cash, which the central bank only learns about with a delay.29

5.2     Chicago Plan and “Vollgeld”
Would an end to fractional reserve banking and thus, a separation of credit and money
creation as proposed in the “Chicago Plan” and the Swiss “Vollgeld” initiative change the
  26
     The risk-free nature of deposits might reflect contingent transfers from the government to banks (e.g.,
a deposit insurance scheme) and correspondingly, insurance premia that banks pay to the public sector.
Under the equivalent arrangement, both these payments would be maintained.
  27
     Households and firms thus would pay transfers to the central bank in histories where deposits suffer
low returns, for instance because of a bank run. No transfers would be needed if the exposure of households
to the government budget exactly mirrored their exposure to risky deposit returns.
  28
     If, moreover, the central bank provided funding subject to the same conditions as depositors, then
the run would have no allocative effects as shown in Theorem 1.
  29
     With CBDC, the central bank could engage more quickly as a lender of last resort; more easily prevent
costly fire sales; and better prevent liquidity problems to morph into solvency crises. Small depositors
might become less wary themselves which could again reduce run risk. The central bank may also set
a low (possibly negative) interest rate on CBDC accounts to render CBDC unattractive as a safe-haven
asset.


                                                    20
equilibrium allocation?30 Since the Chicago Plan would amount to a complete substitution
of CBDC for deposits our discussion of CBDC applies. That is, equivalence would prevail
as long as the central bank rather than households and firms supplied deposits to banks,
and as long as it did so at the same prices and conditions as in the initial equilibrium.
    This, however, is not what the Vollgeld proposal envisioned. According to that pro-
posal, the central bank would not supply deposit substitutes to the banking sector but
it would prevent banks from issuing deposits, forcing them to shed assets or seek other
sources of funding. Banks would likely loose a source of profits—seignorage rents from
liquidity creation—and equivalence would not be guaranteed, both for distributive reasons
and because banks might adopt new business models. Equivalence would hold, though, if
redistribution between the central bank and the banking sector had no effect on household
wealth (e.g., because the economy admitted a representative household or the exposures
of households to bank profits and taxes matched each other) and if redistribution did not
change bank incentives.

5.3     Cryptocurrency
Our framework also is applicable for cryptocurrency–public-money swaps. Clearly, equiv-
alence of such swaps requires the cryptocurrency to operate on a permissioned blockchain
with dedicated record keepers. Cryptocurrencies operating based on proof-of-work algo-
rithms require resources, mostly in the form of electricity, to ensure incentive compatibility
for record keepers (i.e., miners); since this resource requirement is absent in conventional
payment systems equivalence cannot hold for proof-of-work based cryptocurrencies.
    If the currency is pegged to the official currency, as many stable coins are, it resembles
deposits. With full backing the swap parallels open market operations under a currency
board. When the coin and the official currency enter Lt -constraints asymmetrically, then
the central bank needs to additionally adjust the money supply in order to guarantee
equivalence. With less than full backing (fractional reserve banking), coin issuance creates
seignorage rents and equivalence thus requires that wealth effects be neutralized by means
of taxes and transfers.
    If the cryptocurrency’s exchange rate is floating, parallel arguments apply. Equiva-
lence additionally requires that return differentials between coins and public money be
compensated by contingent transfers. No transfers are needed with a representative house-
hold.

5.4     Indian De-Monetization
In November 2016, the Indian government decreed that banknotes of larger denomination
had to be temporarily deposited in a bank account.31 Since the old bank notes were only
  30
     On the Chicago Plan, see Knight et al. (1933), Fisher (1935, 1936), and Friedman (1960). Benes
& Kumhof (2012) offer a quantitative assessment, arguing that the plan would improve outcomes. The
recently rejected Swiss “Vollgeld” initiative proposed a ban on inside money creation. In our discussion,
we disregard a key problem of the proposal, namely enforceability.
  31
     More than 85% of cash in circulation were declared illegal tender; banknotes with a denomination
of 500 rupees (about $7.50) or more had to be temporarily deposited. The intervention was designed to


                                                   21
slowly replaced with new ones the intervention increased the stock of digital money. The
swap violated the sufficient conditions for our equivalence theorem because transactions
in the black economy predominantly require cash.


6     Conclusions
Our paper makes four contributions: First, it provides a general framework for the analysis
of monetary economies. Second, it derives an asset pricing condition that relates the
liquidity of securities to their bubble component and the seignorage rents their issuers
reap. Third, it provides sufficient conditions for the equivalence of monetary systems.
Theorem 1 should be construed as a benchmark result that helps organize one’s thinking,
in the spirit of Modigliani & Miller (1958), Barro (1974), and many other similar findings.
The sufficient conditions for equivalence may rarely apply fully; but they clearly identify
possible sources of non-equivalence. Finally, we apply our findings in the context of several
examples.
    Non-equivalence should be expected whenever wealth or liquidity neutrality does not
hold or a pass-through policy is ruled out, for instance because the reform has distributive
implications and households are sufficiently heterogeneous; many transactions rely on a
security that cannot easily be swapped; or transaction costs prevent balance sheet adjust-
ments. Non-equivalence could also be expected when the central bank cannot replicate
the private sector’s deposit supply schedule, for example due to information frictions.32
    Another possible impediment to pass-through funding are collateral requirements for
lending to banks that differ between private depositors and the central bank (and collateral
scarcity). In our theoretical analysis, this issue is not present because we consider a
consolidated government with the power to tax depositors. Such a government does not
need to impose collateral requirements ex ante in order to guard against losses ex post,
unlike an independent central bank that is wary of having to ask for a recapitalization by
the fiscal authority in case of losses.
    Maybe the most important source of non-equivalence relates to the endogeneity of
monetary policy. The equivalence theorem treats policy as exogenous—it does not re-
quire the pass through at unchanged conditions to satisfy political incentive compatibil-
ity constraints. But this is unrealistic. Even if an intervention satisfied the conditions of
Theorem 1, the pass-through policy might well violate political constraints, for instance
by rendering implicit transfers in the initial equilibrium explicit, and thus making them
better known.33
    Whether a non-neutral monetary reform would be toward the better or the worse is a
question that the equivalence result cannot address. An answer to this question requires
an explicit characterization of equilibrium in a particular model. For policy discussions
reduce the size of the shadow economy, fight corruption, and remove counterfeited notes from circulation.
  32
     In the short run, the information requirement for the central bank appears mild though because
deposits and deposit rates tend to be “sticky.”
  33
     See Niepelt (2018, 2020) for a discussion. See Gonzalez-Eiras & Niepelt (2015) for an analysis of
politico-economic equivalence.



                                                   22
about monetary reform, our paper therefore does not propose definite answers, but an
analytical framework and robust road map.


A        Firms
Firm f chooses input-output, capital investment, and portfolio sequences to maximize
firm value or equivalently, the market value of the firm’s dividend stream (Fisher 1930).34
      We denote firm f ’s input or output of commodity n at date t by ytn,f ; inputs are
negative entries, outputs are positive entries. To align with standard “macroeconomic”
notation we exclude physical capital holdings, ktf , from the commodity vector yt·,f . We let
ιn,f
 t    denote the quantity of commodity n that firm f uses to produce new physical capital,
and κft the quantity of capital that firm f purchases. The price of physical capital is
denoted qtK .
      When we write f for the type of security then we refer to the equity of firm f . E.g.,
at denotes firm f ’s shares outstanding at the end of date t, and ztf denotes firm f ’s
  f,·

dividends. Without loss of generality we normalize the total shares of each firm to unity.
      Letting µt,s denote the date-t stochastic discount factor for payoffs at date s, firm f
chooses y ·,f , ι·,f , κf , k f , a·,f , and z f to maximize
X h              i           X j,f j X j,f j                         X  n,f      
      E0 µ0,t ztf s.t.             at p t =       at−1 (pt + ztj ) +    yt − ιn,f
                                                                              t     qtn − κft qtK −ztf ∀t,
  t                        j6=f            j6=f
                                                                    |n               {z           }
                                                                               operating profit

                           Ftf (kt−1
                                 f
                                     , yt·,f ) ≤ 0 ∀t,
                           Ktf (kt−1
                                 f
                                     , ι·,f  f    f
                                        t , κt , kt ) ≤ 0 ∀t,

                           Lft ({aj,f j       j,f   j    j           ·,f ·,f f
                                  t pt }j , {at−1 (pt + zt )}j , p, y , ι , κ , q) ≥ (=) 0 ∀t,

and a no-Ponzi game condition.
    The first constraint in the firm’s program represents the budget constraint. It relates
dividend payouts, ztf , to the firm’s operating profit and accumulation of net financial
assets. The second and third constraints represent production constraints; function Ftf
represents the firm’s production possibilities and function Ktf represents the law of motion
for physical capital, possibly accounting for depreciation and adjustment costs (Jorgensen
1963, Tobin 1969, Hayashi 1982).35 The Lft -constraint parallels the Lht -constraint of a
  34
    The optimal timing of dividend payouts is indeterminate (Modigliani & Miller 1958).
  35
    We could merge the law of motion for capital and the budget constraint. Suppose for example that
the law of motion takes the form

                                   ktf = kt−1
                                          f
                                              (1 − δ) + Φ(ι·,f  f        f
                                                           t , kt−1 ) + κt ,

where δ denotes the depreciation rate and Φ(ι·,f      f
                                                 t , kt−1 ) denotes physical capital generated from investment
ι·,f
 t , possibly subject to adjustment costs. The budget constraint can then be written as
                                                                 X  n,f         
                                                                                   qtn + Φ(ι·,f
   X j,f j              X j,f j
      at pt + ktf qtK =                        f
                           at−1 (pt + ztj ) + kt−1 (1 − δ)qtK +       yt − ιn,f
                                                                              t
                                                                                                 f     K    f
                                                                                            t , kt−1 )qt − zt .
  j6=f                  j6=f                                    n




                                                         23
household; it captures restrictions that relate to the medium-of-exchange function of
securities or other financial frictions.
    To accommodate price rigidity à la Calvo (1983) we could augment the firm’s program
by a condition that reflects monopolistic competition in the firm’s output market (Dixit
& Stiglitz 1977). This condition would relate demand for the firm’s output to the price set
by the firm (which would constitute an additional choice variable) as well as to choices
made by other firms. The structure of the constraint would parallel the structure of
the limited competition constraint that we discuss in the context of the bank’s program.
Introducing such a constraint in the firm’s program would not affect our results because
securities do not enter the constraint.


B      Liquidity Neutrality
Consider the following condition:

Condition 1. For all i ∈ I, the one-period swap with agents i ∈ I at date t and the
functions Lit and Lit+1 satisfy:
                      b ,i
    1. aM,i
        t   and atD          are linearly substitutable,

                  Lit ({aj,i j       j,i   j    j           ·,i       i   i      i
                         t pt }j , {at−1 (pt + zt )}j , p, x , q) = L̂t (At,t , Φt ),

         Lit+1 ({aj,i  j          j,i j      j             ·,i       i     i        i
                  t+1 pt+1 }j , {at (pt+1 + zt+1 )}j , p, x , q) = L̂t+1 (At+1,t , Ψt+1 ) ∀t + 1|t,

                                         b ,i
      where Φit , Ψit+1 ⊥ aM,i  D
                           t , at               and
                                                                    b     b       b
                              Ait,t ≡ aM,i M M    D ,i D D
                                       t pt vt + at   pt vt ,
                                                                                          b   b             b   b
                         Ait+1,t ≡ aM,i M      M     M      D ,i D
                                    t (pt+1 + zt+1 )vt+1 + at
                                                                         D
                                                                (pt+1 + zt+1   D
                                                                             )vt+1 ,
                                                                                      b              b
      for some exogenous “velocity” parameters vtM , vtD , vt+1
                                                            M      D
                                                                , vt+1 6= 0;
                                                             b ,i
    2. the liquidity effects of ∆aM,i
                                  t   and ∆aD
                                            t                       offset each other,
                                                         M,i           D      b           b   b ,i
                                                 pM  M
                                                  t vt ∆at   + pD  D
                                                                t vt ∆at                                 = 0,
                                                              b                        b ,i
                                                                         Db    Db
                 (pM
                   t+1       +    M
                                 zt+1   M
                                      )vt+1 ∆aM,i
                                              t       +   (pD
                                                            t+1     +   zt+1 )vt+1 ∆aD
                                                                                     t                   = 0 ∀t + 1|t.

      If a one-period swap satisfies the second part of Condition 1 then it leaves Ait,t , Ait+1,t ,
Φit , and Ψit+1 unchanged for all i ∈ I. From the first part of Condition 1 the swap then
leaves the function values Lit and Lit+1 and the derivatives unchanged as well. We thus
have the following result:

Lemma 2 (Liquidity Neutrality). Under Condition 1, a one-period swap with agents
i ∈ I at date t is liquidity neutral (conditional on commodity prices, security prices, and
fundamental payoffs).

                                                            24
References
Andolfatto, D. (2018), Reconciling orthodox and heterodox views on money and banking,
 Working Paper 2018-27A, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis.

Barro, R. J. (1974), ‘Are government bonds net wealth?’, Journal of Political Economy
  82(6), 1095–1117.

Baumol, W. J. (1952), ‘The transactions demand for cash’, Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 67(4), 545–556.

Benes, J. & Kumhof, M. (2012), The Chicago plan revisited, Working Paper 12/202,
  International Monetary Fund, Washington.

Bewley, T. F. (1980), The optimum quantity of money, in J. H. Kareken & N. Wallace, eds,
  ‘Models of Monetary Economies’, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis,
  pp. 169–210.

Brunnermeier, M. K. & Sannikov, Y. (2016), The I theory of money, Working Paper
  22533, NBER, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Bryant, J. (1983), ‘Government irrelevance results: A simple exposition’, American Eco-
  nomic Review 73(4), 758–761.

Calomiris, C. W. & Kahn, C. M. (1991), ‘The role of demandable debt in structuring
  optimal banking arrangements’, American Economic Review 81(3), 497–513.

Calvo, G. A. (1983), ‘Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework’, Journal of
  Monetary Economics 12(3), 383–398.

Chamley, C. & Polemarchakis, H. (1984), ‘Assets, general equilibrium and the neutrality
 of money’, Review of Economic Studies 51(1), 129–138.

Clarida, R., Galı́, J. & Gertler, M. (1999), ‘The science of monetary policy: A New
  Keynesian perspective’, Journal of Economic Literature 37(4), 1661–1707.

Clower, R. W. (1967), ‘A reconsideration of the microfoundations of monetary theory’,
  Western Economic Journal 6(1), 1–8.

Croushore, D. (1993), ‘Money in the utility function: Functional equivalence to a shop-
  pingtime model’, Journal of Macroeconomics 15(1), 175–182.

Diamond, D. W. & Rajan, R. G. (2001), ‘Liquidity risk, liquidity creation, and financial
  fragility: A theory of banking’, Journal of Political Economy 109(2), 287–327.

Dixit, A. K. & Stiglitz, J. E. (1977), ‘Monopolistic competition and optimum product
  diversity’, American Economic Review 67(3), 297–308.



                                          25
Faure, S. & Gersbach, H. (2018), Money creation in different architectures, Discussion
  Paper 13156, CEPR.

Feenstra, R. C. (1986), ‘Functional equivalence between liquidity costs and the utility of
  money’, Journal of Monetary Economics 17(2), 271–291.

Fisher, I. (1930), The Theory of Interest, as determined by Impatience to Spend Income
  and Opportunity to Invest it, Macmillan, New York.

Fisher, I. (1935), 100% Money, Adelphi, New York.

Fisher, I. (1936), ‘100% money and the public debt’, Economic Forum (April–June), 406–
  420.

Friedman, M. (1960), A Program for Monetary Stability, Fordham University Press, New
  York.

Friedman, M. (1969), The optimum quantity of money, in M. Friedman, ed., ‘The Opti-
  mum Quantity of Money and Other Essays’, Aldine, Chicago, chapter 1, pp. 1–50.

Galı́, J. (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle, Princeton University
 Press, Princeton.

Gonzalez-Eiras, M. & Niepelt, D. (2015), ‘Politico-economic equivalence’, Review of Eco-
 nomic Dynamics 18(4), 843–862.

Grandmont, J.-M. & Younes, Y. (1972), ‘On the role of money and the existence of a
  monetary equilibrium’, Review of Economic Studies 39(3), 355–372.

Gurley, J. G. & Shaw, E. S. (1960), Money in a Theory of Finance, Brookings Institution,
 Washington.

Hayashi, F. (1982), ‘Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation’,
  Econometrica 50(1), 213–224.

Holmström, B. & Tirole, J. (1998), ‘Private and public supply of liquidity’, Journal of
  Political Economy 106(1), 1–40.

Holmström, B. & Tirole, J. (2001), ‘LAPM: A liquidity-based asset pricing model’, Journal
  of Finance 56(5), 1837–1867.

Jorgensen, D. W. (1963), ‘Capital theory and investment behavior’, American Economic
  Review, Papers and Proceedings 53(2), 247–259.

Kiyotaki, N. & Moore, J. (2012), Liquidity, business cycles, and monetary policy, Working
  Paper 17934, NBER, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Kiyotaki, N. & Wright, R. (1993), ‘A search-theoretic approach to monetary economics’,
  American Economic Review 83(1), 63–77.

                                           26
Knight, F. H., Cox, G. V., Director, A., Douglas, P. H., Fisher, I., Hart, A. G., Mints,
 L. W., Schultz, H. & Simons, H. C. (1933), Memorandum on banking reform. Henry
 C. Wallace papers.

Lagos, R. (2010), ‘Asset prices and liquidity in an exchange economy’, Journal of Mone-
  tary Economics 57(8), 913–930.

Lagos, R. & Wright, R. (2005), ‘A unified framework for monetary theory and policy
  analysis’, Journal of Political Economy 113(3), 463–484.

Lucas, R. E. (1980), Equilibrium in a pure currency economy, in J. H. Kareken & N. Wal-
  lace, eds, ‘Models of Monetary Economies’, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Min-
  neapolis, pp. 131–145.

Lucas, R. E. (1982), ‘Interest rates and currency prices in a two-country world’, Journal
  of Monetary Economics 10(3), 335–359.

Lucas, R. E. & Stokey, N. L. (1987), ‘Money and interest rates in a cash-in-advance
  economy’, Econometrica 55(3), 491–513.

McCallum, B. T. & Goodfriend, M. S. (1987), Demand for money: Theoretical studies,
 in J. Eatwell, P. Newman & M. Milgate, eds, ‘The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of
 Economics’, Macmillan Press, London, pp. 775–781.

Modigliani, F. & Miller, M. H. (1958), ‘The cost of capital, corporation finance and the
 theory of investment’, American Economic Review 48(3), 261–297.

Niepelt, D. (2018), Reserves for all? Central Bank Digital Currency, deposits, and their
  (non)-equivalence, Discussion Paper 13065, CEPR.

Niepelt, D. (2020), ‘Reserves for all? Central Bank Digital Currency, deposits, and their
  (non)-equivalence’, International Journal of Central Banking forthcoming.

Rocheteau, G. & Nosal, E. (2017), Money, Payments, and Liquidity, 2. edn, MIT Press,
  Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Samuelson, P. A. (1958), ‘An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or without
  the social contrivance of money’, Journal of Political Economy 66(6), 467–482.

Sargent, T. J. (1987), Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory, Harvard University Press, Cam-
  bridge, Massachusetts.

Saving, T. R. (1971), ‘Transactions costs and the demand for money’, American Economic
  Review 61(3), 407–420.

Shell, K. (1971), ‘Notes on the economics of infinity’, Journal of Political Economy
  79(5), 1002–1011.



                                           27
Sidrauski, M. (1967), ‘Rational choice and patterns of growth in a monetary economy’,
  American Economic Review 57(2), 534–544.

Svensson, L. E. O. (1985), ‘Money and asset prices in a cash-in-advance economy’, Journal
  of Political Economy 93(5), 919–944.

Tobin, J. (1956), ‘The interest elasticity of the transactions demand for cash’, Review of
  Economics and Statistics 38(3), 241–247.

Tobin, J. (1963), Commercial banks as creators of “money”, Discussion Paper 159, Cowles
  Foundation, New Haven.

Tobin, J. (1969), ‘A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory’, Journal of Money,
  Credit, and Banking 1(1), 15–29.

Tobin, J. (1985), ‘Financial innovation and deregulation in perspective’, Bank of Japan
  Monetary and Economic Studies 3(2), 19–29.

Tobin, J. (1987), The case for preserving regulatory distinctions, in ‘Restructuring the Fi-
  nancial System, Proceedings of the Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole’, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, chapter 9, pp. 167–183.

Townsend, R. M. (1980), Models of money with spatially separated agents, in J. H.
  Kareken & N. Wallace, eds, ‘Models of Monetary Economies’, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Minneapolis, Minneapolis, pp. 265–304.

Wallace, N. (1980), The overlapping generations model of fiat money, in J. H. Kareken &
 N. Wallace, eds, ‘Models of Monetary Economies’, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
 Minneapolis, pp. 49–82.

Wallace, N. (1981), ‘A Modigliani-Miller theorem for open-market operations’, American
 Economic Review 71(3), 267–274.

Woodford, M. (1990), ‘Public debt as private liquidity’, American Economic Review
 80(2), 382–388.

Woodford, M. (2003), Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press, Princeton.




                                            28
