                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 IT'S THE PHONE, STUPID:
                                  MOBILES AND MURDER

                                         Lena Edlund
                                        Cecilia Machado

                                      Working Paper 25883
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25883


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            May 2019, Revised October 2019




We would like to thank Jerome Fox, Jonathan Heathcote, Thomas J. Holmes, Don Johnson, Ewan
Kwerel, Eva Meyersson, Dan O'Flaherty, Emily Owens, Christopher Ruhm, Michael Riordan,
Rajiv Sethi, Rodrigo Soares, Patrick Sun, and seminar participants at the Minneapolis Federal
Reserve, Bristol University for helpful comments. Christiane Szerman and Laisa Rachter
provided excellent research assistance. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Lena Edlund and Cecilia Machado. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
It's the Phone, Stupid: Mobiles and Murder
Lena Edlund and Cecilia Machado
NBER Working Paper No. 25883
May 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. I0,I18,R0

                                         ABSTRACT

US homicide rates fell sharply in the early 1990s, a decade that also saw the mainstreaming of
cell phones – a concurrence that may be more than a coincidence, we propose. Cell phones may
have undercut turf-based street dealing, thus undermining drug-dealing profits of street gangs,
entities known to engage in violent crime. Studying county-level data for the years 1970-2009 we
find that the expansion of cellular phone service (as proxied by antenna-structure density)
lowered homicide rates in the 1990s. Furthermore, effects were concentrated in urban counties;
among Black or Hispanic males; and more gang/drug-associated homicides.


Lena Edlund
Department of Economics
Columbia University
1002A IAB, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
le93@columbia.edu

Cecilia Machado
Getulio Vargas Foundation (EPGE-FGV)
cecilia.machado@fgv.br
1     Introduction
In the 1990s, US homicide rates fell sharply and have remained low since, remarkable
considering the past decades’ booms and busts; growing income inequality; rising gun
sales; declining incarceration rates (since 2008, Kaeble and Cowhig [2018]), and burgeoning
substance abuse (Desimone [2001], Case and Deaton [2015], Ruhm [2018], also Figure 1).
    New York City provides a telling example. In 1990s, the city recorded 2,245 homicides.
Ten years later, that number was down to 677, a 70% fall. New York City is but one data
point, but it illustrates a wider trend of safer cities, safer big cities in particular. Take the
country’s three largest cities, New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago. In 1990, they
accounted for 5.6% of the US population but 20% of homicides, and had homicide rates
exceeding not only the national average but also those of other cities. Ten years later, the
country’s three most populous cities looked like any other city, a remarkable convergence
(Figure 2).
    This paper investigates the role of cell phones1 in this development. Mainstreaming
of cell phones, we propose, changed how drugs were dealt. Instead of relying on a fixed
location, trades could be coordinated in real time, undermining the need for open street
markets. This development required cell phones to be cheap enough to be an everyday
possession, something the transition from analogue to digital telephony in the 1990s helped
usher in. By 2000, the number of subscribers stood at 100 million, up from a mere five
million in 1990.2
    Illicit drug use has a long history but started to seep into the US mainstream in the
late 1960s with the youth-oriented hippie culture and the return of Vietnam war veterans.
In large cities, open street markets emerged in which buyers and sellers could connect
without prior arrangements. The need to physically spot each other while staying under
the radar of law enforcement or “concerned citizens” limited the number of feasible venues.
Buyers and sellers would coordinate on marginal, but publicly accessible locations such as
poorly supervised street blocks or intersections. Control of that space – or “turf” – meant
control of who could and who could not sell, thus allowing for cartelization of the retail
market for drugs.
    Cell phones removed the need for buyers and sellers to physically spot each other, thus
reducing the importance of turf. Cell phones also provided a level of privacy unattainable
in the street market. In the words of Murray [2001, page 51]: “[Cell phones] oﬀered
something completely new: Dialing a phone number now meant connecting with a person
rather than a place.”
    The hypothesized link from cell phones to reduced violence runs via the demise of
turf as a profit center for street gangs. Turf was local territory that could be patrolled
and defended and thus allowed for drug retailing to be cartelized. The ensuing economic
success of street gangs resulted in more violence because gangs tend to employe violence
liberally in their everyday operations (to settle scores, fight oﬀ rivals, collect debts, impose
    1 More broadly, the role of two-way Commercial Mobile Radio Services, a class that also includes

Specialized Mobile Radio (SMR) and Personal Communication Services (PCS). For brevity, when there
is little risk of confusion, “cell phones” will be used to refer to this whole class.
    2 See for instance the Federal Communications Commission’s Annual Report and Analysis of Compet-

itive Market Conditions With Respect to Commercial Mobile Services, various years.



                                                 2
internal discipline, etc.). Furthermore, high gang profits may have generated violence
around the fringes as aspiring or low-ranking gang members sought to establish their bona
fides by acting tough [Johnson et al., 2000, Levitt and Venkatesh, 2000].
    To obtain plausibly exogenous variation in cell phone uptake, we use a measure of
network build out. Mobility in modern mobile telephony is achieved by calls being handled
in a network of hexagonal cells. As the caller moves between cells, the call is handed from
one cell to another. Each cell consists of an antenna structure (e.g., a tower), antennas,
and a base station. To a first approximation, more antenna structures mean more cells
and more cells mean better service. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
maintains a public register of all antenna structures taller than 200 feet above ground.
The register contains information on location and year of construction, allowing us to
construct a local (county-level) measure of antenna density by year.
    Our identifying assumption is that the build-out of the cellular network generated
exogenous variation in mainstreaming of mobile telephony. We think this is a reasonable
assumption for the 1990s when aﬀordability and versatility of cell phones took major
steps forward due to technological and regulatory advances. It was also a decade of rapid
antenna-structure build-out (Figure 3). This assumption loses validity with distance to
the 1990s. In short, the 1970s saw network construction but no service, the 1980s saw
the introduction of cell phones, but the technology was analogue and low capacity and
expensive, and the 2000s is a decade of saturation for basic voice and text services.
    Our main finding is that annual, county-level mortality data for the contiguous US
covering the four decades 1970-2009 lend support to our hypothesis that expansion of
cellular phone service – as proxied by antenna-structure build-out – lowered homicide
rates. Results vary with time and space in a fashion consistent with our hypothesis: they
are strongest for the 1990s and among urban counties (those belonging to a Consolidated
Statistical Area (CSA)). Our findings are robust to the inclusion of CSA-year fixed eﬀects,
as well as Donohue and Levitt [2019]’s state-year measure of abortion access,3 and do
not appear confounded by illicit drug use or economic activity as measured by county-
level overdose and employment rates respectively. Compared to 1990, homicides in 2000
were down by about 10,000 and back-of-the-envelop calculations suggest that cell-phone
mainstreaming can account for 1,900-2,900 of that decline.
    We are not the first to propose that mainstreaming of mobile communication improved
public safety, or to investigate the relationship empirically [Klick et al., 2002, Orrick and
Piquero, 2015]. Using annual, state-level cell phone subscription data, Klick et al. [2002]
found subscriptions to reduce rape and assault in the study period 1999-2007. Orrick
and Piquero [2015] brought the analysis back to cover the 1990s, our decade of interest,
but did so at the loss of sub-national granularity. Using national time series, they found
support for cell phones having reduced property crimes but not violent crimes.4
    We diﬀer from Klick et al. [2002] and Orrick and Piquero [2015] empirically and con-
ceptually. To start with diﬀerences in the empirical strategy, by exploiting network build
out, we hope to sidestep some of the problems with usage measures. As pointed out by
Klick et al. [2002], cell phones may be acquired prospectively to deter crimes or have
higher use in areas that for reasons unrelated to cell phones see greater reductions in
crime. Furthermore, we avoid the limitation that for most of the 1990s, subscription data
only exist at the national level thus precluding a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence analysis.
  3 We   thank John Donohue and Steven Levitt for these data.
  4 Both   studies used the Uniform Crime Reports for their crime statistics.



                                                    3
     As for conceptual diﬀerences, they emphasized the deterrence eﬀect of cell phones,
whereas we emphasize the eﬀect cell phones had on the business model of street-turned-
drug gangs.
     Evidence on gang related crimes seems germane to the question whether crime fell
because of the improved ability to call a drug dealer as opposed to simply the ability
to call the cops. The nature of gangs, however, makes such evidence scarce. Victims or
witnesses are an important source of information on gang aﬃliation of perpetrators. For
various reasons – fear of retaliation, feelings of loyalty, a desire to not get further involved,
etc. – this information may not be shared with law enforcement. With these caveats in
mind, we present evidence from three sources. First, the National Crime Victimization
Survey (NCVS) is a nationally representative annual survey of the US population 12 years
or older. While the NCVS does not cover homicides, it collects information on crimes
whether reported to the police or not and for each incident asks (the victim) whether
the oﬀender was a gang member. Dividing crimes into violent and property crimes, we
find gang involvement in violent crime not only dwarfed that in property crime, the 1990s
drop in violent crime was accompanied by a drop in the share of violent crime with a
gang connection. While not definitive, these pieces of evidence are supportive of a gang
mediated mechanism.
     Second, breaking down mortality statistics by race, age and sex, we find that antennas
disproportionately reduced homicides among Black or Hispanic young men, a demographic
group with higher gang membership than other race, age, gender demographic cell.5
     Third, we use the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Supplementary Homicide
Reports (SHR) which provide circumstance and victim-oﬀender relationship information.
Unlike the vital statistics, FBI data reporting is voluntary and the detail richness of the
SHR is somewhat tempered by less than full coverage and a substantial fraction of cases
being “undetermined.” That said, using the SHR data we find antenna-structure build-
out to have had a stronger impact on homicides more closely linked to gang and drug
activities (e.g., juvenile gang killing) than on homicides with less of a link (e.g., hunting
accident). As for the victim-oﬀender relationship, the overall picture again is supportive,
with homicides by strangers being among the types of homicides most aﬀected by antenna-
structure build-out. Furthermore, we find no eﬀect for wife killings, consistent with gang
members or drug dealers not being the marrying kind.
     Many types of crime fell in the 1990s, not just homicide. We focus on homicide because
it is a crime that is close to our hypothesis. It is also a well measured crime; the statistics
are not susceptible to changes in victim propensity to report or arrest probability. While
determination can be open to some slippage, once a death is considered a homicide,
reporting is close to 100% [Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2014]. That said, homicide rates
may correlate positively with other crimes and thus provide a window on them for two
reasons. First, while homicide can be the intended end point, it can also be the deadly
outcome of another crime [Maltz, 1999], say robbery or assault, in which case homicide
may just be the tip of the proverbial iceberg. Second, we hypothesize that high homicide
rates were driven by a weaponized gang environment, a factor that itself may give rise to
crime.6 A person carrying a gun for gang business may be tempted to also use it to rob
or rape.
   5 For instance, National Gang Center. National Youth Gang Survey Analysis. Retrieved March 11,

2018, from http://www.nationalgangcenter.gov/Survey-Analysis.
   6 For evidence on the drugs-guns-homicide link, see Evans et al. [2018].




                                               4
    While almost a quarter century ago and time-bracketed, what brought down crime in
the 1990s remains topical. First, our hypothesis suggests that low homicide rates may
be the result of a regime shift, not just the outcome of a string of lucky breaks. Second,
while the 1990s crime reduction need not be reproduceable (cell phones are not going
anywhere), our findings suggest that the relationship between drug dealing and violence
is complex and mediated by the market structure. Third, our paper relates to a small but
growing literature on the equally growing substance abuse crisis where two phalanxes have
crystalized, one viewing substance abuse through the prism of economic decline [Case and
Deaton, 2015] and one that has drawn attention to the proliferation of prescription drugs
[Ruhm, 2018]. We add low prices and ready availability of illicit drugs to the mix.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: We end this section with a brief
discussion of the related crime literature. Section 2 provides a brief background on cellular
telephony and the gang-drug-violence nexus. Section 3 describes the empirical strategy
and Section 4 the data used. Section 5 presents results. Section 6 concludes.

1.1    Related Literature
Our inquiry falls on the heels of a large literature studying the 1990s’ crime decline,
for reviews see e.g., Levitt [2004], Roeder et al. [2015], O’Flaherty and Sethi [2015].7
One strand of explanations has focused on reduced criminality of the cohorts coming of
criminal age in the 1990s, highlighting factors such as lead abatement [Reyes, 2007, Aizer
and Currie, 2017] or abortion liberalization [Donohue and Levitt, 2001, 2019].8
    Other studies have emphasized contemporaneous factors such as economic opportuni-
ties; urban renewal [Diamond, 2016]; crack cocaine [Grogger and Willis, 2000]; policing
policies, incarceration rates, or other facets of the criminal justice system [Kuziemko and
Levitt, 2004, Chalfin and McCrary, 2017]. However, the 1990s and the 2000s through 2006
were economic boom years, followed by the Great Recession, and all the while economic
inequality kept rising. Still crime fell and has remained low. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the
evidence on the role of the economic environment has been inconclusive [Gould et al.,
2002, Bushway et al., 2012]. As for the role of urban renewal, a level of interrelatedness is
bound to exist if only because crime is a low-skill occupation. It is worth noting, however,
that the ascendancy of centrality as a prized amenity has long been in the making. The
trend was evident already in the 1980s [Edlund et al., 2016] but apparently did little to
stop the crime wave of the late 1980s and early 1990s.
    As the crack epidemic receded, so did the crime wave (Grogger and Willis [2000], also
see Figure 1). However, explanations focusing on crack cocaine raise the question why
drug use since has not resulted in similar or higher levels of violence. At least judging by
overdose deaths, drug use has been steadily increasing since the 1980s, e.g., Jalal et al.
[2018]. Certainly, overdose deaths have become more rural and more white, but that is a
relative statement; in absolute terms, deaths have risen in urban areas as well.9
    The second half of the 1990s saw a move away from open, visible-to-all, street transac-
tions to indoor dealing. The change has been described as partly motivated by an interest
   7 For popular press coverage, see for instance, Neil Howe “What’s Behind The Decline In Crime?”

Forbes 28 May 2015; Dara Lind and German Lopez “Why did crime plummet in the US? Vox 19 January
2016 https://www.vox.com/cards/crime-rate-drop; Matt Ford “What Caused the Great Crime Decline
in the U.S.?” The Atlantic 15 April 2016.
   8 For a critique, see Foote and Goetz [2008]).
   9 For the 1999-2015 period, see Mack KA [2017, table 2].




                                                5
in protecting against robbery and partly as a response to more aggressive policing, and the
role of mobile radio communication in this change has also been noted [Furst et al., 1999,
Johnson et al., 2000]. Clearly, the link between cell phones and modes of drug dealing is
not novel. Neither is the link between drug dealing and violent crime. However, to the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to splice the two.
    As noted in the introduction, our paper picks up a thread of the criminology literature
focusing on the crime-reducing capability of technological advances, although the emphasis
has tended to be on the edge technology lends law enforcement or law-abiding citizens.
Other than cell phones, surveillance cameras, alarm systems, locks, etc. have all improved.
Car locks are a case in point. Car theft used to be relatively low-skill, requiring little more
than a blank key and a hammer. Starting in 1990, some high-end cars came equipped
with mobilization technology requiring a computer chip embedded in the key fob to start
the engine. However, uptake in the US was gradual and slow. By 2000, only about 10
percent of cars were thus outfitted [van Ours and Vollaard, 2016, figure 2], undermining
the case for this technology to have played a major role in the decline in violent crime.10
Technological advances also underpinned the “broken-windows” policies popularized by
the New York City Police Department.11 Lastly, the reduced amount of cash in circulation
has aﬀected the gains from robbery accordingly.12
    Lastly, our paper is also related to Bertoloai and Scorzafave [2018] who proposed that
the use of cell phones among Brazilian inmates reduced homicides. Their hypothesized
mechanism, however, is quite diﬀerent from ours. Cell phones, they argued, allowed one
gang to gain hegemony within the prison system by facilitating coordinated, in-prison
attacks on rival gang members; this in-prison hegemony could then be leveraged to drug-
dealing hegemony throughout the state since dealers caught were likely to end up in a
gang controlled prison.


2     Background
This section motivates why we think cell phones reduced violence in the US and why in
the 1990s. To that end we will briefly discuss drug dealing and the use of violence in
illegal organizations, but we start with a short history of mobile telephony.

2.1     Mobile telephony
The crime fighting potential of mobile radio communication was recognized early, with
police departments being among the early adopters in the 1920s. Come World War II and
two-way communication found extensive military use. Modern wireless communication
relies on calls being transferred in a network of hexagonal cells. The concept was worked
out in the 1960s and the first prototype call was placed in 1973. Commercial service,
however, had to wait another ten years. In 1983 the infrastructure was in place to oﬀer
the service commercially in Chicago and the Baltimore-DC area (where it had operated
an experimental basis since 1977). Other major cities followed in 1984. Initially, coverage
  10 For instance by restricting the availability of getaway cars. The share of homicides directly attributed

to motor vehicle theft is exceedingly small, see Table A2.
  11 Specifically, the computer program CompStat https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CompStat
  12 As for drug-sales linked robberies, payment by cryptocurrency reduces the risk further. However,

these currencies appear, by and large, outside of our study period. Bitcoin was launched in 2009.



                                                     6
was limited to the subscribers “home” city; truly national coverage would be another
15 years. Through the 1980s, the handsets were expensive, mono-functional, and barely
portable (often designed to work in cars, so called “car phones”).13 Even the “pocket
phone,” introduced in 1986, weighed 15 ounces and $3,295 [Murray, 2001, page 214].
    To accommodate this new service, the FCC made additional spectrum available. Each
market was given two licenses, one which was given to the existing wireline operator
(one of the Regional Bell Operating Companies or RBOCs) and the other one to a non-
wireline provider.14 While the non-RBOC operator constituted competition, they were
fractionalized and often could not even oﬀer regional coverage. The result was a sleepy
duopoly of Baby Bells and local providers [Murray, 2001], perhaps fitting for an analogue
network that could only handle a handful of phone calls at a time. In sum, in the 1980s,
cellular telephony was far from a mass market service.
    This situation was to radically change in the 1990s, principally because of the transition
from analogue to digital telephony (2G) launched in 1991.15 The 1990s is replete with
milestones, from the first SMS to the 100-million subscriber mark. However, the first half
of the 1990s stands out. In particular, a number of events shaping market structure make
1993 notable.
    First, the 1993 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act made additional spectrum avail-
able for Personal Communications Services (PCS), a wireless technology that was digital
from the start and provides a service very similar to cellular telephony (the first auction
opened in December 1994).
    Second, in 1993, AT&T entered the wireless phone business with the purchase of
McCaw Cellular Communications (the merger was completed in 1994). The entry of
AT&T brought nationwide coverage one step closer. The way in which spectrum had
been allocated (by lottery for a decade) and a “free market” approach to the industry
meant that the US market was highly fractionalized (compared to Western Europe), with
phones, switches, even billing, being unable to handle calls across operators, and operators
were often local. Seamless, cheap, nationwide calling was an obvious goal that could
popularize wireless telephony. In 1998, AT&T introduced the first flat-rate plan with
national coverage, the Digital One Rate plan. It was an instant success.
    Third, 1993 is when a third, hitherto overlooked, system went on-line in LA. Using
dispatch spectrum bought on the cheap and equipment developed by Motorola, Nextel
(formerly Fleet Call) oﬀered a radio that also worked as a phone, and vice versa.
    Meanwhile, handsets and service plans became more consumer friendly. To start with
the phones themselves, they saw improved functionality and battery life, all while shedding
bulk and weight. For instance, in 1994, Motorola introduced the MicroTAC, which retailed
for around $600 ($970 in 2016 CPI adjusted dollars), substantially lower than the $4,000
price tag of the initial phones (in 1983 or $9,000 in 2016 dollars). In 1995, the Nokia GSM
phone, yet cheaper, lighter, and more versatile, reached the American market.
  13 Wikipedia: “The Motorola DynaTAC 8000x commercial portable cellular phone received approval

from the FCC on September 21, 1983. It was priced at $3,995 in 1984, its commercial release year,
equivalent to $9,209 in 2016 dollars.”
  14 To handle the volume of applicants, the existing application process was scrapped for allocation by

lottery, the first of which was held in the spring of 1984.
  15 Simply put, a phone call between points A and B can be likened to highway traﬃc between them.

Analogue technology is the equivalent of an entire lane being dedicated to a call, limiting call capacity to
the number of lanes. Digital telephony, on the other hand, is more like regular use of a highway, each car
occupying only a fraction of lane space.



                                                     7
    As for service plans, in the early 1990s phone plans varied in a myriad of ways: the
charge for incoming and/or outgoing calls; the first minutes of a call; the time of the day
and the day of the week; in-network or roaming, etc, complicating price comparisons. By
the mid-1990s, competitive and technological forces combined to give budget conscious
consumers more options. Pre-paid cards were introduced in 1994, eliminating the need
for a long-term contract (or to provide identification, pass a credit check, etc.). For those
not minding the lock-in of a contract, bare-bones “road-side assistance” plans could be
had for $15/month, while users springing for more minutes could get plans that included
a basic phone [Federal Communications Commission, 1997].
    In 1994, the retail price per minute started to drop after years of little sign of change
[Hazlett, 1999, figure 2]. In terms of contract expenditures, the average local monthly bill
dropped from $95 in 1988 to $52 in 1995, a level it would maintain through the 2000s
(CTIA).16
    In 1998 cellular telephony was common enough to be included in the CPI [Hausman,
1999], and around the turn of the century the subscription base crossed the 100-million
mark, or roughly one subscription per household.17
    Expansion continued apace in the 2000s, in no small part driven by the introduction
of smart phones. In 2000, the first camera phone appeared. In 2003, the BlackBerry
7230 introduced full web browsing. The iPhone arrived in 2007. The decade also saw
the appearance of the term “burner phone” (circa 2002) illustrating both the usefulness
of mobile phones for illegal activities as well as the near disposability of what was once a
luxury item. Table 1 provides a brief summary of these events.
    Our hypothesis is about cheap mobile two-way communication (or Commercial Mo-
bile Radio Services (CMRS)), whether by Specialized Mobile Radio (SMR) and Personal
Communication Services (PCS), or cellular telephony. This CMRS category also includes
pagers but pagers may have been less consequential for our hypothesis because they did
not provide two-way communication (until cell phones and CMRS siblings did so and on
the cheap). Nevertheless a note on pagers is warranted.
    Pagers made a brief but noteworthy foray into the mainstream in the 1980s. Pagers
were largely limited to one-way, highly abbreviated communication and their popularity in
the 1980s speaks volumes about the then state of cell phones. (Pagers existed before 1980
but their range had been too limited to provide more than mobile intercom within a work
site or similar.) In 1980 wide-area pagers with city, even national range were introduced.
Additional functionality included ability to display a number and, by the mid 1980s, a
brief message.
    By the end of the 1980s, the role of pagers in drug distribution was clear to the point of
service providers taking counter measures.18 Unlike the cell phones of their time, they were
aﬀordable enough to make their way into high schools where they conferred a certain status
on their carriers.19 However, pagers appear to have mainly impacted communication
 16 http://files.ctia.org/pdf/CTIA_Survey_MY_2012_Graphics-_final.pdf
 17 The  Wireless Association https://www.ctia.org
 18 Jim  Schachter. “Paging Service Hopes Surcharge Gives Drug Dealers the Message” LA Times
October 06, 1988,
http://articles.latimes.com/1988-10-06/business/fi-4446_1_paging-service
Moses, Jonathan M. “Message Is Out On Beepers” Washington Post July 11, 1988,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/archive/politics/1988/07/11/message-is-out-on-beepers/
58840caa-523e-413b-9224-60ad94d7803f
  19 Sims, Calvin. “Schools Responding to Beeper, Tool of Today’s Drug Dealer, by Banning It” New

York Times September 25, 1988.


                                               8
between dealers and suppliers.20 Why that was can be speculated about. Perhaps the
one-way and highly limited amount of information that could be communicated kept
pagers from aﬀecting street dealing.

2.2      Illegal Drug Dealing
Illegal drugs, like any other product, reach the end user via a multi-legged journey. Our
hypothesis concerns the last leg and in particular the market Johnson [2003] labelled
“public networks” (as opposed to “private networks”‘ and “freelance public distribution”).
Wrote Johnson [2003, page 4]: “Public networks involve sellers and lower-level distributors
making sales to buyers in public settings (streets, parks) and even in private spaces (bars,
clubs, stores, hallways and common areas of buildings). Buyers/sellers rarely know each
other personally.” Why shifting drug retailing away from the public network market would
reduce violence is a germane question, clearly, drug use has not declined. The role of gangs
is our proposed answer, shifting the question to why drug gangs are violent.

2.2.1     Gangs-Drugs-Violence?
Street or youth gangs had been part of the urban landscape well before the crime waves of
the 1980s and 1990s, organizing working-class male youth often along lines of ethnicity or
nationality. Activities ranged from socializing to petty crime and occasional street fights
with rival gangs. As narcotics use become more common in the 1970s, gangs started to
control street dealing. The money making potential in drug dealing quickly outshone
those of other activities [Howell and Decker, 1999]. Cue the drug gang, a more moneyed
and more violent version of the street gang. Gang membership has since been strongly
associated with homicides (e.g., Decker and Curry [2002]), as well as a slate of other crimes
(e.g., National Gang Intelligence Center [2013]).
    Wrote Johnson et al. [2000, page 180] about the late 1980s:

        So many people were striving to make “crazy money” that competition among
        sellers was the major problem. ... The more-organized crack sellers introduced
        a variety of violent innovations to control competition and increase their prof-
        its. Crew leaders started to hire a “protector” to defend turf and enforce
        sanctions against operatives. Many of these muscle men were perceived as
        “crazy,” or unpredictably violent, which enhanced their image, instilled fear in
        others, and increased their worth. ... [juveniles] quickly learned of enhanced
        job opportunities associated with acting crazy. ... One of the most eﬀective
        tactics towards this end was to talk about, display, or use guns.’

   But why are drug gangs violent to start with? Illegality and profitability emerge as
key factors, dimensions we now turn to.
https://www.nytimes.com/1988/09/25/us/schools-responding-to-beeper-tool-of-today-s-drug-dealer-by-banning-it.
html

  20 Tibbets, Wendy. “Technology: What was it like when people used beepers and not cell phones?”

July 5, 2017.
https://www.quora.com/Technology-What-was-it-like-when-people-used-beepers-and-not-cell-phones




                                               9
    To start with illegality, the cost-benefit calculation for illegal organizations favors vi-
olence. Its dual, legality, oﬀers a number of benefits, including protection against confis-
cation of property and access to judicial recourse. Use of violence is one way to lose legal
status, a margin of relevance for the legal enterprise only.21 Thus the cost of violence is
higher for legal than illegal outfits.
    As for the benefits, violence is one way to enforce property rights and settle conflicts
particularly attractive to illegal organizations. While legal organizations tend to favor
contractual obligations and third party enforcement, notably by courts, this avenue is
fraught with diﬃculties for the illegal organization. Courts are loath to enforce contracts
on illegal activities. Furthermore, courts lean heavily on written contracts, documents the
illegal organization tends to avoid since they also constitute prime incriminating evidence
[Reuter, 1985].
    Thus, the cost-benefit calculation for violence looks better for illegal than legal orga-
nizations. Still, not all illegal organizations use violence pointing to additional considera-
tions, a matter of interest to us since we argue that homicides fell because of changes to
the retailing of illicit drugs.22
    Profits, territoriality, and ambiguity are additional factors. Since the State has an
obvious interest in curbing lethal violence and also has considerable resources at its dis-
posal, organizations will only resort to lethal violence if the profits from so doing are
high.23 Drug selling, especially if cartelized, can provide such profits.
    Territory dependent profits, the case in turf-based drug dealing, fans violence because
territory is physical space that can be attacked or defended.
    Lastly, a level of ambiguity is required. If an outcome is certain, then the parties can
economize on the fighting. Periods of uncertainty, for instance because of a weak(ened)
incumbent (e.g., Dell [2015]), may trigger violence. In terms of market entry, the in-
between case may be more conducive to violence than the extremes: secure monopoly
(e.g., Bertoloai and Scorzafave [2018]) or free entry (the case considered here).
    In sum, drug dealing in the US in the 1980s and early 1990s exhibited above four
features conducive to lethal violence: illegality, profitability, territoriality and ambiguity.
This situation may have come to an end with the mainstreaming of cell phones. The cell
phone allows buyers and sellers to make contact and improvise on the point of exchange,
rendering redundant the fixed market place. In the 1990s, in particular in the later half,
cell phones became aﬀordable enough to be everyday possessions. In 1997, a New York
Times article noted that drug dealing had moved indoors.24
    If cellular telephony freed sellers from the need for turf access, then the lower barriers
to entry should have resulted in lower drug prices. In fact, prices fell. In 1990, a gram of
heroin cost about $300 (inflation adjusted to 2015 dollars). Today it can be had for a third
of that,25 and, interestingly, the price decline was steepest in the 1994-2001 period.26
  21 Non-State combatants pose a direct threat to the State and it is therefore unsurprising that private

armies, militias, even duelling [Tilly, 1990] are highly circumscribed in modern states.
  22 For anectdotal evidence, see e.g., Miroﬀ, Nick “Mexican traﬃckers making New York a hub for

lucrative – and deadly – fentanyl.” Washington Post 13 November 2017.
  23 In addition to attracting the attention of law enforcement, violence creates bad-will in the aﬀected

communities, deters customers, and demoralizes the rank and file [Levitt and Venkatesh, 2000].
  24 Rohde, David. “Where Has Your Neighborhood Drug Dealer Gone?” The New York Times 17

August 1997.
  25 Washington Post, August 27, 2015: “Why a bag of heroin costs less than a pack of cigarettes.”
  26 United Nations, reported in “Heroin Prices” The Economist 25 June 2009.




                                                   10
    Lower prices suggest squeezed profit margins, reduced gang income and with it the
appeal of gangs. While gang activity is diﬃcult to measure, it appears that after a pro-
longed period of steady increase [Miller, 2001], youth gang membership declined through
the later half of the 1990s and held steady between 2000 and 2012 (latest year available).27
Furthermore, youth gangs may have assumed a less crime-oriented identity, for instance,
by being more inclusive and less cohesive than in the past [Pyrooz and Sweeten, 2015,
Morselli et al., 2017].
    Data from the National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS) also suggest reduced
gang activity. The NCVS is a nationally representative annual survey that has existed in
its current form since 1992.28 The NCVS seeks to capture victim accounts of crimes. A
strength of the NCVS is that it reports crimes regardless of weather reported to the police.
Furthermore, it asks victims whether the oﬀender was a street gang member. Drawbacks
include: (i) the sample framework means that it does not cover persons currently homeless
or in correctional facilities, two groups with high victimization rates; (ii) it is a sample
and nationally representative statistics are obtained using weights; and (iii) the focus on
first-person victimization accounts means that homicides are not covered. Still, the NCVS
can shed light on gang prevalence, types of crimes gangs engage in, as well as changes over
time. To start with, the NCVS show a drop in violent and property crime victimization
similar to that observed in FBI data (although the decline appears somewhat later, see
Figure 4). Turning to types of crime, the NCVS confirms the stereotype of gangs as violent.
Gang involvement in violent crime stood at almost 10% in the mid-1990s, dwarfing that
of property crimes (0.25%=25/10,000). Furthermore, the decline in violent crimes in
the second half of the 1990s was accompanied by a halving of the share of crimes with
gang involvement (Figure 5), consistent with gangs being important originators of violent
crimes.


3     Empirical Strategy
Turning to our regression analysis, we estimate a model of the following form:

                              HOM Ict = AN Tct + αc + αt + ϵct ,                                 (1)
where:
HOM Ict – Homicides per 100,000 inhabitants in county c and year t.
AN Tct – Antenna structure density in county c and year t.
αc , αt – county and year fixed eﬀects.
     In our preferred specification, regressions are population weighted and standard errors
are clustered at the county level. Year fixed eﬀects control for time eﬀects common across
counties. County fixed eﬀects control for time-invariant county characteristics, such as pre-
existing infrastructure or demographic profile. Specifications will also introduce location-
specific time trends.
     This approach explores within county variation in antenna-structure density under
the assumption that the timing of the build-out is unrelated to other determinants of
  27 National Youth Gang Survey Analysis https://www.nationalgangcenter.gov/survey-analysis/

measuring-the-extent-of-gang-problems
  28 Data on crime victimization has been collected by the Census Bureau since 1973, initially by the

National Crime Survey. The NCVS started to be phased in the late 1980s, early 1990s. Concatenated
NCVS files exists for the years 1992-2015.


                                                 11
homicides. However, cell network expansion was not random. For instance, population
density clearly played a role, metropolitan areas were covered before rural ones. It is also
quite conceivable that areas with more economic activity, or slated for such, saw greater
infrastructure investments. Conversely, better infrastructure could attract new firms and
change the employment prospects of the local population, or the local population itself,
with attendant consequences for crime (e.g., Dix-Carneiro et al. [Forthcoming]). There
could also be an aﬀect on crime through drugs being cheaper and easier to obtain.
    Here, the 1970s may prove useful since there was no cell phone service, cell construction
in that decade was in preparation of service. Assuming that the relationship between
antenna structure placement and economic activity was the same in the 1970s as the other
decades, the 1970s could serve as “placebo.” No eﬀect on homicides in this period would
support the case for antenna-structure build-out being unrelated to other determinants of
violence.
    Another tack is to examine the exogeneity of antenna-structure placement to county
indicators of economic activity. We will focus on rates of county OD deaths and employ-
ment. Under our hypothesis, more antennas should have made drugs cheaper and easier to
obtain and to the extent that higher drug use (as opposed to profits in drug dealing) leads
to homicides, this eﬀect would go against us. The employment rate proxies for the eco-
nomic environment. If antennas were put in place in economically more successful areas,
this could introduce a spurious negative association between antennas and homicides.


4     Data
We draw on two main sources, the FCC’s register of antenna structures29 and Vital
Statistics mortality files. We supplement the mortality data with FBI’s Supplementary
Homicide Reports. We aggregate the individual-level data to the county level.
   We restrict the study to the contiguous United States and the years 1970-2009 (data
are missing for 1989). These four decades cover the rise and decline in crime as well as
many signature dates in the development of cellular telephony. The end year falls before
the emergence of the “Silk Road,” and other darknet sites, as well as the proliferation of
synthetic opioids.
   Our analysis sample has some 120 thousand county-year observations. There were
3,118 counties or county equivalents in the contiguous US (in 2016). For the 1990s, our
focal decade, we capture 3,100 or more of these counties, missing counties being rural and
small (population wise).

4.1     Homicide
The United States uses two national data collection systems to record homicides: the Fed-
eral Bureau of Investigations’s Supplementary Homicide Reports (SHR) and the National
Vital Statistics System (NVSS) [Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2014].30
    The NVSS data are maintained by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS)
and draw on death certificates. The NCHS data contain information on the date and cause
  29 http://wireless.fcc.gov/uls/index.htm?job=transaction&page=weekly
  30 National Center for Health Statistics. Mortality Data File for 1990-2014 with all county identifiers, as

compiled from data provided by the 57 vital statistics jurisdictions through the Vital Statistics Cooperative
Program.



                                                     12
of death.31 Reporting is mandatory but the homicide classification can be a judgement
call (e.g., absent witnesses or clear evidence) [Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2014].32
    The public-use files include county (occurrence or residence) identifiers for all counties
prior to 1990. For the years 1990 and onwards, we use the restricted-use data with county
identifiers for all counties.33 We use the county of occurrence and limit the sample to US
residents.
    Additional contextual information can be had from the Supplementary Homicide Re-
ports (SHR), part of the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program. The SHR
provide information on the apparent circumstances and the victim-oﬀender relationship.34
The data are at the incident level and reported by individual policy agencies on a monthly
basis. As detailed by Maltz [1999], this additional granularity comes at a cost. Agency
participation is voluntary and police departments vary in the priority given to filing. Many
agencies fail to report for all or some months of the year. Among those that report, dili-
gence varies. Further, while the circumstances surrounding a homicide can be legitimately
unknowable, the “undetermined” category is large and probably contains “determinable”
cases.

4.2       Illicit Drug Use
The NCHS mortality data also oﬀers a measure of illicit drug use, overdose (OD) deaths.
Overdose deaths are coded as death by “poisoning by medical or biological substances,
whether intentional, accidental or homicide.” We follow Ruhm [2016, table 1]’s coding of
ICD-10 cause-of-death codes.35
     As a snapshot of contemporaneous drug use, mortality data have some obvious draw-
backs. First, while habitual consumption of illicit drugs trends fatal, use may be ongoing
for many years making overdose deaths a lagging indicator. Second, inconsistent potency
of a drug tends to raise fatality rates as illustrated by the deadliness of synthetic opioids
such as fentanyl and carfentanyl. Third, not all overdose deaths are caused by illicitly
obtained drugs, viz. legally obtained prescription drugs [Ruhm, 2018]. Fourth, the OD
classification may depend on the results of a toxicology test and there is no national stan-
dard for when such is to be performed, thus reporting varies by time and jurisdiction [Seth
et al., 2018]. Still, overdose deaths may be the best nationwide county-year measure of
illicit drug use available for the study period.

4.3       Antenna Structure Density
A cellular network is made up of cells, each consisting of a base station and antennas
mounted on a structure, for instance a tower or a mast. If the antenna structure rises
 31 We   omit year 1989 because for this year, only a subset of counties are reported.
 32 The   number of homicides reported by the NCHS is higher than that reported by the FBI. The
main diﬀerence is that the FBI, being interested in crime, excludes justifiable homicides (e.g., by law
enforcement or by civilians in self defense).
  33 After 1990, only counties with more than 100,000 population are identified in the public-use files.
  34 The SHR captures death by the location of the oﬀence.
  35 That is, All Drug Poisoning Deaths, ICD-10: X40-44, X60-64, X85, Y10-14. We do not include,

Y35.2 (legal intervention), or *U01.6, *U01.7 (terrorism). The ICD-10 code has been used since 1999.
For earlier years, cause of death was recorded using ICD-8 (1970-1978) and ICD-9 (1979-1998), and we
code cause of death in these earlier years to align with the ICD-10 coding.




                                                  13
more than 200ft above ground or is within sight of an airport, it needs to be registered
with the FCC.
    The FCC register contains information on location (coordinates) and year of construc-
tion. It also gives height above ground, which allows us to filter out low antenna structures
(otherwise, areas close to airports would appear more antenna-structure dense without
that necessarily being the case). To calculate density (structures per 1,000 square miles of
county land area), we match the antenna structures to counties using Census information
on county centroids.36
    The antenna structures were assigned as follows. First, each structure was assigned to
the closest county (centroid) as well as any county within 20 miles. Then, the number of
structures assigned to a county was summed, where structures assigned to multiple coun-
ties were partially counted (an antenna structure assigned to n counties was counted as
1/n in each county). Considering the finite capacity of antenna structures (and antennas),
we think this is a reasonable assignment.
    To obtain a density measure, we divide the number of antenna structures by the county
land area.
    For time variation in antenna structure density, we use the year of construction. That
is, once constructed, we assume that the structure stays there. While this may not be
literally true, the study period was one of expansion.
    For ease of exposition, we will occasionally let “antennas” substitute for “antenna-
structure density.”
    While we proxy cell-phone uptake by density of registered antenna structures, three
(at least) caveats are worth bearing in mind. First, antennas have a number of uses (tv,
radio, public safety radio communication). We do not know which one(s) an antenna
structure was used for. Still, by 1973, the above were mature technologies with high level
of penetration and therefore to a first approximation, expansion since 1973 largely reflects
the growth of CMRSs.
    Second, the relationship between structures and service has not been constant. Ini-
tially, towers were built and operated by individual phone companies. The 2000s see the
emergence of independent tower companies that lease out antenna space, allowing one
tower to serve several networks.
    Third, the FCC registry covers only towers rising 200ft or more above ground (or
within sight of an airport). Over time, the cells making up the cellular network have be-
come smaller, thus lowering the height demands of antenna structures. This development
accelerated in the 2010s (outside our study period).

4.4    Combined Statistical Areas – CSAs
Our hypothesis primarily concerns urban violence, turf requiring some population density.
Therefore, we are interested in grouping counties by a measure of urbanicity. In addition,
we are interested in grouping counties belonging to the same metropolitan area to con-
trol for common economic shocks. To these ends, we use the Combined Statistical Area
typology, the Census states: “Combined statistical areas (CSA) consist of two or more ad-
jacent metropolitan and micropolitan statistical areas that have substantial employment
interchange.”
  36 County centroid and land area information as of year 2000, http://www.census.gov/tiger/tms/

gazetteer/county2k.txt.



                                              14
    Using the year 2013 classification, there were 166 CSAs in the contiguous United States.
The New York-Newark CSA (population 23 million) was the largest CSA, followed by Los
Angeles-Long Beach and Chicago-Naperville. The smallest CSA was Steamboat Springs-
Craig, CO (population 37,757, 2016 estimate).
    CSAs counties are more urban than non-CSA counties and account for about 75% of
the population (in the contiguous USA).
    On average, there were about seven counties per CSA. To further zero in on urbanicity,
we designate the county containing the main Central Business District (CBD) of the CSA
as “main.” Many CSAs contain multiple cities or towns, and we give the main designation
to the CBD county of the first named locality. For instance, for the New York-Newark
CSA, New York City is named first and Manhattan contains the CBD, thus Manhattan is
the main county. In a handful of cases, the CBD abutted two or more counties, in which
case they were all given the main designation.37


5     Analysis
We start the analysis with some descriptives. Figures 6-9 show the decadal change in
antenna density by county. Table 2 details these changes by county urbanicity. Clearly,
the 1990s is the decade with the most expansion. Overall, mean antenna density increased
from 14.6 to 22.9 antennas (per 1,000 square miles). The increase was higher in urban
areas. Among CSA counties, antenna density increased from 17.3 to 26.7, whereas among
the main CSA counties the increase was from 20.1 to 30.2.
    The 1990s also saw homicide rates (per 100,000 population) almost halve, dropping
from 11 in 1990 to 6.2 in 2000. Broken down by urbanicity, the respective numbers for
CSA counties were 11.9 and 6.5, a decline of 5.4 homicides (per 100,000 population).
For main CSA counties, homicides rates fell from 17.3 to 9.5 between 1990 and 2000, a
reduction of almost eight homicides (per 100,000 population).
    Our hypothesis turns on a change in the relationship between drug dealing and violence.
Figure 10 reports the correlation between homicides and overdose deaths (conditional
on county fixed eﬀects) by year for the period 1970-2009. We see that from the mid-
1970s to the mid-1990s, the correlation was positive and rose with the overdose death
rates, consistent with the homicide waves around 1980 and 1990 (Figure 1) being drug
related. Before that period, OD rates were low and so was the correlation with homicides,
again supportive of homicide rates being drug related. After the mid-1990s, however,
the relationship breaks down. OD deaths are high and rising but the correlation with
homicides falls and fails to be statistically significance, consistent with our hypothesized
change to the relationship between drug dealing and violence.
    We now turn to the regression analysis.

5.1    Regression Results
Table 3 shows the results from estimating variations of Equation 1 on the full sample
(counties in the contiguous US, years 1970-2009, except 1989). Simply regressing homicide
on antennas yields a positive relationship, contrary to our hypothesis (Column 1). The
  37 For the list of CSA names, see https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/

bulletins/2017/b-17-01.pdf.




                                             15
positive association is strengthened by the inclusion of year fixed eﬀects (Column 2) but
turns negative when county fixed eﬀects are included (Column 3). The addition of county-
decade fixed eﬀects strengthens the negative relationship (Column 4) and the estimated
eﬀect maintains significance once the standard errors are clustered at the county level
(Column 5).
    We next present results from alternative ways of computing antenna density and the re-
sults remain similar. Column 6 shows the results from simply summing antennas assigned
to a county. This raises the antenna density substantially and likely more so for urban
counties. This measure performs equally well as the “share” measure used in Columns
1-5.
    Column 7 dispenses with the height restriction and include all registered antennas
irrespective of height above ground. Since antenna structures rising less than 200ft above
ground only need to be registered if close to an airport, removing the height restriction
raises antenna density in counties with airports. As expected, this cruder way of computing
antenna density results in a less precise coeﬃcient estimate.
    As mentioned, we expect the relationship between antennas and homicides to vary
by decade. In the 1970s towers were constructed but there was no cellular service. In
the 1980s, the service existed, but it was expensive and phones were bulky and mono-
functional. It is not until the 1990s that we expect cell phones to have a meaningful
impact on drug retailing.
    Table 4 uses our preferred specification (i.e., Column 5, Table 3) to look at subsamples
by decade and by county type. To start with the decadal breakdown. Consistent with our
expectation, the coeﬃcient in the 1970s is highly insignificant (Column 1). The coeﬃcient
is negative in the 1980s and is borderline significant. Fast forward to the 2000s, the
estimated coeﬃcient is close to zero. By contrast, for the 1990s, the estimated coeﬃcient
is negative and statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
    We expect the eﬀect to be stronger in more densely populated areas and restricting
the sample to CSA counties, this is also what we find. The estimated eﬀect is larger and
is estimated with greater precision in the main CSA counties (Column 5) compared to
all CSA counties (Column 6). In rural (non-CSA) counties, the estimated eﬀect is not
significant (Column 7).

5.2    CSA counties, 1990s
As hypothesized, results were stronger in more urban counties and in the 1990s. Hence-
forth, we will limit the analysis to CSA counties and the 1990s.
    Table 5, Panel A, Columns 1 and 2 restrict the sample to the main CSA counties. Re-
sults remain negative and significant. Adding CSA-specific quadratic time trends (Column
2) substantially reduces the coeﬃcient estimate (but raises precision). The attenuation is
perhaps not surprising considering that for this subset, in most cases, there is only one
county per CSA.
    In Columns 3-5, we expand the sample to all CSA counties allowing us to include CSA-
specific year fixed eﬀects. Interestingly, inclusion of CSA-specific time controls (quadratic
time trend or year fixed eﬀects) does not reduce the point estimate which is about 70%
of that estimated for main CSA counties (Column 1). Antenna structure density in CSA
counties went from 17.3 to 26.7, an increase of 9.4. An estimated coeﬃcient of -0.154 thus
implies a drop of 1.45 homicides per 100,000 population in CSA counties comparing year


                                             16
2000 to year 1990 (see Table 2), or 27%(=1.45/5.43) of the observed decline in these coun-
ties. Translated into homicides per year, this represents a reduction of 2,900(=1.45×2,000)
homicides.38

Confounders It is possible that our results are confounded by factors that corre-
lated with antenna-structure density. Infrastructure expansion targets economically more
promising areas, or conversely, beefed up infrastructure boosts economic activity. The
economic environment, in turn, could plausibly impact homicide rates. Therefore, we
substitute the county employment rate for homicide as the dependent variable (Table 5,
Panel B). We expect antennas to be positively correlated with economic activity and thus
employment levels, which in turn could reduce homicide rates (e.g., Dix-Carneiro et al.
[Forthcoming]) and thus form a potential confounder. However, contrary to our expecta-
tions, results indicate a negative and insignificant association (with the exception of the
specification in Column 2).
    Another possible confounder is that antenna structures and cell-phone mainstreaming
plausibly made illicit drugs cheaper and easier to obtain, factors that could plausibly
increase drug use. Greater drug use in turn could raise homicide rates, for instance from
psychopharmacological eﬀects or erosion of social networks.
    Results from making the county overdose rate the dependent variable are shown in
Table 5, Panel C. The only statistically significant result obtains in the main CSA county
sample and the specification including CSA-specific time trends (Panel C, Column 2),
and the estimated eﬀect is positive. Under the assumption that drug use corrodes inter-
personal relations this result would work against finding a negative eﬀect of antennas on
homicides.
    In sum, potential confounders go against us or fail to reach statistical significance.

Abortion Our proposed explanation follows on the heels of a number of factors proposed
to have brought down crime in the 1990s. The role of abortion access [Donohue and Levitt,
2001, Foote and Goetz, 2008, Donohue and Levitt, 2019] is of particular interest, not least
because unlike mobile radio communication, legalized abortion in the US continues to face
legal challenges.
    Our results control for CSA-year fixed eﬀects, which capture most state-year variation
present in the Donohue and Levitt abortion-access measure. However, CSAs and state are
not entirely collinear (41 of the 166 CSAs straddled two states or more). Therefore, we
start by adding state-year fixed eﬀects. We see that the coeﬃcient on Antenna remains sig-
nificant but is attenuated by 10-20% (Appendix Table A1, Panel A). While reassuring, we
next swap out the state-year fixed eﬀects for the Donohue and Levitt abortion measure.39
The coeﬃcient on the abortion measure is significant (in four of the five specifications)
and of the expected sign, but more importantly for our interests, the estimated eﬀects of
Antennas remain significant and are quite close to those obtained in specifications with-
out the abortion control, suggesting that cell phones and abortion may constitute two
independent explanations.
  38 CSA counties had about 200 million population in 1995. For the contiguous US vital statistics show

27,218 homicides for 1990 and 17,321 homicides for 2000, a drop of 9,897. (These numbers are higher
than those reported by the FBI because inter alia FBI statistics exclude justifiable homicides, e.g., self
defense or defense of others).
  39 From Donohue and Levitt [2019].




                                                   17
Race and Age So far we have ignored demographics, but gang violence tends to prey
on its own. The National Youth Gang Survey (1996-2011) estimated that 40-50% of
gang members to be juveniles (under 18); more than 90% male, and about 80% Black
or Latino/Hispanic.40 Therefore, we now turn to male homicides and two race groups:
Black/Hispanic and non-Hispanic White.41
    For reasons of sample size, we focus on five-year age bins between ages 15 and 39. We
restrict the sample to county-year observations with more than 100 males in the relevant
age and race cell.42
    Figure 11 presents the coeﬃcients and 95% confidence intervals from estimating the
equivalent of Table 5, Column 5 specification on race-by-age sub-samples. We see that the
estimated coeﬃcients are consistently negative for Blacks/Hispanics whereas for Whites,
the estimated eﬀects are close to zero and only statistically significant for the 15-19 age
group.

5.2.1    Homicide Context
Our hypothesis suggests that types of homicides more closely related to drugs or gangs
would be more aﬀected by cell-phone mainstreaming. To that end, we turn to the FBI’s
Supplementary Homicide Reports which report on homicide circumstance and victim-
oﬀender relationship.
    In addition to drug dealing, crimes found to have high street-gang involvement include
assault, robbery, and threats/intimidation (see Figure 5, also National Gang Intelligence
Center [2013, page 14]). Therefore homicides with such mentions are of particular interest
to us. As for victim-oﬀender relationship, we expect killings by strangers to be more
aﬀected than, for instance, employer-employee killings or spousal murder (gang members
not being the marrying type).
    Before going into the results, a note on coverage is warranted. Unlike Vital Statistics
data, SHR reporting is voluntary. Notable absences for part or whole of the 1990s are DC,
Florida, and Louisiana, homes of “high crime” cities such as DC, Miami and New Orleans.
Missing counties and partial reporting from counties means that for our sample covering
the 1990s and CSA counties, the SHR covers about half of the homicides reported in the
Vital Statistics.
    Partial reporting raises the question what population figure to use for calculating rates.
The SHR provides reporting agency population figures, but unfortunately this information
is zero or missing in a non-trivial number of cases. Therefore, in the preliminary analysis,
we considered three approaches: (i) the county population; (ii) the county aggregate
of agency (ORI) populations where missing values were treated as zeros; and (iii) only
included counties for which no agency (ORI) reported missing population values.
  40 National Gang Center. National Youth Gang Survey Analysis. Retrieved March 11, 2018, from

http://www.nationalgangcenter.gov/Survey-Analysis.
  41 Hispanic status was not reported on the death certificate by Oklahoma (1990-1996), Louisiana (1990)

and New Hampshire (1990-1992) for indicated and therefore records for those states and years are excluded.
Additionally, decedents whose Hispanic status was stated as unknown were included among the Black or
Hispanic group and excluded from the non-Hispanic White group.
  42 We experimented with 100, 200, and 500 cutoﬀs and found the results to be quite similar, but with

drastic eﬀects on sample size. So as to minimize sample selection due to a high cutoﬀ, we choose 100 as
our cutoﬀ level. A population of 100 means that if a homicide were to occur, the implied rate per 100,000
population is 1000.




                                                   18
    While the three approaches resulted in diﬀerent population counts and analysis sam-
ples, results were very similar across the three approaches. Therefore, we chose (i), the
county population, as it produces the more straightforward sample: counties with at least
one agency reporting to the SHR. These “SHR-reporting” counties form the universe for
our analysis of the SHR information on homicide by context (Tables 6-8).

Circumstances Figure 12 shows the series of homicides (counts) grouped into five broad
categories: Narcotics-Gang, Argument, Theft, Miscellaneous and Undetermined (a list of
the specified circumstances are in Appendix Table A2). These five groups move with re-
markably synchronicity in the 1990s, but arguably the first three are more closely related
to drugs and gangs. Narcotics-Gang groups circumstances explicitly mentioning drugs
or gangs. Arguments is the single most common category and while somewhat generic,
gang culture may be one reason an argument turns deadly, gang culture being charac-
terized by a weaponized environment in which toughness is feted [Johnson et al., 2000,
Levitt and Venkatesh, 2000, Johnson, 2003] allowing minor incidents to escalate [Sethi
and O’Flaherty, 2010]. Theft is the third category of interest, it covers robbery, theft
and larceny. As noted, gangs are crime generalists, drug sellers can make for attractive
robbery targets, and theft is one way for addicts to finance their addiction. These three
groups accounted for almost half of the homicides covered by the SHR.
    Remaining homicides can be split into two roughly equal sized groups: Miscellaneous
and Undetermined. The circumstances grouped under Miscellaneous had a less clear link
to drugs or gangs, examples include “brawl due to influence of alcohol,” “lovers triangle,”
“victim shot in hunting accident.”
    Since the SHR does not cover all counties, we start by replicating the results of Table
5, Panel A for the SHR-reporting counties using the NCHS homicide data. We see that
results also hold in this sub-sample. Although eﬀect sizes are smaller, coeﬃcient signs go
in the same direction and reach statistical significance, confirming previous findings.
    Turning to homicide circumstance, estimates are of the expected sign and mainly
statistically significant for the three groups of homicides arguably most closely linked to
gangs and drugs: Narcotics-Gang, Argument, Theft (Panels B-D). Further, the estimated
eﬀect size is the largest for Narcotics-Gang group.
    By contrast, antennas appear to have no eﬀect on homicides in the Miscellaneous group
(Panel E), consistent with our hypothesis.
    Panel F considers homicides without a specified circumstance, either because the SHR
reported the circumstance as Undetermined or because the homicide was not covered by
the SHR. In other words, the outcome variable in Panel F is the number of homicides
reported in Panel A minus the homicides reported in Panels B through E. We find no
eﬀect, one interpretation of which is that the SHR information on drug and gang related
homicides does capture the bulk of such homicides.

Victim-Oﬀender Relationship The early 1990s brought the term super-predators –
juvenile gang members with the ruthlessness and moral compass of child soldiers, wrote
Dilulio: “They live by the meanest code of the meanest streets, a code that reinforces
rather than restrains their violent, hair-trigger mentality. In prison or out, the things
that super-predators get by their criminal behavior – sex, drugs, money – are their own
immediate rewards. Nothing else matters to them.”43
 43 Dilulio,   John. “The coming of the super-predators” The Weekly Standard, November 27, 1995.


                                                  19
    The conjured picture of youth capable of indiscriminate violence suggests that gang
violence may be particularly related to killings by strangers. To investigate this possibility,
we turn to the victim-oﬀender relationship information contained in the SHR. Four broad
categories emerge: Strangers (17%), Friends and Acquaintances (32%), Family (15%),
and Undetermined (66%) (for a list of specified relationships, see Appendix Table A3).
We expect the link to drugs and gangs to be in descending order, Strangers, Friends and
Acquaintances, and Family. Figure 13a shows the time series and again the synchronicity
in the 1990s is striking.
    Table 7 present regression results, again focusing on the 1990s and the CSA counties.
The eﬀects for homicide by Strangers was arguably the strongest, the estimates are signif-
icant at conventional levels once controlling for CSA-level time varying eﬀects (Panel A,
Columns 2, 4 and 5). The coeﬃcient estimate in Column 5 suggests that an increase by 10
antennas/1000 square miles reduced murders by strangers by 22 per 10 million population,
a 15%(=22/150) reduction of this type of homicide.
    The estimated eﬀect on homicides in the Friends and Acquaintances group is weaker;
the level of statistical significance is lower, as is eﬀect size (Panel B). The implied eﬀect
of an additional 10 antennas/1000 square miles is around 10%(=29/274).
    For Family, estimates are more precise, but the eﬀect size is yet smaller (Panel C).
Column 4 suggests that a 10 antenna/1000 square miles increase in antenna-structure
density resulted in 0.7 fewer homicides (per 10 million population), or a 5%(=7/135)
reduction. The largest individual relationship category is Undetermined and we find no
eﬀect (Panel D).
    That Strangers would be the group with the most important eﬀect lines up with our
expectations. We were, however, surprised to find eﬀects for Family – gang warfare being
quite distinct from domestic strife. Therefore, we divide the Family category into the
following groups: spouses, partners, natal family (parents, siblings, oﬀspring) and others
(see Figure 13b).
    Before going into the result, it may be useful to consider the profile of a typical low-
level drug dealer, wrote Johnson [2003]: “Almost no low-level distributors and few sellers
pay for their own apartments/home or support a family. In the United States, many lower-
level distributors live at severe poverty levels. This is true even when their sales income
appears to be substantial,” life circumstances perhaps more memorably summarized by
“Why do drug dealers live with their moms?”44 In sum, the typical drug dealer appears
to be an unmarried man who has yet to establish an independent household.
    Table 8 presents the results, where the first four panels show the results for spouses
and partners, and the last two panels group family according to whether natal (parents,
siblings, oﬀspring) or not (in-laws, exes, step-children, step-parents, or other family).
    The largest individual victim category is Wife, and here we find no eﬀect – the point
estimate is small and the standard errors are large. In addition to being consistent with
the typical drug dealer not being married, this finding is interesting because, as has been
noted (e.g., Levitt [2004]), most crime, not just homicides or violent crimes, fell in the
1990s, and looking within homicides, most types of homicides followed the pattern of high
rates in the beginning of the 1990s and a sharp drop about 1/3rd into the decade. The
pattern for wife (and husband) victims also follow this pattern in the 1990s. Yet, we
find no eﬀect of antenna-structure density on spousal homicides, consistent with spousal
homicides being driven by other factors, e.g., Stevenson and Wolfers [2006]. By contrast,
 44 Freakonomics,   chapter 3 title.


                                              20
the girlfriend category has seen a steady increase in numbers but we find antennas to have
had a tempering eﬀect. (The eﬀects for Boyfriend are weaker and fail to reach statistical
significance at conventional levels.)
    As for non-partner family, we find eﬀects for natal family members (Panel E), but not
other family (Panel F).
    Taken together, these results (Table 8) paint a picture of reduced everyday violence by
young, unmarried men living at home (possibly from reduced presence of guns around the
home, c.f. Evans et al. [2018]). Investigation of victim ages corroborates this picture. The
sons and daughters killed were young, the modal victim was an infant (not reported). A
possible mechanism is that reduced profitability within gangs has lowered the status and
return to lethal violence, thereby reducing the presence of handguns in and around the
homes of gang members/drug dealers.


6    Discussion
This paper has provided evidence that cell-phone mainstreaming contributed to the drastic
reduction in homicide rates seen in the 1990s and maintained since. Our argument is
straightforward. Cell phones removed the rationale for illegal drugs to be sold at a fixed
location. As a result, drug retailing was de-cartelized, eroding the economic base for
street-turned-drug gangs, entities known for their ready employ of violence. We proxy
cell-phone uptake by the build-out of cellular phone networks and find that antenna-
structure density reduced homicides in the 1990s, the decade cell phones went from niche
to mainstream. Consistent with cell phones bringing down gang-related violence, we
found eﬀects to be confined to urban areas (counties within a Combined Statistical Area),
street-dealing being a distinctly urban phenomenon. Furthermore, drilling down on types
of homicides we found stronger eﬀects for Black or Hispanic male victims and categories
of homicides more closely associated with gang violence and drug dealing. By contrast,
we found no eﬀect on spousal homicides, a non-finding consistent with low marriage rates
among rank-and-file gang members.
    Compared to 1990, homicides in 2000 were down by about 10,000 and back-of-the-
envelop calculations suggest cell-phone mainstreaming can account for 1,900-2,900 of that
decline, leaving plenty of room for additional factors. The fact that homicide rates today
vary substantially across localities further underlines the partial nature of our findings.
For instance, in 2017, the homicide rate in Baltimore was 55.8 per 100,000 population, or
16 times higher than that of New York City, a diﬀerence hardly attributable to diﬀerences
in cell-phone penetration.
    The decline (and preceding rise) in violent crime has been a US phenomenon. Our
findings point to the circumstances of how illicit drugs are retailed, factors likely to be
more salient in the US, arguably the number one consumer market for narcotics (e.g.,
Peacock et al. [2018]).
    Our findings suggest that cell phones removed a cash cow for US street gangs, in-
creased public safety and reduced prices, many of the advantages touted by advocates of
legalization of drugs. Cell phones may also have contributed to an increase in drug use,
a scenario feared by opponents of legalization. Thus, we may already have been oﬀered a
preview of some of the pros and cons of drug legalization.




                                            21
                                          Figure 1: Homicide and Overdose Death Rates
                  15
   Deaths per 100,000 population
         5        0    10




                                   1970          1980               1990                2000   2010
                                                                    year

                                                           Homicide               Overdose


Source: NCHS. Notes: Contiguous USA. Data are missing for 1989.
We use vital statistics data which show higher number of homicides than FBI statistics.
This is because of diﬀerent procedures and definitions. By law, a death certificate needs
to be filed National Vital Statistics System for each death. In case of homicides this is
noted as the cause of death on the death certificate by the medical examiner or coroner.
By contrast, the FBI is interested in crime. An investigation may reveal that the killing
was justified (e.g., done by law enforcement or civilians in self defense) and these deaths
are not part of the FBI statistics.
The jump in OD deaths in 1979 may be associated with the change from ICD-8 to ICD-9
coding. Homicide deaths are less likely to be aﬀected by this change.




                                                              22
                               Figure 2: Homicides by County Type – Rate per 100,000 population
               30       25
  Rate per 100k population
   10     15   5 20




                             1970          1980           1990            2000           2010
                                                          Year

                                                       County type:
                                                  NYC−LA−Chicago           City
                                                  Suburb                   Rural


Source: NCHS. Notes: Contiguous USA. Data are missing for 1989.

Notes: NYC-LA-Chicago includes the counties of New York City, Los Angeles, and
Chicago (the five NYC boroughs, LA county and Cook county);
City includes main CSA counties (except NYC-LA-Chicago as defined above);
Suburb includes remaining CSA counties (neither NYC-LA-Chicago nor City);
Rural includes all non-CSA counties (in contiguous US).




                                                              23
                       Figure 3: Antenna Structures (200ft above ground)
       25000
       20000
  10000 15000
    Antennas
       5000
       0




                1950      1960         1970         1980         1990        2000   2010
                                                    year

                                       Constructed*10                Cumulative


Source: Federal Communications Commission.
Notes: Contiguous USA.




                                              24
                                                 Figure 4: Estimated Crime Incidents
               50




                                                                                               12                 10
  All, Property (millions)
                     40




                                                                                               Violent (millions)
                                                                                                       8
       30




                                                                                               6
               20




                             1990   1995             2000          2005     2010        2015   4
                                                            Year

                                                      Crime Incidents
                                           All              Property          Violent


Source: National Crime Victimization Survey, Concatenated File, 1992-2015.
https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/studies/36456
Notes: All crimes are divided into Property and Violent crimes.
Property crimes group (attempted and completed) purse snatching, pocket picking,
personal larceny, burglary, household larceny and motor vehicle theft.
Violent crimes group (attempted, completed or threatened) rape, assault, and robbery.
Grouping purse snatching and pocket picking with violent crimes does not aﬀect results.




                                                                   25
                             Figure 5: Rate of Gang Involvement
  200
  150
  100
  50
  0




        1990      1995            2000           2005      2010           2015
                                         Year

                             Offender Gang Member, Rate
               All, per 5k           Property, per 10k        Violent, per 2k


Source: National Crime Victimization Survey, Concatenated File, 1992-2015.
https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/NACJD/studies/36456
Notes: All crimes are divided into Property and Violent crimes.
Property crimes group (attempted and completed) purse snatching, pocket picking,
personal larceny, burglary, household larceny and motor vehicle theft.
Violent crimes group (attempted, completed or threatened) rape, assault, and robbery.
Grouping purse snatching and pocket picking with violent crimes does not aﬀect results.




                                                26
         Figure 6: Antenna structures (200ft+)/1000 square miles – Change 1970s




  Change: 1970−1980
    0.00−0.05
    0.05−1.00
    1.00−2.00
    2.00−4.00
    4.00+




Source: Federal Communications Commission.

          Figure 7: Antenna structures (200ft+)/1000 square miles – Change 1980s




  Change: 1980−1990
    0.00−0.05
    0.05−1.00
    1.00−2.00
    2.00−4.00
    4.00+




Source: Federal Communications Commission.


                                           27
          Figure 8: Antenna structures (200ft+)/1000 square miles – Change 1990s




  Change: 1990−2000
    0.00−0.05
    0.05−1.00
    1.00−2.00
    2.00−4.00
    4.00+




Source: Federal Communications Commission.

          Figure 9: Antenna structures (200ft+)/1000 square miles – Change 2000s




  Change: 2000−2010
    0.00−0.05
    0.05−1.00
    1.00−2.00
    2.00−4.00
    4.00+




Source: Federal Communications Commission.


                                           28
                     Figure 10: Homicide and Overdose Correlation
         1.5
         1
         .5
  beta
         0
         −.5
         −1




               ’70   ’75       ’80       ’85       ’90         ’95         ’00          ’05   ’10
                                                  year

                                95% CI, w/o trend                    beta, w/o trend
                                95% CI, with trend                   beta, with trend


Source: NCHS.
Notes: The figure plots regression coeﬃcients and 95% confidence intervals from regressing
county homicide rates on overdose rates, year- and county fixed eﬀects, with and without
CSA-specific quadratic trends respectively. The sample is restricted to CSA counties in
the contiguous USA. Data are missing for 1989.




                                           29
   Figure 11: Eﬀects of Antenna Density on Male Homicide Rates: by Race and Age
   1
   0
   −1
   −2
   −3
   −4




                    15−19         20−24         25−29           30−34         35−39
                                              Age Group

                             Black or Hispanic          Non−Hispanic White
                             95% CI high                95% CI high
                             95% CI low                 95% CI low


The graph shows the coeﬃcients from the Table 5, Column 5 specification, estimated for
the indicated race and age groups. That is, the sample is restricted to the years 1990-1999
and to CSA counties, and the regressions include CSA-specific year fixed eﬀects, county
fixed eﬀects and standard errors are clustered at the county level.
The antenna measure is density per 1,000 square mile land mass and the homicide measure
is homicides per 100,000 population.
Counties with fewer than 100 men in the relevant age and race/ethnicity group were
excluded. The reduction in sample size was greater for Black and/or Hispanic, a group for
which the number of county years is reduced from around 11,250 to around 7,250 (varies
slightly with age group). For non-hispanic whites, the sample reduction was about 170
county-year observations.
The reason the full sample does not have 11,490 county-years (cf. Table 5) is that following
states did not report Hispanic status on the death certificate and are therefore were
dropped for the years in parentheses: Louisiana (1990), New Hampshire (1990-1992),
Oklahoma (1990-1996).
Black and/or Hispanic includes “hispanic origin unknown.”
Non-Hispanic White excludes “hispanic origin unknown.”
Source: NCHS.



                                            30
                    Figure 12: Homicides by Circumstance: 1976-2016
         8000
            6000
  Homicides
    4000 2000
         0




                   1980            1990            2000                2010               2020
                                                Year

                                 Narcotics−Gang                 Miscellaneous
                                 Argument                       Undetermined
                                 Theft


Notes: For a details on the types of circumstances under each heading, please see Table
A2.
The 2001 spike reflects the 2,996 victims of the 9/11 attacks.
Source: Kaplan, Jacob. Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program Data: Supplementary
Homicide Reports, 1976-2016. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research [distributor], 2018-06-19. https://doi.org/10.3886/E100699V5




                                          31
       10000
       8000
Homicides
  6000 4000
       2000




                 1980          1990             2000                2010     2020
                                             Year

                            Stranger                Friend or Acquaintance
                            Family                  Undetermined


                        (a) Victim Relation to Oﬀender: 1976-2016
       1500
          1000
  Homicides
500    0




                 1980          1990             2000                2010     2020
                                             Year

                                   Wife                       Husband
                                   Girlfriend                 Boyfriend
                                   Natal                      Other

                                          32
                              (b) Family Victims: 1976-2016

                        Figure 13: Homicides by relationship
    Source: Kaplan, Jacob. Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program Data: Supplemen-
tary Homicide Reports, 1976-2016. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Politi-
cal and Social Research [distributor], 2018-06-19. https://doi.org/10.3886/E100699V5
    Notes to Figure 13: For a details on the types of circumstances under each heading,
please see Table A3.
The 2001 spike reflects the 2,996 victims of the 9/11 attacks.




                                          33
                  Table 1: Key Modern Mobile Telephony Events

Year   Description
1973   First prototype cellular phone call from Midtown Manhattan to Bell Labs, NJ,
       by Martin Cooper of Motorola

1983   First commercial cellular network opened in Chicago and the Baltimore-DC area.

1991   All digital mobile telephony (2G) launched.

1992   First SMS (short message service).

1993   Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act reallocates (broadband PCS) spectrum
       from government to private, commercial use. License winners to be chosen by auction.

       AT&T enters the wireless business with purchase of McCaw Cellular Communications.

       Nextel (previously Fleet Call) on-line L.A. market.

1994   First FCC spectrum auction.

       The Motorola MicroTAC Elite, GSM-compatible and TDMA/Dual-Mode phone
       introduced. It retailed for around $600 – substantially cheaper than
       the 1989 version which had retailed at between $2,495 and $3,495.

       First prepaid wireless service introduced by Houston Cellular Telephone Company.

1995   The Nokia 2190 GSM phone was made available on Pacific Bell Mobile Services
       and Powertel’s network.

       Sprint Spectrum – first commercial PCS system – goes on line.

       McCaw invests in Nextel.

1996   Telecommunications Act of 1996.

1998   Cellular telephony included in the CPI.

       First flat-rate plan with national coverage introduced by AT&T: Digital One Rate.

2000   Subscribers pass 100 million mark, up from five million in 1990.

2003   BlackBerry introduces first “smartphone,” a phone that could receive and send emails on the go.

2007   iPhone introduced.



                                         34
    Table 2: Mean Antenna Density and Homicide Rates by County Type and Year

                                      Year
  County type          1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
  Main CSA
       Homicidea      11.87 19.62 17.27        9.53     8.48
        Antennab       9.46 13.63 20.12 30.19 35.81
                  N     178     179     179     179      179
  CSA
        Homicide       8.34 13.34 11.92        6.49     5.84
        Antenna        8.42 11.83 17.35 26.66 31.89
                  N    1142 1144 1149 1149 1148
  Not CSA
        Homicide       6.33    9.12    8.01    5.21     4.77
        Antenna        1.65    2.98    5.78 10.76 14.49
                  N    1951 1954 1951 1953 1953
  All USA (contig.)
        Homicide       7.87 12.30 10.98        6.18     5.59
        Antenna        6.82    9.66 14.57 22.86 27.73
                  N    3093 3098 3100 3102 3101
Population weighted county means.
a
  – Homicides per 100,000 population. Source: NCHS.
b
  – Sum of antenna structure shares/1000 square miles; antenna structures 200ft or taller
within 20 miles of the county centroid; county area is the land area. Source: FCC.
To correct for the some 3,000 homicides in connection to the September 11, 2001 attacks,
we replace the homicide counts for Manhattan, Arlington and Somerset County with the
average of the flanking years 2000 and 2002.




                                           35
                  Table 3: Homicide rate on Antenna Structure Density

                                                    Dependent Variable: Homicide rate
                                                     Sample: All Counties, 1970-2009
                                                        Antenna Structure Measure:
                        Sharea      Share           Share       Share      Share      Sumb       Share-bisc
                        (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
 Antennas               0.067***    0.080***        -0.052*** -0.097*** -0.097** -0.020***       -0.025***
                        (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.003)    (0.039)    (0.007)    (0.009)

  N                     120,930    120,930      120,930       120,930      120,930    120,930    120,930
  R2                    0.063      0.134        0.744         0.842        0.842      0.843      0.842
  ȳ                    8.754      8.754        8.754         8.754        8.754      8.754      8.754
  x̄                    16.531     16.531       16.531        16.531       16.531     71.397     32.705
  Year FE                          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
  County FE                                     Yes
  County-Decade FE                                            Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
  Cluster                                                                  County     County     County
Source: NCHS, FCC.
All regressions are population weighted. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Year 1989 is missing.
a
   – Sum of antenna structure shares/1000 square miles; antenna structures 200ft or taller
within 20 miles of the county centroid; county area is the land area.
b
  – The sum of all antenna structures, 200ft or taller, within 20 miles of the county centroid
centroid (per 1000 square mile).
c
   – As for Share, but without height restriction.
To correct for the some 3,000 homicides in connection to the September 11, 2001 attacks,
we replace the homicide counts for Manhattan, Arlington and Somerset County with the
average of the flanking years 2000 and 2002.




                                               36
         Table 4: Homicides/100,000 Population on Antenna Structure Density

                                            Dependent Variable: Homicide rate
                                                         Sample:
                                                                           Counties:
                        1970s     1980s     1990s    2000s     Main CSA All CSA        Non-CSAs
                        (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)          (6)        (7)
 Antennaa               -0.020    -0.139    -0.151** -0.001    -0.117***    -0.103**   -0.023
                        (0.114)   (0.089)   (0.061)  (0.018) (0.039)        (0.043)    (0.018)

 N                      30,955    27,922    31,034    31,019   6,978       44,740      76,190
 R2                     0.795     0.847     0.855     0.848    0.899       0.889       0.597
 ȳ                     9.150     10.531    9.710     6.325    13.620      9.353       6.868
 x̄                     7.912     11.576    17.381    25.593   22.081      19.509      7.162
 Year FE                Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
 County FE              Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
 County-Decade FE                                              Yes         Yes         Yes
 Cluster                County    County    County    County   County      County      County
See notes to Table 3.




                                            37
                 Table 5: Homicide rate on Antenna Structure Density

                                 Homicides/100,000 Population
                                        Sample: 1990s
                      Main CSA counties             All CSA counties
                     (1)      (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)
                                      Dependent Variable:
                                      A. Homicideb Rate
 Antennaa            -0.200** -0.067***     -0.156** -0.150*** -0.154**
                     (0.083)  (0.022)       (0.068)     (0.058)    (0.063)

 R2                  0.914      0.972           0.890      0.911       0.920
 ȳ                  14.976     14.976          10.433     10.433      10.433

                                       B. Employmentb Rate
 Antenna             0.010      -0.054***     -0.009   -0.005          -0.005
                     (0.030)    (0.008)       (0.015)  (0.015)         (0.016)

 R2                  0.962      0.992          0.962       0.977       0.980
 ȳ                  61.552     61.552         61.619      61.619      61.619
                                            C. ODc Rate
 Antenna             -0.011     0.030***       0.023       0.018       0.019
                     (0.027)    (0.008)        (0.028)     (0.024)     (0.026)

  R2                  0.865      0.943          0.804       0.838      0.858
  ȳ                  7.384      7.384          5.897       5.897      5.897
  x̄                  23.739     23.739         20.592      20.592     20.592
  N                   1,790      1,790          11,490      11,490     11,490
  CSA-specific:
     Quadratic trend             Yes                        Yes
     Year FE                                                           Yes
All regressions include year and county fixed eﬀects and are population weighted. Robust
standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
a
   – Sum of antenna structure shares/1000 square miles; antenna structures 200ft or taller
within 20 miles of the county centroid; county area is the land area.
b
   Source: BLS. https://www.bls.gov/lau/#cntyaa.
c
   Source: NCHS.




                                           38
                  Table 6: Homicides on Antennas – by Circumstance

                             Homicide by Circumstance/100,000 Population
                    Sample: CSA Counties covered by Special Homicide Reports (SHR)
                                             Years: 1990s
                    Main CSA counties                  All CSA counties
                      (1)      (2)           (3)        (4)             (5)

                               A. Total Homicides (from Vital Statistics (NCHS))
 Antennaa            -0.063     -0.070***       -0.057   -0.082**          -0.082**
                    (0.056)      (0.021)       (0.037)    (0.033)           (0.033)
 R2                  0.922        0.973          0.909     0.930             0.930
 ȳ                  14.31        14.31          10.50     10.50             10.50

                                        B. Narcotics-Gang (from SHR)b
 Antenna             -0.016     -0.035***       -0.023   -0.031**           -0.031**
                    (0.021)      (0.010)       (0.015)    (0.013)            (0.013)
 R2                   0.755       0.920          0.749     0.819              0.819
 ȳ                    1.77        1.77           1.14      1.14               1.14

                                             C. Argument (from SHR)
 Antenna             -0.030      -0.015*        -0.042** -0.042***          -0.042***
                    (0.021)      (0.008)         (0.017)   (0.016)           (0.016)
 R2                   0.828       0.925           0.795     0.832             0.832
 ȳ                    3.62        3.62            2.56      2.56              2.56

                                               D. Theft (from SHR)
 Antenna            -0.030*     -0.020***       -0.023*     -0.025**        -0.025**
                    (0.017)      (0.003)         (0.013)     (0.010)         (0.010)
 R2                  0.760        0.897           0.728       0.772           0.772
 ȳ                   1.49         1.49            0.98        0.98            0.98

                                            E. Miscellaneous   (from SHR)
 Antenna             -0.003       -0.009          -0.006        -0.007        -0.007
                    (0.007)      (0.007)         (0.005)       (0.006)       (0.006)
 R2                   0.590        0.749          0.591          0.662         0.662
 ȳ                    2.67        2.67            2.03           2.03         2.03

                     F. Undetermined or No SHR report (Panel A minus Panels B-E)c
 Antenna             0.016     0.010        0.038     0.023           0.023
                    (0.071)   (0.026)      (0.054)   (0.047)         (0.047)
 R2                  0.856     0.925        0.800     0.832           0.832
 ȳ                   4.75      4.75         3.80      3.80            3.80
 x̄                  28.93     28.93        21.50     21.50           21.50
 N                   1,508     1,508        7,330     7,330           7,330
 CSA-specific:
 Quadratic trend                   Yes                          Yes
 Year FE                                                                      Yes
See separate page for notes.


                                               39
                Table 7: Homicides by Victim Relationship to Oﬀender

                    Homicide by Relationship to Oﬀender/10M Population
                          Sample: Special Homicide Reports, 1990s
                    Main CSA counties            All CSA counties
                    (1)       (2)          (3)       (4)       (5)
                                        A. Strangerb
         a
 Antenna            -0.428     -2.846**    -1.644        -2.227**   -2.227**
                    (1.584)    (1.216)     (1.069)       (0.909)    (0.999)
 R2                 0.684      0.802       0.700         0.744      0.807
 ȳ                 229.58     229.58      150.46        150.46     150.46
                                 B. Friends   and Acquaintances
 Antenna            1.679      -1.665**        -2.373    -2.881*    -2.879
                    (2.190)    (0.708)         (1.887)   (1.537)    (1.752)
 R2                 0.793      0.904           0.758     0.810      0.847
 ȳ                 374.89     374.89          274.28    274.28     274.28
                                            C. Family
 Antenna            -0.154     -0.722*        -0.531     -0.680**   -0.681**
                    (0.479)    (0.400)        (0.336)    (0.291)    (0.320)
 R2                 0.606      0.738          0.493      0.533      0.609
 ȳ                 157.56     157.56         135.20     135.20     135.20
                                         D. Undetermined
 Antenna            -25.748    -1.697         -14.370   -12.766     -13.045
                    (17.499)   (1.935)        (12.162) (8.309)      (9.296)
 R2                 0.871      0.958          0.864     0.895       0.907
 ȳ                 587.84     587.84         368.26    368.26      368.26
 x̄                 28.93      28.93          21.50     21.50       21.50
 N                  1,508      1,508          7,330     7,330       7,330
 CSA-specific:
 Quadratic trend               Yes                       Yes
 Year FE                                                            Yes
See separate page for notes.




                                              40
                        Table 8: Homicides by Family Relations

                          Within Family Homicide/10M Population
                           Sample: Special Homicide Reports, 1990s
                     Main CSA counties            All CSA counties
                    (1)       (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)
                                           A. Husbandb
 Antennaa           0.183      0.131           0.037       0.040      0.018
                    (0.159)    (0.113)         (0.098)     (0.052)    (0.059)†
 R2                 0.419      0.584           0.266       0.310      0.418
 ȳ                 14.41      14.41           11.86       11.86      11.86
                                             B. Wife
 Antenna            0.195*     0.260          0.052        0.007      -0.027
                    (0.113)    (0.248)        (0.097)      (0.099)    (0.105)†
 R2                 0.345      0.524          0.293        0.328      0.420
 ȳ                 33.97      33.97          30.29        30.29      30.29
                                           C. Boyfriend
 Antenna            0.026      0.064           -0.069      -0.108     -0.123
                    (0.069)    (0.083)         (0.061)     (0.071)    (0.084)
 R2                 0.378      0.535           0.269       0.319      0.440
 ȳ                 12.10      12.10           9.65        9.65       9.65
                                           D. Girlfriend
 Antenna            -0.092     -0.310***       -0.152*     -0.181**   -0.179**
                    (0.125)    (0.104)         (0.089)     (0.077)    (0.085)
 R2                 0.302      0.472           0.266       0.300      0.413
 ȳ                 24.93      24.93           21.85       21.85      21.85
                                        E. Natal Family
 Antenna            -0.425**   -0.875***     -0.319**      -0.254*    -0.245
                    (0.197)    (0.146)       (0.159)       (0.151)    (0.167)
 R2                 0.325      0.489         0.271         0.308      0.425
 ȳ                 46.13      46.13         40.02         40.02      40.02
                                         F. Other Family
 Antenna            -0.040     0.007          -0.081     -0.185       -0.126
                    (0.124)    (0.174)        (0.091)    (0.129)      (0.137)
 R2                 0.364      0.529          0.280      0.318        0.421
 ȳ                 26.03      26.03          21.53      21.53        21.53
 x̄                 28.93      28.93          21.50      21.50        21.50
 N                  1,508      1,508          7,330      7,330        7,330
 CSA-specific:
 Quadratic trend               Yes                         Yes
 Year FE                                                              Yes
See separate page for notes.



                                            41
    Notes to Tables 6-8.
    Source: Supplementary Homicide Reports. https://doi.org/10.3886/E100699V5
    The sample is restricted to counties for which a homicide was reported on in the Special
Homicide Reports (SHR). Franklin county, OH, home to Columbus, OH, was excluded
because the number of homicides reported in the SHR were double those reported in the
NCHS’s Vital Statistics. This exclusion does not aﬀect the results.
    The population denominator is the county population.
    The SHR does not disaggregate by borough the homicides in New York City. All city
homicides are “given” to Manhattan, an allocation we keep (thus the main CSA county
sample includes the whole of New York City). To accommodate this assignment, for
the antenna density structure measure we use the population weighted mean for the five
boroughs. Excluding New York City does not change the qualitative results.
    All regressions include county and year fixed eﬀects and are population weighted.
Robust standard errors clustered at the county level in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
    † – standard errors clustered at the CSA rather than the county level (in the latter
case, standard errors would not compute).
    a
      – Sum of antenna structure shares/1000 square miles; antenna structures 200ft or
taller within 20 miles of the county centroid; county area is the land area.
    b
      – For detailed breakdowns of categories, see Appendix Tables A2 and A3.
    c
      – Number of homicides without a determined circumstance, either because there was
not an SHR report or the SHR report left circumstance “undetermined.”




                                            42
References
Anna Aizer and Janet Currie. Lead and juvenile delinquency: New evidence from linked
 birth, school and juvenile detention records. Working Paper 23392, National Bureau of
 Economic Research, May 2017. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w23392.
Jeﬀerson D. P. Bertoloai and Luiz G.D.S. Scorzafave. ‘property rights’ in illicit drug
  markets. Technical report, FEARP-USP, 2018.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. The nation’s two measures of homicide. Program Report
  NCJ 247060, US Department of Justice, 2014. URL https://www.bjs.gov/content/
  pub/pdf/ntmh.pdf.
Shawn Bushway, Matthew Phillips, and Philip J. Cook. The overall eﬀect of the business
  cycle on crime. German Economic Review, 13(4):436–446, November 2012.
Anne Case and Angus Deaton. Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White
 Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century. Proceedings of the National Academy of
 Sciences, 112(49):15078–15083, 2015.
Aaron Chalfin and Justin McCrary. Criminal deterrence: A review of the literature.
 Journal of Economic Literature, 55(1):5–48, March 2017.
Scott H Decker and G. David Curry. Gangs, gang homicides, and gang loyalty: Organized
  crimes or disorganized criminals. Journal of Criminal Justice, 30(4):343 – 352, 2002.
Melissa Dell. Traﬃcking networks and the Mexican drug war. American Economic Review,
 105(6):1738–1779, June 2015.
Jeﬀ Desimone. The eﬀect of cocaine prices on crime. Economic Inquiry, 39(4):627 – 643,
  2001.
Rebecca Diamond. The determinants and welfare implications of US workers’ diverging
  location choices by skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review, 2016.
Rafael Dix-Carneiro, Rodrigo R. Soares, and Gabriel Ulyssea. Economic shocks and crime:
  Evidence from the Brazilian trade liberalization. American Economic Journal: Applied,
  Forthcoming.
John J Donohue and Steven D Levitt. The impact of legalized abortion on crime over the
  last two decades. Working Paper 25863, National Bureau of Economic Research, May
  2019.
John J. III Donohue and Steven D. Levitt. The impact of legalized abortion on crime.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2):379–420, May 2001.
Lena Edlund, Cecilia Machado, and Maria Sviatschi. Bright minds, big rent: Gentrifica-
  tion and the rising returns to skill. Working Paper CES-WP-16-36R, US Census Bureau
  Center for Economic Studies, November 2016. URL https://www2.census.gov/ces/
  wp/2016/CES-WP-16-36.pdf.




                                          43
William N Evans, Craig Garthwaite, and Timothy J Moore. Guns and violence: The
 enduring impact of crack cocaine markets on young black males. Working Paper 24819,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, July 2018.
Federal Communications Commission. Second annual report and analysis of competitive
  market conditions with respect to commercial mobile services. Report 97-75, FCC,
  1997. URL https://us-fcc.app.box.com/s/rkxvsg39h7o7fzf1p2xjmq91d5pq6o5g.
Christopher Foote and Christopher Goetz. The impact of legalized abortion on crime:
 Comment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1), February 2008.
R. Terry Furst, Richard S. Curtis, Bruce D. Johnson, and Douglas S. Goldsmith. The
  rise of the street middleman/woman in a declining drug market. Addiction Research,
  7(2):103, 1999. ISSN 10586989. URL https://ezproxy.cul.columbia.edu/login?
  qurl=https%3a%2f%2fsearch.ebscohost.com%2flogin.aspx%3fdirect%3dtrue%
  26db%3dsih%26AN%3d4004448%26site%3dehost-live%26scope%3dsite.
Eric D. Gould, Bruce A. Weinberg, and David B. Mustard. Crime rates and local la-
  bor market opportunities in the United States: 1979-1997. Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 84(1):45 – 61, 2002.
Jeﬀ Grogger and Michael Willis. The emergence of crack cocaine and the rise in urban
  crime rates. Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(4):519–529, November 2000.
Jerry Hausman. Celluar telephone, new products, and the CPI. American Statistical
  Association, 17(2):188–194, April 1999.
Thomas W. Hazlett. U.S. wireless auctions. Technical report, George Mason Uni-
 versity, 1999. URL www.accc.gov.au/system/files/Hazlett%2C%20Thomas%20%
 28Auctions%20Paper%29.pdf.
James C. Howell and Scott H. Decker. The youth gangs, drugs, and violence connection.
  Juvenile Justice Bulletin, January 1999. US Department of Justice.
Hawre Jalal, Jeanine M. Buchanich, Mark S. Roberts, Lauren C. Balmert, Kun Zhang,
  and Donald S. Burke. Changing dynamics of the drug overdose epidemic in the united
  states from 1979 through 2016. Science, 361(6408), 2018. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.
  1126/science.aau1184.
Bruce D Johnson. Patterns of drug distribution: implications and issues. Substance use
  and misuse, 38(11-13):1789–1806, 2003.
Bruce D. Johnson, Andrew Golub, and Elo ise Dunlap. The rise and decline of hard
  drugs, durg markets, and violence in inner-city new york. In Alfred Blumstein and Joel
  Wallman, editors, The Crime Drop in America, chapter 6. Cambridge University Press,
  2000.

Danielle Kaeble and Mary Cowhig. Correctional populations in the united states, 2016.
 Ncj 251211, U.S. Department of Justice: Oﬃce of Justice Programs, April 2018. URL
 https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/cpus16.pdf.



                                          44
Jonathan Klick, John MacDonald, and Thomas Stratmann. Mobile phones and crime
  deterrence: An underappreciated link. In Alon Harel and Keith N. Hylton, editors,
  Research Handbook on the Economics of Criminal Law. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2002.
  doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2130234.
Iliana Kuziemko and Steven Levitt. An empirical analysis of imprisoning drug oﬀenders.
   Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10):2043–2066, August 2004.
SD Levitt and SA Venkatesh. An economic analysis of a drug-selling gang’s finances.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(3):755–789, Aug 2000.
Steven D. Levitt. Understanding why crime fell in the 1990s: Four factors that explain
  the decline and six that do not. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1):163–190, Win
  2004.
Ballesteros MF Mack KA, Jones CM. Illicit drug use, illicit drug use disorders, and drug
  overdose deaths in metropolitan and nonmetropolitan areas - United States. Morbidity
  and mortality weekly report: Surveillance summaries, Centers for Disease Control and
  Prevention, October 20 2017.
Maltz. Bridging gaps in police crime data. Bureau Justice Statistics Discussion Paper
 NCJ 176365, U.S. Department of Justice, September 1999.
Walter B. Miller. The growth of youth gang problems in the United States: 1970-98.
 OJJDP report, U.S. Department of Justice, 2001.
Carlo Morselli, Masarah Paquet-Clouston, and Chloé Provost. The independent’s edge in
  an illegal drug distribution setting: Levitt and Venkatesh revisited. Social Networks,
  51(Supplement C):118 – 126, 2017. ISSN 0378-8733. Crime and Networks.
James B. Murray. Wireless Nation: The Frenzied Launch of the Cellular Revolution in
  America. Perseus Publishing, Cambridge, 2001.
National Gang Intelligence Center. 2015 national gang report. Technical report, FBI,
 Washington, DC, 2013.
Brendan O’Flaherty and Rajiv Sethi. Urban crime. In J. Vernon Henderson Gilles Du-
  ranton and William C. Strange, editors, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
  volume 5B, pages 1519–1621. North Holland, Amsterdam, 2015.
Erin A. Orrick and Alex R. Piquero. Were cell phones associated with lower crime in the
  1990s and 2000s? Journal of Crime and Justice, 38(2):222–234, 2015.
Amy Peacock, Janni Leung, Sarah Larney, Samantha Colledge, Matthew Hickman, Jurgen
 Rehm, Gary A. Giovino, Robert West, Wayne Hall, Paul Griﬃths, Robert Ali, Linda
 Gowing, John Marsden, Alize J. Ferrari, Jason Grebely, Michael Farrell, and Louisa
 Degenhardt. Global statistics on alcohol, tobacco and illicit drug use: 2017 status
 report. Addiction, 113(10):1905–1926, 2018.
David C. Pyrooz and Gary Sweeten. Gang membership between ages 5 and 17 years in the
 United States. Journal of Adolescent Health, 56(4):414–419, 4 2015. ISSN 1054-139X.



                                          45
Peter Reuter. The Organization of Illegal Markets: An Economic Analysis. University of
  Michigan Library, 1985.
Jessica Wolpaw Reyes. Environmental policy as social policy? The impact of childhood
  lead exposure on crime. B E Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7(1), 2007.
Oliver Roeder, Lauren-Brooke Eisen, and Julia Bowling. What caused the crime decline?
  Research report, The Brennan Center for Justice at NYU School of Law, 2015.
Christopher J. Ruhm. Taking the measure of a fatal drug epidemic. Working Paper 22504,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, August 2016.
Christopher J. Ruhm. Deaths of despair or drug problems?         Working Paper 24188,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2018.

P. Seth, L. Scholl, R.A. Rudd, and S. Bacon. Overdose deaths involving opioids, cocaine,
  and psychostimulants – United States, 2015-2016. Morbidity and mortality weekly
  report, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, March 29 2018.
Rajiv Sethi and Brendan O’Flaherty. Homicide in black and white. Journal of Urban
 Economics, 68:215–230, 11 2010.
Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers. Bargaining in the shadow of the law: Divorce laws
  and family distress. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(1):267–288, 2006.
Charles Tilly. Coercion, Capital and European States, A.D. 990 - 1992. Blackwell, 1995
 edition, 1990.
Jan C. van Ours and Ben Vollaard. The engine immobiliser: A non-starter for car thieves.
  The Economic Journal, 126(593):1264–1291, 2016.




                                          46
A1   Appendix Tables




                       47
             Table A1: Robustness to State-year level FE or Abortion Rate

                                   Homicides/100,000 Population
                                          Sample: 1990s
                       Main CSA counties              All CSA counties
                      (1)       (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)
                                     0. Antenna (from Table 5)
 Antennaa             -0.200**  -0.067***     -0.156**    -0.150*** -0.154**
                      (0.083)   (0.022)       (0.068)     (0.058)    (0.063)
 R2                   0.914     0.972         0.890       0.911      0.920
                                    A. Antenna + State-year FE
 Antenna              -0.171    -0.065***     -0.135**    -0.119**   -0.121**
                      (0.105)   (0.022)       (0.054)     (0.048)    (0.052)
 R2                   0.955     0.983         0.918       0.928      0.933
                               B. Antenna + Eﬀective Abortion Rate
 Antenna              -0.171**  -0.066***     -0.145**    -0.144*** -0.146**
                      (0.073)   (0.023)       (0.059)     (0.054)    (0.058)
 Abortionb            -3.817*** -1.968        -2.308*** -6.013**     -7.193**
                      (0.708)   (2.230)       (0.447)     (3.002)    (3.503)
  R2                  0.916     0.971         0.890       0.913      0.923
  N                   1,790     1,790         11,490      11,490     11,490
  Mean
   Homicide           14.976       14.976          10.433       10.433     10.433
   Antenna            23.739       23.739          20.592       20.592     20.592
   Abortion           0.974        0.974           1.035        1.035      1.035
  CSA-specific:
   Quadratic trend                 Yes                          Yes
   Year FE                                                                 Yes
All regressions include year and county fixed eﬀects and are population weighted. Robust
standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
a
  – Sum of antenna structure shares/1000 square miles; antenna structures 200ft or taller
within 20 miles of the county centroid; county area is the land area.
b
  – Eﬀective abortion rate for homicides crimes, curtesy of John Donohue and Steven
Levitt. For a description of this state-year level variable, see Donohue and Levitt [2019].
The 1990-1999 change in this variable was 1.36 (unweighted mean, 51 states).
Also see notes to Table 3.




                                            48
            Table A2: Homicide Circumstance – Contiguous US, 1976-2016

 Description                            Incidents   Victims   percent
 Narcotics-Gang                            56,675    60,074       8.3
 [Violation of] narcotic drug laws         25,446    27,339       3.8
 Juvenile gang killings                    22,635    23,609       3.3
 Brawl due to influence of narcotics        4,532     4,799       0.7
 Gangland killings                          4,062     4,327       0.6

 Argument                                205,966    212,360      29.3
 Other arguments                         191,686    197,635      27.2
 Argument over money or property          14,280     14,725       2.0

 Theft                                    63,912     67,160       9.3
 Robbery                                  56,127     58,890       8.1
 Burglary                                  5,901      6,283       0.9
 Larceny                                   1,175      1,252       0.2
 Motor vehicle theft                         709        735       0.1

 Miscellaneous                           183,620    197,923      27.3
 Other non-felony type homicide           86,352     92,432      12.7
 Other – not specified                    13,333     17,284       2.4
 Felon killed by police                   15,550     15,698       2.2
 Brawl due to influence of alcohol        14,987     15,381       2.1
 All suspected felony type                12,402     13,105       1.8
 Felon killed by private citizen          11,685     11,900       1.6
 Lovers triangle                          10,141     10,812       1.5
 Arson                                     2,903      4,547       0.6
 Rape                                      4,051      4,158       0.6
 All other manslaughter by negligence      2,977      3,144       0.4
 Other negligent handling of gun           2,312      2,316       0.3
 Other sex oﬀense                          1,395      1,441       0.2
 Child killed by babysitter                1,235      1,243       0.2
 Gambling                                  1,016      1,061       0.1
 Institutional killings                    1,018      1,035       0.1
 Children playing with gun                   868        868       0.1
 Prostitution and commercialized vice        575        599       0.1
 Sniper attack                               470        547       0.1
 Victim shot in hunting accident             250        252       0.0
 Gun-cleaning death – other than self         90         90       0.0
 Abortion                                     10         10       0.0

 Undetermined                               179,933 188,348     25.9
 Total                                      690,106 725,865    100.0
Source: Kaplan, Jacob. Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program Data: Supplementary
Homicide Reports, 1976-2016. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research [distributor], 2018-06-19. https://doi.org/10.3886/E100699V5
Note: Frequencies are for the first victim.

                                         49
               Table A3: Homicide Relationship – Contiguous US, 1976-2016

 Description                       Incidents   Victims   Percent
 Stranger                            108,317   115,809      16.0

 Friends and Acquaintances          209,416    218,645      30.1
 Friend                              24,704     25,439       3.5
 Acquaintance                       143,481    149,397      20.6
 Employee                               387        439       0.1
 Employer                               514        575       0.1
 Homosexual Relationship              1,606      1,626       0.2
 Neighbor                             7,312      7,824       1.1
 Other Known to Victim               31,412     33,345       4.6

 Wife                                28,519     29,806       4.1
 Wife                                25,374     26,595       3.7
 Common-Law Wife                      3,145      3,211       0.4

 Husband                             14,152     14,226       2.0
 Husband                             11,479     11,547       1.6
 Common-Law Husband                   2,673      2,679       0.4

 Boyfriend                            8,588      8,615       1.2

 Girlfriend                          18,115     18,724       2.6

 Natal Family                        32,657     36,898       5.1
 Son                                  9,747     10,975       1.5
 Daughter                             7,043      8,202       1.1
 Brother                              6,085      6,346       0.9
 Father                               4,771      5,140       0.7
 Mother                               4,274      4,780       0.7
 Sister                               1,237      1,455       0.2

 Other Family                        20,906     22,620         3
 In-Law                               4,289      4,685       0.6
 Ex Wife                              2,125      2,311       0.3
 Stepfather                           1,618      1,675       0.2
 Stepson                              1,319      1,418       0.2
 Ex Husband                             853        859       0.1
 Stepdaughter                           719        852       0.1
 Stepmother                             219        258       0.0
 Other                                9,764     10,562       1.5

 Undetermined                         248,936 260,522         35.9
 Total                                690,106 725,865        100.0
Source: Kaplan, Jacob. Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) Program Data: Supplementary
Homicide Reports, 1976-2016. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research [distributor], 2018-06-19. https://doi.org/10.3886/E100699V5
                                            50 the first oﬀender.
Note: Frequencies are for the first victim and
A2      Appendix – Antenna Structures – FCC
The Antenna Structure Registration data were downloaded from:
http://wireless.fcc.gov/uls/index.htm?job=transaction&page=weekly
    We match the latitude and longitude information to the nearest county centroid re-
flecting county boundaries as of 2000, obtained from:
http://www.census.gov/tiger/tms/gazetteer/county2k.txt


A3      Appendix – Mortality data – National Center for
        Health Statistics (NCHS)
The NCHS data corresponds to the data available on death certificates and are thus the
most complete data on deaths in the US.
   An advantage of the NCHS data is that the five New York City boroughs are reported
separately with respect to occurrence (deaths can also be by residence).
   The NCHS data include place of occurrence and place of residence. We restrict the
data to US residents and for location we use place of occurrence.
   The NCHS data only contain information from some 400 counties in 1989 and therefore
we exclude that year.
   For year 1972, only half of deaths were included and therefore we multiply deaths in
that year by two.


A4      Appendix – Population data – Census
We used the Census’ county level population estimates, available at

   https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/popest/data/data-sets.All.html


A5      Appendix – Homicide data – Special Homicide Re-
        ports
The data shr_1976_2016.csv version V5[2018-06-19] can be downloaded from:
https://www.openicpsr.org/openicpsr/project/100699/version/V5/view
    For a description of the variables in the SHR, please see:
https://ucr.fbi.gov/nibrs/addendum-for-submitting-cargo-theft-data/shr Par-
ticipation in the SHR is voluntary and not all agencies report.
    An agency is identified by its ORI(ginating agency) number.
    Each row is an incident, and the ORI, year, month and incident number identifies each
incident. Each incident can have several homicide victims and several oﬀenders.
    A couple of adjustments were made.
    First, when the National Center for Health Statistics reported zero homicides for a
county and the SHR did not have any reported homicides, we assumed a zero homicide
rate for that county in the SHR data as well, on the assumption that NCHS would
typically have the “correct” number and that zero homicides is plausible reason for the
corresponding SHR data to be missing.


                                           51
    Second, homicide data for New York City are not disaggregated to the county level.
Therefore, for this data set, we exclude New York City.
    Third, there were a few duplicate observations (roughly 350), looking over them, some
of them were ”adjustments”, for those we used the adjusted record.

A5.1     Circumstance
The circumstances are coded for all oﬀenders, for detailed categories see Table A2.
   In the cases of multiple oﬀenders (4 percent of incidents and 9 percent of victims), in
more than 98 percent of the cases with more than one oﬀender, only one circumstance
was given (i.e., the same circumstance was stated for all oﬀenders).
   In cases with multiple circumstances, the priority was as follows:
   Narcotics-Gang > Theft > Argument > Miscellaneous >Undetermined

A5.2     Relation
For detailed categories see Table A3. This information is only available for victim 1. If a
husband kills his wife and n other people, we count all n homicides as being of this type
although only victim 1 was killed by her husband.
    In case of multiple victims, we apply the same relationship for the first victim to all
victims. While somewhat arbitrary, these additional victims may be viewed as collateral
damage swept up by the primary conflict.
    There is information on up to 11 oﬀenders. For instance, for a woman murdered
by her husband and a friend, the first relationship variable might be codes as husband
and the second as friend. We created two indicator variables, one which indicates all
homicides in which a relationship, say friend, was mentioned, and one which assigns only
one relationship to each incident. In practise, these two measures yielded almost identical
results and therefore we went with the measure that assigns a unique relationship so as
to avoid double counting.
    To assign a unique relationship, relationships need to be prioritized. In the above
example, the victim was a wife and a friend. We prioritize “closeness” resulting in the
following order of priority:
    Husband, wife >Family-Natal > Boyfriend, girlfriend > Family-Other > Friends and
acquaintances > Strangers > Undetermined.




                                            52
