                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        GOVERNMENT SPENDING IN A SIMPLE MODEL OF ENDOGENOUS GROWTH




                             Robert   J. Barro




                          Working Paper No. 2588




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May 1988




This research is supported by the National Science Foundation.   I have
benefited from discussions at the National Bureau of Economic Research,
Brown University, and the University of Florida. The paper was prepared
for presentation at the conference on "The Problem of Development", State
University of New York at Buffalo, May 1988. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2588
                                                 May 1988

          Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth

                                   ABSTRACT


    I extend existing models of endogenous economic growth to incorporate a

government sector. Production involves private capital (broadly defined) and

public services. There is constant returns to scale in the two factors, but

diminishing returns to each separately. Public services are financed by a

flat-rate income tax.

    The economy's growth rate and saving rate initially rise with the ratio

of productive government expenditures to GNP, g/y, but each rate eventually

reaches a peak and subsequently declines. If the production function is

Cobb-Douglas with an exponent a for public services, then the value g/y =    a

maximizes the growth rate, and also maximizes the utility attained by the

representative consumer.

    The distortion from the income tax implies that the decentralized

equilibrium is not Pareto optimal; in particular, the growth and saving rates

are too low from a social perspective. In a command optimum, growth and

saving rates are higher, but g/y = a turns out still to be the best choice

for the size of government. The command optimum can be sustained by picking

the expenditure ratio, g/y = a, and then financing this spending by lump-sum

taxes.

    If the share of productive spending, g/y, were chosen randomly, then the

model would predict a non-monotonic relation between g/y and the economy's

long-term growth and saving rates. However, for optimizing governments, the

model predicts an inverse association between g/y and the rates of growth and

saving.

Robert J. Sarro
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
   Recent models of economic growth can generate long-term growth without

relying on exogenous changes in technology or population. Some of the models

amount to theories of technological progress (Rower, 1986), and others to

theories of population change (Becker and Barro, 1988). A general feature of

these models is the presence of constant or increasing returns in the factors

that can be accumulated (Rower, 1988, Lucas, 1988, Rebelo, 1987).

    One strand of the literature on endogenous economic growth concerns

models where private and social returns to investment diverge, so that

decentralized choices lead to sub-optimal rates of saving and economic growth

(Romer, 1986). In this setting private returns to scale may be diminishing,

but social returns—which reflect spillovers of knowledge or other

externalities—can be constant or increasing. Another line of research

involves models without externalities, where the privately determined choices

of saving and growth are Pareto optimal (Rebelo, 1987). These models rely on

constant returns to private capital, broadly defined to encompass human and

non-human capital.

    The present analysis builds on both aspects of this literature by

incorporating a public sector into a simple, constant-returns model of

economic growth. Because of familiar externalities associated with public

expenditures and taxes, the privately-determined values of saving and

economic growth turn out to be sub-optimal. Hence there are interesting

choices about government policies, as well as empirical predictions about the

relations among the size of government, the saving rate, and the rate of

economic growth.
                                                                        2




1. Growth Models with ptimizing Households

      As a background I begin with a brief sketch of the standard optimal

growth model, due to Ramsey (1928), Cass (1965), and Koopmans (1965). The

representative, infinite-lived household seeks to maximize overall utility,

as given by




                                 U =
             (1)
                                       j'u(c)e0tdt

where c is consumption and p>O is the constant rate of time preference.

Population, which corresponds to the number of consumers, is constant. I use

the iso-elastic utility function,



             (2)               u(c) =    [c1l]/(1u)

where q>O.

      Each household-producer has access to the production function,




             (3)                        y =   f(k)


where y is output per worker and k is capital per worker. I interpret

y =   f(k)   as output net of depreciation. The production function satisfies

the usual properties, including positive net marginal product of capital

(f' >   0) over some range of k, diminishing marginal productivity (f'' < 0),
and the limiting conditions, f'(O) = m         and   f'(m)   0. There is no

technological progress, in the sense that the function f(.) is time
                                                                     3




invariant. The economy is closed, and produced net output goes either for

consumption or net investment. The number of workers equals the constant

number of households, and each worker works one unit of time. That is, I

abstract from the labor-leisure choice.

    As is well known, the maximization of the representative household's

overall utility in equation (1) implies that the growth rate of consumption

at each point in time is given by




             (4)                ê/c =   (1/u).(f'-p)

Since I omitted the two standard sources of exogenous growth—population

change and technological progress—the model has steady-state levels of

capital, k*, and consumption, c*. The value k* is determined from equation

(3) by the condition fi(k*) = p.        Since net investment is zero in the steady

state, steady-state consumption is c* =       f(k*).
    A recent strand of endogenous growth models, represented by Rebelo

(1987), departs from the standard framework by replacing diminishing returns,

    <   0,   with constant returns. In the present setting, which has a single

type of capital good, the modified production function with constant returns

to capital is




             (5)                         y=Ak


 where A > 0 is the constant net marginal product of capital.
                                                                4




   The assumption of constant returns becomes more plausible when capital is

viewed broadly to encompass human and non-human capital. Human investments

include education and training, as well as expenses for having and raising

children (Becker and Barro, 1988). In effect, a family can invest in human

capital by improving the quality of its existing members or by deciding to

have more members. In any event, while the returns to broadly-defined

capital may not be precisely constant, it is hard to see why economists

usually interpret capital narrowly to exclude labor input. It seems that

labor services depend as much as capital services on prior investment

decisions.

    Of course, human and non-human capital need not be perfect substitutes in

production. Therefore production may show roughly constant returns to scale

in the two types of capital taken together, but diminishing returns in either

input separately. The Ak" production function shown in equation (5) can be

modified to distinguish between two types of capital, and the model can be

extended, along the lines of Lucas (1988) and Rebelo (1987), to allow for

sectors that produce physical and human capital, respectively. In comparison

with the "Ak" model, the main additional results involve transitional

dynamics whereby an economy moves from an arbitrary starting ratio of

physical to human capital to a steady-state ratio. This transition is

particularly important ia analyzing how countries that start from different

initial conditions—possibly due to major disturbances such as World War

TI—might converge to similar levels of economic performance. However, for

studying steady-state growth, the important element is constant returns to

scale in the faètors that can be accumulated—that is, the two types of

capital taken together—and not the distinction between the
                                                                5




factors.' Since my primary interest in this paper concerns long-term growth,

I decided to use the simplest constant-returns-to-scale production function,

as given by the "Ak" form in equation (5).

    The analysis does assume that fixed factors are not important enough to

cause significant departures from constant returns. Even with the existence

of land and other natural resources, the results can go through as long as

reproducible capital is a good substitute for these fixed factors.

Alternatively, it may be that fixed factors become binding eventually, but

not until the variable factors reach very high levels. Then the present

analysis may be a good approximation over a wide range of accumulation where

the returns to scale in the variable factors are nearly constant.

    The concept of capital can include knowledge, accumulated through

expenditures on research and development, as long as this knowledge is

private property. Knowledge that is non-excludable or non-rival brings in

issues of sub-optimal economic growth that have been studied by Romer (1986).

My study of government as an element in economic growth turns out to parallel

Romer's analysis in some respects.

    The production function in equation (5) implies f' = A.   Substituting

into equation (4) then yields




          (6)                7 =   /c   =   (1/).(A-p)




'Jones and Manuelli (1988) show that similar results can obtain if the
marginal product of capital is diminishing but has a positive lower bound.
In effect, diminishing returns can apply over a range of capital stocks, as
long as roughly constant returns apply asymptotically.
                                                                  6




where I use the symbol      to denote a growth rate. I assume that the

technology is sufficiently productive to ensure positive steady-state growth,

but not so productive as to yield unbounded utility. The corresponding

inequality conditions are




         (7)                      A > p > A(l-)



The first part implies y > 0 in equation (6). The second part, which is

satisfied automatically if A>O, p>O, and u1, guarantees that the attainable

utility is bounded.

    In this model the economy is always at a position of steady-state growth

where all variables—c, k, and y—grow at the rate 7 shown in equation (6).

Given an initial capital stock, k(0), the levels of all variables are also

determined. In particular, since net investment equals 7k, the initial level

of consumption is




          (8)                    c(0) =   k(0).(A-i)


    The model is a theory of endogenous growth in that changes in the

underlying paraneters of technology and preferences map into differences in

growth rates. From equation (6) the growth rate, 7, is higher if the economy

 is more productive (higher A), and lower if people are less patient (higher

p) or less willing to substitute intertemporally (higher a).
                                                                  7




2. The Public Sector

    The contribution of the present paper is to modify the above analysis by

incorporating a public sector. Let g be the quantity of public services

provided to each household-producer. I assume that these services are

provided without user charges, and are not subject to congestion effects

(which might arise for highways or some other public services). That is, the

model abstracts from externalities associated with the use of public

services.

    I consider initially the role of public services as an input to private

production. It is this productive role that creates a potentially positive

linkage between government and growth. I assume now that production exhibits

constant returns to scale in k and g together, but diminishing returns in k

separately. That is, even with a broad concept of private capital,

production exhibits decreasing returns to private inputs if the

(complementary) government inputs do not expand in a parallel manner. In a

recent empirical study, Aschauer (1988) argues that the services from

government infrastructure are particularly important in this context.

     I assume the Cobb-Douglas form of production function,




            (9)             y =   f(k,g)   =




where 0 < a < 1. In equation (9) k is the representative producer's quantity

of capital, which would correspond to the per capita amount of aggregate

capital. I assume that g can be measured correspondingly by the per capita

quantity of government purchases of goods and services. A number of problems

can arise here. First, the flow of public services need not correspond to
                                                               8




government purchases, especially when the government owns capital and the

national accounts omit an imputed rental income on public capital in the

measure of current purchases. This issue is important for empirical

implementation of the model. But conceptually, it is satisfactory to think

of the government as doing no production and owning no capital. Then the

government just buys a flow of output (including services of highways,

sewers, battleships, etc.) from the private sector. These purchased

services, which the government makes available to households, correspond to

the input that matters for private production in equation (9). As long as

the government and the private sector have the same production functions, the

results would be the same if the government buys private inputs and does its

own production, instead of purchasing only final output from the private

sector, as I assume.

    A second issue arises if the public services are non-rival for the users

(as is true for the space program). Then it is the total of government

purchases, rather than the amount per capita, that matters for each

individual. As is well known at least since Sainuelson (1954), this element

is important for determining the desirable scale of governmental activity.

However, the present analysis can be modified to include this aspect of

publicness without changing the nature of the subsequent results.

     Government expenditure is financed contemporaneously by a flat-rate

income tax,




          (10)               g=T=ryrAkg0

where I is government revenue and r is the tax rate. I have normalized the
                                                                              9




number of households to unity, so that g corresponds to aggregate

expenditures and I to aggregate revenues.

   The production function in equation (9) implies that the marginal product

of capital is now




            (11)
                                        =   A(la)(g/k)a

Note that          is calculated by varying k in equation (9), while holding fixed

g. That is, the representative producer assumes that changes in his quantity

of capital and output do not lead to any changes in his amount of public

services.

    It is convenient to substitute g =            ry   in equation (9) and simplify to get




            (12)                  y =   k.AhI.rl)
Therefore, for a given expenditure ratio, r, y is proportional to k, as in

the 'Ak" production function in equation (5). An increase in r means an

increase in the relative amount of public input, and therefore an upward

shift in the coefficient that connects y to k.

    The ratio of the two productive inputs is




            (13)        g/k =   (g/y).(y/k)   =
                                                  r.(y/k)   =   (AT)1/(l-a)


where the value for y/k comes from equation (12). Substituting from equation

(13) for g/k ijcto equation (11) leads to
                                                                   10




         (14)             k =    (lO).Ah/(0).rRl

Therefore, an increase in the expenditure ratio, r, implies an upward shift

in the marginal product of capital,

    Private optimization still leads to a path of consumption that satisfies

equation (4), except that f' is replaced by the private marginal return to

capital. With the presence of a flat-rate income tax at rate r, this return

is (l-r)fk. Therefore, substituting for        from equation (14), the growth

rate of consumption is now




         (15)    7 =   /c (l/).[(la)Ah/(1
                           =                      .(lr).r0I(1) - p]



As long as r is constant—that is, the government sets g and T to grow at the

same rate as y—the growth rate        is constant. Hence the dynamics is the

same as that for the 'Ak" model analyzed before. Consumption starts at some

value c(0) and then grows at the constant rate .      Similarly,   k and y begin

at initial values k(0) and y(0) and then grow at the constant rate .        The

economy has no transitional dynamics, and is always in a position of

steady-state growth where all quantities grow at the rate      shown in equation


(15).

    Given a starting amount of capital, k(0), the levels of all variables are

again determined. In particular, the initial quantity of consumption is




          (16)         c(O) =   k(0). [(1r).A1.r          -

where    is given in equation (15). The first term inside the brackets of
                                                                    11




equation (16) corresponds to y(O) -    g(O),   and the second term to initial


investment, k(O).

      Figure 1 (originally drawn on a menu) shows the relation between the

growth rate, y, and the expenditure- and tax-rate, r. A higher expenditure

ratio raises      in equation (14) and thereby raises 7 in equation (15).

However, a higher tax rate means that people retain a smaller fraction, 1-r,

of their before-tax income, which tends to reduce y. At low values of r, the

first force dominates and creates a net positive effect of r on .         (The

Cobb-Douglas technology shown in equation (9) implies that anarchy is very

unproductive.) However, for high enough r, the second force dominates and

therefore leads to a net negative effect of r on 7.       As r approaches 0 or 1,

the growth rate from equation (15) approaches the same negative value, -p/er.

      The growth rate, 7, is positive for a range of r if the economy is

sufficiently productive relative to the rate of time preference. The

condition for a range with positive growth (which generalizes the condition

A >   p from the Ak" model) is A11'(      .(la)2.a(i0) > p.       Also, as before,

I assume that the economy is not so productive to allow the attained utility

to become unbounded—the condition here is p >       Ah/(.(lu)(1a)2,a.
As in the "Ak" model, the latter condition must hold if A>0, p>0, and 1.

      Equation (15) shows that maximizing 7 is equivalent to maximizing the

expression, (l-r).r. The solution is r = a.               Roughly speaking, to

maximize the growth rate, the government's sets its share of GNP, r =       g/y,   to

equal the share it would get if public services were a competitively supplied

input of production. Note that the value of r that maximizes 7 depends only

on the production parameter, a, and not on the preference parameters, p and

r.    (The independence from p and     follows for any constant-returns
a
Growth      0.03
Rate
( Y)
            0.02
            0.01
            0.00
          —0.01
          —0.02
          —0.03
                          .08      .16   .24    .32    .40       .48      .56   .64   .72   .80    .88    .96
                                                                                            Expenditure Share (r)
                                                             Figure   1
                                         The Growth Rate and the Size of Government
         NOTE:   The curve 1)ows the growth rate, I , from equation (15). The parameter values are a =   1, a — .25.
                 p = .02, A
                              '°.113. These values imply that the maximum value of y is .02.
                                                                      12




production function, and does not depend on the Cobb-Douglas form.)

   The (net) saving rate is given by




         (17)       s =   k/y = (k/k).(k/y)   =




where k/y comes from equation (12), and           is given in equation (15). The

curve in Figure 2 is a graph of s versus r. Because k/y declines with r, the

saving rate peaks before the growth rate. That is, a value r <         a would

maximize s. Recall that saving and investment are broader concepts than

usual in this model since they encompass accumulations of human capital

(including additions to the stock of population). On the other hand, net

product, net investment, and net saving are reduced by depreciation of stocks

of human capital.

    Presumably, there is no reason for the government to wish to maximize 7

or s, per se. For a benevolent government, the appropriate objective in this

model is to maximize the utility attained by the representative household.

Because the economy is always in a position of steady-state growth, it is

straightforward to compute the attained utility as a function of r, as long

as r is constant over time.2 with 7 constant, the integral in equation (1)

can be simplified to yield (aside from a constant),




2An optimizing, benevolent government would choose a constant value of r in
this model. If the government is not benevolent, then its objective may also
entail a constant value of r, although not the value that maximizes the
utility attained by the representative household. For example, this result
obtains in a model, considered below, where the overnment maximizes an
expression that relates to the present value of its net receipts.
Saving
Rate
(s)
                         .08    .16    .24     .32    .40       .48   .56     .64    .72    .80    .88       .96
                                                                                            Expenditure   Share Cr)
                                                     Figure 2
                                   The Saving Rate and the Size of Government
         NOTE:   The curve shows the saving rate, s, from equation (17).    Parameter values are indicated   in
                 Figure 1.
                                                                     13




                                                        1-
                                               [c(0)]
           (18)                    U=
                                                   -
                                        (l-o)p          7(l-)J

The condition that utility be bounded, mentioned before, ensures that

p >   7(1-a).
      Equations (15) and (16) determine 7 and c(0), respectively, as functions

of r. Hence, these formulas can be used to determine the value of r that

maximizes U in equation (18). To see the nature of the results, it is useful

to note that equations (15) and (16) imply that c(0) can be written as a

function of        (with r not appearing separately),




            (19)          c(0) =   [k(O)/(1-a)]•[p           +




Substituting       into equation (18) yields a relation between U and ',




                                        [p +
            (20)                   U=
                                                   -
                                        (1-o)[p         7(1-i)]

It    can then be shown that the effect of on U in equation (20) is positive

for all values of O and Oa<1, as long as utility is bounded, which ensures

p >    (1-).       (This result follows although an increase in 7 need not raise

c(0) in equation (19).) Therefore the maximization of U corresponds to the

maximization of 7. It follows that r = a is the tax rate that delivers the

maximum of attained utility.3


3This calculation holds fixed the initial capital stock, k(0). Therefore, I
do not allow k(0)—that is, prior investment decisions—to respond to
"once-and-for-all" changes in r at date 0. As long as the policymaker is
restricted to a flat-rate income tax—so that pure capital levies are
                                                                  14




3.   A P1annin Problem for the Government

     The result r = a is the solution to a second-best policy problem.

Because of familiar externalities implied by public expenditures and

taxation, the decentralized choices of saving turn out to generate outcomes

that are not Pareto optimal. In fact, the departures from Pareto optimality

are analogous to those in Romer's (1986) growth model, which relied on the

public-goods nature of privately-created knowledge.

     In the present model the easiest way to assess the external effects is to

compare the decentralized outcomes with those from a planning problem.

Suppose that the government chooses a constant expenditure ratio, r, and can

then dictate each household's choices for consumption over time.4 Given the

value of r, the government picks the consumption path to maximize the

representative household's attained utility, where the expression for utility

is again given in equations (1) and (2). The resulting condition for the

planned growth rate of consumption turns out to be




           (21)
                       =   /c = (lI).[A1I(10).(1T).Ta/()      -
                                                                  p]



In   equation (15), the expression within the brackets and to the left of the




precluded—the optimal tax rate, r = a, is time-consistent in this model. It
turns out, as shown below, that the solution is also time consistent if the
policymaker can use a consumption tax, which amounts to a lump-sum tax in the
present model.
4See n. 2 above on the constancy of r.
                                                                     15




minus sign was the private marginal return on capital, (l-r)fk. In contrast,



capital, gin th th expenditure                      j
the corresponding term in equation (21) is the social marginal return on

                                                ,       assumed constant. Equation

(12) shows that the marginal effect of k on y, for fixed r, equals

AhI(1.r(l). However, to maintain r, an increase of y by 1 unit

requires an increase in g by r inits. Since the increase in g comes out of

current output, the effect of k on y is adjusted by the factor, (1-r), to

calculate the net social return on capital in equation (21). Hence, the

difference between the private choice in equation (15) and the planning

solution in equation (21) is the presence of the term, 1-a, in the former.

     Figure 3 shows how r affects the planning growth rate, , and the

decentralized growth rate, y.      It is clear from a comparison of equations

(21) and (15) that       exceeds    for all values of r. That is, the

decentralized choices involve too little growth. (The insufficiency of

growth corresponds to too low a saving rate—see the comparison of saving

rates in Figure 4.) Moreover, since equation (21) differs from equation (15)

only by the absence of the term, 1-a, it follows that the shape of the graph

of      versus r is the same as that of 7 versus r. In particular, the maximum

        also   occurs at the tax rate, r = a.   (The result r =   a is the solution
of 7r
to almost all problems in this paper.)

     It is straightforward to show, following the procedure used for the

decentralized case, that the planner who desires to maximize the utility

attained by the representative household would choose the value of r that

maximizes the growth rate,          But this growth-maximizing expenditure share

is again the value a. Hence the government selects the expenditure share,

r = a, in two circumstances: first, if it uses an income tax to finance
                                           15a


                                      -r
                                      0-
z0
                          P
                      b       b   b
0


1
0
       -
       0-        C

       0
.0
0      0
       0
rt
       0
0
0
N)     0         N)
       rt
       0
0
                 U)
                 N)
"1
0
            I1
.0               C
0

0
0

U,




 0

 •1

 I-
 0
 0

 0-I
Saving      1.0
Rates
(s,  a)
            0
            0
          —0
          —1
          —1
                              .08      .16     .24    .32    .40    .48    .56     .64   .72    .80     .88   .96
                                                                                               Expenditure Ratio (T)
                                                          Figure 4
                              The Planning Saving Rate (a) and the Decentralized Saving Rate (s)
          NOTE:   a   =   I         (k/y), where 1 is given in equation (21) and k/y in equation (12).   s is given in
                  equation (17).          Parameter values are as in Figure 1.
                                                                    16




spending in an environment of decentralized households, and second, if it has

the power to dictate each household's saving behavior. The growth rate,

saving rate, and level of attained utility are all lower in the first

environment than the second. But the optimal share of government in GNP is

the same.

    It is natural to consider whether the command optimum can be implemented

by replacing the income tax with a lump-sum tax in an environment of

decentralized households. (In this model, which lacks a labor-leisure

choice, a consumption tax would be equivalent to a lump-sum tax.) With

lump-sum taxes, the private marginal return on capital is k' rather than

(l-r)fk. Therefore, instead of equation (15), optimizing individual

households would choose the growth rate of consumption,




            (22) 7L =     = (1I).[(l ).AlI(l-e).Ta/(l-a) - p]

Thus,   7L differs from 7 by the absence of the term, l-r, inside the brackets.

    Figure 5 graphs 7L' along with 7 and        as a function of r. As is

apparent from equation (22), 7L is inonotonically increasing in r. That is

because a higher r means a higher expenditure share, which shifts upward the

marginal product,         With a lump-sum tax, households respond to     the   higher

k by choosing a higher growth rate for consumption (and a higher saving

rate—see Figure     6).
    A comparison of equations (21) and (22) indicates that          contains the

term, 1-a,   where 7L contains the term, l-r. At   the point, r =    a, which was
already shown to correspond to the command optimum, the two terms coincide.

Note    from Figures 5 and 6 that the growth rates,    and 7L' and saving       rates,
                                 16a




                            •0


                          FFFF
     —C
                    —rc
CD


D CO
CD




               NJ




               La
               NJ




          C'l.
          .0
          m




          'O




          rt
          CO


             'C
          0 OO
'0
.—1
      Saving
      Rates
      L'   s,   s)
                              .08    .16    .24    .32    .40    .48     .56       .64   .72   .80     .88    .96
                                                                                               Expenditure Ratio (t)
                                                          Figure 6
                                           The Saving Rate in Three Environments
                NOTE:
                        SL        k/y and s = y    k/y, where    is from equation (22), Y from equation (21), and
                        k/y from equation (12). a is from equation (17). Parameter values are given in Figure 1.
                                                                17




s and 5L' are equal at this point. These results mean that lump-sum
taxation supports the command optimum if the expenditure share is set at the

optimal value, r = a.

    If the expenditure share is set non-optimally, r     a, then the planning

solution for consumption—contingent on this incorrect choice of r—does not

coincide with the solution under lump-sum taxation. This result indicates

that the income tax is not the only distortion in the model. I am uncertain

whether the other distortion is economically interesting, but I will now

explain what it is.

    An individual producer computes the marginal product, k' while holding

constant the quantity of public services, g, that he receives from the

government. This assumption is appropriate for some types of public

services, and I continue to assume that it is right in the present context.

(In some other cases the expansion of someone's own production or property

automatically gets that person more public services; an example might be

police protection.) But, if the government sets a given expenditure ratio,

r, then an increase in national product by one unit    induces the government to

raise the aggregate of its public services by r units. Thus, when an

individual producer decides to raise his individual k and y, he is indirectly

causing the government to increase its aggregate spending.    The effect on

that individual's public services, which entered into his production

function, would be negligible, and can therefore be ignored. But it is

 nevertheless true, with r fixed, that an individual's decision that raises

 national product by 1 unit causes the total of government purchases to expand

 by r units. The effects depend on whether the size of the government is

 optimal. If so—namely, at the point r = tv—a marginal change in government
                                                                            18




expenditures is just worth its cost. Hence there is no distortion and the

lump-sum tax result replicates the planning optimum, as noted before. But

suppose that the government is too large, r >         a.    Then the induced expansion

of government expenditures constitutes a negative externality. On this

count, each individual has too much of an incentive to expand individual

output; in particular, in this model, each individual has too much incentive

to save. Hence, if r >      a,            in   Figure 5, and     >          Figure 6.
                                 7L >
                                                                     spin
Analogously, the incentive to expand individual output is too low when the

government is too small, r < a.         Hence, 7L <        and   c s apply in this

range.

      Figures 5 and 6 also allow a comparison between lump-sum taxes (which

could be consumption taxes in this model) and income taxes. At the point

r =   a,   the lump-sum tax generates the command optimum and is therefore

superior to the income tax. For r < a, the lump-sum tax comes closer than

the income tax to the command optimum; therefore, the lump-sum tax would also

be preferred here. However, for r > a the comparison becomes ambiguous,

because the lump-sum-tax choices, 7L and 5L' are too large, while the

income-tax choices,       and s, are too small. For very large governments (that

is, r well above a), the outcome under income taxes can be superior to that

under lump-sum taxes. The reason is that the income tax is an imperfect way

to get individual producers to internalize the distortion described above.

With r > a, people have too great an incentive to expand output by an

additional unit because the government is thereby induced to increase its

expenditures by r units. If government spending were worthless, then the way

to internalize this distortion would be to tax the individual's income at

rate r. As r gets well above its ideal value, a, the social return from more
                                                                  19




government spending diminishes—that is, it becomes more nearly accurate that

government spending is worthless at the margin. Therefore, the income tax

becomes more nearly the right way to offset the negative externality, and the

value 7 in Figure 5 gets steadily closer to the value .       Similarly,   in

Figure 6, s and s converge as r approaches 1.



4. Government Consumotion Services

    Suppose that the government's expenditures also finance some services

that do not enter into households' production functions. For example, the

government might provide services that appear directly in households' utility

functions. I assume that total spending per household is g+h, where the

quantity h represents the government's consumption services. The utility

function for each household is now



                                         (c.h13)1 -    1

           (23)               u(c,h) =
                                              (1-CT)



where 0 < /? < 1. The household's overall utility is still given by equation

(1), except that u(c,h) replaces u(c) in the integral.

    I still assume a flat-rate income tax, so that the government's budget

constraint is




           (24)                     T =
                                          (Tg+Th)•Y



where Tg   = g/y   is the government's expenditure ratio for productive services,

and 7h =   h/y    is the ratio for consumption services.
                                                                     20




       Households' decentralized choices for consumption and saving now lead to

the growth rate




                      (1/[(1-a).A'I('(1-rg-rh)(rg)
                                                                 -
(25)           7h =



This    expression modifies equation (15) in a straightforward manner:

(1Tg_Th) replaces (1-i-), and (rg)aI(l•a) replaces r0/(1). The tax rate

amounts to an existing distortion that reduces private choices of saving and

growth rates. The dotted curve in Figure 7 shows the relation between 7h and

the share of productive government spending, Tg taking account of the

positive value of rh. The growth rate lies uniformly below the value y,

shown by the solid curve, that would have been chosen if rh =        0.   Figure 8

shows the corresponding saving rates, sh and s.

       For a given Th' it is easy to show that the value of Tg that maximizes

in equation (25) is a(1-rh). In other words, the growth-maximizing share of

productive government spending is smaller if the government is also using the

income tax to finance other types of spending. Moreover, if the value of rh

were set arbitrarily (that is, not in order to maximize utility), and if the

presence of h in households' utility were neglected, then the choice

Tg =    a(1-rh) also   turns out to maximize the utility attained by the

representative household.

       However, in most cases it would be uninteresting to treat the choices of

Tg and rh in this asymmetric manner. Presumably, if it is appropriate to

think of Tg as chosen from a utility-maximizing criterion, then it would be

similarly appropriate for rh. Suppose then that each household's utility

function is given by equation (23), and that Tg and rh are set to maximize
0a
     Growth
     Rates
                             .08     .16   .24      .32    .40      .48     .56   .64        .72      .80    .88       .96
                                                                                                      Expenditure Ratio (T)
                                                          Figure   7
                              Growth when the Government also Provides Consumption Services
              NOTES:   Y is from equation (15) and    from equation (25).     The graph of         assumes      .15.    Other
                         parameter values are from Figure 1.
Q
    Saving
    Rates
    (s,
                             .08     .16   .24     .32     .40    .48    .56     .64    .72     .80   .88    .96
                                                                                               Expenditure Rstlo (T)
                                                          Figure 8
                          The  Saving Rate when the Government also Provides Consumption Services
             NOTE:   a is from equation (17). 5h          k/y, where     is from equation (25), and k/y from equation (12).
                                                     1h
                        = .15.   Other parameter values are in Figure 1.
                                                                           21




the overall utility attained by the representative household in the form of

equation (1). The effects of the tax rates on th are shown in equation (25).

As before, it is possible to determine the initial level of consumption,

c(O), and thereby calculate the entire path of consumption as

                7ht
c(t) =   c(O)e        .   The path of the government's consumption services is given

                                    tht
                          =
by h(t) =   r.y(t)            r.y(O)e     .   Using these results, it is feasible to
relate the attained utility, U, to the tax rates, rg and Tb. There are then

two first-order conditions corresponding to the maximization of U. Combining

these conditions leads to the familiar result: Tg =              a.   That is, as long as

Tb is chosen optimally, the optimal ratio for productive government

expenditures, Tg is the same as before. In particular, the choice depends

again only on the productivity parameter, a, and not on aspects of

preferences (including now the parameter j3, which determines households'

preferences for private consumption, c, versus government consumption

services, h).



5. Self-Interested Government

    Thus far, I assumed that the government was benevolent and therefore

sought to maximize the utility attained by the representative household. I

now consider the alternative that the government is run by an agent who has

no electoral constraints and seeks to maximize his own utility.

    Return to the setting where all government expenditures, g, serve as

productive inputs for private producers. The government still uses a

flat-rate income tax, but instead of automatically balancing the budget, the

government can earn the net revenue,
                                                                      22




          (26)                     Cg =   (r-f)y

where the expenditure ratio,       g/y,   can differ from the income-tax rate, r.

The government agent uses his net revenue to purchase the quantity of

consumer goods, cg. (The results would not change if the agent were allowed

to hold capital, and perhaps owned a nonzero quantity of capital at time 0.)

The agent receives utility from consumption in the same manner as any

household—that is, the flow of utils is u(cg) from equation (2), and the

overall attained utility, U, is given by the integral in equation (1). In

particular, the government agent has the same discount rate, p, as each

household.

    Assuming constant values for r and       (which will be optimal for the

government), the privately determined growth rate is now




           (27)
                   =   (l/r).[(la).A                         -
                                                                 1

This   result is a straightforward modification of equation (15) when          r.


The government agent's consumption is cg(t) =      (r-€).y(O)e7   .   Therefore,
using the same procedure as before, it is possible to write the agent's

attained utility as a function of r and €. The two first-order conditions

for maximization of utility then lead to the results




           (28)




The optimal expenditure rate, €,   equals a, as in previous models. This
choice is basically one of efficient production, which means that the
                                                                  23




self- interested government chooses the same value as the benevolent

government. Basically, the government agent sets f = a in order to maximize

the tax base that he has to work with. Then he is also in the position to

set r >   e in order to secure the net flow of revenue, Cg•

     The results in this section parallel those in the preceding one. In

effect, the government agent's consumption, Cg    plays   the same role that the

government's consumption services, h, played in the previous model. In both

cases the presence of these consumption flows does not upset the conditions

for productive efficiency, which imply that the government's productive

expenditures are the fraction a of total output. However, the ratio of

government revenues to output exceeds a in both cases; in one case to provide

consumption to the government agent, and in the other to provide government

consumption services to each household.



6.         Emoirical Imolications

     The theory has implications for relations between the size of government

and the rates of growth and saving. Since the analysis applies to

steady-state growth paths, the natural empirical application would be to

differences in average performance across countries over long periods of

time.

     As is usual in empirical investigations, the hypothesized effects of

government policy are easier to assess if the government's actions can be

treated as exogenous. That is, the results are simple if governments

randomize their actions and thereby generate useful experimental data. In

this case, variations in the share of productive government expenditures in
                                                               24




GNP, g/y, affect growth and saving rates,   and s, as shown by the curves in

Figures 7 and 8, respectively. Countries could be arrayed along the

horizontal axes by the size of g/y, and the responses of 7 and s would be

non-monotonic, as shown in the figures.

    An increase in the share of non-productive government expenditures, say

h/y in the model of section 4, leads to the types of shifts shown by the

movements from the solid to the dashed curves in Figures 7 and 8. For a

given value of g/y, an increase in h/y lowers the growth and saving rates.

These effects arise because a higher h/y has no direct effect on

private-sector productivity, but does lead to a higher income-tax rate.

Since individuals retain a smaller fraction of their returns from investment,

they have less incentive to invest, and the economy tends to grow at a lower

rate.

    The predictions are similar for any other differences across countries

that imply that private investors get to retain a smaller fraction of their

returns from investment. For example, if g/y is held fixed, an increase in

the average marginal tax rate—resulting, say, from a difference in the tax

system—would tend to lower the growth and saving rates. Similarly, any

other source of reduction in property rights would tend to reduce the growth

 and saving rates.

     Aside from problems of measuring public services and the rates of growth

 and saving, the empirical implementation of the model is complicated by the

 endogeneity of the government. Within the theoretical model, the government

 sets the share of productive expenditures, g/y, to equal a. Therefore,

 instead of being arrayed along the horizontal axes in Figures 7 and 8, each
                                                                  25




government would operate at the same point, g/y =    a.   Within this framework

of optimizing governments, cross-sectional variations in g/y arise only if a

differs from country to country.

    The parameter a, which measures the productivity of public services

relative to private services, could vary across countries for a number of

reasons. These include geography, the share of agricultural production,

urban density, and so on. For present purposes it is unnecessary to predict

how any specific element would affect a, and therefore g/y for an optimizing

government. As long as the variations in a are independent of the overall

level of productivity (measured by the coefficient, Al/, which connects

y to k for a given r in equation (12)), the model predicts how the induced

variations in g/y will correlate with differences in 7 and s. Using

equations (15) and (17), substituting r =   a,   and holding constant

the model implies that a rise in a, and hence in g/y, will reduce        and s.

Therefore, the theory predicts that these types of endogenous variations in

productive expenditures will be inversely correlated with       and s.   For

variations in other forms of government expenditures, the negative relation

with   and s follows straightforwardly.

    I am planning an empirical study of cross-country relationships among the

size of government, growth, and saving. But since I have no results at this

point, it may be worth summarizing some findings in the literature. Kormendi

and Meguire (1985) studied 47 countries in the post-World War II period,

using data on total government "consumption" expenditures and other variables

from Imiernaiionai Financial Saiistics. This measure of government

spending, used by many authors because of the availability of the data,

excludes public investment and transfers from overall public
                                                                26




expenditures. Although the category is called consumption, it does not

necessarily follow that these public services enter mainly into utility

functions, rather than production functions. Using data for each country

averaged over roughly 20-year periods, Korinendi and Meguire found (p. 147) no

relation between average growth rates of real GOP and average growth rates of

the share of government consumption spending in GOP. They matched up the

growth of GOP with the change in g/y because they were thinking of a

framework where, with diminishing returns, a different level of g/y would

have only a transitory effect on economic growth. However, in my model, it

would be more appropriate to examine the relation between the growth rate of

GDP and the level of g/y.

    Grier and Tullock (1987) extended the Kormendi-Meguire form of analysis

to 115 countries, using data on total government consumption and other

variables from Summers and Heston (1984). This extension was a pooled

cross-section, time-series analysis, using data averaged over 5-year

intervals. They found a significantly negative relation between the growth

of GOP and the growth of the government share of GDP, although most of the

relation derived from the 24 OECD countries (see Tables 1 and 2).

    Landau (1983) studied 104 countries on a cross-sectional basis, using an

earlier form of the Summers-Heston data. He found (Table 1) significantly

negative relations between the growth rate of real GOP per capita and the

level of government consumption expenditures as a ratio to GDP. This




The regressions held constant the average level of real per capita GDP for
each country. Therefore, the results should not be affected by "Wagner's
Law," which is the proposition that g/y rises with the level of per capita
income (presumably for reasons related to utility functions, rather than
production functions).
                                                               27




formulation is easier to interpret in the context of my model. However,

Landau's regressions held constant a measure of investment in education,

which would be one component of an economy's broadly defined saving. Since

the negative effect of more government on growth in my model works through a

reduced incentive to save, the interpretations are very different if saving

rates are held constant.

    Ram (1986) looked at 115 countries using the Summers-Heston data. He

reported (Table 1) positive effects of the growth of government consumption

spending on the growth of GDP. However, there are two problems with the

results. First, they hold constant the ratio of investment (private plus

public) to GDP, which eliminates the channel in my model for the negative

effect of government on growth. Second, the results amount to a positive

coefficient in a regression of the growth rate of GOP on the growth rate of

government consumption expenditures. This regression would pick up the

reverse effect of income on government consumption; that is, it probably

amounts to a demand function for public services.

    The literature contains a number of additional empirical studies, with

results similar to those reported above. In my empirical work, I plan to

consider these results in more detail, as well as carrying out new research

along the lines suggested by my theoretical analysis.
                                                                28




                                 References



    Aschauer, D.A., "Is Public Expenditure Productive?' unpublished, Federal

Reserve Bank of Chicago, March 1988.

    Becker, G.S. and R.J. Barro, 'A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of

Fertility," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, February 1988, 1-25.

    Cass, D., 'Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital

Accumulation," Review of Economic Studies, 32, July 1965, 233-240.

    Grier, K.B. and G. Tullock, "An Empirical Analysis of Cross-National

Economic Growth, 1950-1980," unpublished, California Institute of Technology,

December 1987.

    Jones, L.E. and R.E. Manuelli, "A Model of Optimal Equilibrium Growth,"

unpublished, Northwestern University, April 1988.

    Koopmans, T.C., "On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth," in The

Econometric Approach to Development Planning, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.

    Kormendi, R.C. and P.G. Meguire, "Macroeconomic Determinants of Growth,"

Journal of lonetary Economics, 16, September 1985, 141-163.

    Landau, D., "Government Expenditure and   Economic Growth: a Cross-Country

Study," Southern Economic Journal, 49, January 1983, 783-792.

    Lucas, R.E., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," forthcoming,

Journal of lonetary Economics, 1988.

    Rain, R., "Government Size and Economic Growth: a New Framework and Some

Evidence from Cross-Section and Time-Series Data," American Economic Review,

76, March 1986, 191-203.
                                                                    29




    Ramsey, F.P., "A Mathematical Theory of Saving," Economic Journal, 38,

December 1928, 543-559.

    Rebelo, S., "Long Run Policy Analysis and Long Run Growth," unpublished,

University of Rochester, November 1987.

    Romer, P.M., "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal of

Political Economy, 94, October 1986, 1002-1037.

                 ,   "Capital   Accumulation in the Theory of Long Run Growth,"

February 1988, forthcoming in R.J. Barro, ed., lodern Business Cycle Theory,

Harvard University Press.

    Samuelson, P.4., "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure," Review of

Economics & Statistics, 36, November 1954, 387-389.

    Summers, R. and A. Heston, "Improved International Comparisons of Real

Product and its Composition: 1950-80," Review of Income and Vealth, 30, June

1984, 207-262.
