                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     OPTIMAL INFLATION AND THE IDENTIFICATION OF THE PHILLIPS CURVE

                                       Michael McLeay
                                       Silvana Tenreyro

                                      Working Paper 25892
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25892


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2019




This paper was motivated by a conversation with Ben Broadbent and Jan Vlieghe. This working
paper is a slightly updated version of the paper prepared for the 34th NBER Annual Conference
on Macroeconomics. We would like to thank conference participants, as well as Francesco
Caselli, Martin Eichenbaum, Benjamin Friedman, Mark Gertler, Marc Giannoni, Andy Haldane,
Richard Harrison, Michael Klein, Per Krussell, Clare Macallan, Frederic Mishkin, Jonathan
Parker, Valerie Ramey, Chris Redl, Ricardo Reis, Matthew Rognlie, Martin Seneca, Jan Vlieghe,
Matt Waldron and Iván Werning for helpful discussions, comments and suggestions and Oliver
Ashtari Tafti for superb research assistance. Tenreyro acknowledges financial support from ERC
grant MACROTRADE 681664. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of England or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 Bank of England, circulated with permission. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips Curve
Michael McLeay and Silvana Tenreyro
NBER Working Paper No. 25892
May 2019
JEL No. E31,E52

                                            ABSTRACT

Several academics and practitioners have pointed out that inflation follows a seemingly
exogenous statistical process, unrelated to the output gap, leading some to argue that the Phillips
curve has weakened or disappeared. In this paper we explain why this seemingly exogenous
process arises, or, in other words, why it is difficult to empirically identify a Phillips curve, a key
building block of the policy framework used by central banks. We show why this result need not
imply that the Phillips curve does not hold – on the contrary, our conceptual framework is built
under the assumption that the Phillips curve always holds. The reason is simple: if monetary
policy is set with the goal of minimising welfare losses (measured as the sum of deviations of
inflation from its target and output from its potential), subject to a Phillips curve, a central bank
will seek to increase inflation when output is below potential. This targeting rule will impart a
negative correlation between inflation and the output gap, blurring the identification of the
(positively sloped) Phillips curve. We discuss different strategies to circumvent the identification
problem and present evidence of a robust Phillips curve in US data.


Michael McLeay
Bank of England
Threadneedle Street, London
EC2R 8AH
michael.mcleay@bankofengland.co.uk

Silvana Tenreyro
London School of Economics
Department of Economics
Houghton St, St. Clement's Building, S.600
London, WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and Bank of England
S.Tenreyro@lse.ac.uk
                                                 1.   Introduction

    A number of recent papers have pointed out that inflation can be approximated (and forecast) by

statistical processes unrelated to the amount of slack in the economy (Atkeson and Ohanian, 2001;

Stock and Watson, 2007, 2009; Dotsey, Fujita and Stark, 2018; Cecchetti et al., 2017; Forbes, Kirkham

and Theodoridis, 2017). The empirical disconnect between inflation and various measures of slack

has been interpreted by some commentators as evidence that the Phillips curve (a positive relation

between inflation and the output gap) has weakened or even disappeared (Ball and Mazumder,

2011; IMF, 2013; Hall, 2013; Blanchard, Cerutti and Summers, 2015; Coibion and Gorodnichenko,

2015).12 . On the face of it, a change in the Phillips Curve relationship could have major implications

for monetary policy, so the potential causes of any weakening have been an important topic of

discussion for policymakers (Draghi, 2017; Carney, 2017a; Powell, 2018).

    The Phillips curve is one of the building blocks of the standard macroeconomic models used for

forecasting and policy advice in central banks. Its empirical elusiveness could challenge the wisdom

of these models and the usefulness of their forecasts. Arguably, it even calls in to question part of

the rationale for independent, inflation-targeting central banks. Or does it?

    In this paper we use a standard conceptual framework to show why:

    • the empirical disconnect between inflation and slack is a result to be expected when monetary

       policy is set optimally; and

    • it is also perfectly consistent with an underlying stable and positively sloped Phillips curve.

More specifically, our framework is built under the assumption that the Phillips curve always holds

(an assumption we later corroborate in the data). In other words, in our model, inflation depends

positively on the degree of slack in the economy. We also allow for cost-push shocks that can lead to

deviations from the curve, but without altering its slope. Monetary policy is set with the goal of

minimising welfare losses (measured as the sum of the quadratic deviations of inflation from its

target and of output from its potential), subject to the Phillips curve or aggregate supply relationship.
   1 Fora selection of the vast media comment on the issue, see articles in the Financial Times, Wall Street Journal and The
Economist and opinion piecies by Alan Blinder, Paul Krugman and Lawrence Summers.
   2 The output gap is defined as the deviation of output from its potential; in the original paper of Phillips (1958), the

focus was the negative relationship between wage inflation and unemployment



                                                             1
In that setting a central bank will seek to increase inflation when output is below its potential. This

targeting rule imparts a negative correlation between inflation and the output gap, blurring the

identification of the (positively sloped) Phillips curve.34

    The paper is extended along five dimensions. First, we study differences in the solutions between

discretion – our baseline case in which the monetary authority cannot commit to a future path of

inflation and the output gap – and the case of commitment, in which the authority credibly commits

to a future plan. We show that the main intuition goes through in both cases. The difference lies in

the implied properties of the statistical process for inflation generated by the optimal policy in each

case. In the simple framework studied here, the greater degree of inertia under optimal commitment

also offers one potential solution to the identification problem.

    A second extension introduces shocks to the targeting rule. These shocks can be interpreted as

lags in monetary transmission; as shocks to the monetary policy instrument rule; or, in a multi-region

setting, as idiosyncratic demand shocks affecting different regions or countries within a monetary

union. We show that the relative variance of these shocks vis-a-vis the cost-push shocks is key for

the empirical identification of the Phillips curve using standard regression analysis. This result also

rationalises the findings of the vast empirical literature that uses identified monetary policy shocks

to estimate the transmission of monetary policy. Effectively, well-identified monetary policy shocks

should help in retrieving the Phillips curve.

    Third, we study a multi-region (multi-country or multi-sector) setting with a common central

bank and discuss conditions under which regional (or sectoral) data can help mitigate the bias

from the endogeneity of monetary policy. The discussion, however, also underscores some of the

limitations faced by regional analysis.

    A fourth extension discusses the estimation of a wage-Phillips curve and compares the identifi-

cation challenges with those faced in the price-Phillips curve.

    The final extension departs from the stylised New Keynesian model of Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler

(1999) and studies the aggregate supply constraint in a large-scale DSGE model of the type designed

for forecasting and policy analysis in central banks. In such larger models, the concept of a single,
   3 This result follows straightforwardly from the basic New Keynesian model as derived in Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler

(1999), while similar results would obtain in the classic setting of Barro and Gordon (1983).
   4 The original Phillips (1958) curve was estimated over 1861-1913 UK data, a period during which Britain was on the

gold standard (King, 2008). The bias we describe here would therefore not have been in effect.



                                                          2
structural relationship between inflation and the output gap is no longer well defined: their reduced-

form correlation varies according to which shock hits the economy. Nonetheless, we show that the

intuition from the structural Phillips curve in the basic model continues to apply to the reduced-form

Phillips curve in larger-scale DSGE models. In the model of Burgess et al. (2013), designed for policy

use at the Bank of England, a positively sloped reduced-form Phillips curve is present when policy

is set according to an estimated Taylor rule. But under optimal discretionary policy the slope of the

curve changes sign.

   We next turn to practical attempts to address the identification issue we raise, focusing on US data.

The simultaneity bias arises due to the behaviour of monetary policy in partially accommodating

cost-push shocks to the Phillips curve. It is magnified because monetary policy seeks to offset any

demand shocks that might otherwise help identify the curve. We discuss three practical solutions

that attempt to circumvent these issues by isolating the remaining demand-driven variation in

inflation.

   First, econometricians can attempt to control for cost-push and other trade-off inducing shocks

to aggregate supply, in line with the approach proposed by Gordon (1982). This helps to minimise

the remaining cost-push driven variance in the error term, leaving only demand shocks that can

correctly identify the Phillips curve. In practice, however, the success of this approach requires

successfully controlling for each and every trade-off inducing shock affecting the economy. The

ability to do this may be limited in the recent past, where energy price shocks are less dominant

than in the 1970s.

   Second, if econometricians can find suitable instrumental variables, they can purge their output

gap data of any cost-push shocks, leaving only the demand variation needed to consistently estimate

the Phillips curve. With highly autocorrelated cost-push shocks (precluding the use of lagged

variables as instruments), using measures of monetary policy or other demand shocks may be

one set of appropriate external instruments (Barnichon and Mesters, 2019). But if the variance of

monetary policy shocks has fallen since the early 1980s and/or the effect of a shock of a given size

has reduced, as suggested by Boivin and Giannoni (2006), then these instruments may be too weak

to provide a practical solution in the recent data.

   We next present evidence on our third solution, using cross-sectional regional variation in unem-



                                                  3
ployment to identify the Phillips curve. Following Fitzgerald and Nicolini (2014) and concurrently

with a recent paper by Hooper, Mishkin and Sufi (2019), we use US metropolitan area price and

unemployment data to estimate a Phillips curve including metropolitan area fixed effects, to control

for time-invariant regional heterogeneity in the natural rate of unemployment, as well as time fixed

effects to control for variation over time in monetary policy and the aggregate natural rate. Under

our preferred specification, a steeper Phillips curve re-emerges, with a short-run slope at least twice

as large as any of our estimates using aggregate data.

    The idea that endogenous stabilisation policy can hide structural relationships in the data

is an old one, going back at least to Kareken and Solow (1963)’s critique of Milton Friedman’s

evidence on the effect of money on income. They pointed out that a monetary policy that perfectly

stabilised nominal income would completely offset any underlying relationship between income

and measures of money. Similarly, Brainard and Tobin (1968) present a model in which the lead-lag

correlation between money and income following an exogenous change in fiscal policy depends

on the endogenous monetary policy response. Goldfeld and Blinder (1972) study the bias arising

from reduced-form OLS estimation of fiscal and monetary policy multipliers when both policies

are set endogenously. These identification issues are very well known in the context of monetary

policy effects: Cochrane (1994) sets out how they were the primary motivation for the literature on

identified monetary policy shocks.

    Several authors over the years have also highlighted the general result that under an optimal

control policy, the correlation between a policy target and policy instrument should be driven

towards zero: including Worswick (1969); Peston (1972); Goodhart (1989) and (in the context of the

Phillips curve) Mishkin (2007).5 This point is perhaps also a specific example of Goodhart’s law:

‘that any observed statistical relationship will tend to collapse once pressure is placed upon it for

control purposes’ (Goodhart, 1984).

    In a forecasting context, Woodford (1994) shows that if an indicator is a poor predictor of inflation

that may just be because monetary policy is already responding to it appropriately. Similarly, Edge

and Gürkaynak (2010) point out that unforecastable inflation is a prediction of DSGE models
    5 See also a series of blogposts by Nick Rowe (e.g. https://worthwhile.typepad.com/worthwhile canadian initi/2010/12/milton-

friedmans-thermostat.html), who uses the analogy (credited to Milton Friedman) of the relationship between a room’s
temperature and its thermostat.




                                                          4
in which policymakers respond aggressively to stabilise inflation. They suggest that forecasting

performance during the Great Moderation is therefore a poor metric of the models’ success, since

policymakers acted strongly to offset the forecastable component of inflation. Perhaps because

measures of slack are one step removed from monetary policy instruments, these issues seem to

have been often neglected in discussions of the Phillips curve.

    Of course, that the empirical Phillips curve may vary with monetary policy was one of the

examples given by Lucas (1976) in his critique. Given their original emphases, both the Lucas

critique and Goodhart’s law are more often applied to explain suboptimal stabilisation policies.

Indeed, several authors have explicitly modelled a situation where policymakers set monetary policy

based on a misspecified or unidentified Phillips curve (Haldane and Quah, 1999; Primiceri, 2006;

Sargent, Williams and Zha, 2006). In these papers, mistakes or imperfect information on the part

of policymakers can lead to changes in inflation expectations that cause the reduced-form Phillips

curve to disappear.6

    In contrast, we show how a disappearing reduced-form Phillips curve is also a natural conse-

quence of successful monetary policy. The idea that improvements in monetary policy have flattened

the slope of the reduced-form Phillips curve is often ascribed to researchers and policymakers at

the Federal Reserve.7 Most articulations of this view have tended to focus on the role of improved

monetary policy in anchoring inflation expectations (e.g. Williams, 2006; Bernanke, 2007; Mishkin,

2007; Bernanke, 2010).8

    Our point is closely related but distinct: even in a purely static setting in which expectations

play no role, the structural relationship between slack and inflation can be masked by the conduct

of monetary policy. This effect of monetary policy on the Phillips curve has also been highlighted at

various times over the years in the literature and by policymakers. Roberts (2006), Carlstrom, Fuerst

and Paustian (2009) and recently Bullard (2018) highlight the role of monetary policy on inflation

dynamics in simple New Keynesian models with Taylor rules, while Nason and Smith (2008),
   6 Relatedly,  others have examined mechanisms through which changes in monetary policy behaviour could change the
underlying structural Phillips curve. For example, Ball, Mankiw and Romer (1988) showed how increases in average
inflation rates, by changing the frequency with which firms reset prices, could change the deep parameters that determine
its slope.
    7 Gordon (2013) terms it the ‘Fed view’.
    8 The effect of endogenous monetary policy on inflation expectations also features in some leading explanations of the

‘missing disinflation’ following the financial crisis, such as Del Negro, Giannoni and Schorfheide (2015).




                                                            5
Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller and Stock (2014) and Krogh (2015) explore Phillips curve identification

in detail in similar setups. Haldane and Quah (1999), using a similar model to the one we adopt,

show that optimal discretionary policy can flatten or reverse the slope of the reduced-form Phillips

curve. Fitzgerald and Nicolini (2014) make the same point using an old Keynesian framework, and

like us, use regional data from US metropolitan areas to recover a steeper Phillips curve slope.

   Despite these papers, a surprisingly bulky literature has continued searching for a Phillips curve

in the data without addressing the key identification challenge. Our first contribution is to frame

the issue as simply as possible: as a classical identification problem; and as one that is present in the

same standard New Keynesian equations that are taught in graduate economics textbooks. Given

that the New Keynesian framework forms the basis for the models used in central banks, it is also a

natural platform to respond to criticisms of that framework, and of policymakers for their continued

reliance on Phillips curve relationships. A second contribution is to show the extent to which

these conclusions generalise to a more complex dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium (DSGE)

quantitative framework and to different measures of inflation and slack, including articulating

why one should expect to see stronger wage Phillips curve relationships in the data. Our simple

analytical framework also enables us to rationalise findings in various strands of the empirical

literature and to critically evaluate some of the practical solutions to the identification problem. This

discussion motivates our empirical focus on using regional variation to recover a steeper Phillips

curve slope for the United States.

   The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 introduces a simple model of optimal policy em-

bedding the Phillips curve and illustrates the ‘exogeneity result’ or disconnect between equilibrium

inflation and output gap under the assumption that the monetary authority cannot commit to a

future path of inflation (discretion). Section 3 illustrates the empirical identification problem. Section

4 presents and discusses extensions of the model and notes some conceptual solutions to achieve

identification. Section 5 examines the solutions in practice using national and metropolitan area

data for the US. Section 6 contains concluding remarks.




                                                    6
                     2.   Optimal inflation in the basic New Keynesian model

This section uses an optimal monetary policy framework to illustrate why, in equilibrium, one

should expect inflation to follow a seemingly exogenous process, unrelated (or even negatively

related) to measures of slack.

   To explain the intuition as starkly as possible, we use the canonical New Keynesian model,

as derived in Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1999), Woodford (2003) and elsewhere. Here we closely

follow the textbook exposition from Galı́ (2008). For now, we dispense with the usual IS equation

determining aggregate demand. This equation is necessary only to determine how policy is

implemented. In the basic model it does not constrain equilibrium outcomes, so we can equivalently

consider the policymaker as directly choosing the output gap as their policy instrument. Our model

therefore consists of just two equations: a Phillips curve and a description of optimal monetary

policy.

   The (log-linearised) New Keynesian Phillips curve is given by


                                                 πt = βEt πt+1 + κxt + ut                                                   (1)


where πt is the deviation of inflation from its target; xt is the output gap, measured as the difference

between output and its potential level9 and ut is a cost-push shock that follows an exogenous AR(1)

process with persistence ρ (ut = ρut−1 + et , where et are i.i.d. and mean zero). We assume that the

Phillips curve has a strictly positive slope, denoted by κ > 0.

   The Phillips curve is evidently alive and well in the model: it is the only equation making up

its non-policy block. By construction, we have a positively sloped Phillips curve. Increases in the

output gap clearly increase inflation and falls in the output gap reduce it. Nonetheless, once we

augment the model with a description of optimal monetary policy, this relationship will not be

apparent in the data. Inflation will instead inherit the properties of the exogenous shock process ut .

   To show this, we assume that the policymaker sets monetary policy optimally under discretion.
  9 In   the full model derived in Galı́ (2008), this is the welfare-relevant gap between output and its efficient level.




                                                                7
Period by period, she minimises the following quadratic loss function


                                                    Lt = πt2 + λxt2


subject to the constraint (1) and taking expectations of future inflation as given.10 The solution to

the minimisation problem is the policymaker’s optimal targeting rule


                                                            λ
                                                      πt = − xt                                                       (2)
                                                            κ


    When faced with a positive cost-push shock that creates a trade-off between the inflation and

output stabilisation objectives, the policymaker balances them, creating a negative output gap to

reduce the degree of above-target inflation. The relative weight placed on each objective depends on

the policymaker’s preference parameter λ.

    The Phillips curve (1) and optimal targeting rule (2) together completely determine the path of

inflation in the model. We can solve for equilibrium inflation by using (2) to substitute out for xt in

(1), and by iterating forward to obtain


                                                              λ
                                               πt =                    ut                                             (3)
                                                      κ2   + λ(1 − βρ)

In equilibrium, inflation deviations are at all times perfectly proportional to the exogenous cost-push

shock. In other words, with a constant target, equilibrium inflation itself behaves as an exogenous

process. In the limit, when the monetary authority does not put any weight on the output gap

(λ = 0), inflation equals the target rate, a point previously made by Haldane and Quah (1999).

    This behaviour is entirely consistent with recent empirical work by Cecchetti et al. (2017) and

Forbes, Kirkham and Theodoridis (2017) suggesting that inflation data in the US and the UK can be

modelled as an exogenous statistical process, unrelated to measures of slack.11 But crucially, the

basic theory is also built under the assumption that monetary policy is at all times constrained by a

working Phillips curve. There is no discrepancy between the two results. The Phillips curve may be
  10 Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1999) show how minimising such a loss function is equivalent to maximising the welfare of

the representative agent in the model. But it can alternatively be motivated as a simple way to capture the preferences
enshrined in the mandates of modern (flexible) inflation targeting central banks: see Carney (2017b), for example.
  11 It is also consistent with the observation that in larger DSGE models such as Smets and Wouters (2007), inflation is

largely explained by exogenous markup shocks (King and Watson, 2012).


                                                             8
the correct structural model of the inflation process, but that does not mean that one should observe

it in the empirical relationship between (equilibrium levels of) inflation and the output gap.

    The reason is simple. The policymaker in the model is able to set policy to achieve any desired

level of the output gap. Successful monetary policy should lean against any undesirable deviations

in output from potential, which would otherwise cause inflationary or deflationary pressures.

Precisely because monetary policy can be used to offset the effect of such output gaps on inflation,

their effect should not be visible in the data.

    Optimal monetary policy does not seek to eliminate all output volatility: from (2) we can see

that in response to cost-push shocks, the policymaker will prefer to tolerate output deviations from

potential. But such shocks impart a negative correlation between inflation and output, rather than a

positive one. Again, the more successful monetary policy is in managing any trade-offs between

inflation and output, the more it will blur the underlying positive Phillips curve correlation.

    To summarise, we have shown that with an optimizing monetary policy, equilibrium levels of

inflation are unrelated to measures of slack. Instead, inflation inherits the statistical properties of

exogenous cost-push shocks. This does not necessarily tell us that the Phillips curve is not present.

In the model, the Phillips curve exists and policymakers are completely aware of its existence. But

because they know exactly how the curve operates, they are able to perfectly offset its effects on

equilibrium inflation.12


                                      3.    Phillips curve identification

    As may already be apparent from the discussion in Section 2, regression analysis will have

difficulty in recovering the Phillips curve. Figure 1 shows data simulated from the model described

by (1) and (2), with parameters calibrated as in Galı́ (2008). Specifically, the slope of the Phillips

curve is set at κ = 0.1275, the policymaker’s weight on output deviations relative to quarterly

inflation is set as λ = 0.0213, or around one-third relative to annualised inflation. The discount

factor is set to β = 0.99 and the persistence of the cost-push shock to ρ = 0.5.

    Of course, there is no Phillips curve visible in the simulated data. As can be seen from the line
   12 Stock and Watson (2009) raise the possibility that, despite its failure to forecast or explain the data, the Phillips curve

is still useful for conditional forecasting. They pose the question ‘...suppose you are told that next quarter the economy
would plunge into recession, with the unemployment rate jumping by 2 percentage points. Would you change your
inflation forecast?’


                                                               9
                                                                              Figure 1: Inflation/output gap correlation in model-simulated data



                                                                             2.5




                        Inflation (percentage point deviation from target)
                                                                               2

                                                                             1.5

                                                                               1

                                                                             0.5

                                                                               0

                                                                             -0.5

                                                                              -1

                                                                             -1.5

                                                                              -2

                                                                             -2.5
                                                                                -10   -8    -6    -4     -2    0     2     4     6      8    10
                                                                                                        Output gap (%)


Notes: 1000 periods of data are simulated from the model described by (1) and (2). We draw each et from a standard
normal distribution.


of best fit, a naive OLS regression of inflation on the output gap,


                                                                                                       πt = γ1 xt + ε t                            (4)


will produce a negative parameter estimate, γ̂1 = − 16 , reflecting the targeting rule (2), rather than a

consistent estimate of the positive slope of the Phillips curve. Many papers have focused on the

difficulty of controlling for inflation expectations in Phillips curve estimation, but the problem here

is a more straightfoward one.13

    The identification problem is a simple case of simultaneity bias. The regressor xt is correlated

with the error term ε t . The naive econometrician does not observe the Phillips curve in the data.

Rather, he or she observes equilibrium inflation and output gap outturns: which are the intersection

of the Phillips curve (1) and the targeting rule (2). In fact, the case here is an extreme one: the
  13 See   Nason and Smith (2008), Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller and Stock (2014) and Krogh (2015) for discussions.




                                                                                                              10
                      Figure 2: Graphical illustration of optimal monetary policy under discretion


                                                               π


                                                                                         Phillips curve
                                                                                         π = κx




                                                                                                           x
                                                                                    Loss
                                                                                    π2 + λx2




                                                                                      Targeting rule
                                                                                               λ
                                                                                        π=− x
                                                                                               κ
regressor and the error are perfectly negatively correlated.14 . The issue is completely analagous to

the classic case of simultaneity bias: jointly determined supply and demand equations.

    To show the identification challenge, we first plot the two model equations in Figure 2.15 The

Phillips curve (1) is in blue, the optimal targeting rule (2) in red, while the black circles index the

policymaker’s loss function at different levels of loss. The observed inflation-output gap pairs are

the equilbrium where the two lines intersect. With no cost-push shocks to the Philips curve, the

first-best outcome of at target inflation and no output gap is feasible, so the lines intersect at the

origin.

    When the upward sloping Phillips curve is subject to cost-push shocks, the equilibrium shifts to

different points along the optimal targeting path, shown in Figure 3. But with monetary policy set

optimally, there are no shifts along the Phillips curve: at all times the equilibrium remains on the
  14 Using (3) to substitute out for πt in (2) gives the equilibirum evolution of the output gap xt = − κ2 +λ(κ1− βρ) ut . While
                                                                       ρλ
the regression error term is equal to ε t = ut + βEt πt+1 = (1 + κ2 +λ(1− βρ) )ut
  15 This graphical illustration of optimal discretionary policy is from Seneca (2018): we are grateful to him for making it

available to us. A similar graphical exposition appears in Carlin and Soskice (2005), as well as in papers at least as far
back as Kareken and Miller (1976) (with thanks to Marc Giannoni for alerting us to the latter reference).


                                                              11
             Figure 3: Graphical illustration of optimal discretionary policy in response to cost-push shocks



                                                              π
                                                                                π = κx + u1

                                                                                    π = κx + u2
                                                                                         Phillips curve
                                                                                         π = κx
                                                                                                  π = κx + u3
                                                                                                      π = κx + u4




                                                                                                                    x




                                                                                     Targeting rule
                                                                                              λ
                                                                                       π=− x
                                                                                              κ
negatively sloped optimal targeting rule line. As a result, the simulated data trace out the optimal

targeting rule, not the Phillips curve. The estimated coefficient is γ̂1 = − λκ = − 16 .

   The issue is that the Phillips curve is not identified. Our simple set-up has no exogenous

variables shifting monetary policy. Worse, the only shocks are to the equation of interest, so the

estimated parameter is almost entirely unrelated to the slope of the Phillips curve.16 The problem is

the same one that arises when trying to identify a supply curve while only observing equilibrium

quantities and prices. Without any exogenous demand shifter, there is no way of doing so.


  4.   Extensions to the basic model and solutions to the estimation challenge

   In this section we study a number of extensions to the basic model. For each extension, we

discuss whether and how it can help solving the Phillips curve’s empirical identification problem. In

Subsection 4.1, we discuss the case in which the monetary authority can commit to a path of inflation

and output gap. In Subsection 4.2, we allow for shocks to the targeting rule and we discuss how
 16 Other   than the fact that the slope of the Phillips curve happens to appear in the optimal targeting rule.


                                                             12
they link to the identified monetary policy shocks in the monetary policy transmission literature.

In Subsection 4.3, we study a multi-region setting. In Subsection 4.4 we discuss the mapping into

a wage Phillips curve. In Subsection 4.5 we extend our analysis to explore the effect of monetary

policy on the Phillips curve in larger DSGE models.


4.1.   Commitment

First, we show that our main results are unchanged when the monetary policymaker is able

to commit to a future plan for inflation and the output gap. In Sections 2 and 3 we assumed

that the policymaker was unable to commit. There are a range of practical issues that may

make commitment difficult: monetary policy committees often have changes in membership and

future policymakers may not feel bound by prior commitments and perhaps relatedly, successful

commitment requires that promises are credible, even when they are time inconsistent. Nonetheless,

the optimal commitment policy is able to achieve better outcomes in the face of cost-push shocks

than optimal policy under discretion, so it is important to know how this affects our results.

   It turns out that the same intuition holds, although the precise details slightly differ. Again

following Galı́ (2008), when the policymaker instead minimises the loss function

                                                ∞
                                       L = E0 ∑ βt (πt2 + λxt2 )                                     (5)
                                               t =0


subject to the sequence of Phillips curves given by (1) for each period. This gives a pair of optimality

conditions
                                                    λ
                                              π0 = − x0                                              (6)
                                                    κ


                                                λ
                                         π t = − ( x t − x t −1 )                                    (7)
                                                κ

These can be combined to give the targeting rule under commitment


                                                    λ
                                              pt = − xt                                              (8)
                                                    κ


where pt is the log deviation of the price level from its level in period −1. Substituting pt − pt−1 for


                                                      13
πt in (1) and substituting out xt using (8) gives a difference equation in pt . Galı́ (2008) shows the

solution for this in terms of the previous period’s price level and the current period cost-push shock.

Iterating backwards and then taking the first difference gives equilibrium inflation

                                                                                                                                 t −1
                                                                                                           δ
                                                                                                πt =            ( u t − (1 − δ ) ∑ δ t −1− i u i )                     (9)
                                                                                                        1 − δβρ                  i =0


             ((λ(1+ β)+κ 2 )−((λ(1+ β)+κ 2 )2 −4βλ2 )0.5 )
where δ ≡                       2λβ                        .                                                       Substituting into (7) and iterating backwards gives the

equilibrium output gap
                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                                    −δκ
                                                                                                         xt =               ∑
                                                                                                                 λ(1 − δβρ) i=0
                                                                                                                                δ t −i ui                             (10)


Equilibrium inflation under optimal commitment policy depends solely on the cost-push shock

              Figure 4: Inflation/output gap correlation in model-simulated data: optimal commitment


                                                                                  2.5
                       Inflation rate (percentage point deviations from target)




                                                                                    2

                                                                                  1.5

                                                                                    1

                                                                                  0.5

                                                                                    0

                                                                                  -0.5

                                                                                   -1

                                                                                  -1.5

                                                                                   -2

                                                                                  -2.5
                                                                                     -10   -8      -6       -4     -2     0     2      4      6      8   10
                                                                                                                   Output gap (%)


Notes: 1000 periods of data are simulated from the model described by (1) and (7). We draw each et from a standard
normal distribution.


process. The equilibrium path is quite different to that under discretion, however. At any point in

time inflation displays history dependence, depending on the entire history of cost-push shocks

rather than just the one in the current period.

    Simple regressions will again fail to uncover the Phillips curve. The only difference is that under



                                                                                                                        14
commitment, the optimal targeting rule imposes a negative correlation between the output gap and

the price level. The relationship between inflation and the output gap in the simulated data shown

in Figure 4 is noisier, but shows no sign of the Phillips curve embedded in the model. The OLS

estimate of γ in (4) gives the coefficient γ̂1 = −0.085.

   At least in the simple framework here, the history-dependence of optimal commitment policy

also suggests a straightforward solution to the identification problem. From (10), the equilibrium

output gap will be correlated with its own lagged values, which can therefore be used as an

instrument. Intuitively, the policymaker chooses to create an output gap even after the cost-push

shock has disappeared. They commit to do so in order to achieve better inflation outcomes when

the shock originally occurs. The policymaker therefore optimally reintroduces the positive Phillips

curve relation that is absent under optimal discretion. As a result, in the simple case here, a suitable

choice of instrument will be able to recover the true Phillips curve slope.


4.2.   Shocks to the targeting rule

The previous sections have illustrated how successful monetary policy might mask the underlying

structural Phillips curve in the data. We now show that the opposite is also true in our model: if

monetary policy is set far from optimally, the Phillips curve is likely to reappear.

   So far we have assumed policymakers can implement monetary policy by directly choosing

their desired observable output gap each period. But alas in practice, policymaking is not quite

so simple. In empirical studies we observe lags between changing policy and its impact on the

output gap and inflation, which means that in practice central banks are inflation forecast targeters

(Svensson, 1997; Haldane, 1998). Forecast errors will therefore inject noise into the targeting

rule. Potential output is unobservable, so the output gap must be estimated (with error). And

the effect of the policy instruments actually available (typically the central bank policy rate and

forward guidance on its future path; as well as quantitative easing) on the target variables is also

unknown. Errors from any of these sources will insert noise into the desired balance between

inflation and output gap deviations. These various shocks to the targeting rule correspond closely

to the typical interpretations of identified monetary policy shocks in the empirical literature on this

topic (Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 1996, 1999; Romer and Romer, 2004b; Faust, Swanson and



                                                  15
Wright, 2004; Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz, 2005; Olivei and Tenreyro, 2007; Gertler and Karadi, 2015;

Cloyne and Hürtgen, 2016). That literature is able to identify a positively correlated response of

inflation and the output gap to monetary policy shocks, in line with the results below.

    Returning to optimal policy under discretion, we model implementation errors by including an

AR(1) shock process et in the targeting rule (2) to give


                                                          λ
                                                    πt = − xt − et                                                                         (11)
                                                          κ


where et = ρe et−1 + ζ t and ζ t is zero-mean and i.i.d. with variance σe2 .17 We can show that equilibrium

inflation and the output gap now both have an additional term proportional to et . Respectively,
                                                                                                                                 1
they are given by πt = s1 λut − s2 κet and xt = −s1 κut − s2 (1 − βρe )et , where s1 ≡                                      λ(1− βρ)+κ 2
                                                                                                                                           and

s2 ≡         κ
       λ(1− βρe )+κ 2
                      .

    With shocks to the targeting rule, neither equation is identified. The equilibrium values of

inflation and the output gap both depend on a combination of both shocks. Consequently, if either

equation is estimated by OLS, its regressor will be correlated with the regression error term and the

resulting parameter estimate inconsistent. In particular, it follows from substituting the equilibrium

values of πt and xt into the definition of the OLS estimator in the regression (4) that

                                                                    2     2
                                                                −λ s1 (1−ρe ) σu2                                   2
                                   plim( T1 ∑tT=1 xt πt )        κ s2 (1−ρ ) σu2 +σe2
                                                                    2     2                  + (1 − βρe )κ σ2σ+e σ2
                                                                                                                u       e
                      plim(γ̂) =                            =                                                                              (12)
                                    plim( T1 ∑tT=1 xt2 )             s21 (1−ρ2e ) σu2
                                                                                            + (1 −
                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                     βρe )2 σ2σ+e σ2
                                                                     s22 (1−ρ2 ) σu2 +σe2                    u     e



The size of the simultaneity bias to each equation depends on the relative variances of the shocks.18

Figure 5 plots simulated data for three cases. We set ρe = 0.5 and set the other parameters as before.

First, the red circles show the case where the cost-push shock has a variance 100 times larger than

the targeting rule shock. These look almost identical to the case with only a cost-push shock: the

circles trace out the targeting rule. Second, the green circles show the case when the shocks have

equal variance. The slope is still negative, but flatter. The final case gives the cost-push shock a

variance 100 times smaller than the targeting rule shock, and the data trace out a positively sloped
  17 Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (1999) and Svensson and Woodford (2004) show in the basic New Keynesian model that

when there are policy control lags that mean all variables are predetermined in advance, up to an unforecastable shock,
the optimal targeting rule will take exactly this form, where et is the forecast error. We subtract it from the right hand
side of (11) to match the usual convention that a positive monetary policy shock involves a policy tightening.
  18 Carlstrom, Fuerst and Paustian (2009) show a similar equation to illustrate the OLS estimate bias in their framework.



                                                                16
Figure 5: Inflation/output gap correlation in model-simulated data: optimal discretion with shocks to the targeting rule

                                                                               2.5




                          Inflation (percentage point deviation from target)
                                                                                 2

                                                                               1.5

                                                                                 1

                                                                               0.5

                                                                                 0

                                                                               -0.5

                                                                                -1

                                                                               -1.5

                                                                                -2

                                                                               -2.5
                                                                                  -10        -8     -6          -4   -2          0    2          4    6          8       10
                                                                                                                     Output gap (%)


Notes: 1000 periods of data are simulated from the model described by (1) and (11). The green circles show the case when
each et and ζ t is drawn from a standard normal distribution. The blue circles show the case when each et is drawn from
an N(0,10) distribution and the red circles each ζ t is instead drawn from an N(0,10) distribution.


line.
                     Table 1: OLS regressions of inflation on the output gap in the simulated data

                                                                                            (1)                (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)                  (6)
                                                                                      σu2                σu2              σu2             σu2             σu2                  σu2
                                                                                      σe2
                                                                                            = 100       = 100
                                                                                                         σe2              σe2
                                                                                                                                =1         =1
                                                                                                                                          σe2             σe2
                                                                                                                                                                = 0.01         σe2
                                                                                                                                                                                  = 0.01
              LHS variable                                                                  πt      πt − Et πt+1                πt    πt − Et πt+1              πt            πt − Et πt+1

                     xt                                                               −0.1667            −0.1805          −0.0873         −0.0792           0.2523               0.1275

Notes: Table shows the OLS regression coefficients of OLS for the shock distributions described in the notes to Figure 5.
Specifications (2), (4) and (6) (perfectly) control for inflation expectations by subtracting from the dependent variable the
true value of βEt πt1 . The true slope of the Phillips curve is κ = 0.1275, while the true slope of the optimal targeting rule
is − λκ = −0.1667.



    Looking at the regression coefficients in Table 1, in the first two cases these are both strongly

influenced by the endogenous policy response embodied in the optimal targeting rule. It also makes

little difference whether or not the econometrician correctly controls for inflation expectations, which

also enter the Phillips curve. In the third case however, the regression coefficient turns positive. The

estimate is actually upward biased in specification 5, which omits inflation expectations. Once these

are controlled for, the bias becomes very small. The regression correctly identifies the slope of the


                                                                                                                            17
Phillips curve to four decimal places.

   The reason the bias disappears is straightforward. When cost-push shocks have a relatively low

variance, most of the variation in the simulated data arises from the shocks to the targeting rule.

With the Phillips curve stable, these movements in the targeting rule now trace out the Phillips

curve, as shown graphically in Figure 6. This suggests that if we can successfully control for the

cost-push shocks ut in (1), then we may be able to limit the bias in estimates of the Phillips curve.


4.3.   Regional Phillips curves

Partly to avoid the difficulties associated with identifying the Phillips curve at the national level,

a number of authors have estimated Phillips curves at a more disaggregated, regional or sectoral

level (Fitzgerald and Nicolini, 2014; Kiley, 2015; Babb and Detmeister, 2017; Leduc and Wilson, 2017;

Tuckett, 2018; Vlieghe, 2018; Hooper, Mishkin and Sufi, 2019). In this subsection we show that in an

extended version of the basic model, this may also help the econometrician to identify the aggregate

Phillips curve.

        Figure 6: Graphical illustration of optimal discretionary policy in response to targeting-rule shocks


                                                          π


                                                                                    Phillips curve
                                                                                    π = κx




                                                                                                            x




                                                                                                 λ
                                                                                           π = − κ x + 𝜖4
                                                                                          λ
                                                                                    π = − κ x + 𝜖3

                                                                                 Targeting rule
                                                                             λ
                                                                       π = − κ x + 𝜖2     λ
                                                                   λ
                                                              π = − x + 𝜖1         π=− x
                                                                   κ                      κ

                                                         18
    The key to identification is that at the regional level, the endogenous response of monetary policy

to demand shocks is switched off, ameliorating the simultaneity bias in estimating aggregate Phillips

curves. This point was made by Fitzgerald and Nicolini (2014) as motivation for their estimation of

Phillips curves at a regional level. The same logic can explain why the Phillips curve may be more

evident in countries within a monetary union such as the euro area.19

    We assume that the aggregate Phillips curve (1) continues to hold, but that aggregate inflation

and the aggregate output gap also depend on the weighted average of inflation and the output gap

in each of n regions
                                                            n
                                                    πt =   ∑ αi πti                                              (13)
                                                           i =1



                                                            n
                                                    xt =   ∑ αi xti                                              (14)
                                                           i =1

where ∑in=1 αi = 1 and regional inflation is determined by a regional Phillips curve analogous to (1)


                                            πti = βEt πti +1 + κxti + uit                                        (15)


with idiosyncratic cost-push shocks uit = ρuit−1 + eti and eti zero-mean and i.i.d over time, but

potentially correlated across regions. We must also specify how idiosyncratic demand shocks and

aggregate monetary policy affect the regional output gap with an equation analogous to the IS curve

in the basic New Keynesian model, given by


                                      xti = Et xti +1 − σ−1 (it − Et πti +1 − rti )                              (16)


where the idiosyncratic demand shocks are given by rti = ρr rti −1 + eri and eri are zero-mean and i.i.d

over time, but potentially correlated across regions. The equations can be aggregated together to

give the usual aggregate IS relation


                                      xt = Et xt+1 − σ−1 (it − Et πt+1 − rt )                                    (17)
  19 Nakamura   and Steinsson (2014) present evidence that endogenous monetary and tax policies reduce national fiscal
multipliers relative to local ones.




                                                           19
We therefore allow inflation and the output gap are determined partly by idiosyncratic shocks to

each region, but restrict the monetary policy rate it to be the same across all n regions.

    We next denote for any regional variable its (log) deviation from the aggregate as ẑit = zit −

∑in=1 αi zit . We can then subtract (1) from (15) to give a Phillips curve in terms of log deviations from
aggregate inflation.

                                              π̂ti = βEt π̂ti +1 + κ x̂ti + ûit                                      (18)


Subtracting (17) from (16) gives an equivalent IS curve


                                          x̂ti = Et x̂ti +1 + σ−1 ( Et π̂ti +1 + r̂ti )                               (19)


Monetary policy is set (under discretion) by minimising the same aggregate period loss function as

in Section 2, subject to the aggregate Phillips curve (1).20 Policy therefore follows the same targeting

rule (2) depending solely on aggregate variables.21

    The crucial difference to the identification problem at the regional level is that while monetary

policy perfectly offsets the aggregate demand shocks, rt = ∑in=1 αi rti , it does not respond at all to the

idiosyncratic regional deviations from that average, r̂ti . The regressor in the Phillips curve equation

x̂ti is now affected by exogenous demand shocks that do not influence the aggregate Phillips curve.

As a result, the endogeneity problem is mitigated.

    For each region, we can verify that one solution to the model described by (18) and (19) is


                                              π̂ti = c1 (1 − ρ)ûit + c2 κi r̂ti                                      (20)


and

                                           x̂ti = c1 ρσ−1 ûit + c2 (1 − ρr β)r̂ti                                    (21)
  20 This differs from the monetary policy that would be welfare-optimal in the model, since welfare would also be
lowered by dispersion in prices within a region, even if average inflation was zero. Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2001) show
in the context of an open economy model that the welfare-optimal policy would minimise a loss function that included
the sum across countries of the squared deviations of inflation, rather than the square of the sum of deviations.
  21 Although to ensure determinacy, the policymaker’s instrument rule will need to respond to idiosyncratic variables.




                                                              20
                        1                                    σ −1
where c1 ≡      (1−ρ)(1−ρβ)−ρκσ−1
                                     and c2 ≡      (1−ρr )(1−ρr β)−ρr κσ−1
                                                                           .22   Unlike aggregate inflation, which

evolves in line with the exogenous shocks to the Phillips curve, regional inflation also depends

on idiosyncratic demand shocks. In the simplest case when the shocks are entirely transitory

(ρ = ρr = 0), the equilibrium output gap deviation will be independent of the idiosyncratic

cost-push shocks ûit and a simple regression of π̂ti on x̂ti will give a consistent estimate of κ.

    Away from that special case, inflation expectations present a separate challenge to identifying

regional Phillips curves. With ρ > 0 or ρr > 0, there will be omitted variable bias unless the

econometrician can control for the effect of regional inflation expectations. While possible in

principle, reliable data are likely to be less readily available than at the national level. If cross-

sectional variation in inflation expectations is important, there is perhaps likely to be more chance

of success when estimating at the country level within a single multi-country monetary authority.

Alternatively, if that variation is constant over time, it can be controlled for using region fixed effects.

A second difficulty at the regional level is that while the specification will help mitigate the bias from

the endogeneity of national monetary policy, insufficient cross-sectional variation in the regional

data will lead to imprecise estimates of κ.


4.4.   The wage Phillips curve

While identification of the price Phillips curve is complicated by the endogenous response of optimal

monetary policy, the focus of the original Phillips study was the correlation between wage inflation

and unemployment in the UK. In this subsection we comment on how optimal monetary policy

maps into the original wage Phillips curve relationship between wage inflation and unemployment.

Intuitively, one might expect the wage Phillips curve to be less vulnerable to identification issues

related to the endogeneity of monetary policy, since wage inflation is one step removed from the

price-inflation targeting remit of most central banks.

    As well as a different dependent variable (wage inflation rather than price inflation), the

typical wage Phillips curve attempts to explain inflation using variation in unemployment or the

unemployment gap, rather than the output gap. Using unemployment in the equation is unlikely to
   22 While this is one solution, depending on how policy is implemented, there may be a multiplicity of equilbria. It

is beyond the scope of this paper to study those, so we assume that the policymaker’s instrument rule is able to rule
them out. In practice, this will involve responding to deviations of regional inflation or regional output gaps from their
equilibrium values, even when those deviations have no impact on aggregate inflation or the aggregate output gap.



                                                           21
solve the identification issues arising from the behaviour of monetary policy for at least two reasons.

    First, many central banks’ remits explicitly specify unemployment or employment as one of

their (secondary or dual) target variables. As such, they will optimally set policy to close any gap

between unemployment and its natural rate, unless there is a trade-off between that goal and their

inflation targets, in which case they will seek to balance the two goals, as was the case with the

output gap in Section 2. Monetary policy will therefore blur the structural relationship between

inflation and the unemployment gap in a similar way. Second, even for central banks without an

explicit mandate to minimise fluctuations in employment, when there is co-movement between the

output gap and the unemployment gap, policy will often implicitly seek to stabilise employment.23

    There are, however, reasons to think that using wage inflation as the dependent variable might

lessen some of the identification problems. Nominal wage rigidities can be incorporated into the

basic model in an analogous way to price rigidities, as introduced by Erceg, Henderson and Levin

(2000). With both wage and price stickiness, some shocks, such as innovations to firms’ desired

price-markups, will lead to a wedge between the rate of price inflation and the output gap, but

not between the rate of wage inflation and the output gap. Since inflation targeting central banks

typically target price inflation, policymakers may respond by adjusting the output gap to achieve

their desired trade-off with price inflation. But doing so would lead to variation in wage inflation

operating via the wage Phillips curve. Put differently, the equilibrium output gap will be a function

of the exogenous shocks hitting the economy. But if those shocks only directly affect the price

Phillips curve and not the wage Phillips curve, then the output gap will be correlated with the error

term in the former but not the latter, which will be consistently estimated.

    The wage Phillips curve may not face quite as severe problems, but there remain limits to how

easily it can be identified under optimal monetary policy. First, while there may be some shocks

that only affect the price Phillips curve, there are likely to be several more that affect both curves

(for a given output gap). Wage mark-up shocks will increase both price and wage inflation relative

to the prevailing output gap. Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) show that shocks to household

consumption or leisure preferences, or to total factor productivity, will conversely move price and

wage inflation in opposite directions for a given output gap. Since the inflationary impact of these
  23 Galı́
        (2011) shows how the basic framework can be easily extended to include unemployment in a way that closely
resembles the output gap in the basic model.



                                                       22
shocks will lead policymakers to attempt to lean against them via the output gap, this will induce a

correlation between the output gap and the shocks affecting the wage Phillips curve (for a given

output gap). The direction of the bias will differ according to the shock, but the equation will in

general not be identified.

    Second, even if price inflation shocks are particularly prevalent, many typical examples of such

shocks, such as changes in oil prices, have relatively transitory effects on price inflation. Since

monetary policy is typically thought to have its peak effect on inflation with some lag, attempting

to offset very transitory shocks may not be possible. As a result, policymakers are perhaps less

likely to respond to the very shocks that would otherwise have helped econometricians identify the

wage Phillips curve. Conversely, when transitory shocks are affecting price inflation, wage inflation

can sometimes give a better signal of underlying price pressures, which may lead policymakers to

behave at times as if they were targeting wage inflation.24


4.5.      Larger DSGE models

In addition to nominal wage rigidities, larger macroeconomic models of the type used for policy

analysis in central banks usually have a range of other frictions, additional factors of production and

a richer dynamic structure.25 In this subsection we study how the intuition underlying Phillips curve

identification in the basic New Keynesian model translates to the aggregate supply relationship in

larger models.

    An overriding conceptual issue in larger DSGE models is that there typically is no single, stable

Phillips curve relationship between inflation and the output gap. In the basic model the output gap

is proportional to firms’ real marginal costs, but this is a special case that does not generalise to

larger models. The reduced-form Phillips curve correlation therefore varies for different shocks.

    We illustrate this point in Figure A1 in the Appendix, which shows the inflation-output gap

relationship in a large-scale DSGE model conditional on each type of shock in the model. We use the

COMPASS model, described in Burgess et al. (2013), which was designed for forecasting and policy
  24 Inaddition, the welfare optimal policy in models with sticky wages typically involves placing a positive weight on
avoiding wage inflation (Erceg, Henderson and Levin, 2000). But we are not aware of any central banks who officially
target wage inflation in practice.
  25 See for example Edge, Kiley and Laforte (2010); Burgess et al. (2013); Brubakk and Sveen (2009); Adolfson et al. (2013)

for descriptions of models used respectively at the Federal Reserve Board, the Bank of England, Norges Bank and the
Riksbank.



                                                            23
analysis at the Bank of England. The model is in the tradition of well-known medium-scale DSGE

models such as Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007), in which

similar findings would emerge, as well as DSGE models used in other central banks. The simulated

Phillips curve varies markedly depending on the shock. Conditional on demand-type shocks, such

as to government spending or world demand, there is a positive relationship between inflation and

the output gap. Conditional on cost-push type shocks to wage or price markups, the correlation

turns negative.

   Even when we restrict our attention to those shocks we typically think of as demand, there are

different reduced-form Phillips curves for different shocks: the investment adjustment cost shock

has a slope over twice as steep as a government spending shock, for example. These different

reduced-form slopes arise for several reasons. First, the shocks do not all have the same impact

on the output gap relative to real marginal costs and inflation. Second, they each have different

dynamic effects (some shock processes are estimated to be more persistent than others, for example),

which influences the contemporaneous Phillips curve correlations. And related to both points, the

simulations incorporate an endogenous monetary policy response via the model’s Taylor rule. While

the Taylor rule is not sufficient to hide the positive Phillips curve relationships completely, it will be

exerting some influence, the scale of which will depend on the specific shock.

   Given these conceptual difficulties, how should we think of the Phillips curve in larger DSGE

models? One interpretation, consistent with the Phillips curve’s inception as an empirical regularity

in the UK data, is that is simply the average reduced-form relationship, conditional on a demand

shock having occurred. The slope of such an object would clearly change over time if some types

of shock became more or less frequent. It would also be vulnerable to the Lucas critique. But if

policymakers judged that such changes were relatively slow-moving, they may still find such an

empirical Phillips curve a useful input into their decisions.

   Under that interpretation, the logic we have outlined for the basic model continues to complicate

estimation of empirical Phillips curves in larger models. Figure 7a shows another DSGE simulation

using Burgess et al. (2013), this time for all shocks in the model. Despite the presence of supply

shocks and an endogenous monetary policy response, a positively sloped Phillips curve emerges.

   Figure 7b runs an otherwise identical simulation with the model’s Taylor rule replaced by the



                                                   24
                               Figure 7: Inflation/output gap correlation in simulated data from a large-scale DSGE model.

                                     (a) Estimated Taylor rule                                                        (b) Optimal discretion

                                                 All shocks                                                                      All shocks
                   5                                                                                  5



                   4                                                                                  4



                   3                                                                                  3
Annual inflation




                                                                                   Annual inflation
                   2                                                                                  2



                   1                                                                                  1



                   0                                                                                  0



                   −1                                                                                 −1
                    −5    −4    −3     −2   −1       0        1   2   3   4   5                        −5   −4   −3    −2   −1       0        1   2   3   4   5
                                             Output gap                                                                      Output gap


Notes: 1000 periods of data are simulated from the model in Burgess et al. (2013) using the MAPS toolkit described in the
same paper. Each period a set of unanticipated shocks are drawn independently from a standard normal distribution. The
red lines show the lines of best fit from an OLS regression of the simulated annual inflation data on the (contemporaneous)
flexible price output gap. The first panel shows the results using the estimated Taylor rule in the model. The second panel
replaces the Taylor rule with the optimal discretionary monetary policy, where the policymaker minimises, period by
period, an ad hoc loss function containing the discounted sum of squared deviations of annual inflation from target (with
a weight of 1) and the output gap (with a weight of 0.25). The solution is calculated using the algorithm of Dennis (2007).


optimal monetary policy under discretion. As in the examples from the basic model, the positively

sloped Phillips curve disappears and its estimated sign turns negative. This is true irrespective of

the shock: Figure A2 in the Appendix shows the correlation under discretion conditional on each

shock. In this more complex setting, the reduced-form slope does not represent any single optimal

targeting rule. But the same intuition continues to hold: monetary policy will seek to minimise any

variation in the output gap that would cause inflation to move in the same direction. Conversely,

following a markup (or cost-push) shock, monetary policy will aim to reduce the output gap at

times when inflation is above target.

                       Even in larger models, we would argue one can still interpret the Phillips curve as a structural

equation. Although they need not feature a simple structural relationship between inflation and the

output gap, larger New Keynesian models will contain some kind of equivalent aggregate supply




                                                                                  25
constraint. Typically this will contain measures of real marginal costs rather than the output gap.26

It is also likely to have a richer dynamic structure. Given that structure and wider variety of shocks,

if one is able to estimate the full structural model and there is enough variation in the data, then it

may be possible to recover any structural aggregate supply relationship. But precisely because we

do not know the true model of the economy, such an approach may be less robust to misspecification

than the empirical Phillips curve described above.

    Moreover, as long as the structural aggregate supply relationship can be specified as a relationship

between inflation and some measure of slack, then the identification issues we raise in the simple

model may still apply. In Burgess et al. (2013), the Phillips curve for consumer price inflation is a

function of past and future inflation; the marginal cost of final output production; and a markup

shock. Figure A3 in the Appendix shows simulated data from the model under a specification of

optimal discretionary policy where the policymaker targets inflation and (instead of the output gap)

the marginal cost of final output production. Just as with the effect of demand shocks on the output

gap in the basic model, the policymaker is able to perfectly offset the effect of all shocks on the

marginal cost. In equilibrium, the only shock that has any effect on the policymaker’s chosen target

variables is the markup shock, which creates a trade-off between them.

    These findings from a larger model designed for practical policy use in central banks suggest

another source of variation to identify the structural Phillips curve or aggregate supply relationship.

If the measure of slack targeted by the policymaker is different to the one that directly influences

inflation, then the policymaker will not seek to offset all variation in the inflation-relevant measure.

In the example above, if the policymaker seeks to minimise fluctuations in the output gap this

will not always minimise movements in real marginal costs, since the relationship between the

two measures of slack will vary according to the mix of shocks. The reasoning is analogous to the

discussion of the wage Phillips curve in the previous section. The policymaker’s actions will only

blur the structural Phillips curve in equilibrium to the extent her policy targets are correlated with

the measures of inflation and slack in the aggregate supply relationship.
  26 In
      the model simulated above, there is a more stable positive relationship across different shocks between inflation
and the relevant measure of real marginal costs than with the output gap.




                                                          26
                   5.   Solutions to the estimation challenge in practice

In this section we examine Phillips curve identification in practice using US data. The previous

subsection suggested at least three ways econometricians could recover the structural Phillips curve:


   1. Supply shocks: if we can control for these well enough, we should be able to recover the

      Phillips curve.

   2. Instrumental variables: with good instruments for the output gap, uncorrelated with cost-push

      shocks, then the structural Phillips curve can be recovered.

   3. Regional data: monetary policy does not offset regional demand shocks, while time fixed

      effects can control for aggregate supply shocks.


    In summary, the identification challenge arises from the presence of cost-push shocks to the

Phillips curve and the partial accommodation of these by monetary policymakers. The size of the

simultaneity bias is magnified because monetary policy seeks to offset any demand shocks that, in

practice, might otherwise help identify the curve.

    Each solution attempts to circumvent these issues by isolating the remaining demand-driven

variation in inflation. The first two solutions use aggregate time-series data and the third turns to

the regional cross-section. While a large number of papers have estimated Phillips curves without

addressing the identification issue we raise here, many others over the years have followed one

or more of these approaches, either implicitly or explicitly. Our discussion provides a framework

which ties together these different solutions.

    The econometric solutions to simultaneity in economics are well known. And econometricians

will no doubt continue to come up with other innovative ways to successfully identify Phillips

curves.27 But there are reasons to think that using aggregate data, the task is likely to become ever

more difficult. Boivin and Giannoni (2006) showed that both the variance and the effect of monetary

policy shocks had become smaller in the period since the early 1980s, while similar arguments

have recently been made by Ramey (2016). Both suggest that in economies such as the US, with
  27 See Barnichon and Mesters (2019), Galı́ and Gambetti (Forthcoming) and Jordà and Nechio (Forthcoming) for some

recent examples, discussed further below.




                                                        27
established policy frameworks, policy is now largely conducted systematically. This limits the

remaining exogenous variation in aggregate demand needed to recover the Phillips curve.

    An alternative avenue, therefore, is to turn to cross-sectional data. As in Fitzgerald and Nicolini

(2014), we next show that using regional data on inflation and unemployment by metropolitan area,

a steeper Phillips curve re-emerges.


5.1.      The empirical Phillips curve in the aggregate data

For our empirical exploration, we turn our attention to the US, where Phillips’ UK findings were

translated by Samuelson and Solow (1960). Our inflation data are the (seasonally adjusted) quarterly

annualised log change in core CPI inflation. While PCE inflation has been the FOMC’s preferred

measure since 2000, for most of our sample monetary policy focused on CPI inflation.28 It also

allows us to more readily compare with the US regional price data, which is a CPI measure. Using

core inflation rather than headline is a straightforward mechanical way of stripping out a subset of

the cost-push shocks affecting headline inflation, in line with our first solution above.

    Again for comparability with the regional data, we use the (seasonally adjusted) quarterly

unemployment gap as our proxy for slack, measured as the civilian unemployment rate less the

CBO estimate of the long-term natural rate of unemployment. Using the unemployment gap, we

would therefore expect to see a negative structural relationship with inflation. Figure 8 plots the

two time series, alongside a simple scatter plot of the data over our sample period of 1957-2018. The

reduced-form Phillips curve slope is flat and not significantly different from zero. But as is clear

from the time series and has been well-documented elsewhere, the full sample masks a great deal of

time variation in the relationship.

    Figure 9 shows how the correlation has varied over time. We split the time periods according to

Fed Chair over our sample period.29 We split Paul Volcker’s chairmanship into two periods, given

the very different inflation and output dynamics at the start and end of his tenure.30

    The data can be explained with the traditional narrative of the US Phillips curve over the second
  28 Board  of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2000).
  29 We  also lag the tenure dates by six quarters to reflect the lags between monetary policy actions and their effect on real
activity and inflation. Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Boivin and Giannoni (2006) both find that monetary
policy has its peak impact on output after around four quarters, and on quarterly inflation after eight quarters.
  30 We split the sample at the end of 1983 in line with convention in dating the Volcker disinflation (Goodfriend and

King, 2005).



                                                              28
                       Figure 8: US core CPI inflation and the unemployment gap: 1957 Q1 to 2018 Q2

                             (a) Time series                                                                                      (b) Scatter plot
 15




                                                                                                      15
                                                                                   Core CPI inflation (qoq annualised)
 10




                                                                                                            10
 5




                                                                                             5
 0




                                                                                                      0
 -5




       1960                  1980                   2000                 2020                                            -2   0               2         4        6
                                        year                                                                                         Unemployment gap

              Core CPI inflation (qoq annualised)          Unemployment gap                                                   PC (slope =   -0.17)      95% CI




Notes: Figures show plots of quarterly annualised core CPI inflation against the CBO estimate of the unemployment gap.
Phillips curve slope and the confidence interval around it is estimated using OLS.


half of the 20th century, as discussed in histories by King (2008) and Gordon (2011). In the latter

years of William McChesney Martin’s 23 year term, with the Phillips curve viewed as an exploitable

long-run trade off, overly accommodative fiscal and monetary policies led to unemployment falling

steadily below today’s estimate of its natural rate (Romer and Romer, 2004a). Inflation rose at the

same time, resulting in a downward sloping Phillips curve visible in the data (driven by rises in xt

in (1)).

      During Arthur Burns’s tenure in the 1970s, a combination of factors increased both inflation and

increased unemployment, leading to a disappearance of any discernible Phillips curve correlation.

Those factors were a series of large cost shocks (increases in ut in (1)) brought about by oil supply

disruption31 , and the Federal Reserve’s inability, unwillingness32 or miscalculations33 in trying to

lean against them (falls in et in (11)) and their impact on inflation expectations34 (increases in Et πt+1

in (1)).

      The beginning of Paul Volcker’s tenure saw a re-emergence of a steep negative Phillips curve

slope, as tighter monetary policy induced rises in unemployment and a sustained fall in inflation
  31 Gordon  (1977); Blinder (1982).
  32 DeLong  (1997).
  33 Orphanides (2002).
  34 Barro and Gordon (1983); Chari, Christiano and Eichenbaum (1998).




                                                                              29
                                                              Figure 9: Phillips correlation by Fed Chair


                                    Martin                                                     Burns/Miller                                             Volcker part 1
                                1957 Q1 - 1971 Q2                                             1971 Q3 - 1980 Q4                                        1981 Q1 - 1983 Q4
                      15




                                                                                    15




                                                                                                                                             15
    Core CPI inflation




                                                                  Core CPI inflation




                                                                                                                           Core CPI inflation
               10




                                                                             10




                                                                                                                                      10
         5




                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                5
    0




                                                                  0




                                                                                                                           0
                           -3      0       3              6                              -3      0       3             6                          -3       0       3             6
                                Unemployment gap                                              Unemployment gap                                          Unemployment gap

                                   PC (slope =   -0.94)                                          PC (slope =   0.21)                                      PC (slope =   -2.27)



                                Volcker part 2                                                  Greenspan                                              Bernanke/Yellen
                                1984 Q1 - 1988 Q4                                             1989 Q1 - 2007 Q2                                        2007 Q3 - 2018 Q2
                      15




                                                                                    15




                                                                                                                                             15
    Core CPI inflation




                                                                  Core CPI inflation




                                                                                                                           Core CPI inflation
               10




                                                                             10




                                                                                                                                      10
         5




                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                5
    0




                                                                  0




                                                                                                                           0
                           -3      0       3              6                              -3      0       3             6                          -3       0       3             6
                                Unemployment gap                                              Unemployment gap                                          Unemployment gap

                                   PC (slope =   0.01)                                           PC (slope =   0.15)                                      PC (slope =   -0.13)




Notes: Figure shows scatter plots of quarterly annualised core CPI inflation against the CBO estimate of the unemployment
gap, split by time period. We lag the tenure dates of each Fed chair by six quarters as a way of reflecting the lags between
monetary policy actions and their effect on real activity and inflation. Phillips curve slopes and confidence intervals are
estimated using OLS.


(driven by falls in σe2 or ρe in (11), or equivalently a fall in λ and a related fall in Et πt+1 in (1):

Clarida, Galı́ and Gertler (2000)).

    For the subsequent two decades under Paul Volcker and then Alan Greenspan, the Phillips

correlation all but disappeared. The causes of the Great Moderation are often divided into those

relating to good policy, good luck (in the form of lower shock variance, particularly of supply

shocks), and changes in the structure of the economy (Stock and Watson, 2002).

    Despite the Great Moderation coming to an end with the 2008 financial crisis and a large rise in

unemployment, the Phillips curve correlation that reappeared under the tenures of Ben Bernanke

and Janet Yellen has been at best weak. The lack of a large deflation following the crisis has sparked



                                                                                                   30
a burgeoning literature attempting to explain the ‘missing disinflation’ by appealing to one or

more of: a flatter structural Phillips curve slope; better anchored inflation expectations or increases

in inflation expectations; the inflationary effects of financial frictions; or weaker potential supply

growth (see Coibion and Gorodnichenko, 2015, for a discussion).

    The reduced-form evidence in Figure 9 has led many commentators to conclude that the Phillips

curve has flattened over time. It is also consistent with estimates using more sophisticated techniques.

In an influential contribution, Ball and Mazumder (2011) estimate a time-varying Phillips curve

using median inflation as a measure of core inflation. They report that the Phillips curve steepened

from -0.23 in 1960-72 to -0.69 in 1973-84 and then flattened to -0.14 in 1985-2010. Blanchard, Cerutti

and Summers (2015) and Blanchard (2016), extending the non-linear Kalman filter estimates of IMF

(2013), find that the Phillips curve slope fell from around -0.7 in the 1970s to around -0.2 from the

1990s onwards.

    Over the period since 1990 (spanning the Great Moderation, then the financial crisis and its

aftermath) a flat Phillips curve is common across a range of typical empirical specifications. Table

2 presents simple OLS estimates using data on quarterly annualised core CPI inflation and the

unemployment gap/rate, over a sample from 1990-2018. The first column shows a simple bivariate

regression of inflation on the CBO measure of the unemployment gap. The second estimates a

typical New Keynesian Phillips curve by replacing the constant term with a survey-based measure

of forward-looking inflation expectations from the SPF.35 The third estimates an acelerationist-style

Phillips curve (Phelps, 1967; Friedman, 1968) by using (three) lags of inflation as a proxy for inflation

expectations. The fourth, fifth and sixth columns nest both models in a hybrid Phillips curve (Galı́

and Gertler, 1999), which feature both forward-looking expectations and lags of inflation (either

as an alternative proxy for inflation expectations or as an additional source of inflation dynamics).

The three hybrid curves feature different specifications for unemployment: they use either the

unemployment rate; or else the unemployment gap, with or without additional lags.

    Across the different specifications, the steepest Phillips curves slopes are only -0.20 (for the

bivariate regression) and -0.17 (augmenting with survey-based inflation expectations). These are in
   35 We use five to ten year ahead inflation expectations, as suggested by Bernanke (2007) and Yellen (2015) as having a

stronger empirical fit with the data. See Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Kamdar (2018) for an extensive review of the use of
survey expectations in the Philllips curve.




                                                           31
                     Table 2: OLS Phillips curve regressions using aggregate US data: 1990-2018

                                   (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
 Phillips curve:                Bivariate        New           Acceler-       Hybrid          Hybrid          Hybrid
                                               Keynesian       ationist      (Ut − Ut∗ )       (Ut )      B( L)(Ut − Ut∗ )

 Unemployment rate                                                                           -0.081**
                                                                                              [0.038]
 Unemployment gap               -0.204***       -0.170***        -0.010        -0.078**                         0.503*
                                 [0.074]         [0.048]        [0.042]         [0.037]                         [0.272]
                   First lag                                                                                   -1.008**
                                                                                                                [0.458]
                Second lag                                                                                       0.291
                                                                                                                [0.437]
                  Third lag                                                                                      0.152
                                                                                                                [0.237]
                       Sum                                                                                      -0.062*
                                                                                                                [0.037]

 Constant                        2.583***                                                     -0.054
                                  [0.179]                                                     [0.284]

 Inflation expectations                          0.943***                      0.388***      0.641***          0.384***
                                                  [0.037]                       [0.105]       [0.152]           [0.103]

 Core CPI inflation
               First lag                                        0.404***       0.252**       0.223**           0.278***
                                                                 [0.091]        [0.103]       [0.096]           [0.097]
                Second lag                                      0.475***       0.343***      0.312***          0.331***
                                                                 [0.083]        [0.098]       [0.095]           [0.107]
                  Third lag                                       0.092         -0.013        -0.050            -0.029
                                                                 [0.089]        [0.083]       [0.091]           [0.079]

 Observations                       118        118         118        118                       118               118
 R-squared                         0.100      0.950       0.957      0.963                     0.745             0.965
                                     Newey-West standard errors in brackets
                                         *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: The first five columns in the Table show the estimated OLS coefficients and standard errors for regressions nested
by the hybrid Phillips curve πt = α + γ1 (Ut − Ut∗ ) + γ2 Et πt+1 + Σ3i=1 γ2+i πt−i + ε t . Specification (1) constrains γ2 = 0,
γ3 = 0, γ4 = 0, and γ5 = 0. Specification (2) constrains α = 0, γ3 = 0, γ4 = 0, γ5 = 0. Specification (3) constrains
α = 0 and γ2 = 0. Specification (4) constrains α = 0 while specification (5) omits Ut∗ and uses Ut as the measure of
activity. Specification (6) constrains α = 0 while also including three lags of (Ut − Ut∗ ). B( L) represents a third order lag
polynomial. Data are quarterly seasonally adjusted measures from 1990 Q1 to 2018 Q2.


line with the flattened Phillips curve slope found by Blanchard, Cerutti and Summers (2015). In

all of the specifications featuring lags of inflation (either to proxy for inflation expectations or as

an additional source of dynamics), the slope is flatter still and not always significant. The sum of

the coefficients on the forward and backward looking inflation terms is close to 1 in each of the



                                                              32
estimates (ranging from 0.9-1.1), in line with natural rate theories of unemployment, which predict

stable long-run inflation if and only if U = U ∗ .

    In all, the results from these ”naive” Phillips curves estimates would suggest that the relationship

still exists, but that the slope is relatively flat. Since policymakers also pay close attention to

similar estimates, then the identification issue we highlight has the potential to provide misleading

inferences for monetary policy. A flatter Phillips curve implies a higher ”sacrifice ratio” associated

with bringing inflation back to target, which could lead policymakers to place greater weight than

optimal on avoiding volatility in output and employment relative to inflation (Blanchard, Cerutti

and Summers, 2015). At worst, weaker evidence of a clear link between real activity and inflation

could be interpreted as a sign that there is no short-run policy trade-off between the two goals,

leading policymakers to abandon the natural rate hypothesis (Taylor, 1998; Cogley and Sargent,

2001). Given its importance for policy, we next discuss the different approaches to identifying the

Phillips curve using aggregate data.


5.2.       Identification using aggregate data

In the extensive literature estimating Phillips curves, a number of papers have adopted approaches

similar to those we suggest, implicitly or explicitly addressing the identification difficulties we

highlight here.36 Encouragingly, even in the period since the first draft of this paper was circulated,

several others have proposed new identification strategies to mitigate simultaneity bias in Phillips

curve estimation. In this subsection we discuss the findings from some of those contributions and

categorise them according to our conceptual framework.


5.2.1      Controlling for supply shocks

In principle, if econometricians can perfectly control for the effect of any cost-push or other trade-off

inducing shocks, then any remaining variation in the output gap and inflation must be due to

movements in aggregate demand. As in our estimates above, the many papers that estimate Phillips

curves using core inflation are already implicitly controlling for cost-push shocks to some degree,

by stripping out their direct effects on the price data.37 Others include the change in the oil price as
  36 SeeMavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller and Stock (2014) for a comprehensive summary.
  37 SeeHasenzagl et al. (2019) for evidence on the different channels through which cost-push shocks to energy prices
impact inflation.


                                                         33
a regressor (e.g. Roberts, 1995).

    The idea of controlling for supply shocks was even present in the original Phillips (1958) article,

which describes periods during which cost-push effects led to deviations from the fitted curve. More

recently it has been associated with the ”triangle model” of Gordon (1982), originally developed to

account for the shift in inflation dynamics in the 1970s.38 As described in Gordon (2013), the model

includes several variables to control for changes in aggregate supply: food and energy price inflation;

relative import price inflation; changes in trend labour productivity; and dummies reflecting the

start and end of the Nixon price controls in the 1970s.39

    Despite including these variables to control for supply shocks, Gordon (2013) still finds a

flattening in the Phillips curve slope coefficient on the long-term unemployment gap: from -0.50 to

-0.31 when he extends his sample from 1962-96 to 1962-2013.40 The smaller absolute coefficient could

be due to a flattening in the structural Phillips curve slope, but could also be due to difficulties

with the practical implementation of the approach in the recent data. The solution is arguably more

suited to helping identify the Phillips curve in a period such as the 1970s, when were large, easily

identifiable cost-push shocks and a higher variance of monetary policy shocks than more recently.41

    A related idea is that of Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), who argue that the supply shock

imparted by higher oil prices also pushed up inflation between 2009 and 2011 by increasing firms’

inflation expectations, which they proxy using household expectations.42 Following Roberts (1995),

they use the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and find a stable Phillips curve slope of between -0.2

and -0.3 (using the unemployment gap) in both the 1981-2007 and 1981-2013 periods.

    In both cases, the large number of supply variables in Gordon’s model point towards a more

general practical difficulty, which is that there are many trade-off inducing shocks that need to be

controlled for, and which of these are most important may vary over time. As an example, the

explanations in the DSGE models of Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2015) and Gilchrist

et al. (2017) for the lack of disinflation during the financial crisis rely on financial frictions that
  38 And  subsequently refined in a series of papers, most recently in Gordon (2013).
  39 The  model also includes a large number of lags of inflation (up to 6 years) to capture additional dynamic factors
affecting inflation.
  40 Gordon instead emphasises the smaller flattening in the point estimate when using the short-term unemployment

rate as the relevant concept of slack, although this measure correlates less closely with estimates of the overall output gap
than the total unemployment rate – largely due to the large negative output gap during the financial crisis.
  41 The standard deviation of the Romer and Romer (2004b) monetary policy shock series is 2.5 times smaller in the

period from 1990 onwards.
  42 See also Hasenzagl et al. (2019).



                                                             34
simultaneously increased inflation and decreased real activity. That suggests one may also need to

add a measure of financial frictions as an additional explanatory variable.

   In some senses, the many papers that estimate the slope of a Phillips curve as part of a fully

specified New Keynesian DSGE model are also adopting a variant of this approach. Schorfheide

(2008) shows how full-information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation of a simple New Keyne-

sian model corrects for the simultaneity bias that markup shocks introduce into the slope of the

Phillips curve. But he also reports evidence from the literature on how sensitive such estimates are

to model specification, with estimates of the coefficient on the output gap varying from 0 to 4.


5.2.2   Instrumental variable estimation

An alternative solution is to use instrumental variable methods. The econometrician must find a

valid instrument that correlates with the demand variation in the output gap, and is uncorrelated

with the cost-push shock. The fitted value from a first-stage regression will then purge the output

gap measure of the endogenous response of monetary policy to the cost-push shock, meaning it can

be used to recover the true Phillips curve slope.

   Instrumental variable methods, and especially IV-GMM estimation, have been common in much

of the literature estimating New Keynesian Phillips curves, including influential papers by Galı́ and

Gertler (1999) and Galı́, Gertler and López-Salido (2001). These papers use only lagged variables

as instruments, which should be orthogonal to the current period cost-push innovation. But as

discussed in Mavroeidis, Plagborg-Møller and Stock (2014) and more recently in Barnichon and

Mesters (2019), if the cost-push shocks exhibit autocorrelation, then shocks will still be correlated

with the lagged variables and the exclusion restriction will not be satisfied. The instruments

used must be of a greater lag length than the lag order of the cost-push shocks, but with highly

autocorrelated cost-push shocks, such instruments are likely to have low relevance.

   Alternatively, separately identified demand shocks can be used as a set of external instruments,

as recently proposed by Barnichon and Mesters (2019). To satisfy the exclusion restriction, the

candidate instruments should be uncorrelated with the cost-push shocks in (1). Monetary policy

shocks, which are not usually thought to affect supply, are a natural candidate.

   Essentially, this strategy applies the findings from the large literature on identifying monetary



                                                    35
policy shocks to recover the Phillips curve.43 Given the major focus of that literature has been to try

to remove the systematic response of monetary policy to economic developments, it should be able

to successfully distill the Phillips curve relationship.

    Recent work by Barnichon and Mesters (2019) follows exactly this approach. Using the Romer

and Romer (2004b) narrative measure of monetary policy shocks as instruments for the output gap,

they find a much steeper Phillips curve slope than under OLS.

    The approach faces the same challenges as outlined by Ramey (2016) for the monetary policy

shock literature. She argues that in the period since 1990, monetary policy has been set more

systematically, and as a result, there is only a limited amount of true exogenous variation in the

data, leading to weak instrument issues.

    Identification of monetary policy shocks using high-frequency data may offer one solution

(Kuttner, 2001; Faust, Swanson and Wright, 2004; Gertler and Karadi, 2015; Nakamura and Steinsson,

2018). The short-time windows over which these shocks are identified help remove any traces of

endogenous monetary policy (Nakamura and Steinsson, 2018), which might otherwise be amplified

if the shocks were weak instruments for the output gap. Barnichon and Mesters (2019) use the high

frequency identified shocks of Gertler and Karadi (2015) for the post 1990 period and find evidence

of a flatter Phillips curve slope than in the earlier period.

    Other demand shocks, such as fiscal shocks to government spending or taxes, could in principle

also be used as external instruments. But for them to successfully capture sufficient variation in the

output or unemployment gap, the shocks must not be offset by any endogenous monetary policy

response. In the basic model presented in Section 2, fiscal shocks do not help identify the Phillips

curve, since they are completely offset by optimal monetary policy. Relative to monetary policy

shocks, a second drawback is that some fiscal changes are more likely to affect aggregate supply,

and so they may not satisfy the exclusion restriction.

    Both drawbacks are evident in the large-scale DSGE model simulations in Subsection 4.5. Figure

A2 shows that under the loss minimising monetary policy, there is little remaining variation in

inflation and the output gap following government spending shocks. And as the shock affects

supply and therefore induces a small trade-off between these two policy goals, the variation that
  43 Forexample, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996, 1999); Romer and Romer (2004b); Uhlig (2005); Bernanke,
Boivin and Eliasz (2005); Olivei and Tenreyro (2007); Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016).



                                                      36
does remain results in a negative correlation between the two variables. These simulations also

highlight that the Phillips curve may vary for different types of demand shock. If so, then the

curve conditional on a monetary policy shock is arguably the more relevant one for monetary

policymakers, since it relates directly to their policy instrument.

    Related to these ideas, a recent paper by Galı́ and Gambetti (Forthcoming) estimates Phillips

curves conditional on identified demand shocks in a VAR. They find that while endogeneity issues do

lead to downward bias in estimates of the US wage Phillips curve, there has also been a structural

flattening over time.


5.3.    Identification using regional data

Given some of the practical difficulties using aggregate data in the presence of systematic monetary

policy, an alternative solution is to exploit cross-sectional variation. An interesting recent approach

in this vein is Jordà and Nechio (Forthcoming), who take advantage of the fact that economies with

fixed exchange rates are unable to implement independent monetary policies.

    To show the possibility of using regional data to identify the aggregate US Phillips curve, we use

a panel of city-level price inflation and unemployment data, as in Fitzgerald and Nicolini (2014).

Hooper, Mishkin and Sufi (2019) also make use of US city-level (and state-level data) in their detailed

study of the US wage and price Phillips curves. Our city-level dataset, containing price data, is an

extended and updated version of the one used by Kiley (2015) and Babb and Detmeister (2017).


5.3.1    Data description

We use data from 28 US metropolitan areas published by the BLS.44 Together these areas account

for over one-third of the US population (Babb and Detmeister, 2017). There is significant size
  44 Specifically,we use 22 of the 23 areas for which CPI data is currently published by the BLS: Atlanta-Sandy
Springs-Roswell, Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, Boston-Cambridge-Newton, Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, Dallas-Fort Worth-
Arlington, Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, Detroit-Warren-Dearborn, Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar Land, Los Angeles-Long
Beach-Anaheim, Miami-Fort Lauderdale-West Palm Beach, Minneapolis-St Paul-Bloomington, New York-Newark-Jersey
City, Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, San Diego-Carlsbad, San Francisco-Oakland-Hayward,
Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, St Louis, Tampa-St Petersburg-Clearwater, Urban Alaska, Urban Hawaii and Washington-
Arlington-Alexandria. We exclude Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, for which data are only published from 2018
onwards. In order to maximise the size of our cross-sectional sample, we also add the six previously published
metropolitan areas for which CPI data was discontinued after 2017: Cincinnati-Hamilton, Cleveland-Akron, Kansas City,
Milwaukee-Racine, Pittsburgh and Portland-Salem. The earlier conference draft of this paper used a smaller sample of
only 23 areas. Moving to the full set yields almost identical results. Since 2018, the BLS has published separate CPI
backdata for Washington and Baltimore (although based on a much smaller sample), which were previously only available
combined. We opt to split them given the quite different behaviour of the data in the two areas.


                                                         37
heterogeneity across the sample - weighted by average labour force, the largest three areas (New

York, Los Angeles and Chicago) account for 31% of the total, while the smallest thirteen areas

account for less than 2% each. Since six cities in our sample were discontinued after 2017, we opt to

exclude the observations from 2018 H1 onwards.45 Our full sample runs from 1990 H1 to 2017 H2,46

with some gaps for metropolitan areas where the data were only published in the later part of the

sample.47

    The inflation series is the annualised log change in the semiannual CPI excluding food and

energy. For the majority of metropolitan areas, data are also available at a higher frequency, but in

order to maximise our cross-sectional sample, we opt to convert these to semiannual data.48 The

city-level CPI data are not seasonally adjusted by the BLS.

    For unemployment, we take the BLS’s metropolitan statistical area measures of unemployed as a

percentage of the share of civilian labour force.49 The BLS publish both seasonally adjusted and

unadjusted labour force data at the metro area level – we use the unadjusted series, consistent with

the CPI data. We take the average of the unemployment rate to convert the monthly published data

to semiannual averages.

    We also run specifications using survey-based measures of 12 month inflation expectations from

the University of Michigan Consumer Survey. The Michigan Survey includes data published for

four broad geographical regions: the North East, North Central, South, and West. We assign each

metropolitan area to its appropriate region (or the region containing most of the metropolitan area’s

population, for metro areas that span more than one region).
  45 We use the terms city and metropolitan area interchangeably.
  46 Metropolitan  area unemployment is published from 1990. In the conference draft of this paper we also used CPI price
level data only from 1990 onwards. Here we make use of the longer published backrun of the CPI to construct a inflation
(and lagged inflation) rates for 1990.
  47 CPI data for Tampa are published only from 1997 H2; Phoenix from 2002 H1. Our results are robust to excluding

both cities.
  48 Where the semiannual CPI figure is published by the BLS, we use that. Where only monthly data are published, we

take the semiannual average. Where the published data are published only in certain months, we follow BLS methodology
and estimate the missing months via interpolation, before taking the semiannual average (see also Fitzgerald and Nicolini,
2014).
  49 The local unemployment data use the CBSA deliniations of metropolitan areas, which the CPI data have also used

since 2018, having previously used sightly different MSA definitions. We match the unemployment data to the currently
used definition, since the BLS treats this as continuous with the old one for CPI. For the subset of cities where CPI data
were only ever published under the old definition, we sum unempoyment and the labour force data for the matching
CBSA metropolitan and micropolitan areas.




                                                           38
5.3.2   Regional data results

To motivate our regional empirical specification, first note that we only have data on the unem-

ployment rate at the regional level, rather than the unemployment gap to proxy for the output gap.

If the regional Phillips curves are of a form similar to (15), transformed to include the regional

unemployment gap (Uti − U ∗ it ):


                                     πti = βEt πti +1 − κ (Uti − U ∗ it ) + uit                     (22)


   If, as is likely, the regional equilibrium unemployment rate, U ∗ it is positively correlated with the

actual unemployment rate, then in a pooled OLS regression such as


                                     πit = α + γ1 Et πit+1 + γ2 Uit + ε it ,                        (23)


the omitted variable will bias the estimated coefficient γ̂2 towards zero. To partially address this we

run specifications including metropolitan area fixed effects (αi ):


                                    πit = αi + γ1 Et πit+1 + γ2 Uit + ε it ,                        (24)


which control for time-invariant regional differences in U ∗ (as well as time-invariant inflation

expectations), although not for time-variation in those regional differences.

   Second, as long the regional unemployment rate is correlated with the aggregate unemployment

rate, and regional inflation is affected by aggregate cost-push shocks, then the slope estimate will

still be biased by the endogenous response of monetary policy to aggregate cost-push shocks. To

avoid this, note that our theoretical Phillips curve in terms of regional deviations from the aggregate,

(18), can be rearranged to give:


                           πti = πt + βEt (πti +1 − πt+1 ) + κ ( xti − xt ) + ûit

                                = βEt πti +1 + κxti + (πt − βEt πt+1 − κxt ) + ûit                 (25)


where xti are uncorrelated with ûit but are correlated with the aggregate cost-push shock ut =



                                                        39
πt − βEt πt+1 − κxt . We can therefore remove any monetary-policy induced correlation between the

regressor and the error term by also including time fixed effects (δt ):


                                       πit = αi + γ1 Et πit+1 + γ2 Uit + δt + ε it                                       (26)


which will also control for any time-varying changes in the aggregate equilibrium unemployment

rate.

    To compare across the different specifications, we estimate each of equations (23), (24) and (26).

As additional controls we include seasonal dummies and, given the data are semiannual, just a

single lag of inflation. For completeness we also show results including time fixed effects but not

including metropolitan area fixed effects. The results are shown in Table 3. All four estimates of the

                                   Table 3: US Metro area Phillips curve: 1990-2017

                                    (1)                   (2)                      (3)                     (4)
 Regression                     Pooled OLS        Metro area FE only          Year FE only        Year and Metro area FE

 Unemployment rate                -0.150***              -0.162***               -0.272***                  -0.379***
                                   [0.016]                [0.019]                 [0.036]                    [0.052]

 Inflation expectations            0.598***               0.589***                0.259*                      0.225
                                    [0.058]                [0.059]                [0.147]                    [0.141]

 Core CPI inflation
               First lag           0.362***               0.371***                0.122***                  0.105***
                                    [0.035]                [0.036]                 [0.035]                   [0.034]

 Observations                    1,525              1,525             1,525                                   1,525
 R-squared                       0.321              0.350             0.450                                   0.487
 Metro area FE                     No                Yes               No                                      Yes
 Year FE                           No                No                Yes                                     Yes
 Seasonal dummies                 Yes                Yes               Yes                                     Yes
                          Robust standard errors (clustered by metro area) in brackets
                                        *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Notes: The table shows coefficients and standard errors estimated from four regional Phillips curve specifications. Core
CPI inflation is the dependent variable in each case. Specification (1) estimates equation 23 (plus controls) by pooled OLS.
Specification (2) estimates equation 24 (plus controls) using group (area) fixed effects. Specification (3) is identical to (1)
apart from the inclusion of a set of year dummy variables. Specification (4) is identical to (2) apart from the inclusion of a
set of year dummy variables. The additional controls are one lag of core CPI inflation and a seasonal dummy variable
for each metropolitan area that takes the value of 1 in H2 and 0 in H1. All specifications contain a constant. Data are
semiannual non-seasonally adjusted measures from 1990 H1 to 2017 H2.


Phillips curve slope are statistically significant and with the correct sign. In the first column, the


                                                             40
pooled OLS estimate of -0.15 suggests a flat Phillips curve. It is slightly larger than the estimates

with lagged dependent variables using aggregate data in Table 2, but no steeper than the estimates

without lagged inflation.50

                Figure 10: Pooled OLS: metropolitan area core CPI inflation versus unemployment (both regressed on controls)

                                                 (a) Raw residuals                                                                               (b) Residuals grouped into bins
                  8




                                                                                                                           6
                                 6
   Residuals(Inflation|Controls)




                                                                                                            Residuals(Inflation|Controls)
                                                                                                                                      4
                 2      4




                                                                                                                          2
        0




                                                                                                             0
 -2               -4




                                                                                                                           -2
                                     0              5                    10                       15
                                                Residuals(Unemployment|Controls)                                                            2      4            6           8             10       12
                                                                                                                                                       Residuals(Unemployment|Controls)
                                          PC (slope =   -0.15)          95% confidence interval




Notes: The figures are a graphical illustration of the Phillips curve slope estimated in specification (1) in table 3. Panel 10a
plots the residuals from a regression of core CPI inflation on all regressors other than the unemployment rate, against the
residuals from a regression of the unemployment rate on all other regressors. Panel 10b shows averages of the same data,
where the unemployment and inflation data are averaged across 100 equal sized bins according to the unemployment rate.


Figure 11: Year fixed effects only: metropolitan area core CPI inflation versus unemployment (both regressed on controls)

                                                 (a) Raw residuals                                                                               (b) Residuals grouped into bins
                  6




                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                           3
                                 4
   Residuals(Inflation|Controls)




                                                                                                            Residuals(Inflation|Controls)
                                                                                                                                      2
                        2




                                                                                                                                1
                 0




                                                                                                                  -1      0
        -2




                                                                                                             -2
 -4




                                                                                                                           -3
                  -6




                                                                                                                           -4




                                     -5             0                    5                        10
                                                Residuals(Unemployment|Controls)                                                            -3          0                   3                  6
                                                                                                                                                       Residuals(Unemployment|Controls)
                                          PC (slope =   -0.27)          95% confidence interval




Notes: The figures are a graphical illustration of the Phillips curve slope estimated in specification (3) in table 3. See the
notes to Figures 10a and 10b for details.
     50 Note
        that the estimated coefficient on inflation expecatations is not robust to changes in the sample. Estimating
pooled OLS on a sample beginnning in 1991 instead of 1990 reduces the point estimate from 0.60 to 0.36.


                                                                                                       41
                           Figures 10a and 10b illustrate the slope coefficient. In Figure 10a, the scatter plots core inflation

against unemployment. Both variables are shown as the residuals following a regression on the

other controls in the first column of Table 3, such that the line of best fit shows the estimated Phillips

curve slope. Figure 10b shows averages of the same data, where the unemployment and inflation

data are averaged across 100 equal sized bins according to the unemployment rate.

                           In the second column we include area fixed effects and the point estimate of the slope is slightly

larger, although not significantly so.

Figure 12: Year and metro area fixed effects: metropolitan area core CPI inflation versus unemployment (both regressed
           on controls)

                                                 (a) Raw residuals                                                                               (b) Residuals grouped into bins
                  6




                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                           3
                                 4
   Residuals(Inflation|Controls)




                                                                                                            Residuals(Inflation|Controls)
                                                                                                                                      2
                        2




                                                                                                                                1
                 0




                                                                                                                  -1      0
        -2




                                                                                                             -2
 -4




                                                                                                                           -3
                  -6




                                                                                                                           -4




                                     -5             0                    5                        10
                                                Residuals(Unemployment|Controls)                                                            -3          0                   3             6
                                                                                                                                                       Residuals(Unemployment|Controls)
                                          PC (slope =   -0.38)          95% confidence interval




Notes: The figures are a graphical illustration of the Phillips curve slope estimated in specification (4) in table 3. See the
notes to Figures 10a and 10b for details.


                           In the third column we include year fixed effects but not area fixed effects, purging the data of

any aggregate-level variation over time, including changes in monetary policy and in the natural

rate of unemployment. The estimated Phillips curve slope steepens to -0.27, as shown in Figures 11a

and 11b.

                           In the fourth column, metro area fixed effects are also included, controlling for any time-invariant

unobserved factors such as different average levels of U ∗ across regions. The resulting Phillips curve

is -0.38, 2.5 times larger than the pooled OLS estimate and. The residuals and slopes including both

sets of fixed effects are shown in Figures 12a and 12b; as well as in 13, which plots the estimated

Phillips curve by metropolitan area, with different intercept terms for each city.

                           These results provide evidence of a robust US Phillips curve at the regional level. They are

                                                                                                       42
Figure 13: Year and metro area fixed effects: metropolitan area core CPI inflation versus unemployment by metro area
           (both regressed on controls)


                                             Atlanta              Baltimore             Boston                  Chicago                Cincinnati            Cleveland              Dallas
                                   5
                                   0
                                   -5
   Residuals(Inflation|Controls)




                                             Denver                Detroit              Houston             Kansas City           Los Angeles                 Miami                Milwaukee
                                   5
                                   0
                                   -5




                                         Minneapolis              New York         Philadelphia                 Phoenix                Pittsburgh            Portland              San Diego
                                   5
                                   0
                                   -5




                                        San Francisco              Seattle              St. Louis               Tampa            Urban Alaska           Urban Hawaii           Washington
                                   5
                                   0
                                   -5




                                        -2   0   2   4   6   -2    0   2   4   6   -2    0   2   4    6    -2   0    2   4   6    -2    0   2   4   6   -2    0   2   4   6   -2    0   2    4   6


                                                                               Residuals(Unemployment|Controls)
                                                                                                      PC (slope =                -0.38)


Notes: The figures are a graphical illustration of the Phillips curve slope estimated in specification (4) in table 3. For each
metropolitan area, the figure plots the residuals from a fixed effects regression of core CPI inflation on all regressors
other than the unemployment rate, with a different area fixed effect plotted for each city, against the residuals from a
fixed-effects regression of the unemployment rate on all other regressors.


consistent with the idea that because monetary policy endogenously offsets changes in aggregate

demand, and leans against cost-push shocks, identification is blurred at the aggregate level.


                                                                                                 6.       Conclusion

               We use standard analytical framework to explain why inflation follows a seemingly exogenous

statistical process, or, in other words, why the Phillips curve cannot be easily identified with

macroeconomic data. In the framework, a monetary authority minimizes welfare losses, measured

as deviations of inflation and output from their targets, subject to a Phillips curve. This leads the



                                                                                                                43
authority to follow an optimal targeting rule in which it seeks to increase inflation when the output

gap decreases. This imparts a negative relation between inflation and the output gap that blurs the

identification of the positively sloped Phillips curve. In equilibrium, inflation inherits the statistical

properties of any cost-push shocks affecting the Phillips curves (e.g., energy price shocks, exchange

rate changes, and so on).

   We show that shocks to the targeting rule are key for the identification of the Phillips curve.

These targeting shocks can take the form of monetary policy shocks in a Taylor rule or, in a multi-

region setting or a multi-country monetary union, idiosyncratic demand shocks affecting the various

regions or countries in different ways. In a univariate regression analysis, if the relative variance

of these shocks is sufficiently high, vis-a-vis the remaining variance of the cost-push shocks that

cannot be controlled for, the slope of the Phillips curve can be identified. Similarly, identification

of monetary policy or other demand shocks allows the positive relationship between inflation and

output gap to be distilled.

   We have also shown how the simple framework here can jointly rationalise several empirical

findings on the Phillips curve. First, it should be weaker in periods when there are large cost shocks

– such as the 1970s – and when monetary policy is relatively successful in achieving its targets –

as in the inflation targeting era. Second, wage Phillips curves should be more evident in the data

that price Phillips curves. And third, the Phillips curve relationship should appear stronger in

disaggregated panel data than in aggregate data.

   To summarise, the paper explains the identification problem posited by the estimation of Phillips

curves; rationalises findings in the empirical literature and discusses practical solutions to the

identification problem, showing evidence of a steeper Phillips curve in US regional data. In doing

so, the paper hopes to address a recent wave of work questioning the existence of a link between

inflation and slack, a key building block of the prevalent monetary policy framework.




                                                   44
                                           References

Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laséen, Lawrence Christiano, Mathias Trabandt, and Karl Walentin.
 2013. “Ramses II – Model Description.” Sveriges Riksbank Occasional Paper Series 12.

Atkeson, Andrew, and Lee E. Ohanian. 2001. “Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting Inflation?”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 25(1): 2–11.

Babb, Nathan R., and Alan K. Detmeister. 2017. “Nonlinearities in the Phillips Curve for the United
  States: Evidence Using Metropolitan Data.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
  Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-070.

Ball, Laurence, and Sandeep Mazumder. 2011. “Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession.”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 42(Spring): 337–381.

Ball, Laurence, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David Romer. 1988. “The New Keynesian Economics
  and the Output-Inflation Trade-off.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 1–65.

Barnichon, Regis, and Geert Mesters. 2019. “Identifying modern macro equations with old shocks.”
  https://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/8ac201 48b1201ec4a74fddae04bcc5aadf9c89.pdf.

Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon. 1983. “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
  Rate Model.” Journal of Political Economy, 91(4): 589–610.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2007. “Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting.” Speech given at the
  Monetary Economics Workshop of the NBER Summer Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20070710a.htm.

Bernanke, Ben S. 2010. “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy.” Speech given at the Federal
  Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. https://www.
  federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bernanke20100827a.pdf.

Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz. 2005. “Measuring the Effects of Monetary Policy:
  a Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  120(1): 387–422.

Blanchard, Olivier. 2016. “The Phillips Curve: Back to the’60s?” American Economic Review, 106(5): 31–
  34.

Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers. 2015. “Inflation and Activity – Two
  Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications.” NBER Working Paper No. 21726.

Blinder, Alan S. 1982. “The Anatomy of Double-Digit Inflation in the 1970s.” In Inflation: Causes
  and Effects, ed. Robert E. Hall, 261–282. University of Chicago Press. https://www.nber.org/books/
  hall82-1.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2000. “Monetary Policy Report to the
  Congress.” Board of Governors February. https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/2000/
  February/FullReport.pdf.

Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni. 2006. “Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?” The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 445–462.



                                                 45
Brainard, William C., and James Tobin. 1968. “Pitfalls in Financial Model Building.” American
  Economic Review, 58(2): 99–122.

Brubakk, Leif, and Tommy Sveen. 2009. “NEMO – a new macro model for forecasting and monetary
  policy analysis.” Norges Bank Economic Bulletin 1/2009.

Bullard, James. 2018. “The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve.” Presentation at the 2018
  ECB Forum on Central Banking on the Macroeconomics of Price- and Wage-Setting, Sintra,
  Portugal. https://www.stlouisfed.org/∼/media/files/pdfs/bullard/remarks/2018/bullard ecb sintra
  june 19 2018.pdf.

Burgess, Stephen, Emilio Fernandez-Corugedo, Charlotta Groth, Richard Harrison, Francesca
  Monti, Konstantinos Theodoridis, and Matt Waldron. 2013. “The Bank of England’s forecasting
 platform: COMPASS, MAPS, EASE and the suite of models.” Bank of England Working Paper
  471.

Carlin, Wendy, and David Soskice. 2005. “The 3-equation New Keynesian Model – a Graphical
  Exposition.” Contributions in Macroeconomics, 5(1).

Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian. 2009. “Inflation Persistence,
  Monetary Policy, and the Great Moderation.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41(4): 767–786.

Carney, Mark. 2017a. “[De]Globalisation and inflation.” Speech delivered as the 2017 IMF Michel
  Camdessus Central Banking Lecture. https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/
  2017/de-globalisation-and-inflation.pdf.

Carney, Mark. 2017b. “Lambda.” Speech given at the London School of Economics. https://www.
  bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2017/lambda.pdf.

Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoen-
  holtz. 2017. “Deflating Inflation Expectations: the Implications of Inflation’s Simple Dynamics.”
  http://people.brandeis.edu/∼cecchett/Polpdf/USMPF2017.pdf.

Chari, V. V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum. 1998. “Expectation Traps and
 Discretion.” Journal of Economic Theory, 81(2): 462–492.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 1996. “The Effects of Monetary
 Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 78(1): 16–
 34.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 1999. “Monetary Policy
 Shocks: What Have we Learned and to What End?” In Vol. 1A of Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed.
 John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 65 – 148. Elsevier.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities
 and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1): 1–45.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2015. “Understanding the
 Great Recession.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1): 110–67.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New
  Keynesian Perspective.” Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4): 1661–1707.



                                                46
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler. 2000. “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
  Stability: Evidence and Some Theory.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(1): 147–180.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galı́, and Mark Gertler. 2001. “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open versus
  Closed Economies: An Integrated Approach.” American Economic Review, 91(2): 248–252.
Cloyne, James, and Patrick Hürtgen. 2016. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Monetary Policy: A
  New Measure for the United Kingdom.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(4): 75–102.
Cochrane, John H. 1994. “Comment on What Ends Recessions? by Christina D. Romer and David
  H. Romer.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 9: 58–74.
Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2001. “Evolving Post-World War II US Inflation Dynamics.”
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 16: 331–373.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All?
 Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 7(1): 197–232.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Rupal Kamdar. 2018. “The Formation of Expectations,
  Inflation, and the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Economic Literature, 56(4): 1447–91.
Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Frank Schorfheide. 2015. “Inflation in the Great Reces-
 sion and New Keynesian Models.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1): 168–96.
DeLong, J. Bradford. 1997. “America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s.” In Reducing Inflation:
 Motivation and Strategy, ed. Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, 247–280. University of
 Chicago Press. http://www.nber.org/books/rome97-1.
Dennis, Richard. 2007. “Optimal Policy in Rational Expectations Models: New Solution Algorithms.”
 Macroeconomic Dynamics, 11(1): 31–55.
Dotsey, Michael, Shigeru Fujita, and Tom Stark. 2018. “Do Phillips Curves Conditionally Help to
 Forecast Inflation?” International Journal of Central Banking, 14(4): 43–92.
Draghi, Mario. 2017. “Accompanying the economic recovery.” Speech given at the ECB Forum
 on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal. https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2017/html/ecb.
 sp170627.en.html.

Edge, Rochelle M., and Refet S. Gürkaynak. 2010. “How useful are estimated DSGE model
  forecasts for central bankers?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 41(2): 209–244.
Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley, and Jean-Philippe Laforte. 2010. “A comparison of forecast
  performance between Federal Reserve staff forecasts, simple reduced-form models, and a DSGE
  model.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 25(4): 720–754.
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin. 2000. “Optimal monetary policy
  with staggered wage and price contracts.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2): 281–313.
Faust, Jon, Eric T. Swanson, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2004. “Identifying VARS based on high
  frequency futures data.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(6): 1107–1131.
Fitzgerald, Terry J., and Juan Pablo Nicolini. 2014. “Is There a Stable Relationship between Unem-
  ployment and Future Inflation? Evidence from US Cities.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
  Working Paper 713.

                                               47
Forbes, Kristin, Lewis Kirkham, and Konstantinos Theodoridis. 2017. “A trendy approach to UK
  inflation dynamics.” Bank of England External MPC Unit Discussion Paper 49.

Friedman, Milton. 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review, 58(1): 1–17.

Galı́, Jordi. 2008. Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New Keynesian
 Framework. Princeton University Press.

Galı́, Jordi. 2011. “The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve.” Journal of the European Economic Associa-
 tion, 9(3): 436–461.

Galı́, Jordi, and Luca Gambetti. Forthcoming. “Has the US Wage Phillips Curve Flattened? A
 Semi-Structural Exploration.” In Changing Inflation Dynamics, Evolving Monetary Policy, ed. J. Galı́
 and D. Saravia. Central Bank of Chile.

Galı́, Jordi, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric analysis.” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 44(2): 195–222.

Galı́, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David López-Salido. 2001. “European inflation dynamics.” Euro-
 pean Economic Review, 45(7): 1237–1270.

Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2015. “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit costs, and Economic
 Activity.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1): 44–76.

Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae Sim, and Egon Zakrajšek. 2017. “Inflation Dynamics
  during the Financial Crisis.” American Economic Review, 107(3): 785–823.

Goldfeld, Stephen M., and Alan S. Blinder. 1972. “Some Implications of Endogenous Stabilization
 Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1972(3): 585–644.

Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert G. King. 2005. “The incredible Volcker disinflation.” Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 52(5): 981–1015.

Goodhart, C. A. E. 1984. “Problems of Monetary Management: The UK Experience.” In Monetary
 Theory and Practice. 91–121. Palgrave, London.

Goodhart, C. A. E. 1989. Money, Information and Uncertainty. Macmillan International Higher Educa-
 tion.

Gordon, Robert J. 1977. “The Theory of Domestic Inflation.” The American Economic Review,
 67(1): 128–134.

Gordon, Robert J. 1982. “Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of Unemployment.”
 In Workers, Jobs, and Inflation, ed. Martin Neil Baily. Brookings Institution.

Gordon, Robert J. 2011. “The History of the Phillips Curve: Consensus and Bifurcation.” Economica,
 78(309): 10–50.

Gordon, Robert J. 2013. “The Phillips Curve is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU During the
 Slow Recovery.” NBER Working Paper No. 19390.

Haldane, Andrew G. 1998. “On Inflation Targeting in the United Kingdom.” Scottish Journal of
 Political Economy, 45(1): 1–32.



                                                    48
Haldane, Andrew G., and Danny Quah. 1999. “UK Phillips curves and monetary policy.” Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 44(2): 259–278.

Hall, Robert E. 2013. “The Routes Into and Out of the Zero Lower Bound.” Paper presented at
 the Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
 City Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2013/
 2013hall.pdf.

Hasenzagl, Thomas, Filippo Pellegrino, Lucrezia Reichlin, and Giovanni Ricco. 2019. “A Model
 of the Fed’s View on Inflation.” CEPR Discussion Paper 12564.

Hooper, Peter, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi. 2019. “Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure
 Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or is It Just Hibernating?” NBER Working Paper No. 25792.

IMF. 2013. “The Dog that Didnt Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?” In
  World Economic Outlook, April 2013: Hopes, Realities, Risks. Chapter 3.

Jordà, Òscar, and Fernanda Nechio. Forthcoming. “Inflation Globally.” In Changing Inflation Dynam-
  ics, Evolving Monetary Policy, ed. J. Galı́ and D. Saravia. Central Bank of Chile.

Kareken, John H., and Preston J. Miller. 1976. “The Policy Procedure of the FOMC: A Critique.”
 In A Prescription for Monetary Policy: Proceedings from a Seminar Series. Federal Reserve Bank of
 Minneapolis. https://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/books/a-prescription-for-monetary-policy.

Kareken, John H., and Robert M. Solow. 1963. “Lags in Monetary Policy.” In Stabilization Policies,
 ed. E. Cary Brown, 14–96. New York:Prentice-Hall.

Kiley, Michael T. 2015. “An evaluation of the inflationary pressure associated with short-and
  long-term unemployment.” Economics Letters, 137: 5–9.

King, Robert G. 2008. “The Phillips Curve and U.S. Macroeconomic Policy: Snapshots, 1958-1996.”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 94(4): 311–359.

King, Robert G., and Mark W. Watson. 2012. “Inflation and Unit Labor Cost.” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 44(s2): 111–149.

Krogh, Tord S. 2015. “Macro frictions and theoretical identification of the New Keynesian Phillips
  curve.” Journal of Macroeconomics, 43: 191–204.

Kuttner, Kenneth N. 2001. “Monetary policy surprises and interest rates: Evidence from the Fed
 funds futures market.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3): 523–544.

Leduc, Sylvain, and Daniel J. Wilson. 2017. “Has the Wage Phillips Curve Gone Dormant?” FRBSF
  Economic Letter 2017-30.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1976. “Econometric policy evaluation: A critique.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy, 1: 19–46.

Mavroeidis, Sophocles, Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and James H. Stock. 2014. “Empirical Evidence
 on Inflation Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.” Journal of Economic Literature,
 52(1): 124–88.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2007. “Inflation dynamics.” International Finance, 10(3): 317–334.



                                                 49
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2014. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
 US Regions.” American Economic Review, 104(3): 753–92.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2018. “High-Frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
 Neutrality: The Information Effect.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(3): 1283–1330.

Nason, James M., and Gregor W. Smith. 2008. “Identifying the new Keynesian Phillips curve.”
 Journal of Applied Econometrics, 23(5): 525–551.

Olivei, Giovanni, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2007. “The Timing of Monetary Policy Shocks.” American
 Economic Review, 97(3): 636–663.

Orphanides, Athanasios. 2002. “Monetary-Policy Rules and the Great Inflation.” American Economic
 Review, 92(2): 115–120.

Peston, Maurice H. 1972. “The Correlation between Targets and Instruments.” Economica,
  39(156): 427–431.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1967. “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment
  Over Time.” Economica, 254–281.

Phillips, Alban W. 1958. “The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money
  Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957.” Economica, 25(100): 283–299.

Powell, Jerome H. 2018. “Monetary Policy and Risk Management at a Time of Low Inflation and
  Low Unemployment.” Speech given at the ”Revolution or Evolution? Reexamining Economic
  Paradigms” 60th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Boston,
  Massachusetts. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/powell20181002a.pdf.

Primiceri, Giorgio E. 2006. “Why Inflation Rose and Fell: Policy-Makers’ Beliefs and U. S. Postwar
  Stabilization Policy.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3): 867–901.

Ramey, Valerie A. 2016. “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation.” In Handbook of Macroeco-
  nomics. Vol. 2, ed. John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig, Chapter 2, 71–162. Elsevier.

Roberts, John M. 1995. “New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking, 27(4): 975–984.

Roberts, John M. 2006. “Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics.” International Journal of Central
 Banking, 2(3): 193–230.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2004a. “Choosing the Federal Reserve Chair: Lessons
  From History.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1): 129–162.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2004b. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
  and Implications.” American Economic Review, 94(4): 1055–1084.

Samuelson, Paul A., and Robert M. Solow. 1960. “Analytical Aspects of Anti-Inflation Policy.” The
  American Economic Review, 50(2): 177–194.

Sargent, Thomas, Noah Williams, and Tao Zha. 2006. “Shocks and Government Beliefs: The Rise
  and Fall of American Inflation.” American Economic Review, 96(4): 1193–1224.

Schorfheide, Frank. 2008. “DSGE Model-Based Estimation of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve.”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 94(4): 397–433.

                                               50
Seneca, Martin. 2018. “A graphical illustration of optimal monetary policy in the New Keynesian
  framework.” http://seneca.dk/Seneca graphicalNKanalysis.pdf.
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian
 DSGE approach.” American Economic Review, 97(3): 586–606.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2002. “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual, 17: 159–218.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?”
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(s1): 3–33.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 2009. “Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts.” In Understanding
  Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy, ed. Jeff Fuhrer, Yolanda K. Kodrzycki, Jane Sneddon
  Little and Giovanni P. Olivei, Chapter 3, 99–186. Cambridge:MIT Press.
Svensson, Lars E. O. 1997. “Inflation forecast targeting: Implementing and monitoring inflation
  targets.” European Economic Review, 41(6): 1111–1146.
Svensson, Lars E. O., and Michael Woodford. 2004. “Implementing Optimal Policy through
  Inflation-Forecast Targeting.” In The Inflation-Targeting Debate, ed. Ben S. Bernanke and Michael
  Woodford, 19–92. University of Chicago Press.
Taylor, John B. 1998. “Monetary Policy Guidelines for Unemployment and Inflation Stability.” In
  Inflation, Unemployment, and Monetary Policy, ed. Benjamin M. Friedman, 29–54. Cambridge:MIT
  Press.
Tuckett, Alex. 2018. “What can regional data tell us about the UK Phillips Curve?”
  Bank    of    England       Bank     Underground.        https://bankunderground.co.uk/2018/04/13/
  what-can-regional-data-tell-us-about-the-uk-phillips-curve/.

Uhlig, Harald. 2005. “What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an agnostic
 identification procedure.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2): 381–419.
Vlieghe, Gertjan. 2018. “From asymmetry to symmetry:                   changing risks to the
  economic outlook.” Speech given at the Confederation of British Industry,
  Birmingham,         UK.      https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2018/
  from-asymmetry-to-symmetry-changing-risks-to-the-economic-outlook-speech-by-gertjan-vlieghe.

Williams, John C. 2006. “Inflation Persistence in an Era of Well-Anchored Inflation Expectations.”
 FRBSF Economic Letter 2006-27.
Woodford, Michael. 1994. “Nonstandard Indicators for Monetary Policy: Can Their Usefulness be
 Judged from Forecasting Regressions?” In Monetary Policy, ed. N. Gregory Mankiw, Chapter 3,
 95–115. The University of Chicago Press. https://www.nber.org/books/greg94-1.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
 University Press.
Worswick, G. D. N. 1969. “Fiscal Policy and Stabilization in Britain.” Journal of Money, Credit and
 Banking, 1(3): 474–495.
Yellen, Janet L. 2015. “Inflation dynamics and monetary policy.” Speech given at the Philip Gamble
  Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts. https://www.
  federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/yellen20150924a.pdf.


                                                   51
                                                          A.         Appendix
         Figure A1: Inflation/output gap correlations by shock in a large-scale DSGE model with a Taylor rule

          Exchange rate risk premium shock            Labour augmenting productivity growth shock                                   Government spending shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

          Investment adjustment cost shock       Residual component of total final expenditure shock                           World preferences for UK exports shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

              Import preference shock                         Import price markup shock                                                   Wage markup shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

             Export price markup shock                      Final output price markup shock                                       Value added price markup shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

              World export price shock                          Monetary policy shock                                                         TFP shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

                World demand shock                                  Labour supply shock                                                   Risk premium shock
                                                                                                       Annual inflation




    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2
                                                                                                                                            Output gap


Notes: For each panel, 1000 periods of data are simulated from the model in Burgess et al. (2013) using the MAPS toolkit
described in the same paper. For each panel, a realisation for the specified shock is drawn each period from a standard
normal distribution. All other shocks are set to zero. The red lines show the lines of best fit from OLS regressions of the
simulated annual inflation data on the (contemporaneous) flexible price output gaps. Monetary policy is specified using
the estimated Taylor rule in the model.



                                                                        52
Figure A2: Inflation/output gap correlations by shock in a large-scale DSGE model under optimal discretionary policy

         Exchange rate risk premium shock             Labour augmenting productivity growth shock                                   Government spending shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

          Investment adjustment cost shock       Residual component of total final expenditure shock                           World preferences for UK exports shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

              Import preference shock                         Import price markup shock                                                   Wage markup shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

             Export price markup shock                      Final output price markup shock                                       Value added price markup shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

              World export price shock                          Monetary policy shock                                                         TFP shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2

                World demand shock                                  Labour supply shock                                                   Risk premium shock
                                                                                                       Annual inflation




    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2         −1           0            1        2
                                                                                                                                            Output gap


Notes: For each panel, 1000 periods of data are simulated from the model in Burgess et al. (2013) using the MAPS toolkit
described in the same paper. For each panel, a realisation for the specified shock is drawn each period from a standard
normal distribution. All other shocks are set to zero. The red lines show the lines of best fit from OLS regressions of the
simulated annual inflation data on the (contemporaneous) flexible price output gaps. Monetary policy is optimal policy
under discretion, where the policymaker minimises, period by period, an ad hoc loss function containing the discounted
sum of squared deviations of annual inflation from target (with a weight of 1) and the output gap (with a weight of 0.25).
The solution is calculated using the algorithm of Dennis (2007).



                                                                        53
Figure A3: Inflation/output gap correlations by shock in a large-scale DSGE model under optimal discretionary policy
           (using real marginal costs as a policy target)

         Exchange rate risk premium shock             Labour augmenting productivity growth shock                                    Government spending shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2          −1           0            1        2

          Investment adjustment cost shock       Residual component of total final expenditure shock                            World preferences for UK exports shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2          −1           0            1        2

              Import preference shock                         Import price markup shock                                                    Wage markup shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2          −1           0            1        2

             Export price markup shock                      Final output price markup shock                                        Value added price markup shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2          −1           0            1        2

              World export price shock                          Monetary policy shock                                                          TFP shock

    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2          −1           0            1        2

                World demand shock                                  Labour supply shock                                                    Risk premium shock
                                                                                                       Annual inflation




    3                                             3                                                                       3


    2                                             2                                                                       2


    1                                             1                                                                       1

    −2       −1          0           1       2    −2           −1            0            1     2                         −2          −1           0            1        2
                                                                                                                              Marginal cost of final output production


Notes: For each panel, 1000 periods of data are simulated from the model in Burgess et al. (2013) using the MAPS toolkit
described in the same paper. For each panel, a realisation for the specified shock is drawn each period from a standard
normal distribution. All other shocks are set to zero. The red lines show the lines of best fit from OLS regressions of the
simulated annual inflation data on the (contemporaneous) flexible price output gaps. Monetary policy is optimal policy
under discretion, where the policymaker minimises, period by period, an ad hoc loss function containing the discounted
sum of squared deviations of annual inflation from target (with a weight of 1) and the marginal cost of final output
production (with a weight of 0.1). The solution is calculated using the algorithm of Dennis (2007).


                                                                        54
