                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SOURCES OF BUSINESS CYCLE FLUCTUATIONS




                            Matthew D. Shapiro
                              Mark W. Watson




                          Working Paper No. 2589




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May 1988



We are grateful for extensive discussions with Olivier Blanchard and Robert
Hall and for many helpful comments from Joseph Altonji, Francis Diebold,
Robert Engle, Stanley Fischer. Robert Gordon, James Hamilton, Danny Quah,
Christopher Sims, James Stock, and participants in the Conference and a
seminar at Yale. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from NSF
Grants Nos. SES-8521791 (Shapiro) and SES-8510289 and SES-8618984 (Watson).
This paper is prepared for the NBER Macroeconomics Annual, S. Fischer, ed.,
(M.I.T. Press, 1988). The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NEER Working Paper #2589
                                               May 1988



                  Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations




                                ABSTRACT


     What shocks account for the business cycle frequency and long run

movements of output and prices? This paper addresses this question using

the identifying assumption that only supply shocks, such as shocks to

technology, oil prices, and labor supply affect output in the long run.

Real and monetary aggregate demand shocks can affect output, but only in the

short run. This assumption sufficiently restricts the reduced form of key

macroeconomic variables to allow estimation of the shocks and their effect

on output and price at all frequencies. Aggregate demand shocks account for

about twenty to thirty percent of output fluctuations at business cycle

frequencies. Technological shocks account for about one-quarter of cyclical

fluctuations, and about one-third of output's variance at low frequencies.

Shocks to oil prices are important in explaining episodes In the 1970's and

1980's. Shocks that permanently affect labor Input account for the balance

of fluctuations in output, namely, about half of its variance at all

frequencies.




Matthew D. Shapiro                               Mark W. Watson
Cowles Foundation                                Department of Economics
  for Research in Economics                      Northwestern University
Yale University                                  2003 Sheridan Road
Box 2125 Yale Station                            Evanston, IL 60208
New Haven, CT 06520
1.   INTRODUCTION

     What is the source of business cycle fluctuations? Most theories take

as axiomatic the answer to this question. The essence of Keynesian theories

Is that in the short run the willingness of agents to absorb the output of

the economy determines the quantity of output produced. On the other hand,

classical and new classical theories do not admit the possibility that

output can deviate from capacity except for perhaps very short intervals.

In these theories, prices and rates of return adjust so that a change in

aggregate demand does not cause output to change. Here, we attempt to

quantify the sources of economic fluctuations by making minimal and

plausible identifying restrictions that do not depend on a theory of the

business cycle.

      Standard textbook treatments of macroeconomic fluctuations separate the

high frequency, business cycle fluctuations from the low frequency, growth

fluctuations. This dichotomy lies at the heart of most Keynesian and

rational expectations models.1 In these models, shocks to aggregate demand

temporarily move the economy away from some "full employment," "potential,"

or "natural" level of output. The natural level of output is determined by

the capital stock, the labor force, and technology in long run


      1lextbook treatments of Keynesian economics treat business cycles as
fluctuations around a long term deterministic trend. Sophisticated
Keynesian macroeconometric models, such as the Fair model, incorporate a
production function that determines output in the long run. Rational
expectations with misperceptions models of the cycle (Lucas, 1973) also have
monetary impulses moving output temporarily from a trend level.
                                   -2—

equilibrium.2 These supply-side factors are assumed to be independent of

the business cycle phenomenon. This dichotomy, which is central to the

neoclassical synthesis, superimposes business cycles as short run

disequilibrium phenomena on an economy in long run equilibrium.

    This business cycle/growth dichotomy has been vitiated by new research

on two fronts. First, research on the time series properties of main

economic aggregates indicates that output can be characterized as following

an integrated process.3 Extracting the long run trend from data generated

by integrated process cannot be accomplished by simple regression detrending

methods. Auxiliary assumptions concerning the covariation of the trend and

cyclical components of the data are necessary. Once covariation of the

trend and cyclical components is allowed, the rationale for detrending loses

much of its appeal.

     Second, some recent theories of macroeconomic fluctuations attribute

all of the variability in output to real factors.4 These real business

cycle theories account for fluctuations at all frequencies by the same

shock. There Is, then, no meaningful dichotomy between the short run and

the long run.

     In this paper, we take seriously the message of these challenges to the

neoclassical synthesis; shocks that move the economy at business cycle


     21n Milton Friedman's (1968) words, the natural rate is "ground out by
the Walraslan system of general equilibrium equations" (p. 8) even if
unexpected monetary disturbances move output In the short run (p. 9).

     3See Nelson and Plosser (1982) and Campbell and Mankiw (1987a).

     4See Kydland and Prescott (1982), Long and Plosser (1983), and Prescott
(1986).
                                   -3-


frequencies may also affect the economy in the long run. Indeed, we use

economic theory about the long run impacts of different shocks to identify

our model. Vet, we do not take this challenge to its extreme.

Specifically, we do not maintain that all fluctuations in output are

attributable to growth shocks. To the contrary, we view fluctuations as

arising from a mixture of shocks; our goal is to disentangle these shocks.

     The key identifying restriction underlying our empirical work is the

simple but powerful assumption employed by Blanchard and Quah (1988), which

we state as:

          The level of output is determined In the long run by

          supply shocks such as shocks to technology and labor

          supply.

This identifying assumption does not exclude the possibility that these

shocks also account for the high frequency movements in output as they

would, for example, in a real business cycle model. Vet, it also does not

exclude the possibility that short run fluctuations are largely explained by

aggregate demand shocks, such as shocks to the money supply or velocity, or

by shocks to fiscal policy or animal spirits. It only excludes the

possibility that the aggregate demand shocks permanently affect the level of

output. The assumption allows the data to choose a description closer to

the Keynesian view, in which fluctuations are predominantly transitory, or a
                                   -4-

description closer to the real business cycle view, in which fluctuations

are largely the result of permanent shocks.5

     In the next section of the paper, we sketch the economic model that

guides our empirical analysis. In Section 3, we give the precise

econometric specification. We present our findings in Section 4 and offer

concluding remarks in Section 5.




2. MODEL

     Our econometric specification is motivated by a model in which the long

run properties of real variables are determined by a simple neoclassical

growth model. In this model, long run movements in output can be attributed

entirely to exogenous changes in labor input and technological progress. In

the short run, output may deviate from its long run steady state value.

These deviations may arise from shocks to the permanent levels of labor

input and technology, which lead to a transition from one steady state to

another, or from the influence of aggregate demand disturbances. Hence,


     5Blanchard and Quah (1988) use this assumption In a bivariate model of
output and unemployment. They assume that output is integrated, but that
unemployment is stationary, and that supply shocks are responsible for the
stochastic growth component of output. Other researchers have relied on the
distinction between permanent and transitory shocks for identification.
Campbell and Mankiw (1987b) identify long run movements in output as the
part of output orthogonal to unemployment changes. King, et al. (1987)
identify the long run movement in output as the conunon long run component in
output, consumption, and investment. Blanchard (1986) analyses a model
where the identifying assumption is long run homogeneity of demand schedules
                                   -5—

movements in output arise from three sources: labor supply disturbances,

technological disturbances, and aggregate demand disturbances. The first

two of these--the supply shocks--have a permanent effect on the level of

output, the third has only a temporary effect.

     Interest rates and the rate of inflation are also included in the

empirical model. All three sources of shocks are allowed to have both long

run and short run effects on the level of Inflation and the level of the

nominal interest rate, but not on the real interest rate.

     Two identifying assumptions allow us to separate these three sources of

shocks from a dynamic reduced form which includes labor input, output,

inflation, and nominal interest rates. The first was alluded to above:

aggregate demand disturbances have no long run effect on output. This

assumption allows us to determine the historical influence of aggregate

demand and aggregate supply on the variables in the model. The second

identifying restriction allows us to divide the aggregate supply effect Into

the component arising from labor input and the component arising from

technology. This second identifying restriction is that the long run level

of labor supply is exogenous. In the long run, labor supply is influenced

neither by aggregate demand nor by the level of technology. We could relax

this assumption to allow permanent real wage growth to affect labor supply.

Doing so would only affect the decomposition of the permanent supply

component into labor supply and technology. The decomposition between

supply and demand would not be affected.

     In standard models of long term growth, the shocks to technology and

labor supply together with capital accumulation determine the level of
                                         -6-


output in the long run. Suppose that labor supply and technology evolve

according to



(2.1)         h      8h +   h1   +



and



(2.2)         4 = 6c + ttl + 8(L)et

where 4 and h are the log levels of technology and labor supply and where
   and e are serially and mutually uncorrelated shocks.         The lag

polynomials Bh(L) and e(L) are assumed to have absolutely sunimable

coefficients and roots outside the unit circle. That is, the dynamics

described by the polynomials are transitory.6

        We define the long run log level of output      as




(2.3)        ynh+(1-a) 4+4

where
         4   Is   the long run log level of capital. That is, we assume that the

production function is Cobb-Douglas in the long run. Yet, as shown below,

we allow output to deviate In the short run from this relationship.




        6Unless otherwise stated, all of the lag polynomials that we use in
this paper will have these properties. Thus, they will always give rise to
transitory dynamics. Where necessary we will invert them.
                                         —7—


        We now introduce our ffrst restriction from economic theory by assuming

that the steady state output capital ratio Is a constant



(2.4)




where t    is   the constant log capital-output ratio. The Solow-Swan7 growth

model would generate a constant v which is a function of 6h' 8c' and the

economy's saving and depreciation rates. Substituting (2.4) into (2.3) and

rearranging yields



(2.5)           y —   h+   (1/a)   £

where the constant i7(1-.a)/a is suppressed.

        If we were willing to identify y and h with the actual log levels of

output and labor, the equations above would define a real business cycle

model although with a much simpler propagation mechanism for the shocks

than, say, Kydland and Prestott's (1982). We close our model, however, by

adding aggregate demand disturbances that allow output and inputs to deviate

temporarily from their long run levels.

        By allowing output and labor to move in the short run independently of

the labor and productivity shocks we Introduce two aggregate demand shocks,

denoted by            and v. These can be thought of as goods market (IS) and

money market (Lii) shocks. They are assumed to be serially uncorrelated and

uncorrelated with the growth shocks. We cannot disentangle these shocks.


        7Solow (1956) and Swan (1956).
                                              -8-


Reasonable specifications of the goods and money market do not restrict just

one of these shocks to affect the price level in the long run. Both labor

input, ht. and output, t' can deviate temporarily from their long run

values because of these aggregate demand shocks, or because of transitory

adjustments to permanent labor and or technology shocks.8 Namely,



                             +
(2.6)       ht
                     h
                                 Eh(L)   [
                                             v,   et   1

and



(2.7)       t —     t    *
                             +
                                 E(L)    [
                                             Vt   et
                                                       12

The dependence of ht on all of the shocks in the model allows flexible

responses of labor to aggregate demand and real wages. Equation (2.6)

allows labor supply to be elastic in the short run. Indeed, in the short

run, workers can be off their labor supply schedules. Output and hours can

deviate from their long run levels as they would in a wide range of models

such as the inflation-augmented Phillips curve, the Lucas supply model, or

the Fischer-Taylor contract model. Moreover, equations (2.6) and (2.7)

break the tight link between output and inputs so that "off the production

function" behavior or labor hoarding can be captured in the estimates. We




        8Tobin's (1958) dynamIc aggregative model Is the first to superimpose a
business cycle model on neoclassical growth model. It features wage
inflexibility as the source of cyclical fluctuations.
                                      -9-

only assume that the production function holds is the long run (equation

2.3).

        Differencing (2.6) and (2.7) yields



(2.8)        Aht —   8h1-"t   + (1-L)Eh(L) ( Vt et v y


and



(2.9)        Ay = O(L)vt + &'e(L)ct + (1-L)E(L) [ V e vj v

which are two of the reduced form equations that we estimate.9

        To complete the model we add equations describing the inflation rate

and the nominal interest rate. The Inflation reduced form is



(2.10)       Aw —       E(L) i: v e w

which implies that the rate of inflation is integrated, its first

difference is stationary, and that all of the shocks can have a long run

effect on the level of inflation.

        Equations (2.3) and (2.4) imply that the long run real interest rate is

constant. Shocks to the system can have only short run effects on the real

rate, so the real rate is stationary. Given the definition of the real

interest rate as the difference between the nominal Interest rate and the


        9Here and for the remainder of the paper, constant terms are
suppressed. They are included in the estimated equations.
                                                - 10   -




expected inflation rate, the restriction on the real rate implies a
restriction on the joint behavior of the nominal interest rate i and the

inflation rate. Specifically, the nominal interest rate and the inflation

rate are cointegrated, leading to the reduced form




(2.11)     it -    Rt - E1(L)   [
                                        Vt et

      Summarizing, the model can be written as



                  Aht                                      Vt

                  Ay1               a                      et
(2.12)                                            A(L)      1
                  Ant

               it_nt


The matrix polynomial A(L) is a function of the polynomials Eh(L)$ E(l)

En(L)             8ht'   and O(L) appearing in (2.8) through (2.11). Our

identifying restrictions can be written in terms of the long run

multipliers, that is, the elements of A(1). Setting the lag operator L

equal to one in (2.8) and (2.9) shows that the long run multiplier from '4

and      to ht and       are zero, and that the long run multiplier from e to

ht is zero. Consequently, the matrix of long run multipliers A(1) is lower

block triangular, so
                                                — 11 —




                                           0     0   0
                              a11
                              a        a         0   0
                                  21       22
(2.13)         A(1) —
                              a31 a32 a33 a34
                              a41 a42 a43 a44


Because we place no restrictions on a34 the identification scheme that we

employ cannot be used to separate the two aggregate demand shocks.'° We

report only their joint impact In our empirical analysis.

      The model summarized in (2.12) and (2.13) might reasonably characterize

aggregate hours, output, inflation, and Interest rates, were it not for the

large oil shocks that occurred in the 1970's and 1980's. We introduce

exogenous oil price changes into our model. Below, we support this

specification for oil shocks. We also assume that oil price changes have no

long run effect on labor supply, which is consistent with our assumption

that there are no wealth effects in labor supply. Oil prices are allowed to

have a permanent effect on all of the other variables in the model.

Denoting the change In real prices by



(2.14)           Aot —   et

the   model becomes




       10With conventional exclusion restrictions, which we abjure in this
paper, one could Identify these shocks.
                                     - 12   -




                Aht                              Vt

                Aot
(2.15)
                              —       C(L)
                Ayt                              et

                Mt
                it_nt                            '1



where C(1) retains the lower block triangular structure of A(1).
     We estimate equations (2.15) and discuss the results in section 4.

Before proceeding to that discussion, we give details in the next section of

the econometric method and specification.




3.      ECONOMETRIC METHOD AND SPECIFICATION

        In this section, we present the precise form of the equations that we

estimate and discuss how we Impose the identifying restrictions introduced

in the last section. These restrictions are a combination of covariance

restrictions and restrictions on long run multipliers. There are several

equivalent methods for imposing these identifying restrictions. We discuss

a simple instrumental variables approach.

        We assume that the C(L) in equation (2.15) is invertible, so that it

can be written as



(3.1)                   D(L) X —
                                    - 13   -




where D(L)—C(LY1, X, is the 5x1 vector (Ahtt Ao', Ayt, Mr it-It)' and

is the vector of disturbances (vt          et   4. '4)'. Following   the

assumptions made in section 2, we assume that the roots of ID(z)I are

outside the unit circle and that wt is vector white noise. Our goal in the

empirical analysis is to use the observed data to estimate the disturbances

   and the moving average polynomial C(L). To do so, we appeal to

identifying assumptions derived from the model in Section 2. The classical

approach to the Identification problem Is to impose exclusion restrictions

in the equations so that "endogenous" variables have no effect on

"exogenous" variables and specific exogenous variables affect some but not

all of the endogenous variables. Criticisms of these restrictions are well

known.     In rational expectations models restrictions across the

coefficients in 0(L) and covariance restrictions on th! matrix of structural

disturbances are used to identify the model. These restrictions typically

impose tight constraints on the dynamics of the model

       In "structural" VAR approaches (Bernanke (1986), Blanchard and Watson

 (1986), or Sims (1986)), the dynamics of the model are left unconstrained

 and identification is achieved by imposing constraints on contemporaneous

 relations of the data through D(O) and the covariance matrix of w. These

 restrictions are similar to the classical exclusion restrictions and are

 often difficult to justify on a orion grounds.

       An alternative identification scheme is used by Blanchard and Quah

 (1988).h1 They constrain 0(1), the long run multipliers, as well as the


            closely related identification procedure is employed in King, it

 fi.   (1987).
                                     - 14   -




covariance matrix of      to identify the model. We use this approach in our

empirical analysis. In particular, we use the block lower triangular

structure of D(1) (inherited from C(1)), together with the assumption that

the supply shocks Vt, et and        are mutually uncorrelated and uncorrelated

with the demand disturbances, to identify the supply disturbances, the

impulse response functions of these disturbances, and a linear conbination

of the demand disturbances. To this end, write the first equation of

(3.1), the equation for ht as




(3.2) Aht a                     + _0$ho,JàOtJ +
                  ZflhhjAhtj
              +
                     0h,it-J +                          + Vt




Since 0(1) is lower triangular the long run multipliers from Aot Ay,
                                                                             Mr
and it_it to Aht are zero so the coefficients of their lags each sum to

zero. Imposing these constraints yields



(3.3) Aht a
                  2;_1Phh,AhJ + j:o7h0iA Otj + .07hyJAYt.J

              +                 +
                                       lhlj(Altj-Mtj) + Vt


so that only differences of Aot                 and    enter the equation.

Clearly, equation (3.3) cannot be estimated by ordinary least squares since
                                      - 15    -




It   includes contemporaneous values of some of the regressors which are

correlated with Vt. We estimate the equation by instrumental variables

using lags one through p of Aht. AYt,             it_1tt and lags zero through p

of Ao as instruments. The current value of to can be used because it is

exogenous.

       Similarly, the equation for          is specified as




(3.4) Ay =                      +         $yoiAOti +
                 1$yh,jAhtj
                  p-i      2          p-i
                                                               + flYVvt + et
              + .01y1,jA It-i + 1


where the differences of Alt and              are included in the equation to

impose the constraint that the long run multipliers from            and         to
Ay are zero. Equation (3.4) can be estimated using the same set of

instruments as (3.3) plus,          the estimated residual for (3.3). Recall

that Vt Is uncorrelated with e. The Instrumental variables procedure makes

their sample analogues uncorrelated by construction.

       The equations estimated for        and i-w are reduced forms. They are



                                +
(3.5) Alt
                 1n,?t-j             o$Io,iAotj + 1PKy,iAYtJ
                  p                   p                                          1
              + 11P11,jAIti + 1 1$1,(it_nti) + irv"t + $1eet + at


and
                                       - 16   -




(3.6) 1tt -                                             +
                                      + sop
                                                            ;1siy,jatj

                +                 +     P
                                               (i-)          + s1   + sleet + 4




The error terms at and 4 are linear combinations of the structural

aggregate demand shocks vt and v. Since these disturbances are

uncorrelated with the regressors, equations (3.5) and (3.6) can be estimated

by ordinary least squares. We include the estimated Vt and e in equations

(3.5) and (3.6) as regressors and instruments; the estimated at and 4 are

uncorrelated by construction with those estimated supply shocks.'2

        Finally, oil prices are exogenous, so they are simply specified as



(3.7)         Aot —



        All   equations include constant terms. The results from estimating

(3.3) through (3.7) are the subject of the next section.'3


        121n the RATS packages, the equations can be estimated without the
disturbances included and then transformed via the standard Cholesky
decomposition. This decomposition picks out a different linear combination
of the aggregate demand shocks, but since only their joint effect is
identified, this difference is inessential.

        13Blanchard and Quah (1988) use a different technique to estimate
models subject to these long run Wold causal orderings. They estimate the
unrestricted vector autoregression for            and then transform the system by
                                  - 17   —




4.   RESULTS

4.1. Data

     The variables considered in our model are total hours worked (ht)

output ()' inflation (wt) the nominal interest rate (it), and real oil

prices (ot). The Appendix gives the details of the sources of the data.

Estimates reported in this paper are based on quarterly U.S. data from

1951:1. Data before 1951 are used as initial conditions in

autoregressions. The end of the sample period is discussed below. The data

for labor hours, output and price are for the nonfarm private economy

excluding housing. We choose output for the nonfarm, non-housing private

sector rather than the whole economy because there are serious conceptual

difficulties relating the output to the inputs of housing, government, and

farms. Housing and government are imputed in the national accounts.



post-multiplying the VAR by a matrix that imposes the necessary restrictions
on the long run multipliers and the residual covariance matrix. There is
unique matrix that simultaneously diagonalizes the VAR innovation covariance
matrix and triangularizes the matrix of long run multipliers. When the only
constraints on the system are a lower triangular matrix of long run
multipliers and a diagonal innovation covariance matrix, the model is
just-identified, and this procedure can be thought of as "indirect least
squares." The instrumental variable approach that we outline can be thought
of as two stage least squares. When the model is just-identified, these two
estimation methods produce identical estimators and are equivalent to the
FIML estimator. The model that we estimate is overidentified. In
particular, oil prices are assumed to be strictly exogenous, and this
imposes overidentifying restrictions. These overidentifying restrictions
are easy to impose in our instrumental variable approach, but are much more
difficult to impose in the indirect least squares approach.
                                     - 18   -




Farmers are largely self-employed so measures of their hours of work are

unreliable. Moreover, studying the nonfarm business sector allows us to

abstract from the major changes in aggregate labor productivity caused by

workers leaving farms.'4



4.2. Oata Analysis

     Our modelling and estimation strategy depends critically on the correct

differencing of our time series.     In Table 1 we present a variety of unit

root test statistics that underlie our choice of specification.     In the top

panel we present the familiar Dickey-Fuller t-statistics, which test for a

root of unity versus a root less than unity. In the next column we present
                                                                           A
the largest estimated root from a sixth order autoregression denoted by p.

In the hours, output, and productivity regressions we included a time trend

in the autoregression to eliminate deterministic drift in these series. The

t-statlstlcs for hours, output, labor productivity, inflation, and interest

rates are far less extreme than the 10 percent critical values. The
                     A
estimated values of p are less than unity, but under the null hypothesis of

a unit root, these estimates have a substantial negative bias. As pointed

out in Schwert (1987) this bias is particularly severe when the first

differences of the data have a large moving average component. Such moving

average components might explain the small value of P for inflation.

     Unit root tests cannot be performed on the unobserved ex ante real

interest rate; we present results for the ex oost real rate. Since the null

hypothesis of a unit root in the ex ante real rate Implies a unit root In


     14See Denison,1974, pp. 62-4.
                                    - 19   -




the   ex Dost real rate, little Is lost In this substitution. The results for

the ex oost real interest rate it-rt+l are qualitatively different from the

results for the other variables. The Dickey-Fuller t-statlstic is much

closer to the 10 percent critical value (its p-value is approximately 12

percent), and the estimated value of p is only 0.81. Thus, there Is

stronger evidence supporting the hypothesis that the real rate is stationary

than there is supporting the hypothesis that the other variables are

stationary.

       In the bottom panel of the table we present the multivariate unit root

tests developed in Stock and Watson (1987). The first statistic, Qf(413).

tests the null hypothesis of 4 versus 3 unit roots among the four variables

lit, y, ,r, and it. The null of four unit roots is strongly rejected: the

p-value of the test Is 0.3 percent. The data, therefore, appear to be

cointegrated. The next statistic, Qf(3'2). tests for 3 versus 2 unit roots

in the four variable system. Here the data are consistent with the null of

3 unit roots: the p-value for the test is 85 percent. Thus, there appears

to be only one cointegrating relationship among the data.

       In summary, these results suggest that htt
                                                      y-h 1      and    each

contain a unit root, that there is one cointegrating relationship, and that

the stationary linear combination of the data Is it_Xt implying a

statIonary real interest rate. Recall that stationarity of the real

interest rate is one of the restrictions imposed on the data by our

neoclassical model of long term growth.

       Unit root tests never provide sharp discrimination between the unit

root hypothesis and the hypothesis that the data are stationary but highly
                                    - 20   -




serially   correlated. It Is possible, especially in the case of inflation,

that we are making a type two error by falsely accepting the null of a unit

root, or in the case of the real rate, making a type one error by falsely

rejecting the null. The univarlate results for the nominal interest rate

suggest that either Inflation or the real rate has a root very close to

unity. If the large root is less than one, then an expectations theory of

the term structure suggests that interest rates should become more

stationary (that is, have smaller AR(1) coefficients) as the term increases.

Interest rates do not get more stationary as the term increases. The values

of   for 6 month, 1 year, 5 year, 10 year, and 20 year nominal Federal

interest rates vary between 0.96 and 0.98. One concludes that either

inflation or the real rate has a unit root. Our data analysis, together

with our priors, leads us to accept the unit root in inflation and reject

the unit root in the real rate.

     Finally, before proceeding to the results, we offer support for our

specification of exogenous oil price changes. Oil prices are, in principle,

endogenous. On average, real oil prices should increase by the real rate of

Interest, with innovations in the price reflecting shocks to demand and

supply. Yet, over our sample period oil price changes are dominated by four

exogenous events: the 'torn Kippur War In 1973, the fall of the Shah in 1979,

price decontrol In 1981 and the 1986 "collapse" of OPEC. That these events

dominate the data is obvious from Figure 3, whIch plots the percentage

change In real oil prices over the sample period.
                                    — 21   -




4.3.   Results for Basic Model

       We estimate the model in equations (3.3) through (3.7) using six lags

of the data together with a constant. Initially, we carried out the

analysis using data through 1987:2, but It quickly became obvious that this

led to possible serious misspecificatlon for the role of oil prices. The

largest oil shock during the sample period occurred during the 1986

collapse of OPEC: during 1986 oil prices fell 50 percent. This dramatic

decrease in prices coincided with sluggish growth. Averaging this period of

positive covarlation between oil price changes and output growth together

with the 1974-1975 and 1979-1981 periods of negative covariation misses the

possibility that the dynamic response of the variables in the model is

different for oil price decreases than it Is for oil price increases. The

most straightforward way to allow for this asymmetric response is to

interact the lags of oil prices over the 1986-1987 period with a dummy

variable. Since we allow six lags of oil prices in our model, full

interaction of the lags with the dummy variable over the 1986:1 -   1987:2

period results In a perfect fit over that period. Consequently, we present

results for the model estimated the model using data through 1985:4.

       The results for the estimated model are summarized in Figure 2 and

Table 2. The graphs give the response of the logs of labor, output, the

price level, Inflation, and the nominal and ex ante real interest rates to

shocks in labor supply, oil and technology.'5 The tmpulse responses are

normalized as follows: the labor supply shock has a unit long run impact on


       15The ex ante real interest rate is computed using the expected
inflation rates Implied by the model.
                                   - 22   -




hours, the oil shock represents a 1 percent increase in oil prices, and
the technology shock has a long run impact of 1.6 on output. The long run

elasticity of output with respect to technology is 1/a (see equation 2.5).

Since the share of labor averages approximately 0.625, our impulse response

functions trace out the effect of a 1 percent long run increase in

technology.

     Since our identification procedure does not allow us to untangle the

two aggregate demand shocks we do not report the aggregate demand impulse

response functions. Any impulse response functions that we reported would

depend on arbitrary normalizations that would make interpretation difficult.

     A 1 percent shock in long run labor supply has a 0.4 percent impact

effect on hours. After five to six quarters, hours reach 80 percent of

their long run level. The labor shock increases output by 0.6 percent in

the long run. Recall that we expect a unit long run elasticity of output

with respect to the labor supply shock. We cannot reject the null that the

elasticity is one.16

     Oil price increases lead to reductions in hours and in output. The

output response reaches a trough after six quarters when a 1 percent oil

price increase leads to a decline in output of 0.1 percent. The point

estimate of the long run elasticity of output with respect to oil prices is

-0.07.   011 prices have a small positive long run effect on inflation. A

1 percent increase is oil prices leads to an increase in the price level of

roughly 0.09 percent after two years.




     161he t-statistic for this null hypothesis equals 1.7.
                                  - 23   -




     Increases in technology have little effect on hours. Their effect on
output is immediate; the impact effect of output Is 80 percent of the long

run effect.

     Table 2 contaIns the variance decompositions for a variety of forecast

horizons.17 The table presents the fraction of the forecast errors

variance for each of the variables that is attributed to each of the shocks.

Since we can observe a linear combination of the aggregate demand shocks, we

report the variance explained by aggregate demand. Our Identifying

restrictions imply that 100 percent of the variance of hours is explained by

the labor supply shock at the infinite horizon and that 100 percent of the

variance of output is explained by shocks to labor supply, oil and

technology at the infinite horizon. At shorter horizons aggregate demand is

allowed to have an impact on these variables. The results in Table 2

suggest that this impact is substantial. Approximately 40 percent of the

variability in hours and 30 percent of the variability in output over the

one year horizon is attributed to aggregate demand. Shocks to technology

account for roughly 20 percent of the variability in output but explain

little of the variation in hours during the first year. As the horizon

increases from 4 to 8 to 20 quarters the variability in output attributed to

aggregate demand falls from 28 percent to 20 percent to 12 percent; the

variability attributed to technology increases from 22 percent to 32 percent


     17The standard errors reported in Tables 2 and 3 were calculated using
Monte Carlo simulation. The simulations were carried out using draws from
the normal distribution for the innovations in hours, output, price, and the
interest rate. The historical sample path of oil prices was used in all of
the simulations. Three hundred Monte Carlo draws were carried out.
                                    - 24   -




to   37 percent. 011 prices explain only a small fraction of the variability

in output.

      Our results are quite close to results found by other researchers

using different measures of output and different specifications. King,

Plosser, Stock and Watson (1987) find that between 30 and 40 percent of the

8 quarter ahead variability in per capita GNP can be attributed to

transitory factors (corresponding to aggregate demand in our framework, but

unspecified in theirs). Blanchard and Quah (1988) use data on real GNP and

unemployment. They attribute 10 percent to 40 percent of the 8 quarter

ahead variability of GNP to the temporary, aggregate demand shock,

depending on the detrending procedure for the unemployment rate. All of

these results attribute a substantial fraction of, but less than half of,

the variance of output to shocks that have a temporary effect on the level

of output.

      Aggregate demand is the main determinant of the variability in prices,

inflation, and the nominal and real interest rate. It explains

approximately 90 percent of the variability in prices and inflation,

between 70 and 90 percent of the variability in nominal interest rates, and

roughly the same percentage of the ex ante real rate.

       The variance decompositions show the importance of the shocks in

explaining the average variability in output. Of equal importance is the

role that these shocks played in specific historical episodes. Our

procedure produces estimates of the quarter-to-quarter shocks. Because

these are serially uncorrelated, they are difficult to Interpret. In Figure

3, we plot the 8 quarter ahead forecast error in output and its components.
                                   - 25   -




These are simply an eight-period weighted average of estimated shocks, where

the weights are given by the impulse response functions. Again, the

parameter estimates are based on data through 1985:4.

     A striking feature of the graph Is the post-sample 1986-1987 period.

Using the estimated model through 1985:4, the oil price decline during 1986

provides a dramatic stimulus to growth. Actual output growth was sluggish,

so the positive stimulus from oil is countered by large negative

contributions from labor and technology. Given the sharp drops in output

following the oil shocks of the 1970's as well as during the pre-OPEC era

(Hamilton, 1983), our model predicts a strong increase in output following

the big decline in oil prices in 1986. Given that the boom did not occur,

our procedure offsets the positive effect on output of the oil price

decrease with negative shocks to the other components permanently affecting

output. As noted above, one would like to accommodate this episode by

allowing for an asymmetric response of output to oil prices. Given that oil

prices fell by a large amount only once in the sample, it is not possible to

estimate such an asymmetric response.

     The results through 1985:4 are not complicated by the asymmetric

response to oil prices. Throughout the early 1980's, oil prices were

important negative factors affecting output. Declines in aggregate demand

coincide nearly perfectly with the output "double dip," and the decline is

particularly severe during 1981-1982. Labor supply is essentially neutral

until the very end of the 1981-1982 recession when It turns down sharply

while technology does not play a role in the recessions of the 1980's.
                                   - 26   -




     During the 1974-5 recession, oil and labor supply are the major
factors. Aggregate demand does not play a role in this episode although it

fluctuates noticeably In the years immediately following it.

     The largest negative impact of technology occurs during the 1970

recession and corresponds to the beginning of the productivity slowdown.

Note also that there is a lower frequency contribution of technology to the

forecast errors in output corresponding to the extremely strong performance

of measured productivity growth in the 1960's and its subsequent slowdown in

the 1970's.18

     In addition to its roles in the recessions of the 1980's, aggregate

demand appears to have played the major role In the recessions of 1957-1958

and 1960.

     Finally, at the beginning of the sample, there is a large movement in

the labor supply variable related to the Korean demobilization. This

anomaly remains in the results even if an exogenous variable accounting for

military employment is included in the system.'9




     18Note that negative values for the contribution of technology in
Figure 4 usually do not correspond to declines In the level of technology
because It has a positive drift.

     '9Thls variable is the ratio of military employment to the civilian
labor force. Its movements, which match closely those of the ratio of
Federal purchases to private output, are dominated by the Korean war and to
a lesser extent by the Vietnam War.
                                     - 27   -




4.4.   Role of Permanent Labor Shocks in Output Fluctuations

       A striking feature of our results is the large role that permanent

labor supply shifts play In the variability of output at all frequencies.

Labor supply explains 40 percent of the 8 quarter ahead variability In

output (Table 2). Moreover, permanent shifts in labor input are the first

or second most important factor in the recessions of 1954, 1958, and 1975

(Figure 3). Why do these results arise and should they be regarded as

surprising? Economists have long attributed about half of long run changes

in the level of output to exogenous changes In labor input.20 This

decomposition of variance at very long horizons is almost entirely

noncontroversial.2' Now consider why, in our estimates, that the shock to

labor is important at all frequencies. Labor supply shocks are important

because we allow them to have a stochastic rather than •a deterministic trend

and because the stochastic trend is estimated to have a large variance. Our

findings are based on a simple, standard, and widely accepted model of long

term growth on which is superimposed business cycle dynamics. Because we

find our specification so plausible, we are reluctant to dismiss it. Vet,

because the important role of the permanent labor shock Is inconsistent with

our prior beliefs, we investigate alternative specifications.




       20See many careful studies by Denison (1974, for example) and others.

       2l has been challenged recently by Romer (1987).
                                    - 28   -




4.4.1.     Measure of Labor Input

      We measure labor input as total hours worked in the sector. Given that

a production function Is at the heart of our growth model, using hours

worked as the labor variable is appropriate. For questions of low

frequency movements in labor input, a smoother variable such as labor force

or population are perhaps just as appropriate.    In the notation of the

model of Section 2, labor force or population could be used in an equation
      *                                                                       *
for   ht with actual hours worked fluctuating in a stationary manner about ht.

In such a formulation, the labor supply shock would be the structural error

in the labor force equation. The residual stationary deviations of hours

about labor force would be attributed to aggregate demand.

      This solution, attractive as it may seem, fails because the deviation

of hours worked from labor force Is not stationary. The first graph in

Figure 4 shows the deviation of hours worked from labor force (in

logarithms). This deviation clearly contains a trend.22 The trend arises

from a convolution of the decline in the average work week, the increase In

female participation in the labor force, and the recent increase in part-

time work. If we treated this trend as stochastic, It would play nearly an

identical role as labor supply shock in the estimates just discussed.




       22The detrended deviation of log hours from log labor force is highly
serially correlated. Indeed, one marginally cannot reject the null
                                                           A
hypothesis   that It has a unit root. The deviation has a p of 0.90 and a
Dickey-Fuller t-statistics of -3.4. See the notes to Table 1 for details of
these computations.
                                     - 29   -




Alternatively,   we could treat it as deterministic and abstract from issues

of weekly hours and participation in the calculations.23

     The fluctuations of the detrended deviation of the logs of hours and

labor force are very similar to those of detrended log hours. These series

are graphed in the second two panels of Figure 4. Because the series are so

similar, the model we are about to discuss--with trend-stationary hours but

ignoring the labor force data--is very similar to the trend-stationary labor

supply model where the labor force data are included.




4.4.2.        Trend-Stationary Labor Supply

     As discussed above, we find that the permanent labor shock is

important at all frequencies because labor appears to have a stochastic

trend, and the estimated variance of this trend is large. Harvey (1985),

Watson (1986) and Clark (1987) point out that the sum of a stochastic trend

 (a random walk) and an independent highly serially correlated stationary

 process have an ARIMA representation with long run properties    that are

 poorly approximated by low order autoregressions. A low order

 autoregression could attribute some of the cyclical variability in the

 series to the stochastic trend. Therefore, the large stochastic trend in

 hours that we find may arise from a confusion between trend and stationary

 components.


         23Blanchard and Quah (1988) face a nearly identical problem In dealing
 with the trend in the unemployment rate. Their results are sensitive to
 whether or not unemployment is detrended.
                                    30 -




     To check for misspeciflcation of this form we have carried out a

variety of experiments, Including doubling the lag length on all variables

In the model, and doubling the lag length of the variables In the hours

equation.24 Qualitatively, the results are unchanged. Labor supply

remains an Important detenninant of the business cycle variability In

output. Including many lags of output in the hours equation should give

ample opportunity for removing the cyclical movements from its disturbance.

     The most extreme case of this misspeclficatlon occurs when hours

contain no stochastic trend component and are characterized as stationary

deviations about a deterministic trend. Differencing hours would Introduce

a unit moving average root into the model, which could not be inverted to

yield an autoregressive representation.    In this case, our models with 6

lags and our model with much longer lags would both be misspecified. It is

unlikely, however, that they would give the same qualitative results. Even

if the long lags could not eliminate the stochastic trend, they could make

Its variance small.

     The estimates based on the differenced-stationary specification for

labor are valid even If labor supply is trend stationary only If the

estimation procedure allows for unit moving average roots. We do not

undertake the difficult task of estimating a loosely parameterized vector

ARMA model. Yet, it is instructive to consider the univariate ARMA process

for hours to check for the presence of unit MA roots. Campbell and Mankiw


            Is only a partial response to the criticism, since we have
estimated unconstrained autoregressive models. Proponents of unobserved
component models would estimate parsimonious constrained ARIMA models. See
below for a further discussion of this econometric issue.
                                         - 31   -




(1987a) discuss the difficulties in estimating processes where a unit MA
root might cancel an over-differenced dependent variable. For aggregate

GNP, their results indicate that it is difficult to distinguish the trend-

stationary AR(2) model from the ARIMA(1,1,1). For our log hours variable,

the trend-stationary AR(2) estimates are (with constant and trend

suppressed)



     ht — 1.54 ht_i - 0.61 ht_2 +
             (.07)      (.07)
                                         vt     S.E.E. —   0.757,   Q(36) —   26.5.



The ARIMA(1,i,1) estimates are (with the constant suppressed)



     Aht —    0.38 Ahti +   Vt1   +   0.39 vt_is S.E.E. — 0.776,       Q(36) —    29.3.
              (.10)                   (.11)




Here S.E.E. is the standard error of estimate and Q(36) is the Box-Pierce

test.25 Note, In the univarlate setting, there is no evidence that the

moving average root Is near unity. Were there a unit moving average root in

the hours equation of the vector system, there would also be one in the

univariate equation. Although the univariate test is not as powerful as a

multivarlate test and we have explored only a limited number of ARIMA

models, the univarlate estimates do suggest that excluding MA components

from the VAR estimates is not a serious problem. Hence, we believe that a

unit moving average root is not a major source of mlsspeclfication.


     25The estimates of the ARIMA model are exact maximum likelihood and are

computed using a computer program kindly provided by John Campbell.
                                    - 32   -




     Notwithstanding   these findings, one can still argue that the estimate

of   reported in Table 1 for hours is 0.93 which, if it was a precise

estimate, would suggest that hours exhibit persistent but stationary

deviations about a linear trend. The estimate is not precise. A value of

equal to 0.93 is roughly the median value one would expect to   find if the

true value of p was 1. That is, there is significant downward bias in

when the true value of p is c1ose to one. On the other hand, despite the
                          A
bias in the estimate of p, one also cannot reject the hypothesis that hours

are borderline-stationary.

     Prior knowledge is needed to resolve the problem. One possible prior

is that the true underlying trend in hours comes from population growth

whose trend is very smooth and likely to be well approximated by a

deterministic function of time. An alternative prior is that the stochastic

growth component in hours is trivially small compared to its stationary

component. Both priors suggest that deviations of hours from a

deterministic trend are, for all practical purposes, stationary.

     We therefore present estimates consistent with this prior by estimating

a model where labor is stationary around a deterministic trend. We view

the estimates with detrended labor as an extreme but instructive case. They

show the consequence of a prior that the stochastic trend in labor has low

variance by taking the extreme position that the variance is zero. The

trend-stationary model is a special case of our basic model with stochastic

labor, but with the variance of the long run component in labor set to zero.

An econometric difficulty (estimating a loosely parameterized vector ARMA

model) necessitates estimating the trend-stationary model as a separate,
                                   - 33   -




special   case. In principle, it is nested by the stochastic trend model. If

we estimate the stochastic labor model with labor differenced and in fact

the process is trend stationary, the estimated process will have a unit-

moving average root, which should undifference the labor model. Yet,

because we do not have explicit moving average components in our estimation,

this undifferencing cannot take place in practice.

     Specifically, the model with trend-stationary labor is as follows:

Hours are assumed to be stationary around a deterministic trend. Output is

still integrated, since we maintain the assumption that productivity Is

integrated.26 Since detrended hours are now stationary, there are now

three transitory shocks in the model. We now associate these shocks with

aggregate demand. Oil prices and technology permanently affect the level of

output. A summary of the results for this model can be found in Figures 5

and 6 and in Table 3.

     In Figure 5 we present the impulse response functions. The responses

to changes in oil prices are much the same as they were in the model with

stochastic labor supply growth. The responses to shocks in technology are

different. Hours now fall sharply in response to shock to technology and

output increases very slowly.

     Table 3 presents the variance decompositions. Oil explains roughly the

same fraction of output as in the model with differenced-stationary hours.

The contributions from aggregate demand and technology are substantially



     26Froin Table 1, the estimated p   for   average productivity is 0.98.
Hence, there is less doubt about the non-stationarity of output or output
per hours than for hours.
                                   - 34   -




different.   In this model, aggregate demand explains 90 percent of output

over the first year, and 80 percent at the 8 quarter horizon. Indeed even

though we constrain aggregate demand to have no long run effect on output,

it still accounts for roughly 35 percent of the variability of output at the

8 year horizon. This result is a consequence of labelling shocks in the

hours equation as aggregate demand rather than as labor supply. Recall

that these shocks are very persistent.

     The historical 8 quarter decomposition, shown in Figure 6, tells much

the same story as the variance decompositions. Aggregate demand is now more

Important, oil retains its importance for the 1974 and 1980-198Z periods,

and technology is somewhat less important.

     The two sets of estimates tell markedly different stories about the

sources of economics fluctuations in the post-war United States.

Unfortunately, the data do not clearly support one model or the other.

Priors concerning the likely role of permanent labor supply responses are

necessary. While the models give very different answers about the relative

importance of transitory/permanent shocks, much of this difference is

attributed to the allocation of the shock to hours. That is, our results

suggest that permanent components other than labor supply--productivity and

oil prices--have been less important than is suggested by others.

Productivity is somewhat more important at business cycle frequencies in the

model with stochastic labor supply growth, but even there it explains only a

third of the 8 quarter variation in output.
                                    - 35   -




4.5.   Solow Residual

       We would also like to incorporate a measure of technology, such as the

Solow (1957) residual, explicitly into the estimation. It might seem

consistent with our modelling strategy to assume that the long run changes

in the Solow residual measure long run changes in technology. But a

difficulty arises in using the Solow residual because it is Inherently

measured as a rate of change. If this measure contains errors due either to

data or specification problems, these errors will accumulate in the measures

of the level of technology. Hence, the accumulated Solow residual will

contain a permanent component attributable to measurement error in addition

to the permanent component representing technological progress. Such

difficulties could arise from measurement issues alone. Specifically,

transitory measurement error in capital accumulation leads to a permanent

error in the accumulated Solow residual. Additionally, if measured input

flows are not always equal to input services (labor is hoarded) then the

accumulated Solow residual will have a permanent component similar to that

arising from measurement error. Similarly, Hall (1988) shows that the

measured Solow residual contains a business cycle component if the

assumption of perfect competition is incorrect.

       Despite these difficulties in incorporating the Solow residual

explicitly into the model, it is interesting to know how our estimated

technological shock relates to this widely-studied measure of technological

progress. The considerations in the previous paragraph suggest that the

relationship at high frequencies is likely to be weak. Yet, if the

measurement errors are fairly small one might expect to find a relationship
                                    - 36   -




in   the long run between the Solow residual and our technological shock. We

compute the fraction of variance at frequency zero of the Solow residual

accounted for by our estimated shocks to technology.27 In brief, we find

that our technological shocks are closely related to the Solow residual at

low frequencies. For our basic model with differenced-stationary hours, the

technological shock accounts for 62 percent of the variation of the Solow

residual in the long run; for the model with trend-stationary labor, that

figure Is 75 percent.28 Therefore, we conclude that our estimated

technological shock corresponds closely to more familiar estimates of

technological progress.29




       27The definition of and data for the Solow residual are discussed in
detail In the Appendix. The variance decompositions are computed based on a
regression of the Solow residual on current and six lagged values of the
five shocks plus a constant and six lags of the Solow residual itself.

       281n the hours differenced-stationary model, labor shocks account for 6
percent, oil price shock for 8 percent, aggregate demand for 16 percent, and
the residual for 8 percent of the long run variation in the Solow residual.
In the hours trend-stationary model, the decompositions are 6 percent for
labor, 4 percent for oil prices, 9 percent for aggregate demand, and 6
percent for the residual.

       29See Shapiro (1987) for further discussion and evidence that the Solow
residual Is a good measure of technological innovations despite the
potential presence of cyclical errors.
                                     - 37   —




4.6.   Further Considerations

       We conclude this section with a discussion of a few minor empirical

issues and some general comments about the identifying assumptions that we

employ. First, consider an empirical observation about the long run

output-capital ratio, which is assumed to be constant in our equation

(2.4). With our data, the ratio wanders between 1.04 at the beginning of

the sample to 0.85 at the end of the sample. Its sample path looks more

like a random walk than stationary oscillations around a constant mean. We

are skeptical that building a variable output-capital ratio into our model

would be fruitful. The mean and variance of its drift is small relative to

the other drifts in the model, so we believe ignoring it does not

substantially affect our results.

       An important limitation of our model is that aggregate demand

disturbances are synonymous with transitory disturbances. Purely transitory

aggregate supply and technological disturbances will be misclassified as

aggregate demand disturbances. If aggregate demand disturbances have a

long run impact on capacity, they will be misclassified as labor supply and

technological disturbances. We would be reluctant to apply this technique

to European countries that appear to display hysteresis in unemployment

(Blanchard and Summers, 1986). For post-war U.S. data, there is a stronger

case for stationarity of the unemployment rate.3°

       We now turn to the limitations of the technique. For many VAR

exercises, the degree of differencing and cointegration of the data is not


       30Unempioyment is the only series for which Nelson and Plosser (1982)
reject the null hypothesis of a unit root.
                                   - 38   -




a crucial issue. The researcher can estimate the model in levels and let

the VAR estimate unit roots if it chooses. Inference issues can be subtle,

but many of the usual inference procedures are asymptotically valid even in

the presence of unit roots and cointegration. Identification procedures

such as ours that rely on the long run multipliers depend critically on the

location of unit roots. So, for example, we have already seen how the

results can change when the assumption that hours are difference stationary

is changed.   In addition, our assumption that inflation contains a unit

root Is not innocuous. We have estimated a modification of our five

variable system replacing lrt   (1-L)pt with (i.AL)pt where A is estimated by

maximum likelihood. We find that values of A greater than 0.9 provide

local maxima of the likelihood function and results similar to those

reported in the paper follow from this model. There is another local maxima

of the likelihood function of comparable size near AO. Those estimates

yield results somewhat different from those reported in the paper. We

believe those results are unreliable. They are based on autoregressive

models with roots near unity, and consequently the long run multipliers,

upon which our identification rests, are close to being undefined.

     Finally, VARs do not eliminate omitted variable bias. It is critical

in all structural VAR exercises that the VAR forecast errors span the space

of structural disturbances. Except in unusual circumstances, the number of

variables in the VAR must be at least as large as the number of structural

disturbances driving the variables. Hence, the statistical model must be

based on an underlying economic model that takes into account the major

shacks impinging on the aggregate economy.
                                  - 39    -




5.   CONCLUSIONS

     We now summarize the main results from our model in which labor supply

is allowed to have a stochastic trend. Aggregate demand accounts for

between twenty and thirty percent of the variation in output at business

cycle horizons. Moreover, it is an important factor in most episodes

labelled as recessions in the NOER chronology. Technological change

accounts for roughly a third of output variation. Adverse technological

shocks are not an important factor in recessions except for the recession in

1970 which roughly coincides with the beginning of the productivity

slowdown. Favorable technological shocks play an important role in

explaining strong growth in the 1960's. Additionally, our estimated

technological shocks and the observed Solow residual are highly correlated

at low frequencies.

     Oil price shocks are a key factor in explaining the recessions

following the two OPEC crises, but are unimportant on average.

     The estimates imply a large role for permanent shifts in labor input In

explaining output fluctuations at all frequencies. The finding that changes

in labor are Important in explaining low frequency movements in output is

not surprising. Our estimate that labor supply changes account for half the

long run changes In the level of output corresponds closely with the

findings of growth accounting research.

     Our finding that the permanent shocks in labor account for at• least

 forty percent of output variation at all horizons Is, however, quite

 surprising. Yet, this finding follows from a simple and widely-accepted

 growth model together with our specification for the stochastic process
                                      40 -




followed   by hours. We find that changes in hours have a permanent component

and that changes in output do not account for much of the cyclical

variability of hours. Hence, permanent, autonomous, shocks to hours will

have an important role at business cycle frequencies.

     In order to accommodate the prior belief of many economists--which we

share--that changes in labor supply are fairly smooth, we estimate an

alternative model where hours.worked are stationary about a deterministic

trend. Detrending hours is an extreme solution because it Implies there is

no stochastic component to the trend in labor supply. Our basic model with

stochastic trend could have told us that variance of the trend is small.

Indeed, had we allowed for unit moving average roots In the estimates, the

trend-stationary case is nested in the basic model with stochastic trend.

We do not find a unit moving average root in the univariate ARIMA model for

hours, and so we believe that explicitly Incorporating moving average

components into the model would not alter the results.

     Despite our belief that the model with stochastic trend in labor is the

best econometric specification, we present results with trend-stationary

labor because of our prior that labor supply changes smoothly and because

of the econometric difficulty in distinguishing stochastic and deterministic

trends. In the model with deterministic labor, aggregate demand is very

important in explaining output at business cycle frequencies and has a very

persistent effect on output. This result arises because the low frequency,

high variance, autonomous movements in labor input are attributed to

aggregate demand rather than labor supply. Because taking out a

deterministic trend is an overly stringent way of imposing the prior that
                                     - 41   -




labor   supply shocks are smooth, these estimates provide a loose upper bound

on the contribution of aggregate demand to output fluctuations.

        The statistical difficulty in distinguishing between the two models

should be viewed in proper perspective. The basic model with the stochastic

trend in labor supply implies that the permanent components of output

account for two-thirds to three-quarters of business cycle frequency

variation in output. This finding is similar to those of other researchers.

We are surprised that permanent movements in labor input are so important in

explaining output fluctuations in the short run. Yet, we would not want to

label these shocks as aggregate demand as is done effectively in the trend-

stationary estimates. The estimated labor supply shocks are autonomous

movements in labor input. The estimates take into account Okun's law by

purging the estimated labor shock of movements in hours that can be

explained by business cycle frequency movements In output and other

variables. A theory that would, attribute these shocks to aggregate demand

needs to explain why there are large movements In hours not explained by

movements In output.
                                        - 42   -




                                       Table   1


                           Unit Root Descriptive Statistics


                            A. Univarlate Unit Root Tests

                                                    -           A
               Series               Dickey-Fuller               p
                                     t-statlstic

                                         -2.71                  .93

                                         -2.47                  .93

                                         -0.99                  .98

                                         -1.96                  .85
                     lrt


                     it
                                         -1.84                  .96
                                         -2.48                  .81




                           B. Multivariate Unit Root Tests

                     Four Variable System: ht 't' t' tt

4 vs. 3 Unit Roots             Qf(43) — -62.84          P-value —   0.3   percent

3 vs. 2 UnIt Roots             Qf(32) — -13.83          P-value —   84.8   percent



     Note: The Dickey-Fuller t-statistics are calculated from a regression
Including six lags of the differenced data. The regressions for ht; .'v and
                                                                                      and
Yt-ht Included a constant and time trend. The regressions for '                 1t'
it_Kt+i included a constant. The 10 percent critical values for ht,                     and
tt are -3.12. The 10 percent critical values for it,                It'   and lt_it+i are
-2.57.    is largest autoregressive root in the sixth order autoregression
used to calculate the Dickey-Fuller t-statistics.           The multivariate tests
(Qf) are described in Stock and Watson (1987). They are calculated using
linearly detrended data with a VAR(6) correction.
                                         - 43 -



                                            Table   2

                               DECOMPOSITIONS OF VARIANCE

                               Stochastic Trend in Hours


quarter                    fraction of hours explained by shock to

          labor supply               oil                technology      aggregate demand

   1       58.9 (20.8)             0.3 (2.0)            4.3    (10.1)       36.5 (19.5)
   4       57.7 (21.0)             0.8 (2.6)            1.4 ( 7.2)          40.1 (19.0)
   8       64.7 (19.4)             2.1 (3.0)            2.1 ( 6.3)          31,0 (15.8)
  12       68.7 (17.9)             2.3 (3.1)            1.8 ( 5.9)          27.2 (14.0)
  20       76.8 (14.6)             1.7 (2.3)            1.2 ( 5.2)          20.3 (11.1)
  36       86.2 (10.0)             1.0 (1.4)            0.7 ( 4.3)          12.1 ( 7.2)
          1OO.0                    0.0                  0.0                 0.0



quarter                     fraction of output explained by shock to
          labor    supply            oil                technology      aggregate demand

   1      45.9    (17.7)           0.8   (2.7)          25.2   (15.1)       28.1   (17.6)
   4      48.4    (18.4)           1.1   (2.0)          22.2   (14.5)       28.3   (17.1)
   8      40.1    (16.3)           8.0   (6.1)          32.3   (13.7)       19.5   (13.1)
  12      38.1    (15.4)           9.9   (7.0)          35.3   (13.6)       16.7   (11.2)
  20      40.3 (15.2)              10.6 (7.3)           36.6   (13.9)       12.5   ( 8.7)
  36      45.2 (15.7)              10.4 (7.5)           36.5 (14.4)          7.8 ( 5.9)
          61.7    (20.8)           7.5 (9.4)            31.9 (15.9)          0.0


quarter                     fraction of price level explained by shock to
          labor    supply             oil               technology      aggregate demand

   1      10.3 (15.2)                0.4 (2.3)           0.0 (14.2)         89.2 (19.1)
   4       6.3 (12.3)                5.6 (5.7)           0.1 (12.9)         88.1 (16.9)
   8       5.3 (11.7)                6.2 (6.9)           0.5 (12.0)         88.0 (16.7)
  12       4.3 (11.7)                4.7 (6.8)           0.8 (12.2)         90.2 (16.9)
  20       3.6 (12.0)                3.6 (7.1)           1.4 (12.5)         91.5 (17.3)
  36       3.0 (12.7)                2.9 (7.4)           1.8 (12.7)         92.3 (18.0)
           1.6 (15.3)                2.4 (9.8)           2.5 (11.1)         93.5 (19.1)
                                          - 44 -


                                          Table   2

                                        (continued)


quarter                        fraction of inflation explained by shock to

                labor supply             oil            technology      aggregate demand

   1             10.3 (15.2)            0.4 (2.3)        0.0   (14.2)        89.2 (19.1)
   4              7.6 (10.7)            9.8 (5.9)        0.6 (10.7)          82.0   (14.5)
   8              6.3 ( 9.3)           10.4 (5.4)        1.5 ( 9.2)          81.8 (12.4)
  12              5.3 ( 9.3)            8.9 (5.5)        1.7 ( 9.4)          84.1 (12.6)
  20              4.6 (10.0)            7.0 (5.7)        2.0 (10.1)          86.4 (13.5)
  36              3.7 (11.5)            5.3 (6.2)        2.2 (11.0)          88.8 (15.0)
                  1.6 (15.3)            2.4 (9.8)        2.5 (11.1)          93.5 (19.1)

quarter                        fraction of real Interest rate explained by shock to

                labor supply             oil            technology      aggregate demand

   1             10.3 (15.2)            0.4 (2.3)        0.0 (14.2)          89.2 (19.1)
   4             14.9 (14.0)            3.2 (3.7)        1.5 (12.0)          80.4 (16.7)
   8             21.3 (13.1)            7.3 (4.8)        2.3 (10.0)          69.1 (14.6)
  12             22.5 (13.6)            6.6 (4.7)        2.2 (10.0)          68.6 (14.6)
  20             24.0 (14.3)            6.7 (4.8)        2.3 (10.2)          67.1 (14.9)
  36             24.9 (15.0)            6.5 (4.9)        2.3 (10.5)          66.3 (15.3)
                 34.1 (17.6)           10.2 (8.5)        3.6 (11.1)          52.1 (19.1)

quarter                        fraction of nomipal interest rate explained by shock to

                labor supply             oil            technology      aggregate demand

    1             0.7 ( 5.5)            8.5 (6.5)        7.8 (10.9)          83.0 (12.1)
   4             11.7 (10.5)           14.3 (7.8)        3.4 ( 7.0)          70.6 (12.2)
   8             13.8 (12.4)           11.5 (8.2)        2.4 ( 6.4)          72.3 (13.2)
   12            12.0 (12.3)           11.3 (8.8)        2.2 ( 6.7)          74.4 (13.7)
   20             8.4 (11.9)           10.5 (9.1)        1.9 ( 7.3)          79.2 (14.4)
  36              4.8 (12.2)            8.2 (8.9)        1.9 ( 8.7)          85.1 (15.5)
                  1.6 (15.3)            2.4 (9.8)        2.5 (11.1)          93.5 (19.1)

        Note:    See text for details of these computations. Standard error are in
parentheses.
                                         - 45   -




                                          Table     3

                               DECOMPOSITIONS OF VARIANCE

                              Deterministic Trend In Hours


quarter     fraction of hours explained by shock to

             oil                  technology            aggregate demand

   1      0.0 (1.9)               61.1 (24.9)             38.9 (24.9)
   4      0.2 (2.0)               51.4 (23.1)             48.3 (22.9)
  8       6.4    (6.3)            41.5   (19.8)           52.1   (19.7)
  12      8.4    (7.7)            40.2   (19.2)           51.4   (19.1)
  20      8.6    (7.9)            39.9   (18.9)           51.5   (19.0)
  36      8.7    (7.9)            39.7   (18.8)           51.6   (19.0)
          1.9    (9.4)            40.2   (29.6)           57.8   (29.4)

quarter     fraction of output explained by shock to

                oil                technology           aggregate demand

   1       0.4   (2.5)             0.8   (12.0)           98.8   (12.2)
   4       2.2   (3.5)             3.9   (11.2)           93.9   (11.7)
   8      14.2   (8.6)             5.2   (10.0)           80.7   (11.7)
  12      16.4   (9.3)            10.4   (11.2)           73.2   (12.3)
  20      15.2   (8.7)            26.4   (13.1)           58.5   (13.0)
  36      11.0   (7.7)            51.7   (12.5)           37.3   (11.3)
           2.0    (8.9)           98.0 ( 8.9)              0.0




quarter      fraction of price level explained by shock to

                 oil               technology           aggregate demand

   1       0.3 (       2.3)        4.9 (16.9)            94.7 (16.9)
   4       6.6 (       5.6)        6.0 (16.1)            87.4 (16.4)
   8       8.3 (       7.4)        3.3 (14.0)            88.4 (15.1)
  12       7.5 (       8.1)        2.1 (13.5)            90.5 (15.0)
  20       7.9 (       9.6)        0.6 (12.8)            91.5 (15.0)
  36       9.5 (11.4)              0.6 (13.1)            89.9 (15.7)
          13.9 (14.8)              6.6 (16.0)            79.5 (19.8)
                                        - 46 -



                                     Table    3

                                   (continued)


quarter          fraction ofinflation explained by shock to

                 oil             technology       aggregate demand

   1          0.3 (2.3)          4.9 (16.9)        94.7 (16.9)
   4         11.0 (5.5)          4.8 (12.7)        84.2 (13.1)
   8         11.8 (5.6)          4.1 (10.6)        84.1 (11.2)
  12         11.1 (6.2)          3.4 (10.2)        85.5 (11.1)
  20         10.8 (7.3)          3.2 (10.1)        86.0 (11.5)
  36         11.5 (9.1)          4.0 (11.2)        84.5 (13.2)
             13.9 (14.8)         6.6 (16.0)        79.5 (19.8)

quarter          fraction of real interest rate explained by shock to
                 oil              technology        aggregate demand

   1           0.3 (2.3)          4.9   (16.9)       94.7 (16.9)
   4           3.6 (3.9)          4.6 (12.5)         91.9 (12.3)
   8           6.5 (4.3)          7.4 (10.3)         86.0 (10.2)
  12           6.0 (4.2)          7.4 (10.3)         86.6 (10.2)
  20           5.5 (4.3)          7.9 (10.7)         86.6 (10.5)
  36           5.2 (4.4)          8.3 (11.3)         86.4 (10.9)
              15.0 (4.3)         17.0 ( 8.0)         68.0 (8.1)
quarter          fraction   of nominal interest rate explained by shock to

                  oil              technology       aggregate demand
    1          8.5 ( 6.1)          8.1 (10.9)        83.4 (11.7)
   4          13.4 ( 7.6)         15.6 (12.1)        70.9 (12.5)
   8          10.5 ( 8.1)         12.0 (11.6)        77.4 (12.3)
   12         11.0 ( 9.0)          9.6 (10.8)        79.4 (11.9)
  20          13.1 (10.0)          6.3 ( 9.2)        80.6 (11.7)
  36          14.4 (11.1)          4.7 ( 9.8)        80.9 (13.3)
              13.9 (14.8)          6.6 (16.0)        79.5 (19.8)




        Note: See text for details of these computations. Standard error are in
parentheses. Aggregate demand includes the shock to hours worked.
                              Figure 1
                          OIL PRICE CHANGES

        160


        120



a)      80
0
ci::
        40
0
         0

4-
       -40
a)
U
a)
0      -80


       -120


       -160
              51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81 84 87
                                Year
                                             Figure 2
                               IMPULSE RESPONSE FUNCTIONS
                                STOCHASTIC. TREND IN HOURS

                                    Response of Hours
 1.0




         :PitI7T7T
     0


 1.0
             0 3 6 9 12 15 lB 21 24 27 30 33
                                    Response of Output
3.0
2.0 -                1   -N
             ..—J,
 I.0
     0
-1.0     —
             I                  I        I   I       I   I       I    I   I   I
             o 3 6 9 12 15 lB 21 24 27 30 33
                             Response of the Price Level
 3
                                                                         -—   -—
 2                                                                   — —
                                          --- -— -—
                               —-   — ---
 0 -             ..-t.t
             036     I   I           I           I
                               9 l2 15 lB 21 24 27 30 33
                                                             I            I   I




                                                     Response to Labor Supply —
                                                     Response to Oil Price
                                                     Response to Technology — - —
           >t--
                                               Figure 2
                                               (Continued)
                                   Response of Inflot ion
 .2
                        /\ A
  0
—.1

-.2
-.3                                    I       I       I         I       I       I       I
           o3
           I                       I

                              6    9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33
                        Response of the Nominal Interest Rate
 .2 -
  .1


  0 -
       —           /I
-.2
-.3            I         I     I   I       I       I       I         I       I   I   I

           0            3     6    9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33
                             Response of the Reol Interest Rote
  .2

   0

-.2
-.3

                                                               Response to Labor Supply —
                                                               Response to Oil Price
                                                               Response to Technology
                                        Figure 3

                       COMPONENTS OF FORECAST ERROR FOR OUTPUT

                               STOCHASTIC TREND IN HOURS

   Percent
(Annual Rate)                                                               Percent Variance

                2.0
    Total         0                                                         100
                -2.0

                 2.0
Labor Supply      0                                                         40
                -2.0

                 2.0
  Oil Price       0                                                          8
                -2.0

                2.0
 Technology                                                                 32
                -2.0

                 2.0
  Aggregate       0•                                                         20
    Demand      -2.0


                       55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87
                                       Figure 4
                             HOURS AND LABOR FORCE

                 Ratio of Hours Worked to Labor Force
                              (Logarithms)
-6.4

-6.6 -

-6.8       I        I          I                   I      I      I




         1951     1957       1963         1969    1975   1981   1987

       Detrended Ratio of Hours Worked to Labor Force
                        (Logarithms)
 .08 -
 .04
  0
 .04
-.08                    I          I

          1951     1957       1963        1969    1975   1981   1987

                            Detrended Hours Worked
                                 (Logarithms)
 .08
 .04
  0
-.04
-.08
          1951     1957       1963         1969   1975   1981   1987
                                                                Figure 5

                                              IMPULSE RESPONSE FUNCTIONS

                                             DETERMINISTIC TREND IN HOURS


                                                       Response of Hours
  1.0

   0
                                                        —
                                             —— — —
-1.0     t                      ,    —

         'I
                   ——
                        ,/
-2.0                                 I
         03             I                      I            I           I               I    I                    I            I
                                     6         9 12 15 lB 21 24 27                                                         30 33

                                                       Response of Output
 2.0 -

  1.0                                          -
                                     ,
                            ,   6'

   0 -                  I
             •I
                  'I.
-1.0     I              I                I                  I               I           I                         I        I       I

                        3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27
                                                   I                                             I


         0                                                                                                                 30 33

                                     Response of the Price Level
2.0
                                                                                .                                                      -—
                                                                                                                               —

 LO-                                                                                                                  ——

                                                                                                     —
                                                                                                             ——
                                                                                                                                   —
  0
                                                                —




-1.0
         036                                                        I
                                              9 12 15 lB 21 24 27 30 33
                                                        I                           I        I           I        I                I




                                                                                            Response to Oil Price
                                                                                            Response to Technology
                                                                      Figure 5
                                                                      (Continued)

                                                         Response of Inflation
 .2
 .1                              A
                                                                  —

  0 -          ..-—rt                                        ——

                             I
                    /
—.1                 I
                   I
-.2        I,
-.3        I                                         I                 I    I    I              I   I

           o3
                                                                  I                     I



                                         6           9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30                             33


                        Response of the Nominal Interest Rote
 .2
 .1

  0                                                      ———
                                                 —
       -       t                     /
                   '_—_
                    V
-.2
-.3    —
                                                                  I    I    I       I       I   I   I   I

                         3 6 9 12 15
                         I               I

           o                                                               lB 21 24 27 30               33


                                     Response of the Real Interest Rote
 .2
  .1

  0    -
       -
               .tfl
               I

—.1

-.2    —




-.3
           036               I               I           I

                                                     9 12 $5 18 21 24 27 30 33

                                                                                Response to Oil Price
                                                                                                         --
                                                                                Response to Technology -
  Percent
Annuol Rote)                                                               Percent Vorionce

                2.0
   Toto I                                                                  tOO
                2.8


                2.0
  Oil Price       0                                                         '4
               -2.0


                2.0
 Technology      0                                                          52
               -2.0


                2.0
  Aggregote       0                                                         SI
   Demand      -2.0



                      55 57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87
                                   - 47   -




                               DATA APPENDIX




     This Appendix discussed the data used in the estimates.

     All data are quarterly. The estimates are carried out on data from

1951:1 to 1987:2. All data are seasonally adjusted unless otherwise noted.

     Outout and the price level are measured as the 1982 dollar quantity and

the deflator for total gross domestic product less the gross domestic

product of farms, the government, and the housing sector. These data are

available In the National Income and Product Accounts. Given that our

estimates are based on a model of long run growth relating measured Inputs

to measured output, this measure is more appropriate than gross national

product. First, this level of aggregation (private domestic nonfarm and

nonresidential) matches hours and capital stock data. Second, this

aggregation abstracts from the major Imputations in the national accounts:

output of own-occupied housing is imputed based on its rental value; output

of the government is imputed as its wage bill. Third, farmers are largely

self-employed so there is no meaningful hours data for them. Shocks hitting

the farm sector also might be very different from shocks to the nonfarni

sector.

     The hours data are hours of all persons in the nonfarm business sector.

This index Is published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics as part of its

productivity data.

     The labor force Is defined as the civilian labor force minus

agricultural and civilian government employment. These data are also

published by the BLS.
                                          - 48   -




        The interest rate data are average of monthly data for three-month

Treasury bills on the secondary market.

        The oil once series is the producer price index for crude oil (PW561,

not seasonally adjusted) deflated by our general price index.

        Computation of a quarterly Solow residual Is complicated by the

unavailability of compensation and capital stock data on a quarterly basis.

Hence, our procedure necessarily involved some interpolation.

        The formula for the Solow residual is



(A.1)            —
                     Ay
                          -
                              s Ah -   (1-s)   Akt



where       is the share of labor compensation in nominal output and Aye, Aht

and Akt are growth in output, labor, and capital. The capital stock is the

beginning-of-period stock. Output and labor are measured as above. The net

capital stock on a constant dollar basis for nonfarin business is available

on an end-of-year, not end-of-quarter basis (see August 1987 Survey of

Current Business, for example). We calculate the quarter-to-quarter changes

in the capital stock by using the quarterly gross investment series (gross

private domestic nonfarm fixed investment) from the NIPA. We know the net

change in the capital stock over the year from the annual capital stock

data. We use this information to convert the gross flows to net flows by

assuming the ratio of gross to net investment is the same within each

quarter of a given year.

        The compensation for nonfarm private business employees is also only

available annually (Table 6.4 of the NIPA). We add to employee compensation
                                    - 49   -




three-quarters   of proprietor's income (net of depreciation) to arrive at the

annual estimate of s. The quarterly figure is then defined as a weighted

average of the previous years and the current years share. The weights for

the first quarter are 3/4 on the previous year and 1/4 on the current year;

for the second quarter are 1/2 and 1/2; for the third 1/4 and 3/4; and 0 and

1 for the fourth quarter. This procedure approximates the standard Divisia

index approximation, which is, in annual data, to take a moving average of

the current and lagged year's data as an estimate of the current share.
                                     - 50   -




                                   REFERENCES



Bernanke, Ben S. 1986.      Alternative Explanations of the Money-Income
     Correlation. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
     25(Autumn) :49-99.


Blanchard, Olivier J.     1986. Empirical Structural Evidence on Wages,
     Prices, and Employment in the US. NBER Working Paper No. 2044,
     Cambridge, MA.


Blanchard, Olivier J. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1986. Hysteresis and the
     European Unemployment Problem. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1:15-78.


Blanchard, Olivier 3. and Mark W. Watson. 1986. Are Business All Cycles
     Alike? American Business Cycle, Robert J. Gordon, ed. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press.


Blanchard, Olivier J. and Danny Quah. 1988. The Dynamic Effects of
     Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances. M.I.T. Mimeo.


Campbell, John V. and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1987. Are Output Fluctuations
     Transitory. Quarterly Journal of Economics 102:857-80. (a)


Campbell, John V. and N. Gregory Mankiw. 1987. Permanent and Transitory
     Components in Macroeconomic Fluctuations. American Economic Review
     Proceedings 77:111-7. (b)


Clark, Peter K. 1987. The Cyclical Component of U.S. Economic Activity.
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 102:797-814.


Denison, Edward F.    1974. Accounting for United States Economic Growth.
     1929-1969. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
                                   - 51   -




Friedman, Milton. 1968. The Role of Monetary Policy. American Economic
     Review 58:1-17.


Hall, Robert E.   1988. The Relation Between Price and Marginal Cost in U.S.
     Industry. Journal of Political Economy. Forthcoming.


Hamilton, James. 1983. Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II,
     Journal of Political Economy 91:228-48.


Harvey, Andrew C. 1985. Trends and Cycles in Macroeconomic Time Series.
     Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3:216-27.


King, Robert, Charles Plosser, James Stock, and Mark Watson. 1987.
     Stochastic Trends and Macroeconomic Fluctuations. University of
     Rochester. Mimeo.


Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Presáott. 1982. Time to Build and Aggregate
     Fluctuations. Econometrica 50:1345-1370.


Long, John B. and Charles I. Plosser. 1983. Real Business Cycles. Journal
     of Political Economy 91: 39-69.


Lucas, Robert E. 1973. Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation
     Tradeoffs. American Economic Review 63:326-34.


Nelson, Charles R. and Charles I. Plosser. 1982. Trends and Random Walks
     in Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications. Journal
     of Monetary Economics 10:139-69.


Prescott, Edward C. 1986. Theory Ahead of Business-Cycle Measurement.
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 25(Autumn):11-44.


Romer, Paul M. 1987. Crazy Explanations for the Productivity Slowdown.
     NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2:163-202.
                                   - 52   -




Schwert, G. William. 1987. Tests for Unit Roots: A Monte Carlo
    Investigation. University of Rochester. Mimeo.


Shapiro, Matthew 0. 1987. Are Cyclical Fluctuations In Productivity Due
    More to Supply Shocks or Demand Shocks. American Economic Review
     Proceedings 77:118-124.


Sims, Christopher A. 1986.     Are Policy Models Usable for Policy Analysis?
     Quarterly Review Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (Winter) 2-16.


Solow, Robert M. 1986. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.
     Ouarterlv Journal of Economic 70:65-94.


Solow, Robert M. 1957. Technical Change and the Aggregate Production
     Function. Review of Economics and Statistics 39:312-20.


Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 1987. Testing for Common Trends.
     Northwestern University. Mimeo.


Swan, T.W. 1956. Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation. Economic
     Record 32:334-61.


Tobin, James. 1955. A Dynamic Aggregative Model. Journal of Political
     Economy 63:103-15.


Watson, Mark W. 1986. Univariate Detrending Methods with Stochastic
     Trends. Journal of Monetary Economics 18:49-75.
