                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          BOOM-BUST CAPITAL FLOW CYCLES

                                     Graciela L. Kaminsky

                                      Working Paper 25890
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w25890


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2019




This is a draft of an article that has been commissioned for publication by Oxford University
Press as part of the Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Economics and Finance, http://
economics.oxfordre.com/. I would like to thank the editor and two anonymous referees for
excellent suggestions. I gratefully acknowledge support from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking (Grant No INO14-00009) and the SOAR Fellowship, IIEP, GWU. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Graciela L. Kaminsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Boom-Bust Capital Flow Cycles
Graciela L. Kaminsky
NBER Working Paper No. 25890
May 2019
JEL No. F3,F34,F65

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines the new trends in research on capital flows fueled by the 2007-2009 Global
Crisis. Previous studies on capital flows focused on current-account imbalances and net capital
flows. The Global Crisis changed that. The onset of this crisis was preceded by a dramatic
increase in gross financial flows while net capital flows remained mostly subdued. The attention
in academia zoomed in on gross inflows and outflows with special attention to cross border
banking flows before the crisis erupted and the shift towards corporate bond issuance in its
aftermath. The boom and bust in capital flows around the Global Crisis also stimulated a new
area of research: capturing the “global factor.” This research adopts two different approaches.
The traditional literature on the push-pull factors, which before the crisis was mostly focused on
monetary policy in the financial center as the “push factor,” started to explore what other factors
contribute to the comovement of capital flows as well as to amplify the role of monetary policy in
the financial center on capital flows to the periphery. This new research focuses on global banks’
leverage, risk appetite, and global uncertainty. Since the “global factor” is not known, a second
branch of the literature has captured this factor indirectly using dynamic common factors
extracted from actual capital flows or movements in asset prices.


Graciela L. Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
I.   Introduction

         Almost 45 years after barriers to capital flows were erected around the world in the aftermath of
the Great Depression, the collapse of the Bretton Woods System in 1973 launched a new era of financial
globalization. With floating exchange rates, countries can follow independent monetary policies even in
the presence of capital mobility. Thus, as currencies started to float in 1973, countries began removing
restrictions to capital flows. United States and Germany were the first to eliminate capital controls. Japan,
the United Kingdom, and Latin America followed later in the 1970s. The rest of Europe followed suit in
the late 1980s by relaxing controls on its path to the monetary union. By the early 1990s East Asia had
removed most capital controls. Since then, capital flows have dramatically increased and have played an
important role on economic growth, the business cycle, and financial crises.
         Naturally, the research on capital flows has surged. One of the areas of research that has
flourished the most is that of understanding what triggers boom-bust cycles in international capital flows.
With developing countries suffering a variety of currency, banking, and sovereign debt crises in the 1980s
and 1990s in the aftermath of capital flow bonanzas, the focus during this early phase of financial
globalization was on these countries. One theme of this research is the distinction between global “push”
factors and country-specific “pull” factors. The questions most frequently asked are about the role of the
financial center. Is monetary policy in the financial center at the core of the volatility of capital flows to
the periphery? Does monetary policy in the financial center trigger crises in the periphery? Calvo,
Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993, 1996) were the first to emphasize the importance of external push factors
in explaining capital flows to emerging economies. They isolated monetary policy in the financial center
as one of the main culprits fueling capital flow bonanzas to the emerging periphery. Importantly, the early
empirical research on capital flows focused on the behavior of net capital flows or current account
imbalances. All this changed with the onset of the Global Crisis in 2007. The focus of attention shifted to
advanced economies. Also, since the onset of the Global Crisis was preceded by a dramatic increase in
gross financial flows while net capital flows remained mostly subdued, the attention in academia and
policy circles zoomed in on gross inflows and outflows with special attention to cross border banking
flows.
         This paper reviews the new research on capital flows during the last ten years in the aftermath of
the Global Crisis. We can divide this research as follows: First, the research focusing on the triggers of the
2007-2009 crisis as well as on the effect of this crisis on capital flows in its aftermath. This research
concentrates on the role of global banks in the years preceding the crisis and on the explosion of non-
financial corporates’ borrowing in international capital markets in its wake Second, the research

                                                      1
examining the role of global and idiosyncratic factors (the traditional “push-pull” factors) in explaining
gross capital flows. This research examines the evidence on gross capital flows for a longer episode, with
some research going back to the 1980s. Most of this research uses panel regression estimations. Third,
the Global Crisis motivated researchers to capture the degree of commonality in capital flows around the
world. This research mostly centers on extracting unobserved components from capital flows using
dynamic latent factor models. The next three Sections discuss respectively these three areas of research.
The last Section provides some reflections.

II. Capital Flows and the Global Crisis

        The Global Crisis erupting in August 2007 and the bonanza that preceded the crisis fueled a
growing research on the type and size of capital flows at the core of the capital flow boom preceding the
crisis, the mechanisms through which these flows created financial fragilities, and the spillovers of the
crisis to both advanced and developing countries.         The Global Crisis shifted the focus from current-
account imbalances to the spectacular evolution and integration of international financial markets
captured with gross flows (inflows plus outflows). These flows increased from about 10 percent of world
GDP in 1988 to over 30 percent in 2007. One of the earliest papers assessing the role of gross flows on
financial fragility in the years predating the Global Crisis is Obstfeld (2012). In this paper, Obstfeld
evaluates (theoretically and empirically) the case for focusing on current account imbalances as well as
the case for emphasizing gross flows and positions as the source of financial fragility. He describes how
gross exposures in the presence of financial distortions can carry risks of financial instability regardless of
whether the country has a current-account deficit or surplus: “a country with a gross short-term debt
position may be vulnerable to a run, just as banks are, even if that country as a whole holds a large net
foreign asset stock.” (page 9). Importantly, while Obstfeld emphasizes that the explosive growth of gross
positions led to a balance-sheet crisis in 2007-2009, he reminds us that large and persistent current
account imbalances in a world with incomplete markets can also signal elevated macroeconomic and
financial stresses, as the evidence from the 1980s and the 1990s shows.
        Borio and Disyatat (2011) study what triggered the easy credit conditions in the United States
leading up to the Global Crisis. They examine the evidence supporting two alternative hypotheses: the
“Global Savings Glut” and the “Global Banking Glut.” According to the “Global Savings Glut” hypothesis
(Bernanke, 2009; Krugman, 2009; and Portes, 2009), net capital outflows from emerging market countries
with current account surpluses to current account deficit nations (such as the United States) exerted
downward pressure on world interest rates, fueled a credit boom and risk-taking in major advanced


                                                      2
economies and sowed the seeds of the global financial crisis.           In contrast, the “Global Banking Glut”
hypothesis (Borio and Disyatat, 2011; Shin, 2011; and Acharya and Schnabl, 2011) indicates that the
spectacular expansion of global gross flows from the late 1990s to 2007 was driven by flows between
advanced economies, which ultimately led to a balance-sheet crisis. In an exhaustive empirical analysis,
Borio and Disyatat show that current accounts did not play a dominant role in determining financial flows
into the U.S. in the run-up to the crisis. They show that gross capital flows into and out of the United
States expanded roughly three times faster than net claims. In contrast to the claims of the “Savings Glut”
hypothesis that stresses the role of the official sector in emerging economies, Borio and Disyatat show
that the bulk of gross inflows into the United States originated in the private sector, with global banks at
the heart of these flows. Importantly, they also show that the largest source of capital inflows into United
States was Europe, not emerging markets. Europe accounted for around one-half of total inflows in 2007.
Of this, more than half came from the United Kingdom, a country running a current-account deficit and
roughly one-third from the Eurozone, a region roughly in balance.
        Shin, in his Mundell-Fleming Lecture at the IMF Research Conference (2011), provides a
theoretical model on the creation of global liquidity centering on the activities of international banks. At
the core of this model is the leverage cycle of banks. The paper shows that cross-border banking flows
and the fluctuating leverage of global banks are the channels through which permissive financial
conditions are transmitted globally. The presentation also provides in-depth evidence on the important
role of global banks in the U.S. credit system. Using data from the BIS banking statistics complemented
with data from the Federal Reserve’s Flow of Funds, Shin shows that at the onset of the crisis the offshore
banking sector intermediating in U.S. dollar claims and obligations was of comparable size to the U.S.
commercial banking sector. The paper also provides further information about the importance of the
assets of the European global banks in the United States using the Federal Reserve’s disclosures on the
liquidity support given to commercial banks under the Term Auction Facility. 1 This data shows that non-
U.S. banks’ and U.S. banks’ total borrowing from this facility are similar, providing further evidence that
non-U.S. global banks were at the center of the U.S. financial fragility in 2008.
        Another early contribution to the “Global Banking Glut” literature is Acharya and Schnabl (2010).
In this paper, the authors present an impressive exhaustive analysis of the determinants of the large gross
capital flows across advanced economies based on the proliferation of asset-backed commercial paper


1
 This facility allowed banks to access liquidity support without forcing banks to face the stigma of borrowing from
the Federal Reserve’s discount window


                                                         3
(ABCP) conduits. 2 The authors construct a rich database of ABCP conduits that allows them to identify
the country of origin and the funding currency of these instruments as well as their importance to U.S.
money market funds. To construct this database, they use a variety of sources including conduit rating
reports from Moody’s Investor Service, Bankscope, Osiris, the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds, and iMoney
Net. As shown in the paper, ABCP conduits grew significantly before the financial crisis, becoming the
largest short-term debt instrument with more than $1.2 trillion outstanding in January 2007. Sixty percent
of those conduits were sponsored by global banks outside the United States. Importantly, in contrast with
the hypothesis of the savings glut, the sponsoring commercial banks were based both in current account
surplus countries (for example, Germany, Japan, and the Netherlands) and current account deficit
countries (for example, the United States and the United Kingdom). Their estimates show that,
independent of the sponsor location, most (80 %) ABCP was issued in U.S. dollars. These ABCP conduits
were sold to risk-averse investors, such as money market funds, who invested between 10% to 30% of
their portfolio in ABCP conduits.      Most of the proceeds were used to invest in long-term financial assets
of current account deficit countries, such as the United States. As shown by regressions estimates, when
negative information about U.S. assets became apparent in August 2007, banks in both surplus and deficit
countries experienced difficulties in rolling over ABCP conduits and as a result suffered significant losses.
         Bruno and Shin (2015b) contribute to this debate by quantifying the effect of changes in U.S.
monetary policy on cross-border bank capital flows. The attention in this paper is focused on the
amplifying role of global bank leverage on the monetary transmission mechanism. To capture this
amplifying mechanism, Bruno and Shin estimate a VAR with four indicators: the real Fed Funds target rate,
the broker dealer leverage, the VIX, and the real U.S. dollar exchange rate. They find that shocks to
monetary policy in the United States have economically significant and persistent effect on risk and banks’
leverage, explaining up to 30 percent of the variance of risk (captured with the VIX) and up to 20 percent
of the variance of global banks’ leverage (captured with the broker dealer leverage). In turn, leverage
shocks magnify the volatility of monetary policy in the United States and risk over medium horizons
(explaining almost 40 percent of the variance of monetary policy and 20 percent of the variance of risk).
To capture the international dimension of U.S. monetary policy spillovers, the original VAR is expanded to
include total cross-border lending by global banks to other banks using BIS Locational Bank Statistics. This


2
  As explained in Acharya and Schnabl, “These conduits are a form of securitization in which banks use off-balance-
sheet vehicles to purchase long-term assets financed with short-term debt. Importantly, in this form of
securitization, banks retain the credit risk associated with conduit assets. Hence as long as banks are solvent,
conduits are risk-free for outside investors but can generate significant risks for banks. In exchange for bearing these
risks, banks have access to low-cost funding via the ABCP market.” (page 38)

                                                           4
extension shows that banks’ leverage is the essential link that amplifies the effect of expansionary U.S.
monetary policy shocks and lower risk into larger cross-border banking flows and local currency
appreciation. Overall, their findings indicate that shocks to U.S. monetary policy and global banks’
leverage have persistent and economically significant effects on cross-border flows.
        The previous studies of the Global Crisis focus their analysis on banking flows across advanced
economies. Milesi-Ferretti and Tille (2010) extend their analysis to the various types of capital flows
around the time of the crisis and include the experiences of both advanced economies and emerging
markets. In particular, they study the behavior of capital flows around the Global Financial Crisis using
quarterly data for 75 countries from 2006 to 2009. They find that there is a high degree of heterogeneity
in the patterns of capital flows across time, types of flows, and countries. Their estimations indicate that
international banking flows—particularly among advanced economies— suffered the most dramatic
reversal in the aftermath of the crisis. Their analysis stresses that the main driving force in the reversal of
capital flows following the Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy was a “risk shock,” with investors taking a more
cautious view of investment prospects, but that “pull factors” also mattered. In particular, they show that
countries with large holdings of debt and bank positions before the crisis saw a larger contraction of
capital inflows during the crisis and in its aftermath. Finally, they conclude that macroeconomic conditions
also played a role. For example, there was a larger decline in inflows in countries with downward revisions
in the fiscal and growth outlook.
        While the research at the onset of the 2007-2009 crisis is mostly focused on the banking flow
bonanza preceding the crisis, the post-crisis research is largely centered on the rise of international
corporate debt. The post-crisis episode witnesses the retrenchment of global banks as the main providers
of international liquidity, the surge of assets managers and other investors, and the explosion of issuance
of international debt securities. This phenomenon has been dubbed by Shin (2013) as “The Second Phase
of Global Liquidity” and is studied in Adrian, Colla, and Shin (2013), Caballero, Panizza, and Powell (2016),
Eichengreen (2016), and Bruno and Shin (2017), among others.
        Adrian, Colla, and Shin (2013) are the first to examine this switch from loan to bond issuance.
Their focus is on the United States. They ask why the economic downturn following the onset of the U.S.
crisis affected the banking sector so differently from bond investors. Is it a demand shock or a supply
shock? Aggregate data on loan and bond issuance cannot uncover the driver of this phenomenon because
the evolution of credit characteristics may simply reflect changes in the number and characteristics of the
firms operating in the market. Thus, the authors use granular data on syndicated loans and bond issues
together with information on the listed firms participating in these markets to study the drivers of this

                                                      5
shift. To identify shocks to demand or supply of credit, they examine the behavior of firms that issue loans
and/or bonds during the financial crisis. They point that the evidence from these estimations indicates an
adverse shock to banks’ lending. They find that firms that had access to direct credit through the bond
market tapped this market in large amounts. For these firms, the contraction in bank lending was largely
offset by issuing bonds. Since the cost of credit increased sharply for both bank and bond loans, they
conclude that “the demand curve for bond financing shifted out as a response to the inward shift in the
bank credit supply curve” (page 160).
        Caballero, Panizza, and Powell (2016) and Bruno and Shin (2017) scrutinize further the borrowing
choices of non-financial corporations. They raise several questions. What do firms do with the proceeds
of bond issued in international capital markets? Do non-financial corporations issue bonds solely for real
investment? Or do they also borrow to increase cash holdings or other liquid assets? If they borrow to
increase cash holdings, how do they use them? Are they acting like financial intermediaries, reaching for
the yield by depositing these funds in banks or other financial intermediaries at higher interest rates?
What is the currency of denomination of the bonds? Both papers use granular data on bond issuance
combined with firm level-balance sheet data for non-US firms with special attention to their holdings of
liquid financial assets.
        Caballero, Panizza, and Powell (2016) focus on the behavior of firms in 18 emerging markets and
examine whether capital controls can explain why non-financial corporate firms act like financial
intermediaries (reaching for the yield). Their hypothesis is that non-financial firms tend to act like financial
intermediaries in countries with capital controls because non-financial corporates have a comparative
advantage in arbitraging capital controls that prevent banks from pursuing profitable opportunities. This
is because non-financial firms may have ways of escaping these controls as they can issue bonds in
offshore financial centers and then bring the proceeds of that issuance into the home country via inter-
company loans (which in the balance of payments is normally counted as FDI). Caballero, Panizza, and
Powell also examine an alternative hypothesis: Is the explosive increase in non-financial corporate
borrowing a response solely due to the retreat of global banks from international capital markets? Their
estimates support the hypothesis that capital controls are at the core of the increase in international bond
issuance in search for a yield.
        Bruno and Shin (2017) focus on the behavior of firms in 20 emerging markets and 27 advanced
economies from 2002 to 2014 to answer four questions. First, are there systematic departures from the
“pecking order” theory of corporate finance (a firm uses internal funds first and only borrows when such
funds are insufficient)? Second, what does the firm do with the proceeds of bonds issued? Are the

                                                       6
proceeds used to finance fixed assets and real economic activity? Or do the proceeds end up as cash on
the firms balance sheet? Third, are there systematic differences in the triggers of international bond
issuance in emerging and advanced economies? Fourth, what triggers carry trade? Bruno and Shin have
three main findings. First, advanced economy’s firms’ borrowing patterns conform more to a conventional
pecking order model of corporate financing decisions whereas those of emerging economies resemble
carry-trade like decisions. Second, carry-trade behavior is linked to issuance in dollar-denominated bonds.
Third, carry trade increases in times of low volatility of the exchange rate and high interest rate
differentials.
        The early research on capital flow bonanzas stresses how global banking flow booms fueled
vulnerability in advanced economies leading to the 2007-2009 crisis. The new research on international
borrowing warns of a new capital flow bonanza in emerging economies, this time with non-financial
corporations at its core.     It is argued that non-financial corporates are taking advantage of the
unprecedented easy global financial conditions following the 2007-2009 crisis by borrowing mostly in
dollars and investing in higher yielding domestic assets like bank deposits. As discussed in Eichengreen
(2016) and Chui, Fender, and Sushko (2014), this second phase of global liquidity may expose corporations
to currency as well as roll-over risks in times of hikes in world interest rates, with fragilities also spreading
to local banks as corporates withdraw their deposits from these banks. These risks suggest that this
research may soon expand into a more formal model of early warnings of distress. Interestingly, this
research also emphasizes that the surge in corporate borrowing is fueled by an increase in capital controls
and overall macroprudential regulations introduced in the aftermath of the global crisis. It is believed that
banks cannot circumvent these controls while corporates can. Still, this phenomenon of corporate
borrowing and carry-trade in the aftermath of the global crisis is not new. Also, it is not necessarily an
emerging market phenomenon as emphasized by this empirical literature.              One important example is
Japan in the 1980s. During that decade, non-financial corporates started to behave as financial
surrogates. As explained in Masazumi, Shin, and Takahashi (2009), this behavior was triggered by the
gradual implementation of financial deregulation of the banking and corporate sector.            Naturally, this
example suggests the need to investigate further the effects of the complex phenomenon of financial
repression and deregulation in emerging and advanced economies.

III. Gross Capital Flows: Push and Pull Factors

        The Global Crisis and the capital flow bonanza that preceded the crisis also stimulated new
econometric research on the “push” versus “pull” factors behind capital flow movements. As with the


                                                       7
literature on the triggers of the Global Crisis, the push versus pull factors literature also focuses on gross
capital flows. This literature not only pays attention to capital flows around the Global Crisis, but also
extends the sample to include (if possible) up to the 1980s, thus providing a better gauge of capital flows
in times when the financial center is not in panic and the only crises are in developing countries. Most of
this literature relies on unbalanced panel data estimations since the IMF data on capital flows for many
countries is only available much later even only starting in the 2000s. 3
         One of the earliest contributions in this area is that of Fostel and Kaminsky (2008). This paper
examines the evolution of gross capital inflows captured by gross international primary issuance of bonds,
equity, and syndicated loans of Latin American countries since 1980. As in the typical push-pull factor
literature, the authors include measures of growth and quality of institutions among the pull factors, and
interest rates in the financial center, measures of global liquidity, and risk among the push factors. Using
panel estimation, Fostel and Kaminsky find a time-varying pattern in the drivers of capital flows. They find
that sound fundamentals matter. For example, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile’s superb performance in capital
markets during the early 1990s was in large part driven by better fundamentals. However, the upsurge in
international lending to Latin America starting in 2003 was mainly driven by the dramatic increase in global
liquidity predating the Global Crisis.
         Gosh, Kim, Qureshi, and Zalduendo (2014) examine what fuels capital flows to emerging market
economies using a sample of 56 countries over the period 1980-2009. In contrast to earlier work (for
example, Fernandez Arias, 1996), these authors do not examine the overall behavior of booms and busts
in capital flows. Instead, they focus on certain episodes that are denoted as surges (extreme capital flow
bonanzas). To identify surges, the authors use two different methodologies: a “threshold” approach that
identifies surges as net flows/GDP that fall in the top 30th percentile and a “clustering” statistical
approach that classifies net flows/GDP to distinguish between surges, normal flows, and outflows. These
two methodologies identify, respectively, 290 and 338 surges, concentrated in the early 1980s, the early
1990s, and the mid-2000s. To examine these identified surges, the authors follow a two-pronged
approach. First, they estimate the triggers of surges using a probit model. Next, they estimate the
magnitude of the surges (conditional on their occurrence). The probit estimates indicate that surge events
are mostly triggered by push factors, such as global market uncertainty (volatility of the S&P 500 index)
and commodity price booms. Still, good domestic fundamentals matter. When the authors estimate the
magnitude of the surges, they find that the magnitude of the capital flow during a surge varies


3
 See Koepke (2019) for a more extensive survey of the empirical literature on the drivers of capital flows to emerging
markets.

                                                          8
considerably (ranging from 4 percent of GDP to about 54 percent of GDP). Thus, the authors also focus
on explaining the size of the identified surges using OLS estimations.            Interestingly, the push factors
cannot explain the magnitude of the capital flows in these events, suggesting, as the authors put it, that
“these factors act largely as gatekeepers, with capital surging toward EMEs only when the global
conditions permit, but once this hurdle is passed, the volume of capital flows is largely independent of
push factors and is mostly explained by pull factors, such as external financing needs of the country and
exchange rate regimes” 4 (page 267).
         In the same vein as Gosh et al. (2014), Forbes and Warnock (2012) also study extreme capital flow
movements but extend their analysis to “surges” and “stops” (sharp increases and decreases of gross
inflows) as well as “flight” and “retrenchment” (sharp increases and decreases of gross outflows). The
first two types of episodes (surges and stops) are driven by foreigners while the last two (flight and
retrenchment) are driven by domestic investors. Forbes and Warnock also expand their analysis of capital
flows to both emerging and advanced economies, including a total of 58 countries from 1980 to 2009. In
contrast to Gosh et al., they identify episodes of extreme capital flow movements using data on gross
capital flows that differentiate activity by foreign and domestic investors. Forbes and Warnock identify
the extreme events as those year-over-year changes in four-quarter gross capital inflows or outflows that
are more than two standard deviations away from the historic mean subject to some minimum duration
of the event. They identify 167 surge, 221 stop, 196 flight, and 214 retrenchment episodes. Importantly,
the identification method depends crucially on whether net flows or gross flows are used to identify
extreme movements. Interestingly, the results in Forbes and Warnock indicate that the identification
using gross capital flows yields fundamentally different results than the previous literature that used
measures of net flows. For example, identifying an extreme event with net flows during the Global
Financial Crisis identifies many surges not because countries increase their borrowing abroad but because
in the midst of the Global Crisis, domestic investors are retrenching from foreign markets, selling their
foreign assets, and bringing their money home. Forbes and Warnock’s analysis indicates that waves of
capital flows are primarily associated with global factors. Global risk, which incorporates both risk aversion
and economic uncertainty, is the only variable that consistently predicts each type of capital flow episode;



4
   While the authors identify surges in terms of the net flow of capital, in sync with the rest of the post-2007-2009
literature, they also use gross flow data to distinguish between those surges that correspond mainly to changes in
external liabilities and those that correspond to changes in assets. The authors show that most surges (in their
sample with just emerging-market economies) are driven by an increase in gross inflows rather than by a decline in
gross outflows.


                                                         9
with an increase in global risk being associated with more stops and retrenchments, and fewer surges and
flights. In contrast to Gosh et al. (2014), Forbes and Warnock find that most domestic factors only have a
limited correlation with capital flow volatility.
        Bruno and Shin (2015a) focus their analysis on gross banking flows using BIS locational data.
Departing from the model in Shin (2011), they present a model of global liquidity built around the
operation of international banks, but which now highlights the role of the U.S. dollar in these transactions.
As in Shin (2011), the leverage cycle of global banks is at the center of booms and busts in global liquidity.
In this paper, the authors also construct a model of cross border bank flows where regional banks borrow
in U.S. dollars from global banks to lend to local corporate borrowers. The global banks ﬁnance cross-
border lending to regional banks by tapping U.S. dollar money market funds in the ﬁnancial center. The
transmission channel in this model is via fluctuations in the effective credit risk faced by banks who lend
to local borrowers that have a currency mismatch. When the local currency appreciates vis-à-vis the U.S.
dollar, local borrowers’ balance sheets become stronger, resulting in lower credit risk and hence
expanding bank lending capacity. Thus, in this model, currency appreciation leads to greater risk-taking
by banks. This model also allows for links between changes in monetary policy in the financial center,
with lower U.S. dollar borrowing rates affecting funding costs and bank leverage. The model is tested
using a panel of 46 advanced and emerging economies. As in the rest of the push versus pull literature,
the authors also examine the role of fragilities in the domestic economy, such as a decline in growth, an
increase in inflation, and high debt/GDP ratios. For the push factors, they also focus on the U.S. interest
rate but they now add indicators capturing fragilities in the global banking sector, such as global leverage
and equity growth of major global banks. Their findings suggest that the leverage cycle of global banks
was the key determinant of global liquidity before 2008.
        While not exactly in the same vein as the studies of “push” and “pull” factors, Broner, Didier, Erce,
and Schmukler (2013) present important evidence on the role of country-specific factors on gross capital
flows. Using a sample of 103 countries over the 1970-2009 period, this paper studies the behavior of
international capital flows by foreign and domestic agents over the business cycle and during financial
crises. They find that when foreigners invest in a country, domestic agents invest abroad, and vice versa:
both gross capital outflow and inflows are procyclical. During expansions, foreigners invest more in the
domestic economy and domestic agents invest more abroad. During crises, total gross flows collapse and
there is a retrenchment in both inflows by foreigners and outflows by domestic agents. This pattern is
similar across countries and types of capital flows. These results contradict most models of capital flows
that predict that negative productivity shocks in the domestic economy in the midst of a crisis should

                                                     10
decrease the incentive of foreign investors to bring capital to the domestic economy (procyclical
behavior), while the same shock should increase the incentives for domestic investors to invest abroad
(countercyclical behavior). These findings open new areas of inquiry. On the theorical side, it is important
to examine what type of model may explain this empirical regularity. Are financial frictions at the core of
this regularity? What type of frictions? Do shocks affect domestic and foreign agents asymmetrically? 5 On
the empirical side, it would be important to control for the effect of global factors. What type of shocks
affect the business cycle? The findings in Forbes and Warnock (2012), Gosh et al. (2014), Bruno and Shin
(2015a) suggest that global financial shocks are important determinants of capital flows. These shocks
may be at the core of fluctuations in financial frictions and affect the responses of capital flows to the
business cycle. The joint analysis of push and pull factors may help to untangle the route through which
global and country-specific factors affect the business cycle around the world and contribute to the
cyclicality of capital flows.

IV. Capturing Global Patterns

        The boom and bust in capital flows around the 2007-2009 Global Crisis also motivated a new area
of research: capturing the “global factor.” Since the global financial cycle is unobservable, a new branch
of the literature has captured this factor indirectly using dynamic common factors extracted from actual
capital flows or by overall movements in asset prices. One of the earliest papers is this area is Rey (2013).
In her Jackson Hole paper, Rey examines capital flows from 1990 to 2012 and documents a positive
correlation in capital gross inflows as well as outflows across most of the regions in the world. She finds
particularly strong positive correlations between all the major flows into North America and Western
Europe. This evidence prompts Rey to examine the characteristics of this global cycle. She examines the
correlations between capital flows and the VIX and finds negative correlations between various types of
capital flows and the VIX (both globally and for various sub-regions) averaging around -0.23. She then
documents that a common factor obtained from a large number of asset prices for various regions of the
world shows a relatively high negative correlation with the VIX, suggesting that there is a global financial
cycle in capital flows, asset prices and credit growth. Rey also reports a VAR estimation indicating that
one of the determinants of the global financial cycle is monetary policy in the center country, which in


5
  Broner, Didier, Erce, and Schmukler suggest that models with asymmetries between domestic and foreign investors
may be at the heart of this behavior. For example, if domestic and foreign investors are treated differently when
the sovereign defaults, with domestic residents being treated more favorably, foreigners will have incentives to sell
domestic assets to domestic residents in secondary markets, leading to a retrenchment when the risk of default
rises.

                                                         11
turn affects the leverage of global banks, capital flows, and credit growth in the international financial
system. She concludes that whenever capital is freely mobile, the global financial cycle constrains national
monetary policies regardless of the exchange rate regime, invalidating the “trilemma,” which postulates
that in a world of free capital mobility, independent monetary policies are feasible if and only if exchange
rates are floating.
        Naturally, this provoking conclusion that “cross‐border flows and leverage of global institutions
transmit monetary conditions globally, even under floating exchange‐rate regimes” has stimulated further
research in this area. Cerutti, Claessens, and Puy (2017) explore the role of global factors using data on
gross capital inflows across 34 emerging markets for the period 2001-2013. In the spirit of the literature
on global factors, the authors examine whether aggregate inflows to EMs co-move using dynamic latent
factor models. They not only examine whether total flows co-move together around the world and
regionally, but also study the co-movement across different types of capital flows. They find that while
total capital flows are explained in part by a global factor and by regional factors, the effects of these
factors across countries are quite heterogenous. Importantly, Cerutti, Claessens, and Puy find that
comovement is more pronounced for portfolio and bank flows. They also find that the sensitivity to
common dynamics varies significantly across borrower countries and is influenced by financial market
characteristics, such as liquidity in the recipient country and composition of the foreign investor bases,
rather than country-specific macroeconomic or institutional fundamentals In particular, they find that the
countries most affected by push factors are those countries relying more on international funds, such as
mutual funds and ETFs, and global banks.
        In 2003, the IMF Balance of Payments data on capital flows started providing information not only
about types of instruments but also about types of borrowers. While this database only includes 14 years,
it includes the bonanza preceding the Global Crisis and the retrenchment in its aftermath, and it can help
us to understand not only the behavior of banking, bond, and equity flows, but also the behavior of banks,
corporations, and sovereigns. Cerutti and Hong (2018) use this disaggregation to examine the behavior
of borrowers in 43 advanced and emerging economies. To examine the behavior across borrowers and
instruments, they decompose each capital inflow series into a global factor, borrower-type sub-factors,
and a country-specific component. Their estimations indicate that gross capital flows do not move in
tandem across countries regardless of borrower characteristics: different borrowing sectors have
different sensitivities to the global financial cycle. For example, advanced economy corporates borrowing
before the crisis shows a complementary behavior with both an increase in their borrowing through both
debt securities and loans. This changed in the aftermath of the crisis. Advanced economy corporates

                                                    12
started borrowing more through debt securities which replaced international bank loans. Emerging
market corporates, on the other hand, have shown both an increase in bond and loan financing. The
authors suggest that the heterogeneity across borrowers may explain why capital flows do not respond
strongly to the global cycle.
             Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose (2017) intensively scrutinize the extent of the comovement of capital
flows using a variety of methods and variables to capture the global factor. Using an unbalanced panel of
85 countries, they examine capital flows from 1990 to 2015. The estimations are not limited to total gross
inflows and outflows, they also include different types of flows. Cerutti et al. estimate the global factor
using observable indicators (such as the VIX and the interest rate in the financial center) and unobservable
indicators extracted from capital flows using dynamic factor models. In total they estimate about 600
regressions using different combinations of observable variables from different financial centers for both
panels of countries and individual countries. They find that on average the 𝑅𝑅 2 from all these regressions
is at most about 0.25, indicating that the global factor can only explain a small fraction of the variance of
capital flows.
             Overall, this relatively new strand of the literature suggests that while there is a global cycle, the
effects of global factors are time-varying and seem to affect more strongly North America and Western
Europe. While the emphasis on the role of the global and idiosyncratic factors is somewhat different, the
findings of the traditional research on push and pull factors point to similar results. All these studies
cover at most capital flows starting in the 1990s or they use unbalanced panels because earlier IMF BOP
database on capital flows does not have complete country coverage. Is this because most of the findings
indicate that Western Europe seems to respond more strongly to the global factor? What triggers this
coordination? Is it because of the elimination of controls and deregulation across Western European
countries in their path to the monetary union? Did this process of financial liberalization amplify the
effects of the easy monetary policy of the early 2000s? It is important to examine whether a variety of
shocks can amplify and coordinate financial cycles. Unfortunately, these data limitations prevent us from
studying the most systemic episode of crises (and the boom-bust cycle that triggered those crises) since
the restart of financial globalization following the collapse of the Bretton Woods System. This is the
episode of capital flow bonanzas starting in the 1970s that culminated with defaults in Africa, Asia, Eastern
European countries, Latin America, and the Middle East in what it became to be known as the “Debt
Crisis.” 6


6
 Preliminary work by Kaminsky, Medina, and Wang (2019) constructs a new database on capital flows starting in
1973 in the aftermath of the collapse of the Bretton Woods System. This novel database captures gross inflows by

                                                          13
V. Reflections

         The studies on the causes of the 2007-2009 Global Crisis have uncovered new empirical
regularities predating the crisis as well as new models to explain these regularities. The “global banking
glut” literature brought to attention the major role of European global banks in the explosive round trip
of cross border capital flows that ended with the U.S. subprime crisis. An important contribution of this
literature is the construction of very rich and detailed databases from a variety of sources (including the
BIS, Moody’s, the U.S. Flow of Funds, Fitch, Federal Reserve Disclosures on Term Auction Facility, and
money market mutual funds) to piece together the ingredients that contribute to the build-up of financial
fragility leading to the crisis. This literature also provides new models to explain the creation of global
liquidity. For example, Shin (2011) and Bruno and Shin (2015a) formulate a model of the international
banking system where global banks interact with local banks that can explain the surge in cross border
flows. In this model, easy monetary policy and lower risk trigger an increase in the banks’ balance sheet
capacity, with the leverage cycle acting as the mechanism of transmission of financial conditions across
borders through banking sector capital flows.
         The “push and pull factors” literature as well as the research using dynamic factor models have a
broader scope. Researchers use somewhat longer samples that also include crises in emerging economies
and examine not only bonanzas in bank flows but also in portfolio flows. These studies also assess the
role of global triggers of booms and busts in cross border flows. These estimations have a more nuanced
view about the role of global factors. While cross border capital flows around the world are still correlated
over the longer sample, this correlation is small as shown in Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose (2017).
Importantly, bank flows booms do not predate all crises. For example, bond flow bonanzas are at the core
of the financial fragilities predating crises in emerging markets in the late 1990s (for example, Argentina
(2001), Brazil (1999), and Russia (1998)), making it important to study the role of various investment
vehicles in fueling financial fragilities. Also, monetary policy in the financial center, as captured by the
Federal Funds rate, is not necessarily the trigger of bonanzas across all studies (Forbes and Warnock,
2012), suggesting a time-varying pattern in monetary policy that also needs to be studied further.
Importantly, the research on capital flows only focuses on the easing in the early 1990s and more recently
the easing in the early 2000s. With only a few cycles, it is hard to pinpoint the role of monetary policy in
the financial center on the rest of the world, especially because these cycles coincide with other



using international primary issuance of bonds, loans, and shares. Their results indicate that regional factors and not
global factors are at the core of capital flow movements.

                                                         14
worldwide shocks, such as the oil shocks in the 1970s, the creation of the European Monetary Union in
the 1990s, or the increase in savings in East Asia in the early 2000s.
         New research is addressing some of these issues. For example, Kaminsky (2019) examines capital
flows using a newly created database on international issuance of bonds, loans, and shares that spans the
two episodes of financial globalization (the first episode from 1820 to 1931 and the second episode
starting in the early 1970s). Extending the study of capital flows to the first episode of financial
globalization has two major advantages. First, during this episode, monetary policy in the financial center
is constrained by the adherence to the Gold Standard, thus providing a benchmark for capital flow cycles
in the absence of an active role of central banks in the financial centers. Second, panics in the financial
center are rare disasters that need to be examined in a longer historical episode. By comparing boom-
bust cycles across these two episodes, Kaminsky (2019) finds that boom-bust capital flow cycles in the
emerging periphery in times of panics in the financial center are milder in the second episode of financial
globalization but that other cycles are similar across the two eras of financial globalization. It is in times
of crises at the epicenter that countercyclical monetary policy in the financial center is far more aggressive,
with severe tightenings predating these crises and drastic easings in their aftermath. This policy cuts short
capital flow bonanzas before these crises erupt and mitigates sudden stops in their aftermath.7 Converse,
Levy-Yeyati, and Williams (2018) also examine the time-varying effects of the global financial cycle. In
particular, they study how the development of new investment vehicles can affect the incidence of the
global financial cycle in emerging markets. In this paper, the authors examine the behavior of traditional
mutual funds against that of the new exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and find that the sensitivity of investor
flows to global risk factors is between 1.25 and 1.5 times higher for ETFs than for mutual funds. They also
show that countries where ETFs hold a larger share of financial assets are significantly more sensitive to
global risk factors, both for total equity flows and prices. Converse et al. conclude that the growing
participation of ETFs amplifies the incidence of the global financial cycle in emerging markets.
         The research on capital flows and crises in the aftermath of the 2007-2009 Global Crisis has made
important progress in our understanding of triggers of crises, the role of global factors, and the behavior
of gross capital flows. Still, there is also a need to fully understand whether bank flow bonanzas are
different. One of the questions still lingering is why global banks took so much risk in the years predating


7
  Interestingly, even when monetary policy in the financial center during the second episode of financial globalization
provides far more liquidity in the aftermath of a panic in the financial center, the slowdown in economic activity
around the world now is similar to that of the first episode of financial globalization when central banks were
adhering to the gold standard and financial panics were followed by drastic and persistent collapses of world
liquidity.

                                                          15
the Global Crisis. Some argue that the relaxation of rules was at the core of this bonanza. New evidence
using European data is provided by Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014) and Maddaloni and
Peydro (2013). They find that a low policy rate induces thinly capitalized banks to grant more loans to ex
ante riskier firms. Importantly, the 2007-2009 Global Crisis is not the only crisis fueled by bank flow
bonanzas. It is time to examine jointly the bank flow bonanza preceding the 2007-2009 crisis and the
bonanza in syndicated loans predating the Debt Crisis that engulfed emerging economies around the
world in 1982.




                                                   16
                                               References

Acharya, Viral and Philipp Schnabl, 2010, “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbalances? Asset-Backed
       Commercial Paper During the Financial Crisis of 2007–09,” IMF Economic Review, 58 (1), 37–73.

Adrian, Tobias, Paolo Colla, and Hyun Song Shin, 2013, “Which Financial Frictions? Parsing the Evidence
        from the Financial Crisis of 2007 to 2009, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 27(1), 159-214.

Bernanke, Ben, 2005, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” Speech at the
       Sandridge Lecture, Richmond, March 10.

Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat, 2011, “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Link or no Link?”, BIS
        Working Papers 346, May.

Broner, Fernando, Tatiana Didier, Aitor Erce, and Sergio Schmukler, 2013, “Gross Capital Flows: Dynamics
        and Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60 (1), 113-133.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, 2015a, “Capital Flows, Cross Border Banking and Global Liquidity,”
        The Review of Economic Studies, 82 (2), 535–564.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, 2015b, “Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary
          Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 119-132.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, 2017, “Global Dollar Credit and Carry Trades: A Firm-Level Analysis,”
           Review of Financial Studies, 30(3), 703-749.

Caballero, Julián, Ugo Panizza, and Andrew Powell, 2016, “The Second Wave of Global Liquidity: Why
        Firms are Acting Like Financial Intermediaries?” IDB Working Paper Series No. IDB-WP-641, April.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart, 1993, “Capital Inflows and Real Exchange
        Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors,” International Monetary Fund
        Staff Papers, 40 (1), 108-151.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1996) “Inflows of Capital to Developing
        Countries in the 1990s” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, 123-39.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Andrew Rose, 2017, “How Important is the Global Financial Cycle:
         Evidence from Capital Flows,” IMF WP 17/193.

Cerutti, Eugenio and Gee Hee Hong, 2018, “Portfolio Inflows Eclipsing Banking Inflows: Alternative Facts?”
         IMF WP/18/29.

Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Damien Puy, 2017, “Push Factors and Capital Flows to Emerging
         Markets: Why Knowing Your Lender Matters More Than Fundamentals,” IMF WP/15/127.

Chui, Michael, Ingo Fender, and Vladyslav Sushko, 2014, “Risks Related to EME Corporate Balance Sheets:
        The Role of Leverage and Currency Mismatch, BIS Quarterly Review, September, 35-47.


                                                    17
Converse, Nathan, Eduardo Levy-Yeyati, and Tomas Williams, 2018, “How ETFs Amplify the Global
       Financial Cycle in Emerging Markets,” IIEP-WP-2018-1.

Eichengreen, Barry, 2016, “Global Monetary Order,” in The Future of the International and Financial
       Architecture, European Central Bank Conference Proceedings, 27-29 June 2016, Sintra, Portugal.

Fernandez-Arias, Eduardo, 1996, “The New Wave of Private Capital Inflows: Push or Pull?” Journal of
       Development Economics, 48 (2), 389-418.

Forbes, Kristin and Francis Warnock, 2012, “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight, and Retrenchment,”
        Journal of International Economics, 88 (2), 235-251.

Fostel, Ana and Graciela Kaminsky, 2008, "Latin America´s Access to International Capital Markets: Good
         Behavior or Global Liquidity?" in Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies Book Series,
         Kevin Cowan, Sebastián Edwards, Rodrigo O. Valdés, and Norman Loayza (Series Editor) and Klaus
         Schmid (ed.), Current Account and External Financing, Edition 1, Volume 12, Chapter 4, 117-158,
         Central Bank of Chile.

Ghosh, Atish, Mahvash Qureshi, Jun Kim, and Juan Zalduendo, 2014, “Surges,” Journal of International
       Economics, Elsevier, 92 (2), 266-285.

Hattori, Masazumi, Hyun Song Shin, and Wataru Takahashi, 2009, “A Financial System Perspective on
        Japan’s Experience in the Late 1980s,” IMES Discussion Paper Series 2009-E-19, August.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, Jose Luis Peydró, and Jesus Saurina, 2014, “Hazardous Times for
       Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of Monetary
       Policy on Credit Risk-taking?” Econometrica, 82(2), 463–505.

Kaminsky, Graciela, 2019, “The Center and the Periphery: Two Hundred Years of International Borrowing
       Cycles, NBER Working Paper No. 23975, October.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Leandro Medina, and Shiyi Wang, 2019, “Boom-Bust Capital Flow Cycles: Global or
       Regional?” George Washington University, manuscript.

Krugman, Paul, 2009, “Revenge of the Glut,” The New York Times, March 1.

Koepke, Robin, 2019, “What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical
       Literature, Journal of Economic Surveys, Volume 33 (2), 516-540.

Maddaloni, Angela and José Luis Peydro, 2013, “Monetary Policy, Macroprudential Policy and Banking
      Stability Evidence from the Euro Area,” European Central Bank Working Paper No. 1560.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia and Hélène Rey, 2015, “World Asset Markets and the Global Cycle,” in:
       www.helenerey.eu.

Milesi-Ferretti, G., Tille, C., 2010. The Great Retrenchment: International Capital Flows during the Global
        Financial Crisis.” Economic Policy, 66, 285–330.


                                                    18
Obstfeld, Maurice, 2012, “Does the Current Account Still Matter?” American Economic Review: Papers &
        Proceedings 2012, 102(3), 1–23.

Portes, Richard, 2009, “Global Imbalances,” in Macroeconomic Stability and Financial Regulation: Key
        Issues for the G20, edited by Mathias Dewatripont, Xavier Freixas, and Richard Portes. London:
        Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Rey, Hélène, 2015, “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
      Independence, NBER Working Paper No. 21162.

Shin, Hyun Song, 2011, “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium,” Paper presented at the 12th Jacques
        Polak Annual Research Conference Hosted by the International Monetary Fund Washington,
        DC─November 10–11, 2011.

Shin, Hyun Song, 2013, “The Second Phase of Global Liquidity and Its Impact on Emerging Economies,”
        Keynote address, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Asia Economic Policy Conference, in
        https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/Shin-AEPC2013.pdf.




                                                  19
