NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL POSITIVE CAPITAL TAXES AT INTERIOR STEADY STATES
Jess Benhabib
Bálint Sz ke
Working Paper 25895
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25895

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019, Revised February 2020

We are grateful to Marco Bassetto, Raquel Fernandez, Sarolta Laczó, Albert Marcet, Benjamin
Moll, Debraj Ray, Alain Trannoy, and two anonymous referees for helpful suggestions and
criticism. We owe special thanks to Leslie Reinhorn for his detailed comments and careful
reading of an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Jess Benhabib and Bálint Sz ke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Positive Capital Taxes at Interior Steady States
Jess Benhabib and Bálint Sz ke
NBER Working Paper No. 25895
May 2019, Revised February 2020
JEL No. E62,H21,H23
ABSTRACT
We generalize recent results of Bassetto and Benhabib (2006) and Straub and Werning (2018) in
a neo-classical model with endogenous labor-leisure choice where all agents are allowed to save
and accumulate capital. We provide a sufficient condition under which optimal redistributive
capital taxes remain at their allowed upper bound forever, even if the resulting equilibrium
trajectory converges to a unique steady state with positive and finite consumption, capital, and
labor. We then provide an interpretation of our sufficient condition. Using recent evidence on
wealth distribution in the United States, we argue that our sufficient condition is empirically
plausible.

Jess Benhabib
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jess.benhabib@nyu.edu
Bálint Sz ke
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
bs2574@nyu.edu

1

Introduction

The seminal work of Chamley (1986) shows that when the social planner raises revenues for government
expenditures, optimal capital tax rates may remain positive in transition, but at steady-states they
must be set to zero. In other words, at the steady-state, the social planner commits to zero capital
taxes and raises revenues by taxing labor earnings instead. Judd (1985) demonstrates that the same
optimal tax policy applies in an economy where taxes are chosen for redistributive purposes, solely
according to preferences of hand-to-mouth workers whose income is composed of labor earnings and
government transfers. The reason is that positive capital taxes distort savings, which in the limit
shrink the capital tax base too much, while also depressing the marginal product of labor. The
general conclusion from these studies is that committing to positive capital taxes forever is a bad idea.
An initial counterexample to Judd (1985) was given by Lansing (1999) showing that with log
preferences, optimal capital taxes could be positive forever in some equilibria.1 As later established
by Reinhorn (2019), however, this example turned out to be a knife-edge case. Later, Bassetto and
Benhabib (2006) studied a model with a continuum of agents that differed in their initial capital stocks,
but are otherwise all allowed to choose their savings optimally. Assuming inelastic labor supply, they
established a condition under which a sufficiently wealth-poor household would choose to tax capital
at the maximally allowed rate forever, and would redistribute taxes lump-sum and equally to all.2
More recently, Straub and Werning (2018) obtained very similar results in the frameworks of Chamley
(1986) and Judd (1985). In particular, they showed that under certain conditions, optimal capital
taxes can remain positive forever for capital trajectories that converge to extremes, but not those that
converge to an interior steady-state.
In this paper we derive conditions under which infinitely lived households, heterogeneous only with
respect to their initial capital holdings, may optimally set capital taxes at their upper bound forever
in order to fund lump sum redistributions and non-negative government expenditures. Such capital
taxes τ ∗ ∈ [0, τ̄ ], optimally set at the upper boundary of their feasible set τ ∗ = τ̄ forever, can generate
equilibrium trajectories converging to “interior” steady-states with positive consumption, leisure and
capital. By “interiority” therefore we mean that only capital, consumption and leisure are positive,
while capital taxes are at their upper boundary, that is at a corner solution.
First, we generalize the Bassetto and Benhabib (2006) condition for maximal capital taxes to
a neoclassical growth model with endogenous labor-leisure choice and Gorman aggregable balanced
growth preferences. Under this condition, if the sequence of tax rates is optimally chosen according
to the preferences of the median household that is sufficiently wealth-poor relative to the average
household, or alternatively, if the planner assigns relatively more weight to wealth-poor households,
the implemented policy will feature capital tax rates that are kept at their upper bounds forever.
The Bassetto-Benhabib condition, however, involves the equilibrium value function of the house1

While capital, consumption, and the net return to capital converge to an interior steady state in the example of
Lansing (1999), multipliers do not converge, thereby violating the assumptions of Judd (1985). The multipliers diverge,
but they satisfy transversality (see Reinhorn (2019), pages 9-10).
2
Bassetto and Benhabib (2006) also showed that if preferences are Gorman aggregable, a Condorcet winner exists, so
that the preferred policy of the household with median wealth gets implemented if the sequence of tax rates is chosen
by majority voting. See also Piguillem and Schneider (2013).

1

hold with mean wealth, so it is not immediately obvious how to generate examples satisfying this
condition at interior steady-states. The example that Bassetto and Benhabib (2006) gave is for an AK
model where the equilibrium capital stock, depending on parameters, perpetually contracts or grows.3
To demonstrate that this outcome is just a special case, we define a class of models with constant
relative risk-averse (CRRA) preferences and constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production functions for which closed form solutions exist. This allows us to provide examples with positive long-run
capital taxation and interior steady-states. To show that this finding does not depend on stringent
parametric assumptions, we complement our examples with more standard model calibrations requiring numerical solutions. We then provide an interpretation of our sufficient condition implying that
optimal capital taxes will remain at their upper bound forever for equilibria generated under arbitrary
constant returns neoclassical production functions. Finally, we investigate the empirical validity of
the Bassetto-Benhabib condition by using recent data from Wolff (2017) on the wealth distribution in
the United States and find that the sufficient condition is empirically plausible.
We should note that our model, where optimal capital taxes finance lump-sum redistribution and
are maximal forever at interior steady states differs from the model of Judd (1985) or Straub and
Werning (2018) where workers are not allowed to save. Our wealth-poor agents are not required to
immediately consume the wages and transfers they receive. Therefore, even though everyone dislikes
having to pay capital taxes, wealth-poor households find the implied redistributive transfers more
valuable in our setting, where they have the option to save them either fully or in part, than in an
economy where they are constrained to be hand-to-mouth consumers.
There are also a number of studies that deviate from the original Chamley or Judd models in
which optimal capital taxes can remain positive forever. In OLG models with realistic life cycle
profiles having non-constant labor endowments, if labor taxes cannot depend on age, they may not
be able provide an optimal intertemporal redistribution across households that maximizes the social
welfare function of a newborn, especially if labor supply is endogenous. Then a positive capital income
tax that mimics a labor income tax rate varies with age can be optimal despite its intertemporal
distortion of accumulation (see Erosa and Gervais (2002)). Similarly, in incomplete market models with
endogenous labor, borrowing constraints, and idiosyncratic earnings risk, if labor taxes are restricted
to be proportional and cannot be progressive, relying on labor income taxes alone translates directly
into low consumption for poor households at the constraint. Such labor taxes may not be optimal, and
require instead a redistributive positive capital tax forever if progressive labor taxes are ruled out (see
Hubbard and Judd (1987)). Comprehensive theoretical and quantitative analyses of such cases are
studied and illustrated in detail by Conesa, Kitao, and Krueger (2009). On the other hand, Atkeson,
Chari, and Kehoe (1999) and Chari, Teles, and Nicolini (2016) show that in such macroeconomic
models with an enlarged tax system that also includes consumption taxes, capital should not be taxed
in steady-state, either in representative agent models, or in models with heterogeneous agents differing
in their initial wealth. More recently, Saez and Stantcheva (2018) showed that adding household wealth
into the utility functions of households that are heterogeneous in wealth (thereby making marginal
3
In their explicit example, Bassetto and Benhabib (2006) have linear production y = rk and CRRA preferences, and
they set the discount factor β so that βr = 1 and the capital stock contracts to zero. Nevertheless, it is easy to see that
if we increased r slightly, the capital stock would grow forever.

2

rates of substitution in consumption across time wealth dependent and violating Gorman aggregation)
can also generate positive steady state optimal capital taxes because the elasticity of capital to a longrun tax increase becomes finite.
In the next section we describe the model environment and derive the value functions of households
in competitive equilibria. Using these value functions, section 3 discusses how different households
rank the available tax policies. Theorem 4 contains our main result providing a sufficient condition
under which certain households prefer to keep capital taxes at their upper bounds forever. Proposition
5 shows that positive optimal long-run capital tax rate can be consistent with an interior steady-state.
Section 4 computes our sufficient condition under various functional assumptions that allow us to derive
key equilibrium objects in terms of model primitives. Section 4.2 then presents a rough calibration
illustrating that our sufficient condition is empirically plausible. Section 5 concludes.

2

The model

Consider a deterministic neoclassical growth model with a continuum of households of unit measure,
indexed by i, who differ only in their initial wealth level. Household preferences are given by
∞
X
t=0


i

β t u cit , 1 − nt =

∞
X

h
βt

cit

ξ

1 − nit

1−ξ i1−σ

1−σ

t=0

ξ ∈ (0, 1],

σ>0

(1)

where cit and nit are period t consumption and labor supply by agent i, respectively.4 This functional
form is a popular choice in the business cycle literature (see e.g. Kydland and Prescott (1982)) and it
has been used by Chari, Christiano, and Kehoe (1994) to study optimal fiscal policy in an economy
with homogeneous households. That u is a homogeneous function ensures that Gorman aggregation
holds,5 that is, there exists a representative agent endowed with the average initial wealth level and
preferences of the form (1) over average consumption and leisure plans {(ct , 1 − nt )}∞
t=0 . An important
special case of u, associated with ξ = 1, is CRRA preferences with inelastic labor supply.
Output yt at time t is produced by competitive firms using capital kt and labor nt according to
the linearly homogeneous production function
yt = F (kt , nt )
with partial derivatives Fk > 0, Fn ≥ 0, Fkn ≥ 0, Fnn ≤ 0, and Fkk ≤ 0. Firms rent capital and labor
from the competitive factor markets at rates rt and wt , respectively.
In each period t, the government levies proportional taxes on labor income νt ∈ [0, 1)6 and capital
4

Appealing to the Inada conditions in preferences and production, we may abstract from the nonnegativity constraints
and corner solutions on consumption and leisure. To fully avoid corner solutions, we assume that the initial asset
distribution is such that along the equilibrium, the richest agents in the distribution of wealth choose leisure time that
is smaller than the total available time, which we normalized to unity by choice of time units.


5
An alternative (separable) form satisfying this condition would be ui = (1 − σ)−1 (cit )1−σ + (1 − nit )1−σ , where
Gorman aggregation is ensured by assuming identical elasticities of consumption and labor.
6
With endogenous labor supply, if ν = 1, households choose not to work, hence for some neoclassical production
functions output may tend toward zero and utility may tend toward minus infinity. In such cases, setting νt = 1 at any

3

income τt , subject to exogenous bounds τt ∈ [0, τ̄ ],7,8 and provides lump-sum transfers (or taxes) trt
to all households. The period-by-period government budget constraint is
t≥0

Rt bt + gt + trt = τt rt kt + νt wt nt + bt+1 ,

(2)

where Rt is the gross rate of return on one-period bonds held from t−1 to t. In general, the government
∞
uses {τt , νt , trt }∞
t=0 and one-period debt {bt+1 }t=0 for the following purposes: (i ) to pay for spending

on a public good at an exogenous rate {gt }∞
t=0 , (ii ) to redistribute wealth among households, and (iii )
to pay back its initial debt b0 .
To simplify algebra, we impose the no arbitrage condition by stipulating that the gross return on
bonds and capital are equal:
Rt = 1 + (1 − τt )rt − δ,
where δ is the rate of depreciation. That said, we reformulate the constraints for τt in terms of bounds
on the gross after-tax rate of return on capital:
Rt := 1 + (1 − τ̄ )rt − δ ≤ Rt ≤ 1 + rt − δ =: Rt
For convenience, we also define time 0 after-tax prices qt :=

Qt

−1
s=1 Rs

(3)

for all t ≥ 1 with q0 being

be the wealth of household i at time t, consisting of capital kti and
R
maturing government bonds bit . The average wealth level is then at = ait di. The period-by-period

normalized to one. Moreover, let

ait

budget constraint of household i is
cit + ait+1 ≤ Rt ait + (1 − νt )wt nit + trt ,

t ≥ 0,

i ∈ [0, 1],

(4)

and we assume that households cannot run Ponzi schemes:
lim qT aiT +1 ≥ 0

T →∞

i ∈ [0, 1].

Optimality requires that the limit cannot be positive, so the household budget constraints in present
discounted value form can be written as
∞
X
t=0

qt cit ≤ R0 ai0 +

∞
X

qt trt + (1 − νt ) wt nit



i ∈ [0, 1].

(5)

t=0

finite time cannot be optimal under our specification and therefore we rule out this case. See the discussion after Figure
2. See also the discussion in section 3.2 for cases where labor supply is inelastic and where labor productivities are either
homogeneous or heterogeneous.
7
The upper bound can be justified by the fact that households can avoid renting out their capital stock, or by the
presence of a “black market technology” that allows households to hide their capital income from the tax collector at a
proportional cost τ̄ . The zero lower bound will not be binding for the wealth distributions that we will consider.
8
The upper bound on capital income tax rates, τ̄ , can be unrestricted, and in principle capital taxes paid can exceed
capital income. However, we later impose τ̄ < 1 to permit the existence of an interior steady state with positive capital
stocks and with capital income taxes set at their upper bound forever. For this result τ̄ has to be less than unity because
with positive discounting the steady state after-tax return on capital has to be positive. See Proposition 5 and the
discussion in section 3.5.

4

Importantly, trt is lump-sum and it is independent of the household’s type i. For simplicity, let S tr
P
denote the present discounted value of all transfers, S tr := ∞
t=0 qt trt . The standard representativeagent optimal tax problem—the so called Ramsey problem—rules out lump-sum components from
tax policy, because they allow the government to always achieve the first best rendering the problem
uninteresting. In contrast, in our heterogeneous agent setting, as stressed by Werning (2007), lumpsum transfers allow for redistributive effects of the tax system, so it is important to include them as
a possible policy tool.

2.1

Competitive equilibria

When designing an optimal policy, we consider only those allocations and prices that constitute competitive equilibria for given budget-feasible government policies.
∞
Definition 1. A budget feasible policy is an expenditure plan {gt }∞
t=0 , a tax plan {τt , νt , trt }t=0 , and

a debt issuance plan {bt }∞
t=0 that satisfy (2) and (3) for all t ≥ 0, with given b0 and
lim qT bT +1 = 0.

T →∞

∞
Definitionn 2. A competitive equilibrium
o∞ consists of a budget-feasible policy {τs , νs , trs , bs , gs }s=0 , an
 i i i
allocation cs , ns , ks , cs , ns , as i∈[0,1]
, and a price system {rs , ws }∞
s=0 that satisfy
s=0

1. For ∀i ∈ [0, 1], the sequences



cis , nis



∞
s=0

maximize household utilities (1) subject to (5) and

given ai0 . The sequence {ais }∞
s=0 can be recovered from (4) satisfied with equality.
2. Factor prices equal their marginal products:
rt = Fk (kt , nt ) ,

wt = Fn (kt , nt )

t≥0

3. Markets clear
Z

cit di

Z
= ct ,

nit di = nt

t≥0

ct + gt + kt+1 = F (kt , nt ) + (1 − δ)kt

t ≥ 0.

(6)

Let C be the set of all competitive equilibria indexed by alternative budget-feasible government policies.
Without extra restrictions on the sequence {gs }∞
s=0 , however, it is possible that the aggregate feasibility
condition (6) cannot be satisfied for some period t, in which case C is empty. To avoid this, we require
that the sequence {gs }∞
s=0 is not “too high”:
Assumption 1. The upper bound τ̄ , government expenditure plan {gt }∞
t=0 , and initial government debt
b0 are such that setting νt = 0 and τt = τ̄ , for all t ≥ 0 gives rise to an equilibrium with non-negative
transfers S tr ≥ 0 through the government budget constraint. This implies
R0 b0 +

∞
X

qt gt ≤

t=0

∞
X
t=0

5

τ̄ qt rt kt .

In other words, taxing only capital at the maximum rate forever generates enough revenue to fully
cover the exogenous expenditure plan. Assumption 1 guarantees that the set C is nonempty.

2.2

Household i’s utility in competitive equilibria

The form of the utility function allows us to express the present discounted value of each household for
any given competitive equilibrium as a function of the representative agent’s value function. Naturally,
features of this function inform us about how household i values the different tax policies and implied
competitive equilibria. To derive this function, we start with household i’s first-order conditions:

uc cit , 1 − nit

qt = β
uc ci0 , 1 − ni0
t


u1−n cit , 1 − nit
 .
(1 − νt )wt =
uc cit , 1 − nit

and

(7)

Due to the aggregable utility function, the same necessary conditions hold for aggregate consumption,
ct , and aggregate labor, nt , implying that in any competitive equilibrium, household i’s marginal
utilities are proportional to the representative household’s marginal utilities. As a result,
cit = αi ct

and

1 − nit = αi (1 − nt )

t ≥ 0,

(8)

where the nonnegativity restrictions on consumption and labor imply that the endogenous constant
αi must satisfy 0 < αi ≤ 1/(1 − nt ) for all t and for almost all i. Using the aggregate versions of (7),
we derive household i’s implementability condition (IC) from its budget constraint (5):
∞
X




β t uc (ct , 1 − nt ) cit − u1−n (ct , 1 − nt ) nit = uc (c0 , 1 − n0 ) R0 ai0 + S tr .

(9)

t=0

We define the value of the average household’s after-tax initial wealth measured in units of utility:
A(c0 , n0 , τ0 ) := uc (c0 , 1 − n0 ) [1 + (1 − τ0 )Fk (k0 , n0 ) − δ] a0 .

(10)

This variable turns out to summarize completely how each household’s equilibrium utility is affected
by the triple (c0 , n0 , τ0 ). To see this, derive the equilibrium value of αi by subtracting the average
household’s IC from (9) and using the equilibrium relationships in (8) to substitute out (cit − ct ) and
(nit − nt ). In an equilibrium indexed by the pair (V, A), the value of αi is9
αi =


 1+
 1+

9

A(c0 ,n0 ,τ0 )
V (1−σ)
A(c0 ,n0 ,τ0 )
(1−β)−1

ai0
 a0i
a0
a0



For a detailed derivation of αi , see Appendix A.

6


−1
,

−1
,

if σ 6= 1
(11)
if σ = 1

where V :=

P∞

t=0 β

t u (c

t, 1

− nt ) is the present discounted utility of the agent with average initial

wealth a0 . Upon substituting (8) into (1), the present discounted utility of household i is
(
Vi


V, A; ∆ai0 :=

αi

1−σ

log αi
1−β

V

,

if σ 6= 1

+V

,

if σ = 1

(12)

where we define the term entering αi as
∆ai0 :=

ai0 − a0
ai
= 0 −1
a0
a0

(13)

measures the relative position (relative to the average) of household i in the initial wealth distribution.
Function V i represents household i’s equilibrium utility in a remarkably compact way. In particular,
the V i -relevant features of any equilibrium can be summarized by two variables: the average household’s value V and the utility value of the average household’s after-tax wealth A. These variables
embody a rich set of possible tax policies, allocations, and prices.10 Given that households are indifferent between equilibria that lead to the same (V, A), we will henceforth denote the elements of C by
simply using the induced pairs (V, A).

2.3

Subsets of C

We define two subsets of the set of competitive equilibria C that will prove to be useful. The first
subset C ∗ ⊂ C includes those equilibria that are induced by “eventually time-invariant” policies:
C ∗ := { (V, A) ∈ C

: ∃tF ≥ 0, s.t. gt = g ∗ , νt = ν ∗ , τt = τ ∗ ≤ τ̄ , ∀t ≥ tF } .

The second subset T ⊂ C includes those equilibria that feature maximal capital taxation forever:
T := { (V, A) ∈ C

: τt = τ̄ , ∀t ≥ 0 } .

In addition, we will be interested in capital tax policies with the “bang-bang” property:
Definition 3. The capital tax sequence {τt }∞
t=0 has the bang-bang property if τt < τ̄ implies τs = 0
for s > t. That is, there exists a time T, s.t. τt = τ̄ for t < T and τt = 0 for t > T.
Figure 1 illustrates these objects for a particular example economy.11 The green and orange areas
represent the set C ∗ and the intersection of C ∗ and T in the (V, A)-space, respectively. That is, the
orange set contains equilibria induced by policies with indefinite maximal capital taxes and “eventually
time-invariant” labor taxes. Certain policies can be readily identified in Figure 1: (i ) equilibria induced
by eventually zero labor taxes (and no capital taxes) are denoted by the dashed blue line, (ii ) those with
10

It might be surprising that S tr (transfer) does not appear in V i . This follows from the fact that S tr is independent
of i, so its effect on household i can be captured by the average household’s value function and choices.
11
We set the preference parameters (β, σ, ξ) = (0.96, 5, 0.8). Suppose that b0 = 0 and the government expenditure
plan is time invariant, gt = g ∗ , t ≥ 0, with the values (τ̄ , g ∗ ) = (0.25, 0.05) being chosen to make Assumption 1 hold.
The production function is Cobb-Douglas with captial share ρ = 1/3 and depreciation rate δ = 0.

7

bang-bang capital tax policies (without labor taxes) for different T values are denoted by the dotted
blue line.12 In addition, the big colored circles represent two equilbria of particular importance: the

black dot, V , A , shows the allocation induced by the policy using only lump-sum taxes, whereas the
red dot, (V , A), represents the equilibrium induced by the policy in Assumption 1, i.e., (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0),

t ≥ 0. Since in our example government expenditures are positive, the equilibrium V , A is supported
by lump-sum taxes, that is, the present discounted value of transfers S tr is negative. The grey dots
represent other equilibria where this property holds even if distorting taxes are also used. Loosely
speaking, while capital taxes tend to decrease both V and A, labor taxes have an opposite effect on
the two equilibrium objects: they increase A and decrease V .

Sets of competitive equlibria
*

positive labor tax
(zero capital tax)

1.9

*

(V, A)
(V, A)

1.8

A

1.7
1.6

bang-bang capital tax
(zero labor tax)

1.5
1.4

maximal capital tax
(positive labor tax)
1.66

1.65

1.64

1.63

1.62

V

1.61

1.60

1.59

1.58

1.57

Figure 1: Subsets of competitive equilibria in the (V, A)-space. Light green region represents equilibria
induced by eventually time-invariant policies, while the orange region shows those equilibria among
these that are induced by a policy with maximal capital taxes forever (for an arbitrary labor tax
sequence). Transparent green dots show equilibria induced by eventually time-invariant, random tax
paths {(τt , νt )}t≥0 for various (τ ∗ , ν ∗ ) and tF -values. Grey dots denote equilibria with lump-sum taxes,
i.e. S tr ≤ 0. The horizontal and vertical dashed gray lines represent the lowest attainable A and the
highest attainable V , respectively.
That the boundary of the set C consists of equilibria with well-defined tax policies holds true more
generally. To show these properties formally, we first define iso-A sets in the space of competitive
e denoted by C(A),
e consists of all (V, A) ∈ C with A = A.
e 13 That
equilibria. An iso-A set of value A,
said, Lemma 1 shows that policies with maximal capital taxes forever tend to induce (V, A) pairs in
the “bottom left” corner of C (orange region). More precisely, the “western boundary” of C consists
of equilibria featured by τt = τ̄ forever irrespective of labor tax policy.
Lemma 1. If σ > 1 and ξ < 1,14 the equilibrium (V , A), induced by the policy (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) for
12

The definition of a “bang-bang” capital tax policy is silent about the value of τT . For simplicity, we set τT = 0 in
Figure 1 and confirm numerically that “bang-bang” policies with τT > 0 lie in the interior of the plotted set.
13
Clearly, these sets can be represented by horizontal slices in Figure 1.
14
The case ξ = 1 was treated in Bassetto and Benhabib (2006). See their Theorem 3.

8

all t ≥ 0, is associated with the lowest attainable A value. Moreover, for all feasible A ≥ A such that
C(A) 6= ∅, the V -minimizing equilibrium over C(A) belongs to T .
Proof. See Appendix B.1.
In addition, by mimicking the argument of Bassetto and Benhabib (2006), Lemma 2 shows that the
“eastern boundary” of C must consist of equilibria that are induced by bang-bang capital tax policies.
Lemma 2. For all feasible A ≥ A such that C(A) 6= ∅, the V -maximizing equilibrium over C(A) is
induced by a tax policy with bang-bang capital taxes and eventually zero labor taxes, i.e., if τt < τ̄ then
τs = νs = 0 for s > t.
Proof. See Appendix B.2.

3

Preferences over tax policies

When faced with the choice, household i prefers to implement the equilibrium that maximizes V i .15
Remarkably, the only i-dependent term in the V i function is ∆ai0 , so for any given relative wealth
position, household i’s attitude toward the alternative tax policies can be represented by indifference
curves in the (V, A)-space. The way in which these curves are positioned relative to the C-set in Figure
1 determines the relationship between the interests of household i and those of the average household.
In this section we show that in our economy, households’ interests are not necessarily aligned, in fact,
agents with different initial wealth levels prefer very different tax policies. In what follows, if tax
policies are set to to maximize the value function or discounted sum of utilities of household i, we
will occasionally refer to it as the decisive household. For ease of reference, in what follows, we call
household i “wealth-poor” if ∆ai0 < 0 and “wealth-rich” if ∆ai0 ≥ 0.
Preferences over tax policies are shaped by a tension between two effects of taxation. First,
capital taxes distort prices, thereby altering all households’ optimal decisions. In a world without
utility-enhancing government purchases, this distortion has a negative effect on everyone’s welfare. In
fact, because our economy features Gorman aggregation and a common discount factor, this effect
is proportional, independent of the initial wealth levels. This does not mean, however, that every
household prefers the same tax policy. With the availability of transfers, wealth inequality among
households brings about a second role of taxation: redistribution. One can see this by combining the
government’s budget constraint with those of household i’s:
∞
X

q̄t cit = R0 (ai0 − b0 ) +

t=0

∞
X

∞
∞
X

 X
q̄t wt nit − gt −
q̄t νt wt (nit − nt ) +
q̄t τt rt (at − ait )
t=0

t=0

|

t=0

{z

}

redistribution through νt

where q̄t :=

Qt

−1
s=1 Rs

|

{z

}

redistribution through τt

denotes before-tax time 0 prices. The redistributive effect of capital taxation

is captured by the last term on the right hand side: when τt > 0, wealth is being redistributed from
15

To reiterate, we restrict the choice set of household i to competitive equilibria as in Definitions 1 and 2 above, consistent with optimizing agents, competitive market clearing, and the intertemporal budget constraint of the government.

9

wealth-rich households with ait > at to the wealth-poor households with ait < at . Evidently, labor
taxation also has a redistributive effect, captured by the third term on the right hand side, because
households who work more pay more labor tax as well. Notice, however, that if leisure is a normal
good, it is the wealth-poor households who work relatively more, thus labor taxes induce redistribution
from the wealth-poor to the wealth-rich households.
Households determine their preferred tax policy by trading-off these two effects of capital taxation: (1) the inefficiency caused by the distorted inter-temporal margins and (2) the induced wealth
redistribution. There is consensus on the harmfulness of the former, but households with different
initial wealth levels naturally disagree on the latter. In Theorem 4 we provide a condition under which
the benefits from redistribution for household i are so large that the household’s preferred tax policy
features maximum capital taxation forever.

3.1

Indifference curves

We want to maximize V i with respect to (V, A) over the “budget set” C. Similar to standard optimal
choice problems, this constitutes finding a point of tangency between the indifference curves of V i
and the boundary of the set C. Appendix C shows that V i is a (weakly) concave function of its two
arguments. Moreover, by using the implicit function theorem, the slope of the indifference curve of V i
in our (V, A)-space can be written as
−

∂V i ∂V i
/
.
∂V ∂A

Appendix C shows that the sign of the denominator hinges only on the relative wealth level:

sign

∂V i
∂A



= sign ∆ai0



∀(V, A) ∈ C.

(14)

Intuitively, for a given level of V , a wealth-poor household wants to shrink the spread of the crosssectional distribution of utilities, thereby bringing its own equilibrium utility closer to V . Since the
initial wealth level is the only source of heterogeneity, the reduction of the spread ∆ai0 can be achieved
by making the utility value of the after-tax return on initial wealth lower. A similar argument applies
for the wealth-rich households, but with opposite signs.
As for the derivative with respect to V , we obtain the following formula for σ 6= 1:




i

−σ 
∂V i
1 + σ A(c0 , n0 , τ0 ) ∆ai0  = 1 + σD∆a0σ .
= αi


∂V
V (1 − σ)
1 + D∆ai0
|
{z
}

(15)

=:D

Evidently, the sign of this function depends on parameters and the competitive equilibrium in which
the partial derivative is being evaluated. To gain intuition as to why the right side of equation
(15) can be negative note that under Gorman aggregation the equilibrium value of household i is
V i = (αi )1−σ V , hence V i and V move together. However, to satisfy all budget constraints, the

10

constant of proportionality (αi )1−σ , defined by prices and tax rates, has to adjust downward. Given
the definition of αi in equation (11), it is easy to show that it declines and that the net effect is
negative if σ > 1, ai0 is sufficiently smaller than a0 , and τ̄ is sufficiently small.
Nonetheless, Lemma 3 discusses two cases in which the sign is unambiguously positive: (i ) household i is wealth-rich, or (ii ) preferences are such that the substitution effect dominates the income
effect so that savings rate increase in capital returns net of capital taxes.
Lemma 3. The partial derivative

∂V i
∂V

is positive, if σ ≤ 1 or ∆ai0 ≥ 0.

Proof. Since (1 − σ)V > 0, the term D is positive, so for ai0 ≥ a0 the partial derivative is always
positive regardless of the equilibrium allocation. Likewise, from αi = 1 + D∆ai0 > 0 it follows that as
long as σ < 1, we have

∂V i
∂V

> 0. The log case, σ = 1, trivially follows from (12).

Tax policy preferred by the average household
Before turning to our main case, we briefly discuss the average household’s problem, which, due to
Gorman aggregation, can be viewed as a standard representative-agent optimal tax problem. The
existence of lump-sum taxes, however, renders this problem trivial, because the first best (from the
representative agent’s point of view) is always achievable. Nonetheless, even if lump-sum taxes were
not allowed, the well-known result by Chamley (1986) for a representative agent would hold in our
setting for the average household, that is, the capital tax sequence {τt }∞
t=0 that maximizes the average
household’s welfare would have the bang-bang property. While the finiteness of T could be nontrivial,16 in our setting the average household clearly prefers to set capital taxes to zero as soon as
possible, hence T = 0.
Tax policy preferred by wealth-rich households
Lemma 3 implies that for wealth-rich households, the slope of the indifference curves is unambiguously
negative and they prefer high V and high A values. As a result, their preferred tax policies lie on
the “northern boundary” of C, so from Lemma 2 it follows that they want capital tax policies with
the bang-bang property. In fact, since their preferred equilibrium (V ∗ , A∗ ) must feature V ∗ ≤ V , the
corresponding after-tax return on capital must be A∗ ≥ A. As Figure 1 illustrates, such equilibria are
featured by Ti = 0.
Figure 2 shows the set C ∗ along with indifference curves (thin grey curves) for households with
various initial wealth levels. For each panel, the grey arrows in the bottom right corner shows the
direction in which V i increases. The top right panel displays the case of a wealth-rich household with
the blue filled dot denoting its preferred equilibrium pair (V ∗ , A∗ ).
While we provide no formal proof, Figure 1 and 2 clearly support the intuition that wealth-rich
households tend to prefer policies that use distorting labor taxes because labor taxes redistribute
resources from poor to rich households. Since leisure is a normal good, the wealth-rich work less
16
Indeed, abstracting from lump-sum transfers or taxes, Straub and Werning (2018) show that if the initial government
debt b0 > 0 is sufficiently large and σ > 1, the representative household could find it optimal to set T = ∞. They argue
that in this case no interior steady state exists; both capital and consumption must converge to zero asymptotically.

11

and have lower labor income than the wealth-poor. Then if labor productivities are homogeneous,
the wealth-rich have lower labor incomes. Since labor tax collections are equally redistributed lumpsum, the wealthy benefit from labor taxation. However they have to trade off this benefit against
lower returns on capital because higher labor taxes also decrease total labor supply. If the labor tax
was 100%, labor supply would in fact drop to zero, and for a wide range of neoclassical production
functions output would drop to zero as well. Therefore, to avoid such a distorted outcome under the
parametrization that we use in Figure 1, the optimal steady state labor tax chosen by the wealthy,
the filled blue dot, turns out to be less than 100%, in fact it is approximately 17%. We further discuss
optimal labor taxes under in section 3.2.

Average household's preferences
-1.596

-1.586

-0.1
7

5

1.4

7

-0.19

-6.630

0

-1.84
8

9

-1.80
4

-5.950

-1.82

a0i = 1.0

-6.290

-5.610

-1.81
2

1.66

1.65

1.64

1.63

1.62

V

1.61

2

4

1.60

-4.930

-1.75

1.5

-5.270
-1.76

-1.77 -1.78
8
6

1.6

1.4

-0.18

6

1.7

-0.1
51

Wealth-poor household's preferences

a0i = 0.1

-1.83

A

-0.1
63

27 a0i = 3.0

V

Wealth-poor household's preferences
1.8

-0.1

1

V

1.9

39

-0.21

-1.636

1.5

-1.606

1.6

-1.626

1.7

-1.646

A

a0i = 0.0

-1.616

1.8

-1.656

1.9

Wealth-rich household's preferences
-0.1

1.59

-4.590

1.58

1.66

1.65

1.64

1.63

1.62

V

1.61

1.60

1.59

1.58

Figure 2: Effect of initial wealth on the preferred tax policy. Thin gray curves represent indifference
(iso-V i ) curves of household i with initial wealth position indicated in the top right corner of each
panels. The arrows in the bottom right corner of the four panels show the direction in which V i
increases. In each panel, the filled dot denotes the equilibrium preferred by the respective household.
Parameters are as described in footnote 11.
What is the role of lump-sum taxes in our model? Given the choice, those who have average
wealth or higher impose lump-sum taxes in addition to labor taxes to collect enough revenue to meet
government expenditures. The wealth-rich prefer to set capital taxes to zero since lump-sum taxes and
labor taxes are enough to meet government expenditures. Why both labor taxes and lump-sum taxes?
Under the assumption of elastic labor, because leisure is a normal good, the wealth-poor supply more
labor hours and have higher labor income than the wealth-rich. Therefore, the wealth-rich use some
labor taxes to redistribute labor income upwards, but they do this only up to a point because they
12

do not want to curtail labor supply excessively, which would hurt capital returns and output. We can
see this in the upper right panel of Figure 2, indicated by the blue dot. Unlike the wealth-poor, the
wealth-rich prefer to tax labor up to a point because they benefit from it, but if the tax revenues remain
insufficient to provide for government expenditures, they prefer to supplement them with lump-sum
taxes. The wealth-poor prefer positive capital taxes to lump-sum taxes for redistributive reasons. This
is because with capital taxes they can pass a greater share of the burden of government expenditures
to the wealth-rich than they could with lump-sum taxes. Importantly, under our Assumption 1, using
maximal capital taxes provides enough revenue to cover government expenditures so that the rest can
be used for redistribution.17 Of course, if government expenditures are zero, all of the capital tax
revenue is for redistribution.
Tax policy preferred by wealth-poor households
Our main case of interest is when household i’s preferred tax policy features maximal capital taxation
forever, that is, when some household i prefers a competitive equilibrium (V, A) that belongs to T .
As we saw above, a necessary condition for this result is that household i is wealth-poor. In an
environment similar to ours, but with inelastic labor supply, Bassetto and Benhabib (2006) provided
a sufficient condition for indefinite maximal capital taxation, namely, that V i is decreasing in V
at the allocation preferred by household i. Theorem 4 shows that a slightly altered version of the
Bassetto-Benhabib-condition applies in our setting as well.
Theorem 4. If at the equilibrium induced by (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) for all t ≥ 0 the partial derivative is
non-positive,

∂V i
∂V

≤ 0, then the capital tax sequence preferred by household i features Ti = ∞.

Proof. From the property

∂V i
∂V

≤ 0 and Lemma 3, we can conclude that σ > 1 and ∆ai0 < 0. (14) in

section 3.1 then implies that the slope of the indifference curves of household i in the (V, A)-space is
non-positive (recall that V is negative when σ > 1). Therefore, the preferred equilibrium must be on
the V - and A-minimizing “western boundary” of the set C. Then, if ξ < 1, Lemma 1 implies Ti = ∞.
The case ξ = 1 is covered by Theorem 3 in Bassetto and Benhabib (2006).
We can illustrate the above theorem with the help of Figure 2. The two bottom panels of Figure 2
illustrate how the preferences of wealth-poor households are shaped by their relative wealth position.
The bottom left panel displays the case of a decisive household that is not significantly worse-off than
the average household. The partial derivative is ∂V i /∂V > 0 and as the filled blue dot in the lower
left panel suggests, the preferred tax policy features a finite stopping time Ti at which capital taxes
drop to 0. As the household wealth decreases, their preferred stopping time Ti increases, sliding down
along the eastern boundary. The lower right panel shows the case of a household whose wealth is
much lower than the average. The partial derivative ∂V i /∂V becomes negative over large part of the
set C. As a result, a sufficiently wealth-poor household chooses to implement a policy with maximal
capital taxation forever, as illustrated by the red dot of the lower right panel, where Ti = ∞.
17

In fact in our model, the poor decisive agent prefers not to use either distortionary labor taxes or lump-sum taxes to
finance government expenditures at any time. This can be seen in the lower right panel of Figure 2, where the preferred
policy (red dot) represents permanently maximal capital taxes and zero labor taxes.

13

At this point we can take stock of the main ingredients and assumptions that are required for
Theorem (4) to hold, so the decisive household sets the capital taxes at their allowed maximum forever. First, taxes are set under commitment by the decisive household not only to meet exogenous
government expenditures but also to provide lump-sum transfers across households. Capital taxes will
remain at their maximum forever if the decisive household is initially sufficiently capital-poor relative
to the household with average capital holdings. It also has to be true that the maximal capital income
tax is not too high. For example, in the extreme, if capital could be fully taxed and redistributed so
that the wealth holdings are immediately equalized after the first period, they would be set to zero
from then on. Finally the intertemporal consumption elasticity of substitution σ has to be greater
than 1, generating a strong income effect: the savings rate of households decreases in the net rate of
return, so an increase in capital income taxes in fact increases the savings rate.
Remark: We can, of course, replace the decisive household with a social welfare function that assigns
full weight to the decisive household, or allocates positive weights only to households that are at least
as wealth-poor as the sufficiently poor decisive household. To see this, suppose we have a household i
with initial wealth ai0 > 0 and ∆ai0 < 0. If the condition ∂V i /∂V < 0 from Theorem 4 holds, household
i implements a maximal capital tax policy τt = τ̄ , and zero labor tax νt = 0 forever. For this tax
policy there will be an equilibrium with equilibrium prices. Now consider household j with initial
wealth aj0 < ai0 at the same equilibrium. Since ∆aj0 < ∆ai0 < 0 we have ∂V j /∂V < 0, so household j
will also choose to implement (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) forever. In fact household i and j, by implementing the
same tax policy, prefer the same equilibrium. Then, a social planner maximizing a weighted average
of their utilities will also implement the same tax plan. This can be extended to any household s with
initial wealth as0 < ai0 and any weighted average of them. In other words, suppose the optimal capital
tax is maximal for the median voter. Then it will be optimal for any household initially poorer than
the median voter,18 and therefore optimal for a social welfare function that is a weighed average of
those households, since they all prefer the same maximal capital tax.

3.2

Labor Taxation

The decisive household chooses not only the optimal capital taxes but also labor taxes, the properties
of which depend on the specifics of the model under consideration. In this section, we study various
alternative specifications. First, we consider the simplest case where labor supply is inelastic and labor
productivities are homogeneous. We will then discuss the elastic supply case under homogeneous labor
productivities, and relate our results to those of Greulich, Laczó, and Marcet (2016). Finally we will
discuss the cases with heterogeneous labor productivities.
The simplest case is the one where ξ = 1, corresponding to inelastic labor supply and homogeneous
labor productivities. Under our Assumption 1, the revenue from maximal capital taxes are sufficient
to meet government expenditures, with any surplus redistributed equally to all households. In this
inelastic labor case labor taxes are effectively lump-sum and collect the same revenue from all agents.
Each agent receives them back exactly as transfers. In other words, labor taxes do not affect the
18

Here we refer to the voter that is median with respect to initial wealth.

14

agents’ budget constraints, nor do they affect labor supply. It does not matter if labor taxes are
0% or 100% or something in between; they are indeterminate. The results of our Theorem 4, giving
conditions under which perpetually maximal capital taxes are optimal, remains unaffected.
The case of elastic labor supply, with ξ < 1, was already considered in the previous sections.
We consider the case with optimal redistributive transfers and provide conditions under which the
stopping time for optimal taxes to revert to 0 is infinite. Under the specific parametrization used
in Figure 2, the initially wealth-poor households choose to set labor taxes to zero forever, while the
initially wealth-rich set them at the rate of 17%. Our results are nevertheless consistent with those
of Greulich, Laczó, and Marcet (2016), who study the dynamics of optimal capital and labor taxes
being used to finance government expenditures and debt repayments, but not used to fund transfers
for redistributive purposes. They find, consistently with earlier results of Chamley (1986) and Judd
(1985), that optimal capital taxes are initially maximal up to an endogenous threshold time T , but
then drop to zero. A particularly interesting result of Greulich, Laczó, and Marcet (2016) is that the
social planner may backload labor taxes in order to induce larger labor supply early on and raise the
returns on capital. This generates higher capital tax collections that benefit the poor during the initial
phase when the capital tax is relatively inelastic and maximal, and therefore decreases the burden of
financing government expenditures for the wealth-poor households.
In contrast, our model allows for redistributive transfers in every period. In this case, we find that
the initially wealth-poor household wants to set labor taxes to their minimum, that is zero forever.
They do this for two reasons: (1) not to decrease labor supply which would decrease the return to
capital and discourage capital accumulation in the initial phase of maximal capital taxes, which in our
case lasts forever. This accords with the findings of Greulich, Laczó, and Marcet (2016) noted above.
(2) Leisure is a normal good so the wealth-poor work longer hours than the rich, and have higher labor
income. Labor taxes would then redistribute away from the wealth-poor towards the wealth-rich. We
already observed in the discussion of the numerical example in Figure 2 that the wealth-rich prefer to
set positive labor taxes, but stop short of setting them at 100% so that labor supply remains positive,
on the right side of the Laffer curve so to speak.
Now we can consider what happens when labor productivities are not homogeneous. For better
intuition, let’s start by looking at the simple and straightforward case where labor supply is inelastic.
In this case it is clear that if the decisive agent is less productive and earns lower labor income than
the agent with average labor productivity, he will in fact set labor taxes at 100%. Since tax collections
are equally redistributed this will be to his advantage, since labor supply is unaffected in the inelastic
case.19 This reasoning, however, will not automatically carry over to the elastic labor case.
We do not formally explore the case of heterogeneous productivities and elastic labor supply, but
we can still draw some conclusions that depend on the particulars of our model. When labor supply
is elastic, all else being equal, the wealth rich tend to supply fewer labor hours because leisure is a
normal good. If they also have less productive labor than average, they will prefer to tax labor on
both counts, as they benefit from taxing the wealth-poor who not only work longer hours, but also
19

Of course, if the decisive agent can also completely decide the redistribution scheme, he would choose to redistribute
all taxes to himself, an unlikely scenario.

15

have higher wages per hour because they are more productive. On the other hand, if the wealth rich
have more productive labor than the average, there will be two counteracting forces determining their
labor income, resulting from shorter but more productive hours. The net effect will depend on whether
the decisive agent has higher or lower labor income than the average. In addition the effect identified
by Greulich, Laczó, and Marcet (2016) of backloading labor taxes could also be present, but in our
model capital taxes remain at their maximum level forever. The decisive poor agent prefers to finance
government expenditures from the maximal capital tax revenues, and not to resort to distortionary
labor taxes or to lump-sum taxes at any time.

3.3

“Interior” steady-state

Because of Gorman aggregation, we can view every (V, A) ∈ C as an equilibrium induced by a
representative-agent neoclassical growth model for a particular—not necessarily optimal—feasible government policy. As such, the analysis of the long-run properties of aggregate consumption, capital
and labor is standard, provided that the given equilibrium has a steady-state. Recent findings of
Straub and Werning (2018) render the question of “interiority” of such steady-states non-trivial.20 By
revisiting the setting of Judd (1985), they show that if positive long-run capital taxation is optimal
and the corresponding allocation converges, then consumption must converge to zero, i.e. the steadystate cannot be interior. In our context, however, where everyone can save, we obtain the following
proposition:
Proposition 5. Consider an equilibrium in the set T ∩ C ∗ induced by an eventually time-invariant
government policy with maximal capital taxation forever. The steady-state consumption, c∗ , capital,
k ∗ and labor, n∗ , are all positive as long as τ̄ < 1 and ν ∗ < 1.
Proof. Let c∗ , k ∗ , and n∗ denote the steady-state value of consumption, capital, and labor. Using the
linear homogeneity of F and the average household’s Euler equation in the steady-state, we obtain
the following condition for the net return on capital:

Fk

k∗
,1
n∗


=

β −1 − 1 + δ
1 − τ̄

(16)

Equation (16) determines the steady-state capital-labor ratio, which is positive as long as τ̄ < 1. Using
the capital-labor ratio we can then use the steady-state intratemporal first-order condition
c∗ 1 − ξ
= (1 − ν ∗ )Fn
1 − n∗ ξ




k∗
,1
n∗

and the resource constraint
c∗ + g ∗ + δk ∗ = F (k ∗ , n∗ )
to solve for c∗ , k ∗ , and n∗ separately, which are nonzero as long as the long-run labor tax is ν ∗ < 1.
20
To reiterate, by “interiority” we mean capital, consumption, and labor sequences that are positive asymptotically,
while we allow the capital income tax to be set at its maximum allowed rate.

16

In our economy, positive long-run capital taxation can be both optimal and lead to a steady-state
where consumption, capital, and labor are all nonzero while the capital tax remains at its upper
bound, τ̄ .21 The apparent difference of this result from those in Judd (1985) and Straub and Werning
(2018) is due to the fact that the latter papers analyze a setting in which some agents (“workers”)
cannot save, so redistribution is valuable to them only to the extent that it adds to their consumption
streams. The possibility of savings in our setting makes redistribution relatively more valuable, because
poor households can decide how to allocate the extra resources over time. In fact, they may value
redistribution so much more so as to prefer maximal capital taxes at a steady-state with positive
capital stock.

3.4

Inelastic labor supply

Interestingly, if labor supply is inelastic, Theorem 4 can be strengthened. In this case, the condition
is not only sufficient, but also necessary.
Theorem 6. Suppose that ξ = 1, that is, the period utility function is u(cit , 1 − nit ) =
i. The capital tax sequence preferred by household i features

Ti

(cit )1−σ
1−σ

for all

= ∞ if and only if at the equilibrium

induced by (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) for all t ≥ 0 the partial derivative is non-positive,

∂V i
∂V

≤ 0.

Proof. For the if part see case 2 and 3 of Theorem 3 in Bassetto and Benhabib (2006).22 For the
other direction, note that if labor supply is inelastic, taxing labor is non-distortionary. Moreover, it
is straightforward to see that labor taxes and government transfers cancel each other in the average
household’s budget constraint. Because the average household’s decisions and disposable income are
both independent of νt , the values V and A do not depend on the particular {νt }∞
t=0 sequence either.
As a result, all elements of T induce (V , A) with the lowest attainable V and A. Appendix C shows
that the function V i is concave, implying that in order for V i to be maximized at (V , A), we need
downward sloping indifference curves that increase in the direction of lower V and A. As we saw in
section 3.1, this requires

∂V i
∂V

≤ 0 at (V , A).

Figure 3 illustrates how the case with inelastic labor supply differs from our general setup. The key
difference is that labor taxes cease to have any effect on the equilibrium objects V and A, so the set T
becomes a singleton consisting only of (V , A). In addition, the set C ∗ is now bounded with its upper
boundary being made up of equilibria such that the capital tax rate is zero up to a certain period tI ,
then it is set at its maximum value forever. The dash-dotted blue line represents such equilibria for
various tI values with tI increasing as we move from (V , A) to (V , A). Just like in Figure 1 the lower
boundary of the set is determined by bang-bang capital tax policies. The dotted blue line represents
such equilibria for various T values with T increasing as we move from (V , A) to (V , A). The particular
shape of C ∗ implies that the wealth-rich households’ preferred equilibrium coincides with that of the
21

Importantly, we are not looking at steady states induced by policies preferred by the average household. Indeed,
because lump-sum taxes are available, equilibria in T cannot be optimal for the average household.
22
There are two offsetting inconsequential typos in Bassetto and Benhabib (2006) that can be corrected as follows: i)
the second inequality on the top of page 220 should be reversed, and ii) in the 7th line of page 220 the whole expression
for the change in the utility index preceding the inequality sign on the right should be multiplied by a negative sign.

17

Sets of competitive equlibria

0.110

*

(V, A) no capital tax until period tI
(V, A) then maximum capital tax forever

0.105
0.100

A

0.095
0.090
0.085
0.080

bang-bang capital tax
0.0754

0.0752

0.0750

0.0748

0.0746

V

0.0744

0.0742

0.0740

0.0738

Figure 3: Subsets of competitive equilibria in the (V, A)-space with inelastic labor supply. Light green
region represents equilibria induced by eventually time-invariant policies. Transparent green dots
show equilibria induced by (τt , νt ) = (τ ∗ , 0), t ≥ 0 for various τ ∗ ≤ τ̄ values. The horizontal and
vertical dashed gray lines represent the lowest attainable A and the highest attainable V , respectively.
Parameters are as described in footnote 11, except for ξ = 1.
average household: because labor taxes have no redistributive effect, wealth-rich households have no
reason to tolerate distortionary taxes.

3.5

Discussion

At first glance, our finding that wealth-poor households can prefer equilibria with positive steady-state
capital tax rates seems to be at odds with some results in Judd (1985). Notice, however, that our
economy differs from the model in Judd (1985) in which: (i ) some households are excluded from the
capital market, (ii ) government is not allowed to issue debt.
Point (i ) turns out to be the critical difference. Without the option to save, households have no
choice but to consume their wages and transfers every period. Because both sources of their disposable
income depend positively on the aggregate capital stock, the non-saving households’ interests are
naturally aligned with those of the wealth-rich “capitalists”. The situation is different when everyone
can save. In this case, wealth-poor households’ can save their transfers with the aim of bootstrapping
themselves out of poverty. A necessary condition for this channel to be operative is that savings respond
negatively to permanent increases in future interest rates, that is, the income effect dominates the
substitution effect because the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is lower than one, i.e., σ > 1.23
In this case, households react to lower after-tax interest rates by choosing a steeper consumption
path that implies faster capital accumulation and relatively more redistribution, as the faster capital
More precisely, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution with respect to consumption is IES = [1 − ξ(1 − σ)]−1 .
For any ξ ∈ (0, 1], IES is lower (larger) than one if and only if σ > 1 (σ < 1).
23

18

accumulation results in a larger tax base.24
As for point (ii ), the lack of government debt in Judd (1985) implies that tax revenues cannot
be saved, so the government is not tempted to impose a huge capital levy at the beginning of time.
As a result, in Judd’s model the upper bound on capital taxes does not play any critical role. When
heterogeneity among households arise from differential capital holdings, however, the upper bound on
capital taxes becomes essential to keep the problem nontrivial. For instance, if τ0 were unrestricted,
wealth-poor households would all prefer to confiscate the aggregate initial capital stock and redistribute
it equally, thereby eliminating wealth inequality completely at the initial period.
Unlike us, Straub and Werning (2018) revisit the model in Judd (1985), in which some households
are prohibited from saving, but similar to us, they find that if σ > 1, the optimal long-run capital tax
can be positive. In this case, however, the non-saving household’s consumption must converge to zero,
so the steady-state cannot be interior. In contrast, Proposition 5 shows that if no one is excluded from
the financial markets, taxing capital at the maximum rate forever does not rule out the possibility of
an interior steady-state.
As we saw above, however, this interior steady-state result requires that τ̄ < 1. This follows from
the fact that with positive discounting, a steady-state cannot be compatible with a nonpositive aftertax interest rate, (1 − τ̄ )r (see (16)). While in principle our main finding does not depend on the exact
value of τ̄ < 1, low τ̄ values tend to make our condition in Theorem 4 easier to be satisfied. Intuitively,
the higher the upper bound, the easier it is for the planner to concentrate all redistribution at the
early periods. The desirability of capital taxation is independent of τ̄ , but with a more relaxed upper
bound, the necessary amount of redistribution might be achieved with a lower Ti .
Because preferences over capital tax policies are directly linked to the household’s initial wealth
level, our model predicts that the implemented capital tax policy hinges on the wealth inequality in
the economy. A simple measure of wealth inequality, or more precisely, the skewness of the wealth
distribution, is the difference between the median and the average households’ wealth levels. This
25 The
difference is captured by (13) being applied to the median household. Denote this with ∆am
0 .

partial derivative in our sufficient condition for Tm = ∞ is a function of ∆am
0 : the higher the level of
wealth inequality, the more likely it is that positive long-run capital taxation is optimal. Using recent
Census Bureau data in section 4.2.2, we will show that U.S. wealth inequality seems to be high enough
so that the sufficient condition for Tm = ∞ is satisfied for a wide range of parameter values.

4

Quantitative examples

In general, the condition in Theorem 4 is hard to check, because it depends on the value function
and optimal policies of the average household. To help us understand its content better, in Section
4.1 we provide a simple parametric example for which closed form solution exists, and therefore the
condition can be expressed in terms of primitives. Moreover, to investigate the condition’s empirical
24

Faster capital accumulation also benefits the wealth-poor households by increasing the marginal product of labor.
While the tail of the U.S. wealth distribution can be approximated by a Pareto distribution with tail index 1.5, the
full distribution is certainly not Pareto. Nevertheless, if we were to use a full Pareto distribution with tail index ϕ = 1.5,
1/ϕ
we would get ∆am
(ϕ − 1)/ϕ − 1 ≈ −0.47. For a very rough calibration to the U.S. economy, see section 4.2.2.
0 = 2
25

19

plausibility, Section 4.2 presents an alternative approach exploiting the fact that in equilibrium the
value function of the representative agent in a neoclassical economy can be represented by a linear
intertemporal budget constraint using time varying return and wage sequences consistent with the
existence of interior steady-state equilibria. In a simplified version of our Section 2 economy, it is
possible to express the value function V in terms of initial values and primitive parameters. That
said, the condition in Theorem 4 can be evaluated using recent estimates of US wealth data. Finally,
in Section 4.3 we solve the equilibrium objects numerically with standard functional forms and provide
parameter ranges for which the condition is satisfied.

4.1

Special cases

CRRA utility with CES production
To obtain closed form solutions for the equilibrium objects (V, A) we follow Benhabib and Rustichini
(1994) and assume that (i ) the production function is of the CES form with parameter η, (ii ) labor
supply is inelastic (ξ = 1), and (iii ) the households’ intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES) is
reciprocal to the CES parameter of production. These assumptions give rise to saving policies that
are linear in current income, hence, the average household’s value function V can be solved in closed
form. In more detail, let the production function be
 1

1−η
F (kt , nt ) = z ρkt1−η + (1 − ρ)n1−η
t
with z > 0, η > 0, and ρ ∈ [0, 1], and suppose that η = σ > 1. To simplify algebra, we assume that
(gt , bt ) = (0, 0) for all t ≥ 0, implying a0 = k0 and a balanced government budget every period:
trt = τt rt kt + νt wt
In Appendix D.1 we show that with full depreciation, δ = 1,26 the tax policy with constant rates
(τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) ∀t ≥ 0, induces an equilibrium in which the optimal consumption is ct = λF (kt , nt )
with the marginal propensity to consume being:

1
λ = 1 − β(1 − τ̄ )z 1−σ ρ σ .
Plugging in the implied functions V , c0 , and n0 into (12), taking the partial derivate with respect to
V , and rearranging terms yield the following sufficient condition for Tm = ∞:

1
τ̄ 
ρk01−σ
≤ D (−∆am
0 )= 1−
1−ρ
σ
λ ρk01−σ + 1−β



a0 − am
0
a0



where m denotes the household with median income, am
0 ≤ a0 . Intuitively, in order for this condition
to be satisfied, the following objects should be relatively large: (1) wealth inequality measured by
26

A depreciation scheme can easily be introduced into this formulation as in Benhabib and Rustichini (1994) if current
and past investments, depreciated over their lifetime according to a general depreciation profile, are aggregated within a
CES production function.

20

∆am
0 < 0, (2) capital share in production technology, ρ ∈ [0, 1], and (3) marginal propensity to
consumption, λ. With these objects at hand, computing the evolution of the growth rate of average
capital is straightforward:
kt+1
= (1 − λ)z
kt


ρ + (1 − ρ)

1
kt

1
1−σ ! 1−σ

One can obtain the corresponding steady-state value k ∗ by setting the growth rate equal to one. Figure
4 represents a particular example such that the (i) the sufficient condition for Tm = ∞ is satisfied
and (ii) the steady-state is interior, that is 0 < k ∗ < ∞, 0 < c∗ < ∞. In addition, dashed lines
(computed numerically) in Figure 4 illustrate that the steady state values change continuously with
small perturbations of the parameters. In particular, even if we deviate from the case σ = η for which
closed form solution exists, the steady-state is still interior.

Capital

10

Consumption

=2
= 2.5
=3
= 3.05

8
6
4
2
0

0

5

10

Time

15

20

25 0

5

10

Time

15

20

25

Figure 4: Equilibrium paths of capital and consumption induced by the policy (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) for
all t ≥ 0. Black solid lines show the knife-edge case σ = η for which closed form solution exists.
Dashed lines illustrate how the equilibrium paths change when σ 6= η. As we move η from 2 to 3.05,
the corresponding values of the partial derivative, ∂V i /∂V , are: −6.87, −1.57, −0.11, and −0.04.
Parameter values are: β = .96, σ = 3, ξ = 1, z = 2.5, ρ = 0.95, δ = 1, τ̄ = 0.1, ∆am
0 = −1, k0 = 1.

Linear production – sustained growth with time consistency
Another example of interest is when the production function is linear implying an endogenously growing economy. This involves setting ξ = 1 and ρ = 1, i.e., the production function is yt := F (kt , nt ) =
zkt . Households do not work, nt = 0, and the optimal consumption becomes


1 
ct = 1 − β(1 − τ̄ )z 1−σ σ yt .
The sufficient condition in Theorem 4 simplifies to
1 
τ̄ 
≤ 1−
σ
λ



21

a0 − am
0
a0



whereas the constant growth rate of the economy is
1
1
kt+1
yt+1
ct+1
=
=
= (1 − λ)z = (βz) σ (1 − τ̄ ) σ .
kt
yt
ct

Clearly, there is nothing in this specification that would prevent

kt+1
kt

> 1. For given values of (β, τ̄ ),

different z values can lead to either perpetual growth or perpetual contraction. This example illustrates
that even if there is no interior steady-state, this does not imply that aggregate capital must converge
to zero. Indeed, taxing capital at its maximum rate is consistent with sustained growth.
In this paper we follow the standard approach to studying optimal taxation by assuming full
commitment. With linear production function however, this is not necessary. With capital taxes being
fixed at their upper bound, both the interest rate and the relative wealth shares remain constant, and
thus our key sufficient condition dV i /dV < 0, remains invariant through time. As a result, the solution
is time consistent. No commitment is required, and the decisive wealth-poor household chooses to stick
with its initial plan.27

4.2

Alternative characterization

In the examples of Section 4.1 we imposed strict parametric restrictions and focused on simple special
cases in order to derive a condition—expressed in terms of primitives—under which Ti = ∞. In this
subsection we follow an alternative strategy. Using a simplified version of our Section 2 economy,
we assume a general constant return to scale neoclassical production function with the existence of
∞
an equilibrium characterized by returns {rs }∞
s=0 and wages {ws }s=0 , such that the function V is well-

behaved. By manipulation of the average household’s budget constraint, we derive a formula for V and
∞
express our condition in terms of {rs }∞
s=0 and {ws }s=0 . To obtain a slight generalization of our previous

findings, this subsection uses a hyperbolic absolute risk aversion (HARA) utility specification:28
u
4.2.1

cit




=

σ
1−σ



1−σ
ψ i
c + ū
σ t

(17)

Simplified setting

There are N households, each owning a share ωti of the period-t aggregate capital stock, at , such that
PN
i
i
i=1 ωi = 1 and at = ωt at , for t ≥ 0. Suppose that labor is inelastically supplied (ξ = 1) and all
households receive ‘labor income’ {et }t≥0 irrespective of their wealth level. To guarantee finite budget
27
Under history dependent strategies, where agents expect maximal taxes forever after the decisive agent (or the
government) fails to implement a promised low or zero tax in some period, maximal taxes forever will be sub-game
perfect. This follows because under our redistribution scheme with proportional taxes and lump-sum redistribution, any
agent whose initial wealth is below mean wealth will remain below mean wealth over time as he can only close a fraction
of the gap each period. The decisive agent, irrespective of promises made under commitment, will want to reinitialize
and reset the tax rate at its maximum each period, as the realized capital stock is initially inelastic. As a result, agents
will have correct expectations.
28
The specification used throughout the paper is a special subclass associated with ū = 0 and ψ = σ.

22

as t → ∞, we restrict the growth rate of labor income as
χt := et +

∞
X

ej

j=t+1

Qj

s=t+1 Rs

< ∞.

For simplicity, we assume that νt = 0 and gt = 0, but given that labor supply is inelastic and lumpsum taxes are allowed, this is without much loss of generality. More importantly, we assume balanced
government budget every period, that is, bt = 0, t ≥ 0. As a result the only motive for using distorting
capital taxes is wealth redistribution yielding the transfer: trt = τt rt at .
With these simplifications, household i’s period budget constraint becomes
ait+1 = Rt ait + et + trt − cit =: Rt ait − (cit − dt )

(18)

where dt denotes the non-capital income agent
i receives

 at
 time t. Iterating1 this constraint forward
ψ i
and combining it with the Euler equation, σ ct+1 + ū = ψσ cit + ū (βRt+1 ) σ , and the transversality
condition, we can solve for

cit = λt Rt ait + dt +



∞
X
j=t+1

dj
Qj

s=t+1 Rs

−

σ
ūζt 
ψ

(19)

where

ζt :=

∞
X

1
j
Y
(βRs ) σ − 1
Rs


λt := 1 +

and

j=t+1 s=t+1

∞
X

j
Y

−1
1
1−σ

βRs

σ



.

j=t+1 s=t+1

The following assumption assures that there are λl , λr ∈ R, such that 0 < λl ≤ λt ≤ λh < 1 for all
t ≥ 0. Note that the assumption places no further restrictions on the tax rate in the initial period.
Assumption 2. β < Rtσ−1 for all t ≥ 1. (Sufficient but not necessary for λt > 0)
Using the Euler equation and (19), the value function of household i can be written as
"∞
1−σ #

1−σ
X ψ
σ
ψ i
σ
i
t
i
=
λ−1
V =
β
c + ū
c + ū
0
1−σ
σ t
1−σ σ 0

(20)

t=0

We then postulate the law of motion of aggregate capital as
at+1 = εt+1 at + γt+1
and using this transition rule, we derive an expression for dt and plug it into (19) to obtain

cit = λt

i
 Rt ωt

rt


j
∞
Y
X
1
1
εs 
ft
τj
+ τt +
rt at + λt + λt ζt .
N
N
Rs
N
j=t+1

23

s=t+1

(21)

Appendix D.2 contains formulas for the equilibrium processes {εt }t≥0 , {γt }t≥0 , and {ft }t≥0 , but they
will not be needed for our purposes.
4.2.2

Condition for Tm = ∞

Let a0 and am
0 denote the average and median initial wealth levels, respectively. Using the above
formulas, we can write the derivative of the median household’s value function with respect to V as
R0
∂V m
uc (0)R0 m

=1+σ
(a − a0 ) = 1 + ψ 
(am
0 − a0 ).
ψ
−1
∂V
(1 − σ)V 0
c
+
ū
λ
0
σ 0

(22)

In the isoelastic case, ū = 0 and ψ = σ, this becomes
∂V m
R0 (a0 − am
0 )

=1−σ
P
Q
∞
∂V
R0 a0 + N −1 τ0 + j=1 τj js=1

εs
Rs



,
r0 a0 + N −1 f0

where the denominator is the lifetime wealth of the household with average initial wealth level. It
is the sum of the value of the after-tax return on average capital, the discounted transfers due to
growth factor of capital, the discounted present value of labor income (via the term N −1 f0 ), and the
discounted value transfers accruing through the additive growth in capital.
To get a rough idea about what this partial derivative would be in the data, we use information
from Table 1 in Wolff (2017) for the year 2016 to obtain:
∂V i
=1−σ
∂V



[1 + r(1 − τ̄ )] ($667, 600 − $78, 100)
[1 + r(1 − τ̄ )] $667, 600 + $1, 662, 000



where $1, 662, 000 in the denominator is lifetime individual mean earnings plus transfers (mean income
of $83, 100 capitalized at 5%). The mean and median physical wealth levels are given by $667, 600
and $78, 100, respectively. These values allow us to compute σmin : the minimum σ that makes the
partial derivative equal to 0. Using the above expression with r = 0.06 and τ̄ = 0.329 we obtain
σmin ≈ 3.9. Although the exact number depends on the interest rate and the upper bound on capital
taxes, σmin changes only slightly due to the high observed inequality in the data.30 As a result, as long
as σ ≥ σmin , the sufficient condition in Theorem 4—applied to the median household—is satisfied.31
While this calibration assumes isoelastic utility and we derive a bound on σ, (22) shows that the
sufficient condition for maximal capital taxation forever does not require constant IES.

4.3

Numerical example

To get a sense of how our sufficient condition for Ti = ∞ depends on key model parameters, we turn
to numerical methods and compute the equilibrium pair (V , A) for a range of parameter values that
29
Recall that τ̄ is the tax on capital income. The corresponding value if the tax rate applies to both capital and its
income would be around 2%.
30
In fact σmin is an overestimate, because mean earnings is lower than mean income.
31
These computations assume that the median agent is decisive. If the decisive agent were poorer than the median,
the required minimum σ would be lower.

24

is deemed plausible in the literature. In particular, we specify F (kt , nt ) to be Cobb-Douglas with
capital share parameter ρ and use our isoelastic utility specification (1) parametrized by (σ, ξ). We
then combine the computed equilibrium pairs with wealth inequality measured by Wolff (2017):
∆am
0 =

$78, 100 − $667, 600
≈ −0.88
$667, 600

to obtain estimates for the partial derivative ∂V i /∂V .
As default parameterization, we use ξ = 0.357 to make the representative household work one-third
of its time and ρ = 1/3 to get the standard capital income share. In addition, we set σ = 4 implying
IES= 0.5. Regarding the other parameters, we use β = 0.96, τ̄ = 0.25, and δ = 0.02. Table 1 shows
how the value of ∂V i /∂V changes as we deviate from this default parametrization by varying σ (first
column), ξ (second column), or ρ (third column). Recall that the condition in Theorem 4 is satisfied
when the the partial derivative is nonpositive.
(σ, ξ,
(3, 0.4,
(4, 0.4,
(5, 0.4,

ρ)
0.3)
0.3)
0.3)

∂V i /∂V
0.471
-0.045
-0.613

(σ, ξ,
(4, 0.2,
(4, 0.4,
(4, 0.7,

ρ)
0.3)
0.3)
0.3)

∂V i /∂V
0.714
-0.045
-1.904

(σ, ξ,
(4, 0.4,
(4, 0.4,
(4, 0.4,

ρ)
0.2)
0.3)
0.7)

∂V i /∂V
-0.211
-0.045
0.736

Table 1: Sensitivity of the sufficient condition with respect to some key parameters. First column varies
σ, second column varies ξ, third column varies ρ. Second row shows the default parametrization.

5

Concluding Remarks

We showed that in our heterogeneous agent economy preferred capital tax policies can be ranked
according to the households’ initial wealth level. Why does this matter? At the very least, depending
on the social welfare function, we can obtain quite different optimal capital tax policies. In general,
as noted more formally earlier, the more weight the planner assigns to wealth-poor households, the
longer the capital tax should remain at its maximum level, as has also been noted by Greulich, Laczó,
and Marcet (2016). In our model, under the condition of Theorem 4, the capital tax remains at its
maximum forever, and this outcome is more likely the more wealth-poor the decisive household is
initially relative to the household with average initial wealth.
Our results on interior steady-states with maximal capital taxes stem from redistributive considerations arising from heterogeneous capital holdings, and therefore differ from the representative agent
model considered in Chamley (1986), in which the key motive for taxation is government-spending. In
addition, we use Gorman aggregable preferences where all agents, irrespective of their initial wealth,
are allowed to save, so we also differ from the model of Judd (1985), in which the workers are not
allowed to save. Finally, our model also differs from Werning (2007), who studies a similar economy
except that households differ in their labor productivity (but not in their initial wealth) and finds that
the optimal capital tax is always zero, while labor taxation is used to reduce inequality by channeling
wealth from the more productive to the less productive households. In contrast, in our setting with
25

identical labor productivities, taxing labor increases wealth inequality because leisure is a normal
good.

26

Appendices
Derivation of αi

A

Because of Gorman aggregation, the first-order conditions of the average household read
qt = β t

uc (ct , 1 − nt )
uc (c0 , 1 − n0 )

(1 − νt )wt =

and

u1−n (ct , 1 − nt )
.
uc (ct , 1 − nt )

Plugging these into the time-0 budget constraint (5) and using the definition of S tr yield
∞
X
t=0
∞
X

∞

βt

X uc (ct , 1 − nt ) u1−n (ct , 1 − nt )
uc (ct , 1 − nt )
ct ≤ R0 a0 + S tr +
βt
nt
uc (c0 , 1 − n0 )
uc (c0 , 1 − n0 ) uc (ct , 1 − nt )
t=0

β t [uc (ct , 1 − nt ) ct − u1−n (ct , 1 − nt ) nt ] ≤ uc (c0 , 1 − n0 ) R0 a0 + S tr



(23)

t=0

Using (8), we can derive
1 − nit = αi (1 − nt )

nt − nit = nt (1 − αi ) − (1 − αi ) = −(1 − nt )(1 − αi )

⇒

and
cit = αi ct
In other words, because

R

ct − cit = ct (1 − αi )

⇒

αi di = 1, the aggregated labor income and consumption are equal to the

average household labor income and consumption, respectively.
Subtracting (9) from (23), and using the above expressions imply
i

(1 − α )

∞
X
t=0

β t [uc (ct , 1 − nt ) ct + u1−n (ct , 1 − nt ) (1 − nt )] ≤ uc (c0 , 1 − n0 ) R0 a0 − ai0
{z
}
|



=(1−σ)u(ct ,1−nt )

where the equality under the brace follows from the homotheticity of u.32 In equilibrium, the constraint
binds, so we can write
(1 − αi )(1 − σ)V = uc (c0 , 1 − n0 ) R0 a0 − ai0



hence,
uc (c0 , 1 − n0 ) R0 a0 − ai0
α =1−
(1 − σ)V



i

32

In the logarithmic case (σ = 1), the term within the brackets equals to 1, so the infinite sum equals to (1 − β)−1 .

27

B

Proofs

B.1

Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. We prove the lemma in two steps:
Part I: The equilibrium associated with the lowest A value must be induced by (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) for all
t ≥ 0. The proof is by contradiction. Consider an equilibrium (V ∗ , A∗ ) induced by tax policies such
that for some N ≥ 0 either τN < τ̄ or νN > 0 (or both). We show that this equilibrium cannot have
the lowest A value by constructing a feasible perturbation (V ∗∗ , A∗∗ ) with A∗∗ < A∗ .
Let N be the first period in which either νN > 0 or τN < τ̄ (or both) and let M be the first period
after N with τM +1 > 0. Using the intratemporal FOC in (7), the Euler equation between period N − 1
and N can be written as
uc (cN −1 , 1 − nN −1 ) =

β[1 + (1 − τN )Fk (kN , nN ) − δ]
u1−n (cN , 1 − nN )
(1 − νN )Fn (kN , nN )
|
{z
}
& in k

(24)

% in n

where the arrows below the underbrace indicate that for a given pair (τN , νN ), the first term on the
right hand side is decreasing in kN and increasing in nN . Moreover, using the intratemporal FOC

ct =

ξ
1−ξ


(1 − νt )Fn (kt , nt )(1 − nt )

accompanied with the fact that if σ > 1 and ξ < 1 then uc(1−n) < 0 implies that for given kt value,
both marginal utilities uc and u1−n are increasing in nt .
Note that N > 0, because otherwise we can easily decrease A by setting (τ0 , ν0 ) = (τ̄ , 0). Now
consider the following perturbation to the candidate equilibrium: in period N = 0, decrease uc (0)
by decreasing n0 (and increasing c0 ) so that it leads to lesser capital accumulation, i.e., dkt < 0, for
t ≤ N . This is possible, because (τt , νt ) = (τ̄ , 0) for all t < N and the reduced kt necessarily reduces
the first term on the right hand side of (24), so in order to keep the Euler equation satisfied u1−n (t)
must decrease. The source of this perturbation is the increase in τN or the decreasing in νN (or both),
which is feasible by assumption. To undo the effect on capital accumulation, we increase uc in periods
N, . . . , M , by decreasing τM > 0. The household reacts to this change in tax policy by decreasing
capital accumulation before N leading to a first-order decrease in A∗ which is a contradiction.
Part II: Within the set of equilibria with a particular A ≥ A, the one that minimizes the average
household’s value features maximum capital taxation forever. The proof is by contradiction. Consider
an equilibrium (V ∗ , A∗ ) induced by a tax policy with τN < τ̄ for some N > 0. We show that this
equilibrium cannot minimize V over C(A∗ ) by constructing a feasible perturbation (V ∗∗ , A∗∗ ) such that
A∗∗ = A∗ and V ∗∗ < V ∗ .
Let N be the first period in which τN < τ̄ . Then reduce uc (N − 1) proportionately by a factor
dΨ and increase uc (N ), . . . , uc (M ) by a corresponding (constant) factor dΘ so that feasibility remains
satisfied, where M is the first period after N such that τM > 0. This perturbation entails raising τN

28

and reducing τM . Using the functional form assumptions, the required adjustments are
ucc dcN −1 + uc(1−n) d(1 − nN −1 )
dcN −1
d(1 − nN −1 )
= − [1 − ξ(1 − σ)]
+ (1 − ξ)(1 − σ)
uc
cN −1
1 − nN −1
dct
d(1 − nt )
dΘ = − [1 − ξ(1 − σ)]
+ (1 − ξ)(1 − σ)
N ≤ t ≤ M.
ct
1 − nt

dΨ =

Because the perturbed allocation must be an equilibrium, the intratemporal FOC requires


 

dct
Fnk
Fnn (1 − nt )
d(1 − nt )
dνt
=
dkt + 1 −
−
ct
Fn
Fn
1 − nt
1 − νt

∀t ≥ 0

(25)

with dkN −1 = 0. As a result, dΨ < 0 implies dcN −1 > 0 and d(1 − nN −1 ) > 0, hence dkN < 0.
Moreover, we choose dΘ so that the perturbation leads to dkM +1 = 0. To this end, we pick dct and
d(1 − nt ) such that for all N ≤ t ≤ M
(i) Fn (t)d(1 − nt ) + dct < 0

[positive capital accumulation]

(ii) dct < 0, d(1 − nt ) > 0

[lower labor supply due to reduced wages]

The latter is feasible due to dkt < 0, or alternatively, we can increase labor taxes (see (25)) to ensure
that both properties hold. In more detail, the implied change in capital is
dkN = dF (N − 1) + (1 − δ)dkN −1 − dcN −1 = − [Fn (N − 1)d(1 − nN −1 ) + dcN −1 ]


t
t
X
Y

dkt+1 = −
[1 + Fk (s) − δ] [Fn (j)d(1 − nj ) + dcj ]
N ≤t≤M
j=N −1

s=j+1

Therefore, dkM +1 = 0 requires
0 = [Fn (N − 1)d(1 − nN −1 ) + dcN −1 ] +

M
X

j
Y

j=N

s=N

!
[1 + Fk (s) − δ]−1

[Fn (j)d(1 − nj ) + dcj ] .

Using the Euler equation between period N − 1 and N :
1
1
βuc (N )
≤
=
1 + Fk (N ) − δ
1 + (1 − τN )Fk (N ) − δ
uc (N − 1)
along with (i), we obtain
0 ≥ [Fn (N − 1)d(1 − nN −1 ) + dcN −1 ] +

M 
X
j=N

β j uc (j)
β N −1 uc (N − 1)

with the right hand side being strictly negative unless τN = 0.

29


[Fn (j)d(1 − nj ) + dcj ]

(26)

The effect of the perturbation on the average household’s value is:
M
X

dV =

j

β [uc (j)dcj + u1−n (j)d(1 − nj )] =

j=N −1
M
X

=

β j uc (j) [dcj + (1 − νj )Fn (j)d(1 − nj )]

j=N −1
M
X

j

β uc (j) [dcj + Fn (j)d(1 − nj )] −

j=N −1

j=N −1

|

M
X

{z

≤0

}

β

j



νj
1 − νj

|


u1−n (j)d(1 − nj )
{z

≥0

}

where for the second equality we use the intratemporal FOC. The first term in the last line is nonpositive due to (26), while the second term is non-negative because d(1 − nt ) > 0 for all N − 1 ≤ t ≤ M
by construction and it is strictly positive unless νt = 0 for N − 1 ≤ t ≤ M . As a result, the only
case when dV is not strictly negative is when τN = 0 and νt = 0 for N − 1 ≤ t ≤ M , i.e. when the
P
t
unperturbed allocation maximizes M
t=N −1 β u(ct ) subject to the resource constraint and the initial
and terminal values of capital, kN −1 and kM +1 . In this case, by strict concavity of utility, the perturbed
allocation has a negative second-order effect on V ∗ , hence V ∗∗ < V ∗ .
By construction, the proposed perturbation keeps the intratemporal FOC and the resource constraint satisfied in all periods. The Euler equation is also satisfied, since the perturbation changes
marginal utilities, in a way that leaves the marginal rate of substitution (MRS) between period j and
j + 1 unaffected when N ≤ j ≤ M . The change in the MRS between N − 1 and N is achieved by
raising τN , while the change between M and M +1 is achieved by reducting τM . Then, from Bellman’s
optimality principle it follows that with k0 , kN −1 , and kM +1 unchanged, the segment between 0 and
N and the segment after M (with fixed tax policies) remain unperturbed. The only case when this
does not imply A∗∗ = A∗ is when N = 1. Nonetheless, in this case we can increase ν0 to ensure dA = 0:



dν0
(1 − τ0 )(1 − n0 )Fkn (0)
d(1 − n0 )
Fnn (1 − n0 ) (1 − ξ)(σ − 1)
+
= 1−
+
1 − ν0
Fn
[1 − ξ(1 − σ)]
[1 + (1 − τ0 )Fk (0) − δ] [1 − ξ(1 − σ)]
1 − n0
|
{z
}
>0

so that the conclusion dV < 0 does not change. This is because the labor taxes that the average agent
pays are exactly and fully returned as transfers, so the distortion induced by higher ν0 further reduces
V ∗ . As a result, we have A∗∗ = A∗ and V ∗∗ < V ∗ which is a contradiction.

B.2

Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. Consider first the equilibrium sequences of consumption, labor, and capital that maximize V
and determine (V , A). The solution must solve the first order conditions and resource constraint
uc (ct , 1 − nt ) = βuc (ct+1 , 1 − nt+1 )[1 + Fk (kt+1 , nt+1 ) − δ]
u1−n (ct , 1 − nt ) = uc (ct , 1 − nt )Fn (kt , nt )
F (kt , nt ) = ct + gt + kt+1 − (1 − δ)kt

30

(27)
(28)
(29)

and hence involves setting (τt , νt ) = (0, 0) for all t ≥ 0. Absent concern for redistribution, the average
household has no incentive to distort the economy since lump-sum taxes are available.
For given (feasible) A∗ , let {c∗t , n∗t , kt∗ }t≥0 be a sequence such that (i) A(c∗0 , n∗0 , τ0 ) = A∗ and (ii) it
maximizes V over C(A∗ ). An equivalent statement of the lemma is
if uc (c∗t , 1 − n∗t ) > βRt+1 uc (c∗t+1 , 1 − n∗t+1 )

then

uc (c∗s , 1 − n∗s ) = βRs+1 uc (c∗s+1 , 1 − n∗s+1 ),

and

u1−n (c∗s , 1 − n∗s ) = Fn (ks∗ , n∗s )uc (c∗s , 1 − n∗s )

∀s > t.

Suppose this were not true. Then the sequence {c∗s , n∗s }∞
s=t+1 does not satisfy the necessary first-order
P∞
s
∗ . Because the proposed sequence makes
conditions of maximizing s=t+1 β u(cs , 1−ns ) subject to kt+1
∗∗ ∞
the upper bound constraint for τt+1 slack, this implies the existence of an alternative {c∗∗
s , ns }s=t+1 ,

∗∗ ∞
∗∗
∗∗
such that {c∗s , n∗s }ts=0 , {c∗∗
s , ns }s=t+1 is a competitive equilibrium (V , A ), but such that, for a

sufficiently small  > 0,
∞
X
s=t+1

∞
X

∗∗
β s u(c∗∗
s , 1 − ns ) =

β s u(c∗s , 1 − n∗s ) + 

s=t+1

This implies that the new equilibrium has A∗∗ = A∗ , but V ∗∗ > V ∗ which is a contradiction.

C

Properties of V i

Clearly, if σ 6= 1 and ai0 6= a0 , the function V i is smooth. The first derivatives are:
−σ
1−σ
∂V i
= (1 − σ) αi
(−∆ai0 D) + αi
=
∂V





−σ
−σ 
= αi
−(1 − σ)∆ai0 D + αi = αi
1 + σD∆ai0
and
−σ ∆ai0
−σ
∂V i
= (1 − σ) αi
V = αi
∆ai0
∂A
(1 − σ)V


⇒

sign

∂V i
∂A




= sign ∆ai0 .

The second derivatives are




i
i


∂2V i
i
i −σ −D∆a0
i −σ−1 −D∆a0
(1 + σD∆a0 ) + σ α
=
= (−σ) α
∂V 2
V
V




 −D∆ai0
i −σ−1
i
i
= α
σ −(1 + σD∆a0 ) + α
=
V

2
i 2

i −σ−1
2 D ∆a0
=− α
σ(1 − σ)
< 0,
(1 − σ)V

31

and
2 !
σ ∆ai0
< 0,
(1 − σ)V

−σ−1
∂2V i
= − αi
2
∂A
and





−σ
−σ−1
∆ai0
∆ai0
∂2V i
(1 + σD∆ai0 ) + σ αi
=
= (−σ) αi
∂V ∂A
(1 − σ)V
(1 − σ)V





∆ai0
i −σ−1
i
i
= α
σ −(1 + σD∆a0 ) + α
=
(1 − σ)V
2 !
 2 i 

σ ∆ai0
∂ V
i −σ−1
= α
(1 − σ)D
⇒
sign
= sign (1 − σ) .
(1 − σ)V
∂V ∂A
To show that the Hessian of V i is negative semi-definite, we compute


D
D.1

∂2V i
∂V 2



∂2V i
∂A2




−

∂2V i
∂V ∂A

2
=

h

α

2 !2


σ ∆ai0
(1 − σ)2 D2 − (1 − σ)2 D2 = 0
(1 − σ)V

i2

i −σ−1

Derivations for Section 4
CES production function with CRRA utility

The production function is
F (kt , nt ) = z



ρkt1−η

+ (1 −

ρ)n1−η
t



1
1−η

with z, η > 0 and ρ > 0 and suppose that η = σ > 1. This production function implies the following
competitive factor prices
rt = Fk (kt , nt ) =

zρkt−η

wt = Fl (kt , nt ) = z(1 −



ρkt1−η

ρ)n−η
t



+ (1 −

ρkt1−η

ρ)n1−η
t

+ (1 −



η
1−η

ρ)n1−η
t

= ρz


η
1−η

1−η



yt
kt

η

= (1 − ρ)z

1−η



yt
nt

η

It is well-known that the CES production function satisfies the Inada conditions if σ = η = 1 which
corresponds to the case of Cobb-Douglas production function with logarithmic utility. We require
σ > 1, which implies
1

lim Fk (k, n) = zρ 1−η > 0

lim Fk (k, n) = 0.

k→0

k→∞

For simplicity, let δ = 1 and suppose that gt = 0 and bt = 0 for t ≥ 0, implying that a0 = k0 , so that
the only motive for taxing is wealth redistribution. As a result, the government must keep balanced
budget every period:
trt = τt rt kt + νt wt
32

Consider the tax policy with constant rates τt = τ̄ and νt = 0, ∀t ≥ 0. Guess that the optimal
consumption is linear ct = λyt . In this case, kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt + (1 − λ)yt . Substituting this into the
Euler equation implies
c−σ
= βc−σ
t
t+1 (1 + (1 − τ̄ )Fk (kt+1 , nt+1 ) − δ)


yt+1 η
−σ −σ
−σ
1−η
λ yt = β(λyt+1 ) (1 − τ̄ )ρz
kt+1
η−σ
yt−σ = β(1 − τ̄ )ρz 1−η yt+1
((1 − λ)yt )−η

1
λ = 1 − β(1 − τ̄ )ρz 1−σ σ

This leads to the following form of the value function

z 1−σ υ1 k01−σ + υ2 n1−σ
0
V (k0 ) =
.
1−σ
We find υ1 and υ2 by plugging the guesses for ct , nt , and V into the Bellman equation

z 1−σ (υ1 kt1−σ + υ2 ) = (λyt )1−σ + βz 1−σ υ1 [(1 − λ)yt ]1−σ + υ2


υ1 kt1−σ + υ2 = λ1−σ (ρkt1−σ + (1 − ρ)) + β υ1 (1 − λ)1−σ z 1−σ (ρkt1−σ + (1 − ρ)) + υ2
and matching coefficients to obtain:
λ1−σ ρ
1 − (βρ) [(1 − λ)z]1−σ

1
υ2 =
λ1−σ (1 − ρ) + βυ1 (1 − ρ)[(1 − λ)z]1−σ
1−β
υ1 =

Plugging in V , c0 , and n0 into the partial derivative formula
∂V i
≤0
∂V

⇔

1+σ

A
c−σ
0 (1 − τ̄ )Fk a0 
∆ai0 = 1 + σ 1−σ
∆ai0 ≤ 0
1−σ
(1 − σ)V
z
υ1 k0 + υ2

so the sufficient condition for Tm = ∞ becomes
(1 − τ̄ )
ρk01−σ
1
1−σ
m
≤ D (−∆am
)
=
(1
−
βρ[(1
−
λ)z]
)
0
1−ρ (−∆a0 )
σ
λ
ρk01−σ + 1−β



τ̄ 
ρk01−σ
a0 − am
0
= 1−
1−ρ
λ ρk01−σ + 1−β
a0
where m denotes the household with median income, am
0 ≤ a0 .

33

D.2

Alternative characterization

We postulate the law of motion of aggregate capital as
at+1 = εt+1 at + γt+1 .

(30)

Using this transition rule, we derive a formula for dt and plug it into (19) to get



j
∞
i
X
Y
R
ω
1
ε
ft
1
t t
s 
cit = λt 
+ τt +
rt at + λt
τj
rt
N
N
Rs
N
s=t+1

j=t+1

where
ft = et +

∞
X

"
ej + τj rj

j
X

γs

s=t+1

j=t+1

j
Y

j
Y

!#
εk

Rs−1

(31)

s=t+1

k=s+1

is discounted present value of labor income plus transfers accruing through the additive accumulation
in capital. Plugging cit into (18) and summing over all agents imply

at+1 = (1 − λt )


Rt
− λt 
rt

∞
X

j=t+1

τj


j
Y
εs 
rt at + et − λt ft
Rs

s=t+1

Therefore, the equilibrium relation describing growth rates for our economy is:

εt+1 = (1 − λt )(1 + Fk (kt , 1) − δ) − λt rt 

∞
X

j=t+1

τj


j
Y
εs 
Rs

(32)

s=t+1

and given {εt }t≥0 in principle we could solve for {γt }t≥0 and {ft }t≥0 ,33 but their explicit solutions are
not needed for out purposes.
33

The analytical solution requires to use continued fractions. See Benhabib (2007)

34

References
Atkeson, Andrew, V. V. Chari, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1999. “Taxing capital income: a bad idea.”
Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 23 (3):3–17.
Bassetto, Marco and Jess Benhabib. 2006. “Redistribution, taxes, and the median voter.” Review of
Economic Dynamics 9 (2):211 – 223.
Benhabib, Jess. 2007. “Dynamic economic equilibrium under redistribution.” Journal of Difference
Equations and Applications 13 (2-3):107–119.
Benhabib, Jess and Aldo Rustichini. 1994. “A note on a new class of solutions to dynamic programming
problems arising in economic growth.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 18 (3):807 –
813.
Chamley, Christophe. 1986. “Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with Infinite
Lives.” Econometrica 54 (3):607–622.
Chari, V. V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 1994. “Optimal Fiscal Policy in a Business
Cycle Model.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (4):617–652.
Chari, V. V., Pedro Teles, and Juan Nicolini. 2016. “More on the Optimal Taxation of Capital.” Tech.
rep.
Conesa, Juan Carlos, Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger. 2009. “Taxing Capital? Not a Bad Idea after
All!” American Economic Review 99 (1):25–48.
Erosa, Andrés and Martin Gervais. 2002. “Optimal Taxation in Life-Cycle Economies.” Journal of
Economic Theory 105 (2):338 – 369.
Greulich, Katharina, Sarolta Laczó, and Albert Marcet. 2016. “Pareto-Improving Optimal Capital
and Labor Taxes.” Working Papers 887, Barcelona Graduate School of Economics.
Hubbard, R. Glenn and Kenneth L Judd. 1987. “Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal Policy, and Consumption.” Working Paper 943, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Judd, Kenneth L. 1985. “Redistributive taxation in a simple perfect foresight model.” Journal of
Public Economics 28 (1):59 – 83.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
Econometrica 50 (6):1345–1370.
Lansing, Kevin J. 1999. “Optimal redistributive capital taxation in a neoclassical growth model.”
Journal of Public Economics 73 (3):423 – 453.
Piguillem, Facundo and Anderson L. Schneider. 2013. “Heterogeneous labor skills, the median voter
and labor taxes.” Review of Economic Dynamics 16 (2):332 – 349.
35

Reinhorn, Leslie J. 2019. “On optimal redistributive capital taxation.” Journal of Public Economic
Theory 0 (0):1–28.
Saez, Emmanuel and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2018. “A simpler theory of optimal capital taxation.”
Journal of Public Economics 162:120 – 142. In Honor of Sir Tony Atkinson (1944-2017).
Straub, Ludwig and Iván Werning. 2018. “Positive Long-Run Capital Taxation: Chamley-Judd Revisited.” Harvard University.
Werning, Iván. 2007. “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Redistribution.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3):925–967.
Wolff, Edward N. 2017. “Household Wealth Trends in the United States, 1962 to 2016: Has Middle
Class Wealth Recovered?” Working Paper 24085, National Bureau of Economic Research.

36

