                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF AMERICAN INNOVATION:
               SOME CAUTIONARY REMARKS FOR ECONOMIC GROWTH

                                           Ashish Arora
                                          Sharon Belenzon
                                          Andrea Patacconi
                                            Jungkyu Suh

                                        Working Paper 25893
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w25893


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2019




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, Andrea Patacconi, and Jungkyu Suh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Changing Structure of American Innovation: Some Cautionary Remarks for Economic
Growth
Ashish Arora, Sharon Belenzon, Andrea Patacconi, and Jungkyu Suh
NBER Working Paper No. 25893
May 2019, Revised August 2019
JEL No. O3

                                              ABSTRACT

A defiining feature of modern economic growth is the systematic application of science to advance
technology. However, despite sustained progress in scientific knowledge, recent productivity growth
in the U.S. has been disappointing. We review major changes in the American innovation ecosystem
over the past century. The past three decades have been marked by a growing division of labor between
universities focusing on research and large corporations focusing on development. Knowledge produced
by universities is not often in a form that can be readily digested and turned into new goods and services.
Small firms and university technology transfer offices cannot fully substitute for corporate research,
which had integrated multiple disciplines at the scale required to solve significant technical problems.
Therefore, whereas the division of innovative labor may have raised the volume of science by universities,
it has also slowed, at least for a period of time, the transformation of that knowledge into novel products
and processes.


Ashish Arora                                         Andrea Patacconi
Fuqua School of Business                             Norwich Business School
Duke University                                      University of East Anglia
Box 90120                                            Norwich, NR4 7TJ
Durham, NC 27708-0120                                United Kingdom
and NBER                                             A.Patacconi@uea.ac.uk
ashish.arora@duke.edu
                                                     Jungkyu Suh
Sharon Belenzon                                      Duke University
Fuqua School of Business                             Fuqua School of Business
Duke University                                      jungkyu.suh@duke.edu
100 Fuqua Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
sharon.belenzon@duke.edu
1     Introduction

A defining feature of modern economic growth is the systematic application of science to advance
technology. Many innovations that spurred economic growth in the twentieth century, including syn-
thetic fibers, plastics, integrated circuits, and gene therapy, originated from advances in the natural
sciences, engineering and medicine. Science, by producing “a potential for technology far greater than
existed previously,” clearly distinguishes modern economic growth from previous economic epochs
(Kuznets, 1971).
     However, despite sustained increases in the quantity of scientific knowledge, productivity growth
in most advanced economies has stagnated in recent decades in comparison to a “golden age” in the
mid-twentieth century. Using data from the United States, Gordon (2016) shows that real GDP per
hour (i.e., labor productivity) grew substantially in the middle of the twentieth century, from 1.79
percent per year between 1870 and 1920 to 2.82 percent per year between 1920 and 1970. However,
in the most recent period (1970-2014), productivity grew by a modest 1.62 percent per year. Gordon
concludes that productivity rose between 1920 and 1970 largely because of significant technological
progress, but more recently technical advance has been much less potent in spurring growth. This
slowdown is surprising given the sustained expansion of scientific input (measured in terms of research
dollars spent) and output (measured by academic articles published) from American academia, as
shown in figure 1.1
     Gordon attributes the rapid pace of technological progress in 1920-1970 to the development and
extension of earlier fundamental technologies, such as the internal combustion engine and electricity.
This process, which was often accompanied by important advances in science and engineering, was
largely carried out by researchers working in corporate labs, which, by the 1920s, had replaced
individual entrepreneurs as the primary source of American invention. As Gordon (2016, p.571-2)
    1
      Indeed, Bloom et al. (2017) present evidence across a number of sectors showing that research productivity in the
U.S. has declined since the 1970s. For instance, maintaining the exponential growth in semiconductor performance
(otherwise known as “Moore’s Law”) in 2014 required around 18 times the number of researchers it used to take in
1971. While growth rates for yields per acre for corns, soybeans, cotton, and wheat have averaged around 1.5 percent,
the number of researchers in the agriculture sector has grown by a factor between 3 (wheat) and 25 (soybeans), a
research productivity decline of about 4 to 6 percent per year. In the life sciences, the number of researchers has
been rising by 6 percent annually, while research productivity measured by the discovery of new molecular entities per
number of researchers has been falling by 3.5 percent per year.




                                                          1
                      Figure 1: U.S. Scientific Investment and Output (1980-2013)




  Notes: Doctorates Awarded in S&E are calculated from the NSF’s Survey of Earned Doctorates and excludes degrees in the Social
  sciences. Number of S&E Publications are from the Clarivate Web of Science and includes all scientific articles in the Science Citation
  Index-Expanded (SCI-EXPANDED) and Conference Proceedings Citation Index-Science (CPCSI-S) with a U.S. author from 1980 to
  2013. U.S. Research Expenditure figures are calculated from the National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2014-15 Data update. NSF
  17-311. tables and includes both basic and applied research expenditure. Figures are adjusted to 2016 dollars using GDP deflator from
  the World Bank National Accounts dataset.


writes:

       “Much of the early development of the automobile culminating in the powerful Chevrolets
       and Buicks of 1940-41 was achieved at the GM corporate research labs. Similarly, much of
       the development of the electronic computer was carried out in the corporate laboratories
       of IBM, Bell Labs, and other large firms. The transistor, the fundamental building block
       of modern electronics and digital innovation, was invented by a team led by William
       Shockley at Bell Labs in late 1947. The corporate R&D division of IBM pioneered most
       of the advances of the mainframe computer era from 1950 to 1980. Improvements in
       consumer electric appliances occurred at large firms such as General Electric, General
       Motors and Whirlpool, while RCA led the early development of television.”

       By the 1980s, however, many corporations began to look to universities and small start-ups
for ideas and new products.2 Large corporations’ reliance on externally sourced inventions grew,
and many leading Western corporations began to withdraw from scientific research (Mowery, 2009;
   2
     A good example is IBM, which on November 6, 1980 signed a contract with a then small firm, Microsoft, for
the development of its operating systems. Microsoft itself developed its operating system (eventually named the IBM
PC-DOS) building on the operating system of another small company, Seattle Computer Products.


                                                                  2
     Figure 2: Business funded and performed research in the United States (1953-2015)




  Notes: Data for this graph is sourced from the National Patterns of R&D Resources: 2014-15 Data update. NSF 17-311. from
  the National Science Foundation, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics. 2017. Arlington, VA. Available at
  https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2017/nsf17311/.



Arora et al., 2018). Some corporate labs were shut down and others spun-off as independent en-
tities. Bell Labs had been separated from its parent company AT&T and placed under Lucent
in 1996; Xerox PARC had also been spun off into a separate company in 2002. Others had been
downsized: IBM under Louis Gerstner re-directed research toward more commercial applications in
the mid-90s (Bhaskarabhatla and Hegde, 2014).3 A more recent example is DuPont’s closing of its
Central Research & Development Lab in 2016. Established in 1903, DuPont research rivaled that
of top academic chemistry departments. In the 1960s, DuPont’s central R&D unit published more
articles in the Journal of the American Chemical Society than MIT and Caltech combined. How-
ever, in the 1990s, DuPont’s attitude toward research changed and after a gradual decline in scientific
publications, the company’s management closed its Central Research and Development Lab in 2016.4
     These examples are backed by systematic evidence. NSF data indicate that share of research
(both basic and applied) in total business R&D in the U.S. fell from about 30 percent in 1985 to
below 20 percent in 2015 (figure 2). The figure also shows that the absolute amount of research in
industry, after increasing over the 1980s, barely grew over the 20 year period between 1990 to 2010.
Other data show the same decline. Utilizing data on scientific publications, Arora et al. (2018) show
    3
      According to personal communications with Ralph Gomory (former research director and Senior Vice President for
Science & Technology at IBM), IBM even downplayed to investors the discovery of the scanning tunneling microscope
(which earned Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer of the IBM Zurich Research Laboratory the Nobel prize in physics in
1986), for fear of a drop in share price.
    4
      https://cen.acs.org/articles/94/i1/DuPont-Shutting-Central-Research.html


                                                            3
that the number of publications per firm fell at a rate of 20 percent per decade from 1980 to 2006 for
R&D performing American listed firms. The authors also find that the drop is even more dramatic
for established firms in high quality journals. For articles within the top quartile of Journal Impact
Factor scores, the magnitude of the drop increases to over 30 percent. Large firms’ withdrawal from
science can also be gleaned from the list of R&D 100 awards winners. Fortune 500 firms won 41
percent of the awards in 1971, but only 6 percent in 2006 (Block and Keller, 2009). Over the same
period, total industry R&D and patenting grew steadily, as did university performed research (see
figure 6 below). This evidence points to the emergence of a new division of innovative labor, with
universities focusing on research, large firms focusing on development and commercialization, and
spinoffs, startups, and university technology licensing offices responsible for connecting the two.
     In this chapter, we suggest that this division of innovative labor has not, perhaps, lived up to its
promise. The translation of scientific knowledge generated in universities to productivity enhancing
technical progress has proved to be more difficult to accomplish in practice than expected. Spinoffs,
startups, and university licensing offices have not fully filled the gap left by the decline of the corporate
lab. Corporate research has a number of characteristics that make it very valuable for science-based
innovation and growth. Large corporations have access to significant resources, can more easily
integrate multiple knowledge streams, and direct their research toward solving specific practical
problems, which makes it more likely for them to produce commercial applications. University
research has tended to be curiosity-driven rather than mission-focused. It has favored insight rather
than solutions to specific problems, and partly as a consequence, university research has required
additional integration and transformation to become economically useful. This is not to deny the
important contributions that universities and small firms make to American innovation. Rather, our
point is that large corporate labs may have distinct capabilities which have proved to be difficult to
replace.
     Large corporate labs, however, are unlikely to regain the importance they once enjoyed. Research
in corporations is difficult to manage profitably. Research projects have long horizons and few
intermediate milestones that are meaningful to non-experts. As a result, research inside companies
can only survive if insulated from the short-term performance requirements of business divisions.
However, insulating research from business also has perils. Managers, haunted by the spectre of


                                                     4
Xerox PARC and DuPont’s “Purity Hall”, fear creating research organizations disconnected from the
main business of the company. Walking this tightrope has been extremely difficult. Greater product
market competition, shorter technology life cycles, and more demanding investors have added to this
challenge. Companies have increasingly concluded that they can do better by sourcing knowledge
from outside, rather than betting on making game-changing discoveries in-house.
       The way forward, therefore, probably involves improving the efficiency of the existing division
of innovative labor because science remains a vital input into invention. Arora et al. (2018) find that
the decline of scientific research in corporate R&D after 1980 was mirrored by a drop in the implied
value of scientific capability, as measured by stock market valuation and acquisition price. As they
also stress, however, whereas the private value of investing in scientific research in-house declined,
there is no evidence that the social value of science declined. Patents continue to build upon scientific
knowledge (as measured by citations) and, if anything, the relevant science is more likely to be new
rather than old science. In other words, not only is science relevant for invention, but advances in
science continue to be useful. This is especially true of corporate research. Where company research
is significantly advantageous, due to complements such as specialized equipment or proprietary data,
companies will continue to invest in research, especially if they can appropriate enough of the benefits
by restricting spillovers to rivals.5
       The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 describe the rise of
the U.S. scientific-industrial complex. Section 4 explains how this ecosystem has changed in recent
times. Interestingly, this rise and fall of the large corporate lab matches quite well the rise and fall
of American productivity. Section 5, therefore, explores the idea that corporate labs may be an
important engine of economic growth, even when research produced by universities is at a record
high. Section 6 briefly discusses some effects of public policy on the American innovation ecosystem,
and Section 7 concludes.
   5
     Arora et al. (2017) show that companies remain engaged in research when they can use the research in internal
inventions, and can restrict spillovers to product-market rivals.




                                                        5
2     The old innovation ecosystem: 1850-1940

Our discussion builds on accounts by Mowery (2009), Mowery and Rosenberg (1998), and others.
These authors note that, while in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries independent
inventors were the primary source of American inventions, the locus of innovation shifted during
the interwar years from such inventors and small firms to large corporations and their labs. After
World War II, corporate labs reached their zenith, with corporate scientists winning a number of
Nobel prizes. By the 1980s, however, small firms (often founded by university scientists) regained
their advantage, because the postwar period also saw the rise of the research university. Universities
went from merely the producers of human capital to becoming the dominant producers of scientific
knowledge.


2.1    The age of independent inventors and the market for technology:

       1850-1900

Up until the late nineteenth century, American academia was considered backward. The main appli-
cation of scientific knowledge was in agriculture, and the pursuit of more abstract natural phenomena
were limited. For instance, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences had stated in 1780 that it
was devoted to “improvements in agriculture, arts, manufactures, and commerce” (Reich, 1985,
p.14). Even the Smithsonian Institutions did not pursue or support basic scientific research during
this era (Shils, 1979, p.22). The Land Grant Institutions established after the Morril Act of 1862
were intended to pursue research in “agriculture and [the] mechanic arts,” which did not include
physics or chemistry. By 1897, a mere 56 PhDs had been earned by Americans in mathematics, 73 in
physics, and 101 in chemistry. Full-time research jobs were rare and U.S.-based authors had seldom
published in major international journals, with only 39 papers in mathematics, 154 in physics, and
134 in chemistry (Kevles, 1979, p.170). Naturally, American inventions in this period relied upon
individual creativity, mostly in mechanical design. Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (1999) show that in the
1840s and 1850s, patents were mostly held by individuals such as Charles Goodyear (vulcanized
rubber patent (1844)) and Henry Bessemer (Bessemer process patent (1855)). Research consulting



                                                  6
activities were contracted by the petroleum and telegraph sectors. Standard Oil employed Herman
Frasch to lower the sulfur content of its newly opened Ohio fields in the 1880s, and Western Union
employed Thomas Edison for various technical solutions in the 1870s (Birr, 1979). By the turn of
the century, as the inventive process itself became more science-based, firms began to invest more
directly in science. Even so, independent inventors remained an important source of inventions in
the first half of the twentieth century.
       Independent inventors were supported by an active market for technology. By the 1870s, technol-
ogy transactions were common, particularly in the northeastern part of the United States. Lamoreaux
and Sokoloff (1999) estimate that ratio between patents assigned in 1870 to patents granted in 1870
was 0.83. In 1890 and 1911, the ratio was somewhat lower, at 0.71.6 On the other hand, if one exam-
ines patents assigned at issue, the share grew from 18.4 percent to 31.1 percent, with an increasing
share of assignments going to companies. In other words, a growing share of inventions were being
commercialized by selling the patents, especially to existing producers. Simply put, there was an
active market for technology in the latter half of the nineteenth century.
       The number of individuals specializing in inventions grew as well, consistent with Adam Smith’s
dictum that specialization is limited by the extent of the market. The share of occasional inventors
(who filed one or two patents over their lifetime) from all inventors fell from over 70 percent in 1830
to less than 35 percent in 1870. In 1870, specialized inventors, who filed ten or more patents over
their lifetime, accounted for 5 percent of all patents. By 1911, their share, of a much larger patent
pool, had grown to 25 percent. These specialists were also more likely to assign their patents to
others, consistent with the view that a growing market for technology and greater specialization in
invention went hand in hand during this time.
       Corporate engagement in research began modestly. The leading American firms of the 1870s
and 1880s largely relied on external inventions; the railroad companies did not invent steam engines
or breaking systems, nor did Western Union invent telegraphy. Instead, Railroads and other large
firms relied upon acquiring inventions from inventors. In many instances, these inventors worked
for the railroad but were not hired to invent (Usselman, 1999). These leading firms did, however,
establish their own industrial labs to evaluate the quality of these external inventions and other
   6
     In absolute terms, the number of patents assigned more than doubled over this period, but the number of patents
granted grew even faster.


                                                         7
inputs, to perform materials testing and quality control, and to trouble-shoot production. The patent
department of the American Bell Telephone, a high tech enterprise of its day, was responsible for
evaluating ideas submitted to it for patenting. Much of its efforts were spent on evaluating external
inventions, even though the company acquired only a small fraction of such inventions. Only in 1907
the emphasis shifted to internal R&D, with the appointment of Theodore Vail as president.
      Corporate attitude towards the organization of science in for-profit corporations was well ex-
pressed in 1885 by T. D. Lockwood, head of American Bell Telephone Company’s patent department:
“I am fully convinced that it has never, is not now, and never will pay commercially, to keep an es-
tablishment of professional inventors, or of men whose chief business it is to invent” (Lamoreaux and
Sokoloff, 1999). Wise (1985) argues that Westinghouse and Edison Electric followed similar strategy
during the late nineteenth century. In short, these leading companies were purchasing patents and
consulting services from independent inventors, rather than developing their own R&D facilities.


2.2     The innovation ecosystem in transition: 1900-1940

2.2.1    The beginnings of corporate research

Several pushes and pulls propelled American corporations to create large R&D laboratories. First,
there was the German precedent of industrial research in chemical firms that allowed for firms such
as BASF, Bayer, and Agfa to thrive in organic synthetic dyes in a highly competitive international
market (Reich, 1985, p.41). Second, the strategy of acquiring patents was becoming harder because
of rising complexity of technologies. For example, DuPont had repeatedly failed in its attempt to use
the Bevan, Cross and Topham patents from the United Kingdom to start a viscose rayon process in
the United States in the 1910s. It lacked the internal technical and scientific capability to understand
these patents and know-how to use them. Eventually, a joint-venture with Britain’s Samuel Courtauld
& Company (which had the know-how and manufacturing expertise) was necessary to start viscose
rayon production in America (Hounshell, 1988). Third, American inventions were challenged by
science-based competition across the Atlantic. GE’s control over electric lighting in the 1890s, for
instance, was solely based on the carbon-filament high-vacuum incandescent variety, first invented
by Thomas Edison in 1879. German chemists such as Carl Welsbach and Walther Nernst (the 1920


                                                   8
Nobel Laureate in Chemistry) respectively invented incandescent mantels for gas lamps (a substitute
product) and a glower which required no vacuum to operate and was 50 percent more efficient. Patent
rights to the Nernst glower in turn were first sold to the German firm AEG for $1 million and then
sold to GE’s rival, Westinghouse in 1894 (Wise, 1985). GE management took notice of this “pandora
effect” of innovative activity that was difficult to circumscribe and control, and thereby approved
electrochemist Charles Steinmetz’s proposal to establish the GE Research Laboratory (GERL) in
1900. The payoffs were not long in the coming: William Coolidge (1906) would develop a method
using tungsten instead of carbon filaments to increase bulb life, and Irving Langumir (1913) would
invent the inert gas-filled lightbulb to reduce blackening, which became the industry standard.
    The result was a sustained growth in corporate research. The chemical industry, perhaps the
most scientifically grounded industry of the first half of the twentieth century, employed 1,102 sci-
entists in corporate labs in 1921, and grew to 3,255 in 1933 and to 14,066 by the end of World War
II (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1999). Later, the wartime experiences of being part of the National
Research Council cemented the faith of managers that science could be effectively put to practical
applications (Geiger, 2004). This process gained momentum as corporations grew larger and more
keen to “routinize” innovation; that is, to originate and manage it instead of relying on an uncer-
tain supply of external inventions (Maclaurin, 1953). Stronger antitrust enforcement also convinced
managers that buying other firms would be a costlier way to grow than by introducing new products
derived from in-house research. In the 1950s, firms such as AT&T, DuPont, IBM, and Kodak em-
ployed tens of thousands of scientists whose chief objective was to conduct research to support the
companies’ existing products and to develop products that would open up new markets.
    It is important to emphasize that the science conducted even within the most university-like
corporate labs was still aimed at some form of economic problem solving, and hence fell under
the category of “mission-oriented” research. Steinmetz’s application of complex exponentials to
decompose sinusoidal signals, for instance, was motivated by the need to better understand impedance
and control alternating currents (Kline, 1992). Of course, the mission-orientedness of industrial
research does not detract from its scientific sophistication (Stokes, 2011). Indeed, even at the early
stages of industrial research, Steinmetz earned himself the presidency of the American Institute of
Electrical Engineers, while Langumir collected his Nobel prize in Chemistry in 1932 for work done at


                                                  9
GERL.7 The scientific quality of corporate research remained high even as quantity grew. Quality,
as measured by forward citations by scientific peers, kept up with (and at times exceeded) research
at top universities, as seen in figure 3.

               Figure 3: Scientific Citations per Publication, by Sector (1920-1940)




  Notes: This graph plots the number of forward scientific citations per publications in Clarivate Web of Science, by the sector of the
  author’s affiliations. “Top Research Universities” refer (in alphabetic order) to UC Berkeley, Brown, Bryn Mawr, Caltech, Chicago,
  Clark, Columbia, Cornell, Harvard, Hopkins, Illinois, Iowa, Lafayette, MIT, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Carolina,
  NYU, Penn, Princeton, Stanford, Wisconsin, and Yale. The “Corporate” sector includes parents and subsidiaries of 200 large industrial
  firms included in Kandel et al. (2018). We fuzzy-match these university and firm names to the address column of Web of Science
  publications and count the number of forward scientific citations these publications receive until 2016.




2.2.2    The rise of research universities

As shown in figure 4, universities in this era relied heavily on state and industry funding, rather than
federal funding (Geiger, 2004; Bruce, 1987). According to the Biennial Survey of Education compiled
by the Department of Education, the share of federal funding as a source of university revenue had
hovered around 4-7 percent between 1909 and 1939. The share of state funding, on the other hand, was
somewhere between 20-30 percent in the same period (Snyder, 1993). As a result, colleges developed
specialties specific to industrial activity relevant to their location. The University of Oklahoma, for
instance, pioneered innovations in petroleum engineering such as reflection seismology. The University
of Akron and the University of Cincinnati respectively trained specialists that could be employed by
the local rubber and tanning industry (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1991). Federal institutions paid
very little attention to the pursuit of fundamental knowledge – most federal research was conducted
   7
     Industry executives took a keen interest in the world of science as well. AT&T Bell Labs president Frank Jewett
was instrumental in persuading Princeton physicist Karl Compton to take up his presidency at MIT, and later served
as president of the National Academy of Sciences from 1939 to 1947.

                                                                 10
            Figure 4: Sources of University Revenue in the United States (1889-1954)




  Notes: This graph plots the sources of revenue for the institutions of higher education in the United States. Data is sourced from
  Snyder (1993), Table 33 and is based on the U.S. Department of Education’s Annual Report of the Commissioner; Biennial Survey of
  Education in the United States. The figure for federal funding sources in 1919-20 is included under state government funding for those
  years.



through agencies with clear short-term objectives such as the Coastal, Geological Surveys and the
Permanent Commission of the Navy Department (Shils, 1979). These form the origins of the mission-
oriented tradition in U.S. universities.
     The alternative view of the university as a fundamental research institution driven by intellec-
tual curiosity had been pioneered by Alexander von Humboldt, who founded Humboldt University of
Berlin in 1809 (Atkinson and Blanpied, 2008). American returnees from these German universities
such as Evan Pugh and Samuel Johnson advocated for fundamental research at universities (Shils,
1979). The subsequent establishment of research universities such as Johns Hopkins (1876), Clark
(1887) and the University of Chicago (1892) made possible the recruitment of prominent mathe-
maticians such as James Sylvester, who founded the American Journal of Mathematics in 1878, and
chemists, such as Ira Remsen, who founded the American Chemical Journal in 1879 (Kevles, 1979).
These early successes spurred established schools to follow suit, with Harvard opening the Jefferson
Physical Laboratory in 1884. German-trained physicists and chemists such as Henry Rowland (at
Berlin under Hermann von Helmholtz) and Arthur Noyes (at Leipzig under Wilhelm Ostwald) took
up prominent positions at Johns Hopkins and MIT respectively, and diffused the norm of curiosity-



                                                                 11
driven science (Reich, 1985). Rowland, for instance, authored the Plea for Pure Science in 1883
for the AAAS address that year, in which he demanded “what must be done to create a science
of physics in this country, rather than to call telegraphs, electric lights, and such conveniences by
the name of science?” (Rowland, 1883). In the view of Rowland and other like-minded scientists,
applied science “drives out” basic, making it imperative for universities to defend the latter type
(Bush, 1945). Federal reforms such as the Hatch Act of 1887 and the Adams Act of 1907 allowed
federal funds to reach original research that was not immediately applied.
       Between 1870 and 1893, 39 articles by Americans had appeared in mathematics publications, 144
in physics publications, and 134 in chemistry publications. Between 1894 and 1915, those numbers
rose to 372, 303, and 403, respectively. There is evidence of an increase in quality as well as quantity.
Over the same period, the number of papers by American scientists published in prestigious foreign
journals such as Nature and Comptes Rendus (the proceedings of the French Academy) doubled
for physics and chemistry and jumped almost eightfold for mathematics (from 39 to 303). The
total number of doctorates in these three disciplines also increased from 230 to 820. Perhaps most
tellingly, the number of doctoral students in the sciences studying abroad decreased from 189 to 90
(chemistry saw the steepest decline, from 116 to 32). These patterns are consistent with American
science catching up to European standards.
       As research universities entered the interwar period, the twin norms of mission-orientation and
discipline-orientation became a source of increasing tension within, and a demarcator between, these
institutions. On the one hand, universities were receiving industrial contracts for research that
were focused on specific problems. For instance, the National Rock and Slag Wool Association
financed building insulation studies from the University of Minnesota. MIT’s electrical engineering
department maintained close ties with AT&T from 1902, which supported departmental research and
teaching. At MIT, the Research Laboratory of Applied Chemistry (RLAC) led by William Walker
aggressively pursued industrial contracts. An endowment fund drive that began at the Institute
in 1919 resulted in the “Technology Plan,” which would secure corporate financing in exchange for
tailor-made conferences and access to alumni files for recruitment.8
       Another incentive for university faculty to collaborate with industry was that many of the ex-
   8
     Sponsored industrial research at MIT exceeded $100k in 1920-21 and rose to over $270k by 1930 (Geiger, 1986,
p.179)


                                                       12
citing research areas required expensive equipment (vacuum tubes, catalysts) often more abundantly
found in industrial laboratories. For instance, as the demand from the electrical industry drove MIT
to offer its first degree in electrical engineering in 1882 (Reich, 1985, p.24), some of the best academic
researchers at the time, such as MIT’s Willis Whitney and William Coolidge, went to General Elec-
tric to continue their research. William Carothers, the inventor of nylon, was drawn away from his
position at Harvard to DuPont, which could offer him more time for research and greater experimen-
tal resources. Synthesizing complex polymers required expensive instruments, such as the molecular
still which eliminates excess water in chemical reactions, which were critical to the synthesis of large
polymers such as nylon. Large companies also helped found many scientific associations; for exam-
ple, the Optical Society of America was founded in 1916 by a group at Eastman Kodak while the
Acoustical Society of America was founded in 1928 at Bell Labs (Weart, 1979, p.321).
    Research universities in this era therefore seem to have become not only more able, but also
more willing to provide inputs to corporate inventions. Indeed, the employment characteristics of
American Physical Society members in figure 5 shows that compared to 1905, the share of physicists
working in industry and government had increased to around 10 percent in the 1930s. National
Research Council data on scientific employment figures show a similar growth over a slightly later
period: Scientists and engineers employed in manufacturing industries grew more than sixteen-fold,
from 2,775 to 45,941 between 1921 and 1946 (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1999, p.22).

                    Figure 5: Employment of American Physical Society Members




  Notes: This figure is based on data on the employment affiliations of members of the American Physics Society from Weart (1979), and
  plots the annual employment share of each destination sector.



    However, this pattern of willing university research for industry faced a backlash from within.

                                                                13
Chemist G.N. Lewis left MIT for Berkeley citing “industrial intrusions into university research” as a
reason. Arthur Noyes (former acting president of MIT and NRC member) also departed from MIT
for Caltech after a dispute with Walker about industrial research. MIT’s replacement of Richard
MacLaurin with physicist Karl Compton from Princeton, and the subsequent shutdown of individual
industrial research programs, shows universities defending their institutional logic as builders of sci-
entific disciplines. The operation of the newly founded California Institute of Technology epitomizes
this “correction.” Advocacy by scientists such as George Hale led Caltech to shun direct consultan-
cies with firms, and to only accept “fluid” grants from foundations and firms that could be used for
general research. A stark demonstration of universities’ willingness to avoid mission-oriented research
tasks comes from the closure of flagship government laboratories after World War II. For instance,
Harvard informed the Navy in 1944 that it did not wish to house an underwater sound lab. Chicago
similarly wished to withdraw from managing the Metallurgical Lab, which designed an experimental
reactor for plutonium production (Geiger, 1986, p.32). It was largely due to lobbying efforts by lab
management and funding by federal agencies that Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory or Applied
Physics Lab were able to persist.



3     The postwar period: 1950-1980

3.1     Growing federal support for university research

The evolution of American research universities since the mid-nineteenth century shows a pendulum
swing between mission-oriented and discipline-building research goals. While the beginnings of re-
search universities had been to serve practical purposes, the infusion of German-trained expatriates
imbued a new goal of pursuing science for its own sake in these institutions. The postwar federal
research expansion enabled universities to free themselves of the need for industry support. By the
1960s, faculty at top research universities were largely pursuing agendas of their own without having
to coordinate their efforts with industry.
      The war years saw large increases in Federal R&D expenditures rising from $83.2 million in
1940 to a peak of $1,313.6 million in 1945 (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1999, p.28). Figure 4 also shows



                                                  14
that beginning from 1940, the university sector has been an important beneficiary of this spending
increase. Synthetic rubber, mass-produced penicillin, radar, and the atomic bomb demonstrated
to policy makers the possible returns that federal investment in science could yield. Universities
functioned as hosts of such research efforts. For example, before being moved to Los Alamos, the
principal scientific work for the Manhattan project was conducted by academics such as Ernest
Lawrence and Robert Oppenheimer at Berkeley, Harold Urey at Columbia, and A.H. Compton at
Chicago Metallurgical lab. Cyclotron experiments were run at Minnesota, Wisconsin, Harvard, and
Cornell. The Radiation Lab, which studied improvements in radar technology vital to the Allied war
effort in the Battle of Britain, had been located at MIT (Geiger, 1993, p.27-9).
      The onset of the Cold War and the “Sputnik Shock” gave further justification for federal academic
support. Starting with the founding of the Atomic Energy Commission (which largely inherited the
infrastructure for the Manhattan Project), wartime projects were re-organized under mission-agencies
such as the ONR, NIH and NASA, while the National Science Foundation was established by 1950
to oversee and coordinate these efforts. As a result, federal research dollars for the university sector
grew from an estimated level of $420 million (1982 dollars) in 1935-1936 to more than $2 billion (1982
dollars) in 1960 and $8.5 billion in 1985. Between 1960 and 1985, the share of university research of
GNP grew almost twofold from 0.13 to 0.25 (Mowery and Rosenberg, 1993, p.47). This injection of
federal support implied that research universities did not need to rely as much on industrial funding.
Moreover, much of the investments by the federal government during the postwar years — even those
funded by mission-oriented agencies such as the Department of Defense or the Department of Energy
— were aimed at building up stocks of human capital and provided support for faculty-originated
research. Thus, federal research support steadily distanced universities from the specific innovation
needs of industry.


3.2     The golden age of the corporate lab

This extensive investment in science enabled firms to exchange personnel and ideas with the uni-
versity sector in the postwar era. Corporate labs, which had been growing substantially during the
1920-1940 period, grew even further after World War II. For instance, at its peak in the late 1960s,
AT&T’s Bell Labs employed 15,000 people, of whom about 1,200 had PhDs (Gertner, 2013). Four-

                                                  15
teen Bell Labs alumni were awarded the Nobel Prize, and five were recipients of the Turing Award.
DuPont also dramatically expanded its research program in the late 1940s, following the discovery
and successful development of neoprene and nylon in the 1930s and investigations by the Justice De-
partment’s Antitrust Division in the 1940s (Hounshell, 1988). DuPont’s early successes at innovating
cemented the view within the company that research, particularly of the fundamental type, was key
to profitability and growth. Antitrust pressures convinced management to invest in internal research,
rather than relying on technology markets. By the early 1980s, DuPont employed about 6,000 people
in its labs, with a research and development budget exceeding a billion dollars supported by sales
of about $30 billion. This constituted a ten thousand-fold growth in research expenditures and a
thousand-fold growth in sales since the early 1900s (Hounshell and Smith, 1988, p.9).
    Although experimentation and trial-and-error remained key elements of the innovation process,
one fundamental change over this time period was the enhanced role of scientific knowledge in guiding
new product development. Arguably nowhere was this change more evident than in the pharmaceu-
tical industry. From the late nineteenth century, drug discovery had relied on large-scale, “random”
screening of chemical compounds, followed by attempts to improve the molecule and then to test
the potential drug candidate for safety and efficacy. However, in the 1960s and 1970s, advances in
basic knowledge, instrumentation and computational capability had made it increasingly valuable for
pharmaceutical firms to invest in the fundamental understanding of drugs (Arora and Gambardella,
1994; Gambardella, 1995). By isolating and understanding the structure of crucial enzymes, for in-
stance, researchers could greatly increase the chances of discovering a chemical agent that would stop
a sequence involved in a disease process.
    The development of Lovastatin, a breakthrough statin medication used to treat high blood
cholesterol and reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease, illustrates how this more science-based
approach to drug discovery was adopted at Merck Research Laboratories (MRL) in the 1970s (Vagelos
and Galambos, 2004). Researchers at various laboratories had identified an enzyme, HMG-CoA
reductase, controlling the slowest reaction in the cholesterol synthetic sequence. This rate-limiting
enzyme was a natural target for inhibition because it controlled the rate of the entire sequence.
Through random screening, MRL researchers had also identified a product candidate, halofenate,
that lowered blood cholesterol and had advanced it to clinical testing in patients. Many researchers


                                                 16
at MRL were optimistic about halofenate, but Roy Vagelos, the newly hired MRL president, did
not share their optimism. First, this product candidate did not seem to inhibit any of the specific
enzymes involved in the cholesterol synthesis. Second, clinical trials had showed that, besides lowering
cholesterol, halofenate also had several poorly understood side effects. Vagelos, therefore, decided
to prioritize the work of a group of scientists recently hired from Washington University who were
targeting the HMG-CoA reductase enzyme. In 1978, the team discovered that aspergillus terreus, a
common soil microorganism, was producing something that was active against the target enzyme.
In 1979 Lovastatin was patented and in 1987 was approved for medical use under the brand name
Mevacor. In 1986 and 1987 alone, thanks to this more efficient approach to drug discovery, Merck
launched seven major new drugs. The gains from these science-based drug discovery methods also
translated to improvements in Merck’s bottom line — between 1960 and 1989, annual sales increased
thirty-fold from $218 million to $6.6 billion.
    Science-based innovation required corporations to hire larger numbers of scientists, and universi-
ties provided the necessary human capital. The first substantial influx of scientists took place during
the 1930s and 1940s, as pharmaceutical firms grew in size and technical sophistication (Mahoney,
1959). Furman and MacGarvie (2009) provide evidence that, from 1927 to 1946, research-oriented
pharmaceutical firms actively hired from local scientific doctoral programs. Lee (2003) documents
very large differences in innovative outputs between the firms that invested in R&D after 1940 and
those that did not. Moreover, these differences persisted in the succeeding period between 1940 and
1960.
    Even in this “golden age,” interactions between corporate labs and other components of the
innovation ecosystem – government agencies, universities and startups – remained strong. The his-
tory of Xerox’s Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) provides an illustration of the importance of
these interactions (Rao and Scaruffi, 2013). Xerox PARC was arguably the most innovative corpo-
rate research lab in the 1970s, pioneering modern office technology. PARC researchers created the
first personal computer with a graphical user interface, the laser printer, and Ethernet networking
technology. However, many elements of PARCs innovations came from outside, most notably the
ARPA-funded Augmentation Research Center (ARC) at the Stanford Research Institute (SRI). The
ARC had developed bit-mapped screens, the mouse, hypertext, collaborative tools and precursors to


                                                  17
the graphical user interface in the mid-1960s, long before the private sector had. PARC, which hired
many ARC researchers such as Robert Taylor, benefited greatly from the early absorption of these
technologies (Hiltzik and others, 1999). Subsequently, however, PARCs innovations also spilled over
to other organizations. The story of the twenty-four-year-old Steve Jobs visiting PARC in 1979 is
well known. Jobs incorporated many key PARC innovations into the Apple Lisa and the Macintosh.
Charles Simonyi, who had developed the first user-friendly word processor for PARC (the Bravo),
also left PARC to take a job at Microsoft, where he oversaw the creation of Microsoft’s Office suite
of applications. With the benefit of hindsight, Xerox often failed at commercializing technology from
PARC. The exception was when the inventions were closely related to its core business (e.g., the
laser printer). In those cases, the firm was able to profit handsomely from PARC inventions. Such
inventions, at least for a time, allowed the firm to recoup its investment in PARC, despite the errors
and spillovers.
    Another illustration of the interactions between elements of an innovation ecosystem is provided
by the early development of laser technology. The main theoretical work leading up to the laser
was co-authored by a university scientist (Columbia’s Charles Townes) and a corporate researcher
(Bell Lab’s Arthur Schawlow) (Schawlow and Townes, 1958). The ammonium gas maser, invented by
Charles Townes at Columbia’s Radiation Lab in 1953, was part of a natural progression in academia
toward higher frequencies, from radio to microwave to infrared and visible light. But the private
sector also saw the potential in achieving stimulated photonic emission at the visible light range
— AT&T and RCA, for instance, recognized that the information content of visible light was far
richer than in the microwave range (Gertner, 2013; Hecht, 1992). Universities, on the other hand,
were slower to follow up on the “maser paper” by Schawlow and Townes. Many university scientists
such as Gordon Gould (who drafted the “laser memo” at Columbia) left academia to join firms such
as Technical Research Group (TRG). With both significant defense and civilian funding available,
lucrative positions were available at AT&T, Hughes Aircraft, TRG, IBM, and the American Optical
Company. This personnel exchange manifested in active scientific publication activities by indus-
try in this area. A bibliometric analysis of peer-reviewed scientific journals in Physics Abstracts
for 1963 revealed that 71 percent of American-authored papers on lasers were written by industrial
scientists (Bromberg, 1991, p.98). Complementary engineering skills such as semiconductor doping,


                                                 18
vacuum chamber construction, and crystal pulling involved a substantial amount of tacit knowledge.
Therefore, firms with the structures for preserving and passing on such knowledge contributed to
subsequent breakthroughs. For example, although the IBM group was a latecomer to laser develop-
ment, their accumulation of knowledge and know-how over the years would yield the invention of dye
lasers and semiconductor lasers in the 1960s, a crucial step in miniaturizing laser devices and used
today in fiber optic datalinks (Guenther et al., 1991).
    In summary, the innovation ecosystem that emerged after World War II saw a sustained growth
of the research university sector, spurred by the infusion of federal funding. Throughout this period,
corporate labs maintained high-caliber scientific personnel and made complementary investments in
instrumentation and experimental equipment. This helped firms to readily absorb the newest scien-
tific developments and accommodate university scientists in their labs. During this time, corporations
were also, perhaps unfairly, often blamed for failing to exploit the many inventions created in their
labs. As research universities continued to expand, corporations’ ability to source inventions from
outside also grew. These changes made it increasingly difficult for firms to justify large investments in
internal research. A drastic transformation of the American innovation ecosystem ensued, beginning
in the last quarter of the twentieth century.



4    The “new” innovation ecosystem: 1980-2016

The new innovation ecosystem is characterized by a deepening division of innovative labor between
universities and corporations, with the former focusing on research and the latter dedicating their
efforts to development. Freed from specific commercial objectives, individual scientists subdivided
problems into sub-problems, with each sub-problem more amenable to scientific investigation. From
an industry perspective, however, using the output of university research still required significant
coordination and integration. The task of converting scientific insights into inventions that could
be the basis of new products and processes became a specialized one. Universities were not well
placed to “translate” research findings into executable solutions. Corporations – especially those
which lacked internal labs familiar with mission-oriented research – also found it difficult. Thus,
although specialization had its benefits, the separation between upstream research and downstream


                                                   19
applications also presented formidable challenges.


4.1     Universities, the division of innovative labor and the market for

        technology

During the 1980-2016 period, the research university sector continued to grow at a sustained pace.
Academic institutions spent $61 billion on basic and applied research in 2015. Their share of total
research in 1985 was 23.8 percent and rose to 33.6 percent in 2015 (Boroush, 2017). Universities
participated in the division of innovative labor by producing scientific insights, as well by directly
producing inventions to be developed. In support of such a division of labor, the U.S. Congress passed
the National Cooperative Research Act in 1984, which reduced the risk of antitrust prosecution by
the Department of Justice for firms engaging in R&D collaborations. Perhaps the most widely
commented on reform of this era was the Bayh-Dole Patent and Trademark Amendments Act of
1980, which allowed the results of federally funded university research to be owned and exclusively
licensed by universities. Since World War II, the federal government had been funding more than
half of all research conducted in universities and owned the rights to the fruits of such research,
totaling in 28,000 patents (Markel, 2013). However, only a few of these inventions actually made it
into the market. One of the expected benefits of the Bayh-Dole Act was to facilitate the development
of these underutilized resources by transferring property rights to the universities, which would then
be able to independently license at the going market rate. Licensing, joint ventures, or spinoffs from
university research were of course not new. As early as 1934, Arnold Beckman, a physical chemist at
Caltech, spun off his pH meter invention into what would become National Technical Laboratories
(now Beckman Coulter) – the nation’s foremost scientific instrument manufacturer. What was new
with this reform was that the uncertainty related to licensing federally funded research was now
significantly reduced.
      Universities responded by deepening their participation in invention. The share of universities
in patenting activity increased from 1 percent of total patents in 1975 to 2.5 percent in 1990. The
ratio of patents to R&D spending in universities almost doubled during this period, from 57 patents
per $ billion to 96 patents per $ billion. Because the rest of the economy saw a decrease, from



                                                  20
  Figure 6: U.S. Applied & Basic Research Expenditure by Performing Sector (1980-2015)




  Notes: This figure plots the aggregated annual basic and applied research expenditure by performing sector from the NSF National
  Patterns of R&D Resources (2014-15) tables 3 and 4. Figures are adjusted to 2016 dollars using GDP deflator from the World Bank
  National Accounts dataset.



780 to 429 patents per $ billion of R&D spending (Henderson et al., 1998), it is unlikely that this
increase in patent intensity reflected changes in patent office practices or other reductions in the cost
of patenting. Over a longer period of time, the number of patents granted exhibits an even starker
contrast: 380 patents were awarded in 1980, while 3,088 were awarded in 2009 (Markel, 2013). The
increases in university patent applications and gross licensing income shown in figure 7 underlines this
upward trend. The number of university patent applications more than quintupled between 1995 and
2015 from around 2,700 to over 15,000 per year. A similar trend is observed for university licensing
income, which jumped from $.6 billion to $2.3 billion in the same period. University scientists have
found it increasingly attractive to start their own businesses, with high-powered incentives and fast
decision-making that are difficult to replicate in large, established firms. Changes in the institutional
and legal environments complemented these trends. Start-ups can now get financing from venture
capitalists and from SBIR and other government programs (Lerner, 2000; Mazzucato, 2015). Indeed,
many firms have been spun-off from non-profit research institutions bringing forth such innovations
as the MRI, recombinant hepatitis B vaccine, atomic-force microscope and the Google pagerank
algorithm.
    Cultural changes in whether university research should be used in industry were also important in
shaping university participation in markets for technology (MFT). In the 1960s and 1970s, university-
industry collaborations were seen with suspicion. Geiger (1993) argues that the student protests


                                                              21
   Figure 7: Patent Applications and Gross Licensing Income by Universities (1995-2015)




  Notes: This plot graphs university participation in technology markets using survey data from the Association of University Technology
  Managers (AUTM). The bar graph shows the number of patent applications filed by universities. The line graph shows gross licensing
  income received by universities. Units are in millions of 2009 dollars (deflated using GDP figures from Bureau of Economic Analysis,
  National Economic Accounts, Gross Domestic Product, http://www.bea.gov/national/)



of 1968 engendered a widespread antipathy toward “programmatic” or mission-oriented research.
National reports published during the 1970s urged universities to emphasize their teaching functions
and contributions to society at large. Aversion toward commercial engagements with firms can
be gleaned from disclosures of university-industry collaborations (or lack thereof). For instance,
Monsanto’s $23 million, 12-year research deal with Harvard university in 1974 was kept private
until press attention forced Monsanto to reveal the terms of the agreement. NIH investigations and
hearings at the House Science and Technology Committee also followed similar deals between Hoechst
and Massachusetts General Hospital’s new genetics department (affiliated with Harvard University)
in 1981.9
       Gradually, however, appreciation for use-inspired research and industry collaborations was re-
discovered, due to several factors. First, major government initiatives such as the “War on Cancer”
(The National Cancer Act of 1971) indicated that key societal goals could be achieved through sci-
entific research. To support practical applications of basic science, the NSF also created the program
on Research Applied to National Needs (RANN). Second, stagnant growth in the 1970s, combined
with competitive threats from West German and Japanese manufacturing firms, arguably enhanced
   9
       https://www.thecrimson.com/article/1981/7/3/biotechnology-and-the-faustian-dilemma-pscientists/




                                                                 22
the value of using research as an input to economic growth. For instance, state governments in
Georgia and North Carolina looked to universities for regional economic development by inducing
co-location of research contracting firms. Later, other policies encouraged co-location of spin-offs
based on technology developed in academia (Geiger, 2004).


4.2     The expansion of the market for technology and smaller firms

A key characteristic of the new innovation ecosystem is the emergence of small, specialized research
organizations that trade ex ante (research and consulting projects) and ex post (patents, software
licenses, chip designs) knowledge products. These smaller firms either directly commercialize their
ideas by introducing new products to the market or indirectly by selling them on to larger firms with
downstream capabilities, in sharp contrast to the earlier system, where large firms originated their
own inventions.
      While venture capital-backed startup firms had been around since the 1950s (for instance in the
laser industry for defense contracts), their rise to prominence in the American innovation ecosystem
occurred only after the emergence of the semiconductor and biotechnology industries. Mowery and
Rosenberg (1998) emphasize that while large firms such as IBM and AT&T were responsible for
devising more general purpose hardware such as the IBM 360 and the transistor, antitrust pressures
from the Department of Justice (e.g. the 1956 settlement between the DOJ and AT&T) made it very
difficult for them to enter downstream markets using those technologies. Aided by liberal licensing
policies that resulted from this pressure, small firms such as Microsoft, Apple, Texas Instruments and
Fairchild Semiconductors rapidly developed improved iterations of the original products (Malerba,
1985; Tilton, 1971). For instance, Flamm (1988) counts at least 80 computer startups in the mid-
1950s that were catering for defense contracts and later consolidated and re-purposed for civilian
use. The role of firms such as Genentech, which successfully commercialized a university invention
into mass produced human insulin, was crucial in encouraging entry by private equity firms into
the biotechnology sector, which lent capital to scientist inventors that specialized in monoclonal
antibodies and DNA splicing (Pisano, 2006).
      Intellectual property rights were significantly strengthened (Guellec and de La Potterie, 2007;
Jaffe and Lerner, 2006). At the national level, the Federal Courts Improvement Act of 1982 estab-

                                                  23
lished the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, streamlining judgment on patent-related
cases. Select sectors have also received added attention: the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act of
1984 for instance strengthened IP protection for chip designs. Also, while software was unanimously
ruled by the Supreme Court as unpatentable in 1972, successive cases since then have reopened as-
pects of the Court’s decision and allowed for hardware embodying software and software embodying
industrial processes to be patented (Arora et al., 2004, p.61). Globally, the office of the U.S. Trade
Representative has consistently pushed for stronger enforcement of intellectual property rights, and
was integral in inserting the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) agreement into the Uruguay Round of 1995.

Table 1: U.S. Distribution of technology licensing receipts by sector for 2002 & 2011 (in
billions of dollars)


                                      Licensing of IP                   Technology Royalty and License Fee Income (2011)
 Sector
                                      Protected as Industrial
                                      Property (2002)
                                                                             Total            Tech and Ind             Software
                                                                                                  Process
 Manufacturing                                   59.5                         25.7                  24.8                  0.9
 Wholesale, retail, transport                     1                           49.6                  49.4                 0.3
 Information                                     1.9                          27.7                   2.1                 25.6
 Finance and Insurance                           0.2                           1.6                   1.3                 0.3
 Professional and bus. services                   3                           4.5                     2                  2.5
 Other industries                                 1                            1.2                   1.1                 0.1
 Total                                           66.6                        111.2                   81                  30.2

  Notes: This table shows the distribution of technology licensing receipts in the United States. The figures for 2002 are from Robbins
  (2009) Table 4.10. The figures for 2011 are from the Census Enterprise Statistics Program (ESP) 2011 Table 3: Royalty and License
  Fee Income from Rights to Use Intellectual Property (Detail). https://www.census.gov/econ/esp/historical.html

       As a result, American corporations reported $92 billion of income from licensing intellectual
property in 2002, and the supporting IRS data show an annual growth of 11 percent from 1994 to
2004, which outpaced average GDP growth (3.42 %) in the same period (Robbins, 2009). The number
of transferred patents as measured by reassignments between firms has also risen substantially from
around 7,000 to over 12,000 cases per year between 1987 and 2014.10 Moreover, business models
specializing in selling intellectual property without engaging in downstream manufacturing and sales
  10
     Authors’ calculations based on data from the USPTO Patent Assignment Dataset (Graham et al., 2018), repli-
cating cleaning procedures in (Serrano, 2010) to identify patent reassignments that qualify as market transactions.

                                                                 24
have been validated by firms such as Exponent (chemicals), Genentech (biotech), and ARM (fabless
semiconductor design). What is significant about the latter two firms is that unlike traditional
research consulting firms such as SRI, which carry out contract research on behalf of clients, they
are able to provide technology products in a disembodied form (patents and chip design blueprints).


4.3     The decline of corporate research

Another transformation of the American innovation ecosystem was the decline of the large corporate
lab. This decline was especially pronounced given the increase in the average size of America’s leading
corporations. For example, net turnover for GE and IBM in 1980 hovered around $25 billion and
$26 billion respectively, and grew to $100 billion and $82 billion in 1998. In 1979, GE’s corporate
research laboratory employed 1,649 doctorate holders while IBM employed 1,300. The comparable
figures in 1998 were 475 doctorate holders for GE and 1,200 doctorate holders for IBM (National
Research Council, 1980; 1998). U.S. public firms whose sales grew by 100 percent or more between
1980 and 1990 published 20.6 fewer scientific articles per year. This contrast between sales growth
and publications drop persisted into the next two decades: firms that doubled in sales between 1990
and 2000 published 12.0 fewer articles. Publications dropped by 13.3 for such fast growth firms
between 2000 and 2010.11
      A prominent example of corporate withdrawal from science is given by DuPont. The firm closed
its Central Research & Development Organization and merged it with its Engineering division in 2016.
In the early and mid twentieth century, the DuPont Central Research & Development Organization
was run on par with top academic chemistry departments. However, in the 1990s, DuPont’s attitude
toward research changed as the company started emphasizing business potentials of research projects.
As a result, the number of first-authored journal articles fell from around 749 to 245 between the
years 1994 and 2015, while the number of patents filed with the USPTO increased from around 1,600
in 1994 to close to 3,500 in 2012, reflecting a shift to downstream development activities. Following
pressure from activist investor Nelson Peltz, on January 4, 2016, DuPont’s Central Research lab
ceased to operate as a research unit.
  11
     Calculations based on authors’ data on Compustat firms matched to Clarivate Web of Science and EPO Patstat.
Details in Arora et al. (2017).



                                                      25
    Aggregated data from the NSF show a similar pattern of corporate research decline, whereby the
ratio of basic to applied research in corporate R&D declined from 50.7 percent in 1985 to 42.5 percent
in 2015 (Boroush, 2017, Tables 3 and 4). Arora et al. (2018) disaggregate this trend further and find
that, while a significant fraction of corporate publication decline can be attributed to entry by firms
that publish very little, incumbents with established research programs also markedly decreased
their research. The decline in publications is most evident in publications in high impact scientific
journals. The implied private value of scientific capability (measured by stock market valuations or
by the acquisition price in M&A deals) also declined. By contrast, patenting by large American firms
increased, and the implied private value of patents, including the premium paid for patents in M&A,
increased.
Figure 8: Scientific Publications and Patents by Compustat Firms (excluding life sciences)




  Notes: The solid lines represent the average number of publications in Clarivate Web of Science matched to Compustat firms with over
  $10 million of R&D Stock and in industry classes excluding the life sciences sector. The broken lines represent the same for patents
  (details on matching procedure in Arora et al. (2017)).




    We use corporate publications data from 1980 to 2015 to explore these trends in more detail.
Our sample consists of all R&D performing public firms headquartered in the U.S. and available
in Compustat from 1980 to 2015. We match the names of these firms to the author addresses
of scientific articles found in the Clarivate Web of Science’s Science Citation Index files. We also
match these firm names to the assignee names for U.S. utility patents available from EPO Patstat.


                                                                26
Details on the matching process are available from Arora et al. (2017).12 The results in Arora et al.
(2018) are summarized in figure 8, which graphs scientific publications and patents by Compustat
firms with at least $10 million of R&D stock. Consistent with their finding, publications by firms
approximately halved from around 20 to around 10 between the 1980s and 2000s. In contrast,
patenting by firms increased from around 10 to over 70 patents per year in the same period. Among
large U.S. public firms with over $100 million in R&D stock, 184 out of 201 firms (91.5%) published
at least one scientific article in 1980. This number dropped to 73.6 percent in 2015 (528 firms out of
717 published). The decline is more pronounced for the most research active firms: the ratio of firms
that publish more than 10 articles per year dropped from 55.2 percent (111 out of 201 firms in 1980)
to 29.8 percent (214 out of 717 firms in 2015). The average number of scientific publications per
$1 million of R&D spending also declined from 0.46 articles between 1980 and 1985 to 0.40 articles
between 2010 and 2015. The decline also seems to be more pronounced for older firms. For instance,
there were 109 firms out of 131 (83.2%) listed on the stock market on or before 1980 that published
in 2015. This ratio rises to 78.9 percent (15 out of 19) for firms listed in 1995, and 75.7 percent (28
out of 37) for firms listed in 2000.

         Figure 9: Scientific Publications per $Thousand Sales for new IT Sector Firms




  Notes: This plot graphs the normalized number of scientific publications by large U.S. firms in the IT sector. Scientific publications of
  Apple, Amazon, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Netflix found in Clarivate Web of Science are summed each year and divided by $
  thousand sales. Details on matching procedure in Arora et al. (2017)



       Firms in the IT sector did not buck this trend toward declining corporate publications. Figure
  12
       We thank Lia Sheer and Honggi Lee for their excellent assistance on constructing the dataset.


                                                                   27
9 shows publications per $ thousand sale for Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Google, Microsoft, and
Netflix. Firms in this group did publish more than other firms: in 2015, they published on average
304.7 articles, which is around twenty-four times the average for all firms in that year (21.5 articles).
However, Google and Microsoft are the dominant contributors to journals, together publishing close to
90 percent of all articles from these six firms. Moreover, except for Microsoft, publications normalized
by sales fell over time between 1992 and 2015.
    Of the 341 public firms publishing at least one scientific article in 1980, 223 (65.4%) saw a drop in
publications in 1990. Similarly, 280 out of 470 firms (59.6%) publishing at least one scientific article
in 1990 saw a drop in 2000. The comparable figure for the 2000-2010 period is even higher: 671 out of
902 (74.4%) firms publishing in 2000 produced fewer publications in 2010. To investigate this trend
further, Table 2 summarizes publication and patenting trends for the ten firms that published the
most scientific articles in the 1980s, 1990s, and 2000s. We explore how the publishing and patenting
behavior of these firms changed in the following decade. As expected, firms such as GE, Xerox, and
AT&T exhibited some of the sharpest declines. Table 2’s “Top publishers in 1980-99” section indicates
that GE saw a drop of 132 articles between 1980s and 1990s (from 603 to 471), while articles by Xerox
declined from 343 to 310. Also, IBM’s publishing trend in the 1990s (a 9% decline) contrasts with
a doubling in patenting in the same period. This result is consistent with the evidence presented by
Bhaskarabhatla and Hegde (2014), which shows that IBM’s pro–patent policies introduced by James
McGroddy in 1989 incentivized researchers to patent rather than publish research results.
    Table 2 also shows several anomalies to this overall pattern that deserve mention. First, the
absolute number of publications declined sharply (by 73%) at AT&T from the 1990s to the 2000s,
consistent with the firm’s restructuring efforts. However, AT&T’s R&D budget fell even more dras-
tically, from $4,083 million in 1995 to $640 million in 1996, since it had spun off Bell Labs to Lucent
technologies. As a result, AT&T’s papers normalized by R&D actually rose. Second, DuPont reg-
istered an increase in publications between the 1980s and 1990s. However, the growth promptly
reversed in the following decade, where there is a drop of 339 articles, from 762 in the 1990s to 423
in the 2000s.
    Third, firms in the life sciences such as Pharmacia, Lilly, Bristol Myers Squibb, Pfizer, and
Amgen significantly increased publications. In the case of Pfizer and Amgen in the 2000s, this increase


                                                   28
                  Table 2: Changes in Publications and Patents by top 10 Publishers for each decade from 1980 to 2015

                                                                            Publications Per Year                                                   Patents Per Year
     Rank    Top 10 publishers in 1980-89                 1980-1989      1990-1999       % Change        % Change              1980-1989      1990-1999        % Change        % Change
                                                                                                         (R&D Nor-                                                             (R&D Nor-
                                                                                                         malized)                                                              malized)
      1      AT&T CORP                                       1,889           1,028           -46%             -58%                 372              422             13%             -13%
      2      INTL BUSINESS MA-                               1,612           1,929            20%             -16%                 538             1,495           178%              96%
             CHINES CORP
      3      GENERAL ELECTRIC CO                              603             471            -22%             -43%                 908              876             -4%             -29%
      4      DU PONT (E I) DE NEMOURS                         600             762            27%              -25%                 350              506             44%             -15%
      5      EXXON MOBIL CORP                                 554             401            -28%             -23%                 252              245             -3%              3%
      6      XEROX CORP                                       343             310            -10%             -41%                 271              718            165%             73%
      7      PHARMACIA & UPJOHN INC                           336             532             58%             -52%                 101               56            -45%             -83%
      8      CBS CORP -OLD                                    321             108            -66%             -47%                 410              233            -43%             -11%
      9      PHARMACIA CORP                                   302             383             27%             -43%                 146              173            18%              -47%
      10     ROCKWELL AUTOMATION                              279             188            -33%             -63%                 181              171             -6%             -49%
     Rank    Top 10 publishers in 1990-1999               1990-1999      2000-2009       % Change        % Change              1990-1999      2000-2009        % Change        % Change
                                                                                                         (R&D Nor-                                                             (R&D Nor-
                                                                                                         malized)                                                              malized)
      1      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP                     1,929           1,754            -9%             -21%                1,495           3,522            136%             104%
      2      LUCENT TECHNOLOGIES INC                         1,421            748            -47%              -9%                 799             770              -4%              66%
      3      AT&T CORP                                       1,028            279            -73%             119%                 422             288             -32%             450%
      4      DU PONT (E I) DE NEMOURS                         762             423            -44%             -31%                 506             475              -6%              17%
      5      BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO                          582             632             9%              -56%                 135             158              17%             -53%




29
      6      SCHERING-PLOUGH                                  565             557             -1%             -71%                  99             111              11%             -67%
      7      PHARMACIA & UPJOHN INC                           532        merged with         N/A              N/A                   56        merged with          N/A              N/A
                                                                         Pfizer (2003)                                                        Pfizer (2003)
      8      LILLY (ELI) & CO                                 508             884             74%             -44%                 138              97             -30%             -78%
      9      ABBOTT LABORATORIES                              474             600             26%             -48%                 138             128              -7%             -62%
      10     GENERAL ELECTRIC CO                              471             762             62%             -11%                 876            1,269             45%             -20%
     Rank    Top 10 publishers in 2000-2009               2000-2009      2010-2015       % Change        % Change              2000-2009      2010-2015        % Change        % Change
                                                                                                         (R&D Nor-                                                             (R&D Nor-
                                                                                                         malized)                                                              malized)
      1      INTL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP                     1,754           1,703            -3%             -11%                3,522           6,800             93%             76%
      2      PFIZER INC                                      1,616           2,022            25%             19%                  318             167             -47%             -50%
      3      JOHNSON & JOHNSON                               1,014           1,382            36%              -3%                 378             781             106%             47%
      4      LILLY (ELI) & CO                                 884             868             -2%             -33%                  97              70             -28%             -51%
      5      GENERAL ELECTRIC CO                              762             997             31%             -23%                1,269           1,945             53%             -10%
      6      LUCENT TECHNOLOGIES INC                          748        merged               N/A             N/A                  770        merged               N/A              N/A
                                                                         with Alcatel                                                         with Alcatel
                                                                         (2006)                                                               (2006)
      7      MERCK & CO                                       648             866             34%             -36%                 307             541             76%              -16%
      8      BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO                          632             844             34%              -4%                 158             172              9%              -21%
      9      INTEL CORP                                       625             702             12%             -44%                1,463           1,793            23%              -39%
      10     ABBOTT LABORATORIES                              600             568             -5%             -23%                 128             532             316%             240%
      Notes: This table describes annual patenting and publication activities of Compustat firms that are the top publishers for each decade from 1980 to 2015 (1980-1989, 1990-1999, 2000-2009,
      2010-2015). We divide the total number of publications by number of years in every decade for U.S. headquartered firms in Compustat after matching them to the address information in
      each Web of Science article. After ranking the top 10 publishers each decade by publications per year (first column), we calculate the percentage change between the previous decade and
      the next decade (fourth column). We also divide the number publications each year by $ million R&D spending and average over each decade for each firm. The percentage differences
      between each decade in this measure is presented in the sixth column. The same is done for patents from the seventh to tenth columns.
          Figure 10: Ratio of Publications per Firm to Patents per Firm, by Industry




  Notes: This graph plots the ratio of publications to patents per firm in three industrial sectors. The number of publications per firm is
  calculated by matching publications in Clarivate Web of Science to Compustat firms with over $10 million of R&D Stock. The number
  of patents per firm is calculated by matching assignee names in EPO Patstat to the same firms (details on the matching process is
  available in Arora et al. (2017). Publication to Patent Ratio is calculated by dividing the number of publications per firm by the
  number of patents per firm.



in publishing kept up with changes in R&D expenditures. One key feature of the pharmaceutical
industry during this time period was the strong merger activity. However, comparisons with other
sectors that also experienced strong merger activity suggests that the publishing behavior of firms in
the life sciences was not simply an artifact of merger activity. Figure 10 plots the ratio between the
number of scientific publications per firm and patents per firm by main industrial sector. The figure
shows that, in the life sciences, this ratio grew from close to one in the 1980s to between three and five
in more recent years. By contrast, publications to patent ratios for both the computer/IT/software
and electronics/semiconductor sectors more than halved over the same period.
     Apart from the rise in average firm size, there are several other plausible reasons why the
pharmaceutical and biotech sector bucked the trend toward declining scientific publications. First,
the commercial applicability of upstream research, such as that conducted in universities or published
in scientific journals, is much more apparent in the life sciences than in other manufacturing sectors.
For example, in the mid-1990s, 58 percent of industrial R&D lab managers in the pharmaceutical
sector reported that research conducted in academic or government labs suggested new project ideas,


                                                                   30
well above the manufacturing average of 32 percent (Cohen et al., 2002). Second, patents are generally
viewed as more effective in protecting the sale and commercialization of knowledge in the drug
industry than in other sectors. Relatedly, technology markets are very active in pharmaceuticals. As
a result, returns to investments in research may be higher in the life sciences than in other sectors.
In particular, large pharmaceutical companies may have to carry out some research in-house to be
competent buyers of technology. Third, drugs require regulatory approval and scientific publications,
by demonstrating the efficacy of new products, can facilitate this process. Pharmaceutical products
also require the cooperation of physicians who prescribe the products to patients. This implies that
drug adoption also depends on convincing these intermediaries of their quality through, for instance,
scientific publications (Azoulay, 2002; Hicks, 1995).

             Figure 11: Federal Obligations by Selected Subfields, FY 1980-FY 2015




  Notes: This graph replicates figure 4 on Merrill (2018) using data from the Federal Funds for Research and Development Data
  series, available from https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/srvyfedfunds/ Biology excludes environmental sciences. Other includes chemicals,
  computer sciences, materials engineering, metallurgy and electrical engineering.



     Finally, there has been a general increase in federal funding for biomedical research through the
NIH, from $2.5 billion in 1980 to $15 billion in 2001 and $29 billion in 2015. Figure 11 shows that
this steep increase in federal funding for life sciences has not been matched in other sectors such as
chemistry, computer sciences, materials, and electrical engineering. This plausibly increased publi-
cation output by firms, not only those that made use of NIH funds, but also those that could freely
access newly available public resources such as genome sequences to increase research productivity.


                                                                 31
However, this confluence of factors was unique to the life sciences, which may explain why this sector
has stood out among other sectors.
       In summary, the new innovation ecosystem exhibits a deepening division of labor between uni-
versities that specialize in basic research, small start-ups converting promising new findings into
inventions, and larger, more established firms specializing in product development and commer-
cialization (Arora and Gambardella, 1994). Indeed, in a survey of over 6,000 manufacturing- and
service-sector firms in the U.S., Arora et al. (2016) find that 49 percent of the innovating firms be-
tween 2007 and 2009 reported that their most important new product originated from an external
source. In this view, smaller firms have a comparative advantage in generating inventions, whereas
larger firms have an advantage in exploiting them. Large firms therefore invest in scientific capability
not so much to generate knowledge as to be effective buyers of knowledge.


4.4       Why has corporate science declined?

The withdrawal from science by large corporations resulted from the confluence of several factors.
As competition intensified and the interval between invention and commercialization narrowed, it
became increasingly difficult for corporations to profit from their in-house research. Standard theory
implies that firms reduce research when the knowledge spills out, particularly to rivals. This intuition
is supported by the results in Arora et al. (2017) who further document that spillovers to rivals have
greatly increased between 1980 and 2015.13 As former Bell Labs researcher Andrew Odlyzko (1995,
p.4) notes:

        “xerography was invented by Carlson in 1937, but it was only commercialized by Xerox
        in 1950. Furthermore, there was so little interest in this technology that during the few
        years surrounding commercialization, Xerox was able to invent and patent a whole range
        of related techniques, while there was hardly any activity by other institutions. This
        enabled Xerox to monopolize the benefits of the new technology for over two decades. [...
        By contrast,] when Bednorz and Mueller announced their discovery of high-temperature
        superconductivity at the IBM Zurich lab in 1987, it took only a few weeks for groups
        at University of Houston, University of Alabama, Bell Labs, and other places to make
  13
       Spillovers in this study are measured by citations to corporate publications received from patents filed by rivals.

                                                            32
     important further discoveries. Thus even if high-temperature superconductivity had de-
     veloped into a commercially significant field, IBM would have had to share the financial
     benefits with others who held patents that would have been crucial to developments of
     products.”

Another factor that may have reduced large firms’ ability to profit from their in-house research was the
trend toward narrower firm scope. Starting from the 1980s, Wall Street investors increasingly pushed
large public firms to “stick to their knitting” and divest unrelated units. However, diversified firms
may be precisely the ones best positioned to exploit the unpredictable outcomes of scientific research
because, as Richard Nelson (1959, p.302) noted, “[a] broad technological base insures that, whatever
direction the path of research may take, the results are likely to be of value to the sponsoring firm.”
Thus, as firms concentrated on their core markets, their incentives to invest in scientific research may
have declined. Trade, outsourcing, and the offshoring of manufacturing may also have reduced the
incentives to invest in research. For instance, moving manufacturing to locations far from where R&D
takes place could reduce interactions between research and production, which may hinder innovation.
    Large firms also started to invest less in internal research, not only because these investments
became less valuable, but also because tapping into external sources of knowledge and invention be-
came increasingly easy. Historically, many large labs were set up partly because antitrust pressures
constrained large firms’ ability to grow through mergers and acquisitions. In the 1930s, if a leading
firm wanted to grow, it needed to develop new markets. With growth through mergers and acquisi-
tions constrained by anti-trust pressures, and with little on offer from universities and independent
inventors, it often had no choice but to invest in internal R&D. The more relaxed antitrust environ-
ment in the 1980s, however, changed this status quo. Growth through acquisitions became a more
viable alternative to internal research, and hence the need to invest in internal research was reduced.
    The growth of university research likely also contributed to the ease of external knowledge
acquisition. Corporate labs historically operated in an environment where university research and
start-up inventions were scarce. To generate a steady flow of high-quality inventions, large firms
had to develop them in-house, typically by setting up a large lab. As discussed above, however,
universities and small firms became over time more reliable sources of invention. As the volume
of external research increased, corporate labs also found it difficult to keep up with the pace of

                                                  33
technological progress.
      The attractiveness of external technology markets relative to internal research also increased.
Greater protection of intellectual property rights in the 1980s reduced the risk of expropriation
in technology transactions. The diffusion of online platforms (e.g., Procter Gamble’s Connect +
Develop) and the growth of technology market intermediaries (e.g., yet2.com Marketplace, InnoCen-
tive) rendered contracting for innovation easier and less expensive, reducing frictions in technology
markets. All these developments made technology markets more attractive, and internal research
correspondingly less so.



5       The large corporate lab and the innovation ecosystem

We began this chapter by noting the rise and fall of American productivity growth in the twentieth
century. We also noted that the rise and fall of American productivity growth largely coincided with
the rise and fall of the large corporate lab.
      In this section, we suggest that the large corporate lab may be an important (and often unap-
preciated) component of a healthy innovation ecosystem. While we do not deny that there might
be gains from specialization when innovative labor is more finely subdivided, we also point out that
there might be social costs associated with the demise of the large corporate lab. Although large
corporations are withdrawing from internal research because it is no longer privately profitable, this
change may not be positive for society.


5.1     Inventions originating from large corporate labs are different

There are several reasons why large corporate labs may develop inventions that are different from
those produced by universities and startups.


5.1.1    Corporate labs work on general purpose technologies

Because corporate labs are typically owned by large integrated incumbents, they may have strong
incentives to focus on systemic or architectural innovations. Consistent with this, Kapoor (2013)
finds that, following vertical disintegration in the semiconductor industry, integrated incumbents


                                                  34
reconfigured their activities more towards systemic innovations (which require extensive coordination
and communication across different stages of production and actors) and less towards autonomous
innovations (which require relatively little adjustment). Lecuona Torras (2017) also finds that large
firms were more likely to leverage general purpose technologies to introduce architectural innovations
in mobile telephony handsets. Anecdotal evidence support this behavior: Claude Shannon’s work
on information theory, for instance, was supported by Bell Labs because AT&T stood to benefit
the most from a more efficient communication network (Gertner, 2013). IBM supported milestones
in nanoscience by developing the scanning electron microscope, and furthering investigations into
electron localization, non-equilibrium superconductivity, and ballistic electron motions because it
saw an opportunity to pre-empt the next revolutionary chip design in its industry (Gomory, 1985;
Rosenberg, 1994, p.258). Finally, a recent surge in corporate publications in Machine Learning
suggests that larger firms such as Google and Facebook that possess complementary assets (user
data) for commercialization publish more of their research and software packages to the academic
community, as they stand to benefit most from advances in the sector in general (Hartmann and
Henkel, 2019).


5.1.2     Corporate labs solve practical problems

Research conducted in corporate labs is directed toward solving specific practical problems. This
orientation toward specific missions can restrict researchers’ freedom, but also reduces the risk of
purely theoretical ruminations and hastens the translation of science to commercial applications.
Moreover, unlike small firms that often scramble for survival, large labs can provide researchers with
resources and some slack, which may lead to truly path-breaking research. Thus, corporate labs may
integrate the best of both worlds. On the one hand, their research is connected to real problems,
so that their results are likely to have important industrial applications. On the other hand, this
connection is not so strong that the results lie towards the most applied end of the spectrum and have
only limited scientific value. Andrew Odlyzko underlines the importance of commercial necessity at
Bell:

        “It was very important that Bell Labs had a connection to the market, and thereby to
        real problems. The fact that it wasn’t a tight coupling is what enabled people to work

                                                 35
        on many long-term problems. But the coupling was there, and so the wild goose chases
        that are at the heart of really innovative research tended to be less wild, more carefully
        targeted and less subject to the inertia that is characteristic of university research.”14


5.1.3     Corporate labs are multi-disciplinary and have more resources

Inventions by large corporate labs may differ from inventions by universities or start-ups because
large firms have access to greater financial resources and can tackle multidisciplinary problems by
integrating multiple knowledge streams and capabilities (Tether, 1998; Pisano, 2010). The transistor,
for instance, would not have been possible without the blend of theoretical prowess and engineering
skills available at Bell Labs. Attempts at solid state electronics had been made since the early
1940s by Purdue physical chemist Karl Lark-Horovitz, General Electric, and others. Only Bell Labs,
however, had the interdisciplinary team of physicists, metallurgists and chemists necessary to solve
the many theoretical and practical problems associated with developing the transistor.
       Because MIT’s Radiation Lab during World War II had selected AT&T’s Western Electric
to manufacture back-voltage rectifiers for radars, metallurgists at the firm had gained first-hand
experience in purifying and doping semiconductors. Bell metallurgist Henry Theurer later developed
the method of zone refining in 1951, which processed germanium crystals to impurity levels as low as
one part in ten billion. It was also at Bell that Gordon Teal’s crystal “pulling” method fabricated the
positive-negative junctions in silicon rods, and Shockley’s transistor would not have been possible to
invent without either one of these two in-house achievements in material sciences (Gertner, 2013).
       Similarly, Holbrook et al. (2000) note that it was cross-functional coordination between R&D and
manufacturing that led to Fairchild’s two major breakthroughs: the planar process and integrated
circuits. In contrast, fabless firms, which specialize on the design of integrated circuits while avoiding
the high costs of building and operating manufacturing facilities, would arguably find it hard to come
up with these types of innovations.
       Artificial Intelligence (AI) research is an example that the difference between large corporate lab
research from university and startup research. Since the beginning of this decade, large corporations
such as Google, IBM, and Facebook have invested heavily in AI research. Hartmann and Hankel’s
  14
    Letter to the Wall Street Journal, available at http://www.dtc.umn.edu/ odlyzko/misc/wsj-bell-labs-20120326.
Accessed 18/02/2019

                                                      36
(2019) recent study shows that the share of corporate publications in top AI journals such as the
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) have tripled between 2004 and 2016. Firms
have pioneered research in specialized fields such as deep neural networks (DNNs). Google has
published landmark papers such as the “Cat Paper” (Le et al., 2011) and the “Google Translate
Paper” (Wu et al., 2016) that validated the effectiveness of new algorithms such as LSTM (Long-
Short Term Memory) for image recognition and language translation respectively. While many
scientists working at Google for these projects (such as Andrew Ng at Stanford or Geoffrey Hinton at
Toronto) had joint appointments at universities, it is unlikely that either universities or VC-backed
startups would have produced research output on par with Google for three reasons.15
       Scale — In 2018, Google employed more than 1,700 AI researchers, and made a string of startup
acquisitions specializing in the field, starting with Geoffrey Hinton’s firm (DNN research) in 2013
and following with Demis Hassabis’s Deep Mind in 2014. Large firms such as Google also collect and
maintain proprietary datasets that dwarf the sizes of publicly available ones collected at universities.
In the field of machine learning, larger datasets allow for the empirical validation of algorithms that
are difficult to solve analytically. This implies that the cutting-edge empirical work in AI necessarily
occurs in firms, where the data are available. Sun et al. (2017) show that Google uses the JFT-300M
dataset which has more than 375 million labels for 300 million images (Stanford’s Imagenet dataset,
one of the largest datasets made publicly available by a university, contained around 1 million images)
and empirically show that increases in data size correspond to significant performance improvements.
This result was intuitively plausible but difficult to test at scale.
       Multi-disciplinarity — Researching neural networks requires an interdisciplinary team. Do-
main specialists (e.g. linguists in the case of machine translation) define the problem to be solved
and assess performance; statisticians design the algorithms, theorize on their error bounds and op-
timization routines; computer scientists search for efficiency gains in implementing the algorithms.
Not surprisingly, the “Google translate” paper has 31 coauthors, many of them leading researchers
in their respective fields (Wu et al., 2016). This seems to be a broader trend separating university
research from industry research in this area: using data from Marx (2019), we examined the average
  15
     Hinton (a co-laureate of the Turing prize in 2018 with Facebook’s Yann LeCunn and McGill’s Yoshua Bengio)
was a pioneer of neural networks and supervised the execution of Alexnet, the first algorithm to bring error rate in
the Imagenet competition down to under 25 percent in 2012.



                                                        37
number of coauthors in the five leading machine learning conferences in Hartmann and Henkel (2019)
from 2011 to 2018 and found that research by large firms features on average one more co-author
(4.3) than non-large firm papers (3.4).16 These firms make up 10 percent (2,168 out of 20,989) of
the papers published with fewer than eleven authors, but comprise 28 percent (22 out of 79) of the
papers published with more than eleven authors. High-quality papers show the same difference in
the size of teams. Among ML conference papers in the top decile by citations received, corporate
publications involve 4.4 authors, while non-firm publications involve 3.6. This pattern holds for the
top 1 percent of cited publications — firm publications (4.4) involve more coauthors than non-firm
publications (3.6).
       Complementary equipment — The collaboration between science and engineering is also an
advantage at Google Brain that is hard to replicate in universities or VC-backed startups. To imple-
ment code written by Quoc Le (one of the leading scientists on the Google translate project), software
engineers converted Le’s code into Google’s newly developing Tensor Flow language, while hardware
engineers debugged Google’s proprietary Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) that were custom-built by
Google for inference tasks in neural networks.17 Google has continuously improved on these chips,
with four generations of TPU chips being introduced in the span of two years. A few universities such
as MIT (Eyeriss), Georgia Tech, ETH Zurich (Nullhop), and IIT Madras are conducting research on
such “AI-accelerator” chips, but their products are yet to be fielded widely on the market.
       A consequence of large corporate research being i) more general purpose ii) closely coupled with
practical problems and iii) more multidiscplinary is that on average, corporate scientific research
will be more useful to inventors than university research. If this is the case, then we should observe
inventors of patents, for instance, devote more attention to them than to academic counterparts.
       Anecdotal evidence suggests that neural network research published by Google brain has been
implemented by follow-own research at firms. It is now standard practice among researchers to test
their algorithm’s performance against Alexnet or LSTM — both of which were refined at Google. We
  16
      The five conferences are Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), the Association for the Advancement
of Artifical Intelligence (AAAI), the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), the International Joint
Conferences on Artifical Intelligence (IJCAI), and the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS).
The “large firms” are Microsoft, Google, IBM, Yahoo, Toyota, Baidu, NEC Corporation, Facebook, Adobe, LinkedIn
and rank as the top publishers in the field of AI in Hartmann and Henkel (2019)
   17
      TPUs are custom Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASIC) specifically designed for deep neural networks.
The first TPUs were deployed in Google data centers in 2015, and performed up to 26 times faster than existing GPUs.
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/gcp/an-in-depth-look-at-googles-first-tensor-processing-unit-tpu


                                                         38
               Figure 12: Patent Citation to University vs. Corporate Publications




  Note: The sample includes publications from the top 100 U.S. universities and corporate publications of our sample firms that were
  published over the sample period (1980-2006) and covered in Web of Science “Science Citation Index” and “Conference Proceedings
  Citation Index-Science.” Patent citations per publication is measured by total citations (internal and external) per publication by
  corporate and non-corporate patents granted between 1980 and 2014. Figure A presents mean comparison for university vs. corporate
  publications by patent citation received per publication. Figure B, plots the cumulative distribution of patent citations received per
  publication, by corporate and university publications. Number of patent citations per publication is presented with a proximity value
  in the 99th percentile of the sample. Analysis is from Arora et al. (2017)



find that ML papers published by large firms are cited more often in patents than other ML papers:
large firms published 12 percent of the papers in KDD, AAAI, ICML, IJCAI, and NIPS between
2011 and 2018, but accounted for 32 percent of the papers that are cited by patents.
     Bikard (2015) finds corporate publications to be 23 percent more likely to be cited than university
publications one the same scientific discovery. We add wider correlational evidence in support of this
prediction by comparing the likelihood of a U.S. utility patent issued between 1980 and 2006 citing
a corporate scientific publication versus a university counterpart in its non-patent literature section.
Using a linear probability model, we estimate that corporate publications are on average 11 percent
more likely to be cited as a university publications. We control for the possibility that these results
are driven by lower-quality universities, “applied” journals, or industry level differences in scientific
quality, and find that the results hold. Panel (A) of figure 12 visualizes the citation likelihood
differences between these two groups, while panel (B) shows that corporate publications first order
stochastically dominate university publications in terms of the number of citations they receive from
patents.




                                                                 39
5.1.4   Large corporate labs may generate significant external benefits

Beside developing inventions that may not be created otherwise, large corporate labs have also
generated significant external benefits. One well-known example is provided by Xerox PARC. Xerox
PARC developed many fundamental inventions in PC hardware and software design, such as the
modern personal computer with graphical user interface. However, it did not significantly benefit
from these inventions, which were instead largely commercialized by other firms, most notably Apple
and Microsoft. While Xerox clearly failed to internalize fully the benefits from its immensely creative
lab (especially when the industries affected were unrelated to Xerox’s core business), it can hardly
be questioned that the social benefits were large, with the combined market capitalization of Apple
and Microsoft now exceeding 1.6 trillion dollars.
    Another potentially important class of external benefits generated by corporate labs is spin-off
activity. Klepper (2015) systematically documented the importance of spin-offs in the U.S. innovation
ecosystem. He found that in many high-tech industries, including the early automobile industry,
semiconductors and lasers, spin-offs were exceptional performers. Agrawal et al. (2014) also find a
large innovation premium in regions where numerous small patenting entities coexist with at least
one large patenting entity.
    A surprising implication of this analysis is that the mismanagement of leading firms and their
labs can sometimes be a blessing in disguise. The comparison between Fairchild and Texas Instru-
ments is instructive. Texas Instruments was much better managed than Fairchild but also spawned
far fewer spin-offs. Silicon Valley prospered as a technology hub, while the cluster of Dallas-Fort
Worth semiconductor companies near Texas Instruments, albeit important, is much less economi-
cally significant. Arguably, spin-off driven growth encouraged diversity and innovation far more than
the efforts of a well-run Fairchild could have. Similarly, attempts to centralize and direct innovation
activity may backfire. This was the case for Xerox’s spin-offs. As documented by Chesbrough (2002,
2003), the key problem there was not Xerox’s initial equity position in the spin-offs, but Xerox’s
practices in managing the spin-offs, which discouraged experimentation by forcing Xerox researchers
to look for applications close to Xerox’s existing businesses. Again, the coexistence between islands
of centralized control—the large corporate labs—and markets populated by a variety of start-ups



                                                    40
and spin-offs, seems most conducive to fast experimentation and growth.



6         The policy environment

In this section, we briefly discuss some effects of public policy on the American innovation ecosystem.


6.1        Antitrust

As noted in sections 2.2.2 and 3.2, one factor that historically motivated many large firms to estab-
lish or expand their labs was antitrust pressure. In the early and mid-twentieth century, concerns
about excessive concentration of economic and political power in the hands of dominant firms helped
constrain the ability of large firms to grow through mergers and acquisitions. During this period, if
large firms wanted to grow, they often had little choice but to invest in internal R&D.
         Antitrust policy not only encouraged large firms to invest in internal R&D, but also occasionally
promoted technology diffusion. A leading example is the 1956 consent decree against the Bell System,
one of the most significant antitrust rulings in U.S. history (Watzinger et al., 2017). The decree forced
Bell to license all its existing patents royalty-free to all American firms. Thus, in 1956, 7,820 patents
(or 1.3 percent of all unexpired U.S. patents) became freely available. Most of these patents covered
technologies that had been developed by Bell Labs, the research subsidiary of the Bell System.18
         Compulsory licensing substantially increased follow-on innovation building on Bell patents. Us-
ing patent citations, Watzinger et al. (2017) estimate an average increase in follow-on innovation of
14 percent. This effect was highly heterogeneous. In the telecommunications sector, where Bell kept
using exclusionary practices, there was no significant increase. However, outside of the telecommu-
nications sector, follow-on innovation blossomed (a 21 percent increase). The increase in follow-on
innovation was driven by young and small companies, and more than compensated Bell’s reduced
incentives to innovate. In an in-depth case study, Watzinger et al. demonstrate that the decree accel-
erated the diffusion of transistor technology, one of the most important technologies of the twentieth
century.
    18
     Moser and Voena (2012) also find that compulsory licensing spurs innovation. They examine compulsory licensing
after World War I under the Trading with the Enemy Act to identify the effects of compulsory licensing on domestic
(U.S.) invention. Their analysis of nearly 130,000 chemical inventions suggests that compulsory licensing increased
domestic invention by 20 percent.

                                                        41
       This view that the consent decree was decisive for U.S. post-World War II innovation, particularly
by spurring the creation of whole industries, is shared by many observers. As Gordon Moore, the co-
founder of Intel, notes: “[o]ne of the most important developments for the commercial semiconductor
industry (...) was the antitrust suit filed against [the Bell System] in 1949 (...) which allowed the
merchant semiconductor industry “to really get started” in the United States (...) [T]here is a direct
connection between the liberal licensing policies of Bell Labs and people such as Gordon Teal leaving
Bell Labs to start Texas Instruments and William Shockley doing the same thing to start, with the
support of Beckman Instruments, Shockley Semiconductor in Palo Alto. This (...) started the growth
of Silicon Valley” (Wessner (2001, p.86) as quoted in Watzinger et al. (2017)).
       Scholars such as Peter Grindley and David Teece concur: “[AT&T’s licensing policy shaped by
antitrust policy] remains one of the most unheralded contributions to economic development possibly
far exceeding the Marshall plan in terms of wealth generation it established abroad and in the United
States” (Grindley and Teece (1997) as quoted in Watzinger et al. (2017)).
       Starting from the 1980s, antitrust pressures abated and growth through acquisitions returned to
be a viable alternative to internal research. The incentives to invest in internal research correspond-
ingly declined. However, as giants such as Google, Facebook and Amazon continue to grow and amass
market power, political backlash and more intense antitrust scrutiny may return. Just like DuPont
and Bell in the twentieth century, these new economy giants may view research and its military
and/or geopolitical implications as an insurance policy against aggressive antitrust enforcement.


6.2       Bayh-Dole and university research

There are a slew of policy inducements to research, development and commercialization. Here, we
focus on one that relates to commercialization of university research: the Bayh-Dole Act. Dubbed
“[P]ossibly the most inspired piece of legislation to be enacted in America” by The Economist, the
Act was enacted by Congress in 1980 with the goal of facilitating the commercialization of university
science.19 The law eliminated U.S. Government claims to university-based innovation, giving U.S.
universities the rights to inventions that were federally funded. While we remain agnostic on the
extent of inspiration (or lack thereof) behind legislations enacted in America, it is unlikely that
  19
       https://www.economist.com/technology-quarterly/2002/12/12/innovations-golden-goose


                                                       42
Bayh-Dole will be sufficient to fill the gap left by the withdrawal of corporations from research.
     The evidence on whether altering the property rights associated with an invention encourages
the commercialization of university science is mixed. For instance, despite U.S. university patenting
rates being approximately five times larger in 1999 than in 1980, Mowery and Sampat (2004) find
no evidence that Bayh-Dole caused a structural break in the preexisting trend. Using a larger
dataset than previously available, Ouellette and Tutt (2019) reexamine the question of whether higher
inventor royalty shares lead to greater patent-related activity. They do not find that increasing the
inventor’s share of patent licensing revenue in official royalty-sharing policies causes academics to
patent more. They also examine moves between universities by the most active university patenters.
Based on 130 lateral moves for which they could calculate the expected share at both the old and
new institution at the time of the move, they reject the hypothesis that high-patenting academics
tend to move to schools with a higher expected share.
     In contrast, Hvide and Jones (2018) find that the allocation of property rights have an important
effect on innovation. They examine the end of the “professor’s privilege” in Norway. Upon imple-
menting the reform, Norway effectively moved from an environment where university researchers had
full ownership of their inventions (the “professor’s privilege”), to a system where inventors, just like in
the U.S. today, only hold a minority of the property rights (and the university holds the remainder).
The reform had the opposite effect as intended. The shift in rights from researcher to university
reduced both the quantity and the quality of inventions. It led to an approximately 50 percent drop
in the rate of start-ups by university researchers. Patent rates fell by broadly similar magnitudes.
University start-ups exhibited less growth and university patents received fewer citations after the
reform, compared to controls. Overall, the reform, by reducing researchers’ ownership stakes, appears
to have discouraged university innovation.
     Although Bayh-Dole may well have enhanced engagement in commercialization activity by uni-
versity researchers, the effect appears to have been small. Further, the proposed mechanism relies
heavily on startups and university spinoffs being responsible for developing university inventions,
relying upon private investors or venture capital for support. In so doing, not only is the rate of
technical advance affected, but also its direction.




                                                      43
6.3       Mission oriented agencies

Corporate labs play an important role in the U.S. innovation ecosystem because their research is
directed toward solving specific practical problems. This focus on the potential applicability of
research results, however, is not a unique feature of corporate labs.
       Mazzucato (2018, p.804) defines mission-oriented policies “as systemic public policies that draw
on frontier knowledge to attain specific goals.” These goals are advanced by agencies such as the
National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), and
the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E). Mission-oriented agencies have grown
to dominate public funding of science in the U.S. (Mowery, 1997; Sampat, 2012). For instance, in
2008 the NIH alone was responsible for funding nearly 30 percent of all U.S. medical research.
       Azoulay et al. (2019) discuss the distinguishing features of the “ARPA model” for research fund-
ing. First, it must be possible to organize the domain of research around a technology-related mission
or a set of overarching goals. The mission of DARPA, for instance, is “to make pivotal investments in
breakthrough technologies for national security.”20 Azoulay et al. (2019, p.88) note that “the ARPA
model is optimized for technical areas that reside in nascent S-curves — the technology exists, is
relatively unexplored, and has great potential for improvement.” ARPA-ble research is distinct from
basic research because it is mission-oriented, and also different from pure applied research because
its focus is not on incremental advances, but “transformational change.” ARPA-funded projects may
involve advancing the scientific frontier, but this is incidental to the main goal — to make significant
technological advancements.
       To achieve their goals, ARPA agencies collaborate with universities, government labs, and small
and large firms in the innovation ecosystem. DARPA funding has been instrumental in supporting
the growth of small technology firms, which were quick to recognize the importance of innovation
for their viability and tended to be more responsive to small grants than larger defence contractors
(Mazzucato, 2015). Military procurement more broadly played a key role in spurring spinoff and
startup activity in many science-based industries, such as semiconductors and lasers. In the 1960s,
DARPA even supported the creation of scientific and technological human capital by funding the
  20
       https://www.darpa.mil/about-us/mission



                                                   44
establishment of new computer science departments in various U.S. universities, such as Carnegie
Mellon. Also important, “DARPA officers engaged in business and technological brokering by linking
university researchers to entrepreneurs interested in starting a new firm; connecting start-up firms
with venture capitalists; finding a larger company to commercialize the technology; or assisting in
procuring a government contract to support the commercialization process” (Mazzucato, 2015, p.77).
Mazzucato concludes that, by taking advantage of this new ecosystem, “the government was able
to play a leading role in mobilizing innovation among big and small firms, and in university and
government laboratories” (Ibid., p.77).
     Evaluating the impact of mission-oriented agencies and their funding on technological change is
difficult. DARPA has been praised not just for the development of important military technologies
(e.g., precision weapons, stealth technology), but also for having contributed to fundamental civilian
innovations such as the Internet, automated voice recognition, language translation and Global Posi-
tioning System receivers. As argued earlier, the significant increase in federal funding for biomedical
research through the NIH, from $2.5 billion in 1980 to $29 billion in 2015, also likely contributed to
U.S. life science companies not withdrawing from scientific research, unlike firms in other sectors.21
     In an environment where large firms are withdrawing from internal research, it is likely that
the importance of mission-oriented agencies in supporting public and private research may grow
even further. Mazzucato (2018) and Azoulay et al. (2019) provide valuable insights on how mission-
oriented agencies should be staffed, organized and managed to produce maximum societal impact.



7     Conclusion

During the so-called Golden Age of American Capitalism, large corporate labs were important loci of
research, and important sources of scientific and technical advances. At the start of the period, the
university research sector was small (certainly compared to the current period) and uneven in quality.
Over time, university research grew, bolstered by significant support from the federal government.
   21
      Azoulay et al. (2018) find that NIH funding spurs the development of private-sector patents: an additional $10
million in NIH funding for a research area generates 2.7 additional private-sector patents. Fully half of the patents
resulting from NIH funding are for disease applications distinct from the one that funded the initial research. Using
estimates for the market value of patents taken from the literature they find that a $10 million increase in NIH funding
yields $30.2 million in firm market value. Using mean present discounted value of lifetime sales for new drugs, they
estimate that a $10 million increase in funding would generate between $23.4 and $187.4 million in sales.


                                                          45
This period also coincided with (and perhaps this was more than a coincidence) incumbent firms
enjoying significant market power but restrained by aggressive anti-trust actions.
    Despite the apparent successes, corporate research, and the large corporate labs in particular,
fell out of favor with investors, and eventually, also with managers. The focus shifted to university
research, and startups, often venture funded, that aimed to capitalize on the scientific and technical
advances in university labs. Corporations turned to sourcing ideas and inventions from the outside,
hoping to combine it with their downstream development and commercialization abilities.
    These hopes have not been fully realized, at least not yet. Even as this division of innovative
labor has progressed, so have the challenges it faces become more evident. University research is
different from corporate research: it is less likely to be mission-driven. Its smaller scale and greater
disciplinary focus mean that university research typically produces insights which then need further
development and integration to produce commercializable inventions. This requirement of converting
insight to product has proved more onerous and challenging than commonly appreciated.
    It seems unlikely that corporate research will rediscover its glory days. The boost in employment
of data scientists, machine learning experts, and even economists, in large firms would appear to
prognosticate a different future. We disagree. For some time, quick wins from low-hanging fruit
(such as optimizing auction or advertising formats) may cover up the problem, but the fundamental
challenge of managing long-run research inside a for-profit corporation remains a formidable one.
Put differently, although there are significant efficiency gains that companies have realized from
hiring data scientists and economists, there are only a handful of cases of significantly new markets
created from such efforts, and incumbent firms continue to rely on outside inventions to fuel their
growth. In the longer run, therefore, university research will remain the principal source of new
ideas for such inventions. And therefore the ongoing economic experiments of discovering efficient
ways to translate scientific insights in universities into technical advances that eventually manifest
in productivity growth will remain crucial to our future prosperity.




                                                  46
References
Agrawal, A., Cockburn, I., Galasso, A., and Oettl, A. (2014). Why are some regions more innovative
  than others? The role of small firms in the presence of large labs. Journal of Urban Economics,
  81:149–165.
Arora, A., Belenzon, S., and Patacconi, A. (2018). The decline of science in corporate R&D. Strategic
  Management Journal, 39(1):3–32.
Arora, A., Belenzon, S., and Sheer, L. (2017). Back to Basics: Why do Firms Invest in Research?
Arora, A., Cohen, W. M., and Walsh, J. P. (2016). The acquisition and commercialization of invention
  in American manufacturing: Incidence and impact. Research Policy, 45(6):1113–1128.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., and Gambardella, A. (2004). Markets for technology: The economics of
  innovation and corporate strategy. MIT press.
Arora, A. and Gambardella, A. (1994). The changing technology of technological change: general
  and abstract knowledge and the division of innovative labour. Research policy, 23(5):523–532.
Atkinson, R. C. and Blanpied, W. A. (2008). Research Universities: Core of the US science and
  technology system. Technology in Society, 30(1):30–48.
Azoulay, P. (2002). Do pharmaceutical sales respond to scientific evidence? Journal of Economics &
  Management Strategy, 11(4):551–594.
Azoulay, P., Fuchs, E., Goldstein, A. P., and Kearney, M. (2019). Funding breakthrough research:
  promises and challenges of the ARPA Model. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 19(1):69–96.
Azoulay, P., Graff Zivin, J. S., Li, D., and Sampat, B. N. (2018). Public R&D investments and
  private-sector patenting: evidence from NIH funding rules. The Review of Economic Studies,
  86(1):117–152.
Bhaskarabhatla, A. and Hegde, D. (2014). An organizational perspective on patenting and open
  innovation. Organization Science, 25(6):1744–1763.
Bikard, M. (2015). Peer-Based Knowledge Validation: A Hurdle to the Flow of Academic Science to
  Inventors. Available at SSRN, 2333413.
Birr, K. (1979). Industrial research laboratories. The Sciences in the American Context (Washington,
  DC, 1979).
Block, F. and Keller, M. R. (2009). Where do innovations come from? Transformations in the US
  economy, 19702006. Socio-Economic Review, 7(3):459–483.
Bloom, N., Jones, C. I., Van Reenen, J., and Webb, M. (2017). Are ideas getting harder to find?
  Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Boroush, M. (2017). National Patterns of R&D Resources: 201415 Data Update. Technical Report
  NSF 17-311, National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA.
Bromberg, J. L. (1991). The laser in America, 1950-1970. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, c1991.
Bruce, R. V. (1987). The launching of modern American science, 1846-1876. New York : Knopf :
  Distributed by Random House, 1987.
Bush, V. (1945). Science: The endless frontier. Transactions of the Kansas Academy of Science
  (1903-), 48(3):231–264.
Chesbrough, H. (2002). Graceful exits and missed opportunities: Xerox’s management of its tech-
  nology spin-off organizations. Business History Review, 76(4):803–837.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). The governance and performance of Xeroxs technology spin-off companies.
  Research Policy, 32(3):403–421.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., and Walsh, J. P. (2002). Links and impacts: the influence of public
  research on industrial R&D. Management science, 48(1):1–23.
Council, N. R. (1980). Industrial research laboratories of the United States, including consulting


                                                 47
  research laboratories. Washington, D.C. : National Research Council of the National Academy of
  Sciences.
Council, N. R. (1998). Industrial research laboratories of the United States, including consulting
  research laboratories. Washington, D.C. : National Research Council of the National Academy of
  Sciences.
Flamm, K. (1988). Creating the computer: government, industry, and high technology. Brookings
  Institution Press.
Furman, J. L. and MacGarvie, M. (2009). Academic collaboration and organizational innovation:
  the development of research capabilities in the US pharmaceutical industry, 19271946. Industrial
  and Corporate Change, 18(5):929–961.
Gambardella, A. (1995). Science and innovation: The US pharmaceutical industry during the 1980s.
  Cambridge University Press.
Geiger, R. L. (1986). To advance knowledge : the growth of American research universities, 1900-1940.
  New York : Oxford University Press, 1986.
Geiger, R. L. (1993). Research and relevant knowledge : American research universities since World
  War II. New York : Oxford University Press, 1993.
Geiger, R. L. (2004). Knowledge and money : research universities and the paradox of the
  marketplace. Stanford, Calif. : Stanford University Press, 2004.
Gertner, J. (2013). The idea factory : Bell Labs and the great age of American innovation. New
  York : Penguin Books, 2013.
Gomory, R. E. (1985). Research in industry. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society,
  129(1):26–29.
Gordon, R. J. (2016). The rise and fall of American growth : the U.S. standard of living since the
  Civil War. Princeton Economic History of the Western World. Princeton, [New Jersey] ; Oxford,
  [England] : Princeton University Press, 2016.
Graham, S. J., Marco, A. C., and Myers, A. F. (2018). Patent transactions in the marketplace:
  Lessons from the uspto patent assignment dataset. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy,
  27(3):343–371.
Grindley, P. C. and Teece, D. J. (1997). Managing intellectual capital: licensing and cross-licensing
  in semiconductors and electronics. California management review, 39(2):8–41.
Guellec, D. and de La Potterie, B. V. P. (2007). The economics of the European patent system: IP
  policy for innovation and competition. Oxford University Press on Demand.
Guenther, A., Kressel, H., and Krupke, W. (1991). Epiloge: The Laser Now and in the Future. In
  The Laser in America, 1950-1970, pages 228–248. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Hartmann, P. and Henkel, J. (2019). The Rise of Corporate Science in AI.
Hecht, J. (1992). Laser Pioneers. Academic Press Inc., San Diego, revised edition.
Henderson, R., Jaffe, A. B., and Trajtenberg, M. (1998). Universities as a source of commercial tech-
  nology: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 19651988. Review of Economics and statistics,
  80(1):119–127.
Hicks, D. (1995). Published papers, tacit competencies and corporate management of the pub-
  lic/private character of knowledge. Industrial and corporate change, 4(2):401–424.
Hiltzik, M. A. and others (1999). Dealers of lightning: Xerox PARC and the dawn of the computer
  age. HarperCollins Publishers.
Holbrook, D., Cohen, W. M., Hounshell, D. A., and Klepper, S. (2000). The nature, sources, and
  consequences of firm differences in the early history of the semiconductor industry. Strategic
  Management Journal, 21(1011):1017–1041.
Hounshell, D. and Smith, J. K. J. (1988). Science and corporate strategy : Du Pont R&D, 1902-1980.
  Cambridge [Cambridgeshire] ; New York : Cambridge University Press, 1988.

                                                 48
Hounshell, D. A. (1988). The Making of the Synthetic Fiber Industry in the United States.
Hvide, H. K. and Jones, B. F. (2018). University Innovation and the Professor’s Privilege. American
  Economic Review, 108(7):1860–98.
Jaffe, A. B. and Lerner, J. (2006). Innovation and its discontents. Innovation policy and the economy,
  6:27–65.
Kandel, E., Kosenko, K., Morck, R., and Yafeh, Y. (2018). The great pyramids of America: A
  revised history of US business groups, corporate ownership, and regulation, 1926-1950. Strategic
  Management Journal.
Kapoor, R. (2013). Persistence of integration in the face of specialization: How firms navigated the
  winds of disintegration and shaped the architecture of the semiconductor industry. Organization
  Science, 24(4):1195–1213.
Kevles (1979). Physics, Mathematics, and Chemistry Communities. In Oleson, A. and Voss, J.,
  editors, The Organization of knowledge in modern America, 1860-1920, pages 139–172. Johns
  Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Kevles, D. (1979). The physics, mathematics, and chemistry communities: A comparative analysis.
  In Oleson, A. and Voss, J., editors, The Organization of Knowledge in Modern America, 1860-1920,
  pages 139–172. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Klepper, S. (2015). Experimental capitalism: the nanoeconomics of American high-tech industries.
  Princeton University Press.
Kline, R. R. (1992). Steinmetz. Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kuznets, S. (1971). Nobel Prize Lecture: Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections.
  Nobelprize.org.
Lamoreaux, N. R. and Sokoloff, K. L. (1999). Inventors, firms, and the market for technology in
  the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In Learning by doing in markets, firms, and
  countries, pages 19–60. University of Chicago Press.
Le, Q. V., Ranzato, M., Monga, R., Devin, M., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S., Dean, J., and Ng, A. Y.
  (2011). Building high-level features using large scale unsupervised learning. arXiv:1112.6209 [cs].
  arXiv: 1112.6209.
Lecuona Torras, R. (2017). Adjust the mirror: The pioneering role of firms that develop products
  and general purpose technologies in introducing architectural innovations.
Lee, J. (2003). Innovation and strategic divergence: An empirical study of the US pharmaceutical
  industry from 1920 to 1960. Management Science, 49(2):143–159.
Lerner, J. (2000). Assessing the contribution of venture capital. the RAND Journal of Economics,
  31(4):674–692.
Maclaurin, W. R. (1953). The sequence from invention to innovation and its relation to economic
  growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp, pages 97–111.
Mahoney, T. (1959). The merchants of life: an account of the American pharmaceutical industry.
  Harper.
Malerba, F. (1985). The semiconductor business: The economics of rapid growth and decline. Univ
  of Wisconsin Press.
Markel, H. (2013). Patents, Profits, and the American People - The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980. New
  England Journal of Medicine, 369(9):792–794.
Marx, M. (2019). Patent Citations to Science. type: dataset.
Mazzucato, M. (2015). The entrepreneurial state : debunking public vs. private sector myths. New
  York, NY : PublicAffairs, [2015].
Mazzucato, M. (2018). Mission-oriented innovation policies: challenges and opportunities. Industrial
  and Corporate Change, 27(5):803–815.
Merrill, S. A. (2018). Righting the Research Imbalance. Technical report, The Center for Innovation

                                                 49
  Policy at Duke Law.
Moser, P. and Voena, A. (2012). Compulsory licensing: Evidence from the trading with the enemy
  act. American Economic Review, 102(1):396–427.
Mowery, D. (1997). The Bush report after 50 years: blueprint or relic? Science for the 21st
  century.Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.
Mowery, D. and Rosenberg, N. (1998). Paths of innovation : technological change in 20th-century
  America. Cambridge ; New York : Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Mowery, D. C. (2009). Plus ca change: Industrial R&D in the third industrial revolution. Industrial
  and corporate change, 18(1):1–50.
Mowery, D. C. and Rosenberg, N. (1991). Technology and the pursuit of economic growth. Cambridge
  University Press.
Mowery, D. C. and Rosenberg, N. (1993). The US national innovation system. In National innovation
  systems: A comparative analysis, pages 29–75. Oxford University Press.
Mowery, D. C. and Rosenberg, N. (1999). Paths of innovation: Technological change in 20th-century
  America. Cambridge University Press.
Mowery, D. C. and Sampat, B. N. (2004). The Bayh-Dole Act of 1980 and universityindustry
  technology transfer: a model for other OECD governments? The Journal of Technology Transfer,
  30(1-2):115–127.
Nelson, R. R. (1959). The simple economics of basic scientific research. Journal of political economy,
  67(3):297–306.
Odlyzko, A. (1995). The decline of unfettered research. Unpublished, University of Minnesota,
  http://www. dtc. umn. edu/˜ odlyzko/doc/decline. txt.
Ouellette, L. and Tutt, A. (2019). How Do Patent Incentives Affect University Researchers?
Pisano, G. P. (2006). Science business: The promise, the reality, and the future of biotech. Harvard
  Business Press.
Pisano, G. P. (2010). The evolution of science-based business: innovating how we innovate. Industrial
  and corporate change, 19(2):465–482.
Rao, A. and Scaruffi, P. (2013). A History of Silicon Valley: The Greatest Creation of Wealth in the
  History of the Planet, 1900-2013. Omniware group.
Reich, L. S. (1985). The making of American industrial research : science and business at GE and
  Bell, 1876-1926. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Cambridgeshire ; New York.
Robbins, C. A. (2009). Measuring payments for the supply and use of intellectual property. In
  International trade in services and intangibles in the era of globalization, pages 139–171. University
  of Chicago Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1994). Exploring the black box: Technology, economics, and history. Cambridge
  University Press.
Rowland, H. A. (1883). A plea for pure science. Science, 2(29):242–250.
Sampat, B. N. (2012). Mission-oriented biomedical research at the NIH. Research Policy, 41(10):1729–
  1741.
Schawlow, A. L. and Townes, C. H. (1958). Infrared and optical masers. Physical Review, 112(6):1940.
Serrano, C. J. (2010). The dynamics of the transfer and renewal of patents. The RAND Journal of
  Economics, 41(4):686–708.
Shils, E. (1979). The order of learning in the US: The Ascendancy of the University. In Oleson, A.
  and Voss, J., editors, The Organization of knowledge in modern America, 1860-1920, pages 19–50.
  Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Snyder, T. D. (1993). 120 years of American education: A statistical portrait. DIANE Publishing.
Stokes, D. E. (2011). Pasteur’s quadrant: Basic science and technological innovation. Brookings
  Institution Press.

                                                  50
Sun, C., Shrivastava, A., Singh, S., and Gupta, A. (2017). Revisiting unreasonable effectiveness of
  data in deep learning era. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
  pages 843–852.
Tether, B. S. (1998). Small and large firms: sources of unequal innovations? Research Policy,
  27(7):725–745.
Tilton, J. E. (1971). International diffusion of technology: The case of semiconductors, volume 4.
  Brookings Institution Press.
Usselman, S. (1999). Patents, engineering professionals, and the pipelines of innovation: the inter-
  nalization of technical discovery by nineteenth-century American railroads. In Learning by doing
  in markets, firms, and countries, pages 61–102. University of Chicago Press.
Vagelos, P. R. and Galambos, L. (2004). Medicine, science and Merck. Cambridge University Press.
Watzinger, M., Fackler, T. A., Nagler, M., and Schnitzer, M. (2017). How antitrust enforcement can
  spur innovation: Bell Labs and the 1956 Consent Decree.
Weart, S. R. (1979). The physics business in America, 19191940: A statistical reconnaissance. The
  sciences in the American context: New perspectives, pages 295–358.
Wessner, C. W. (2001). Capitalizing on new needs and new opportunities: Government-industry
  partnerships in biotechnology and information technologies. National Academy Press.
Wise, G. (1985). Willis R. Whitney, General Electric, and the origins of US industrial research.
  Columbia University Press.
Wu, Y., Schuster, M., Chen, Z., Le, Q. V., Norouzi, M., Macherey, W., Krikun, M., Cao, Y., Gao,
  Q., Macherey, K., and others (2016). Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the
  gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144.




                                                51
