NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE USE AND MISUSE OF INCOME DATA AND EXTREME POVERTY
IN THE UNITED STATES
Bruce D. Meyer
Derek Wu
Victoria R. Mooers
Carla Medalia
Working Paper 25907
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25907

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019
Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, the U.S. Social Security Administration, any
agency of the federal government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper
meets all of the U.S. Census Bureau's Disclosure Review Board (DRB) standards and has been
assigned DRB approval numbers CBDRB-FY18-324 and CBDRB-FY19-173. We are grateful for
comments from John Creamer, Liana Fox, David Johnson, Robert Moffitt, Laryssa Mykyta,
Austin Nichols, Trudi Renwick, Jonathan Rothbaum, Luke Shaefer, James Spletzer, Laura
Wheaton, Scott Winship, James Ziliak, and participants in seminars at the American Enterprise
Institute, Brookings Institution, NBER Public Economics group, PAA Annual Meeting, Society
of Government Economists, University of California, Berkeley, University of California, Irvine,
University of California, Santa Cruz, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, University
of Michigan, University of Wisconsin-Madison (Institute for Research on Poverty), and Yale
University (Conference in Honor of Joseph Altonji). We also appreciate the support of the Alfred
P. Sloan Foundation, the Russell Sage Foundation, the Charles Koch Foundation, and the SSA
through grant #5-RRC08098400-10 to the NBER as part of the SSA Retirement Research
Consortium.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Bruce D. Meyer, Derek Wu, Victoria R. Mooers, and Carla Medalia. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Use and Misuse of Income Data and Extreme Poverty in the United States
Bruce D. Meyer, Derek Wu, Victoria R. Mooers, and Carla Medalia
NBER Working Paper No. 25907
May 2019
JEL No. C42,C81,I32,I38
ABSTRACT
Recent research suggests that rates of extreme poverty, commonly defined as living on less than
$2/person/day, are high and rising in the United States. We re-examine the rate of extreme
poverty by linking 2011 data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation and Current
Population Survey, the sources of recent extreme poverty estimates, to administrative tax and
program data. Of the 3.6 million non-homeless households with survey-reported cash income
below $2/person/day, we find that more than 90% are not in extreme poverty once we include inkind transfers, replace survey reports of earnings and transfer receipt with administrative records,
and account for the ownership of substantial assets. More than half of all misclassified
households have incomes from the administrative data above the poverty line, and several of the
largest misclassified groups appear to be at least middle class based on measures of material wellbeing. In contrast, the households kept from extreme poverty by in-kind transfers appear to be
among the most materially deprived Americans. Nearly 80% of all misclassified households are
initially categorized as extreme poor due to errors or omissions in reports of cash income. Of the
households remaining in extreme poverty, 90% consist of a single individual. An implication of
the low recent extreme poverty rate is that it cannot be substantially higher now due to welfare
reform, as many commentators have claimed.
Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
Derek Wu
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
derekwu@uchicago.edu

Victoria R. Mooers
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
victoriamooers@uchicago.edu
Carla Medalia
U.S. Census Bureau
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
carla.medalia@census.gov

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25907

I. Introduction
There are reasons to be simultaneously concerned and skeptical about recent reports of high
and rising rates of extreme poverty in the United States. Several distinguished scholars have argued
that millions of Americans – many of them children – live on less than a few dollars per day. Other
researchers have reported high rates of “disconnected” people, defined as those with neither earnings
nor government benefits. Relying predominantly on survey reports of income, both groups claim
that these problems have been rising sharply over time. On the other hand, researchers have long
contended that survey reports in the tails of the income distribution have a disproportionate share of
errors. Some of these scholars have pointed to evidence of increased underreporting of income in
household surveys or conflicting evidence from consumption data. This paper addresses these
questions by bringing to bear a combination of previously under-utilized survey data and newly
linked administrative data. These data allow us to re-examine rates of extreme poverty and shed
light on other questions, including the targeting of in-kind transfers, the effects of welfare reform,
and the measurement of poverty.
Focusing on 2011 data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), we
show that more than 90% of the 3.6 million households with survey-reported cash income below
$2/person/day are misclassified. Our methodology first implements a series of adjustments using
only the survey data. We begin by reclassifying households as not in extreme poverty if they
received sufficiently high amounts of in-kind transfers including SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program), the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children
(WIC), and housing assistance. We then account for those who reported hours worked for pay but
underreported earnings (failing to report any earnings in the vast majority of cases) or who possessed
substantial assets. To further examine households not captured by the survey-only adjustments, we
replace survey reports of earnings, asset income, retirement distributions, Old-Age, Survivors, and
Disability Insurance (OASDI), Supplemental Security Income (SSI), SNAP, and housing assistance
with values from linked administrative tax and program data and also account for the Earned Income
Tax Credit (EITC).
In the end, our best estimate of the extreme poverty rate is 0.24% among households and
0.11% among individuals, with 90% of the remaining extreme poor households made up of single
individuals. We suspect the true extreme poverty rate is lower, given the evidence of survey
underreporting for many income sources – like unemployment insurance, Temporary Assistance for
1

Needy Families (TANF), workers’ compensation, veterans’ benefits, and informal earnings – for
which we have not been able to incorporate administrative data. Our results are robust to a number
of modifications.

For example, very few households with survey-reported incomes over

$2/person/day fall below $2/person/day after applying the administrative data and removing imputed
earnings. Excluding imputed hours from the corrections for underreported earnings also yields
trivial impacts. In addition, according to the administrative data alone, nearly 80% of the
misclassified households overall are initially categorized as extreme poor due to errors or omissions
in cash reports of earnings, asset income, retirement income, OASDI, SSI, or the EITC. As a result,
in-kind transfers play a secondary role. Replicating the analysis with the 2012 Current Population
Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS ASEC), we estimate that only 0.18% of
households and 0.13% of individuals are in extreme poverty for the 2011 calendar year. These
estimates from the two surveys are remarkably similar to rates that researchers have calculated using
consumption data, 1 suggesting that improved measures of income can reconcile past inconsistencies
between income and consumption measures of poverty.
One of this paper’s key methodological advances is the use of multiple sources of
administrative and survey data to validate the survey-only adjustments. As the survey-only
adjustments alone can account for 78% of the total decrease in extreme poverty that we calculate,
showing that they are confirmed by other sources makes the evidence compelling. For the groups
reclassified due to underreported earnings and substantial assets, we find that 72-93% of these
households have incomes from the administrative data above the extreme poverty threshold and 4765% have incomes above the poverty line, depending on the subgroup. Using detailed information
from SIPP topical modules, we find that these groups have material well-being levels (based on
measures of material hardship, appliance ownership, and housing quality) that are similar to the U.S.
average. They are also comparable to the average household on a host of other survey-reported
dimensions, such as years of education, health insurance coverage (especially private coverage), and
occupation.
Accordingly, the preponderance of evidence suggests that the households reclassified by
underreported earnings and substantial assets have survey incomes that are likely to be gross errors.
These results provide a potential explanation for the lack of a strong correlation found by several

1

See Chandy and Smith (2014) and Hall and Rector (2018).
2

studies between income poverty and material hardship.2 In contrast, the households reclassified due
to receipt of in-kind transfers appear to be significantly worse off than the official poor on multiple
dimensions of well-being, implying that these benefits are well targeted to the needy. These results
are consistent with past findings that individuals excluded from the poverty rolls under the Census
Bureau’s Supplemental Poverty Measure (which incorporates in-kind transfers into income and
raises some recipients above the poverty line) appear worse off, on average, than the official income
poor.3
It is important to keep in mind that our best estimate of the extreme poverty rate is not
necessarily a final estimate for the population. The SIPP excludes homeless individuals and
institutionalized populations (such as those living in nursing care facilities and prisons) from its
survey frame, meaning our estimates of extreme poverty are understated if substantial numbers of
the homeless and other institutionalized populations are in extreme poverty. We should emphasize,
however, that the literature reporting high rates of extreme poverty has relied on survey data that
exclude the homeless and institutionalized. If anything, these caveats further highlight the imperfect
ability of most survey data, when analyzed at face value, to identify the extreme poor.
While this paper demonstrates that the rate of extreme poverty in the United States is
substantially lower than what has been reported, we do not contend that there is little deprivation in
the United States. Rather, we argue that focusing on such low-income thresholds as $2/person/day
in the United States is likely to yield a group filled with more gross errors than households that are
truly impoverished. For instance, nearly 50% of the households classified as extreme poor based on
survey-reported cash have incomes above the poverty line in our administrative data sources (which
we know to be incomplete). Moreover, the households receiving means-tested in-kind transfers –
who appear to be among the most materially deprived Americans – are almost all not in extreme
poverty simply by virtue of the extreme poverty income thresholds being lower than benefit
amounts. Among the households that appear to be truly extreme poor, and therefore disconnected
from work or the safety net, the vast majority consist of a single childless individual. Contrasting
sharply with the focus in the literature on extreme poverty among households with children, this
finding is consequential from a policy perspective as eligibility for programs is often dependent on
household composition.
2
3

See, for example, Mayer and Jencks (1989), Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2011, 2012), and Short (2005).
See Meyer and Sullivan (2012) and Fox and Warren (2018).
3

While our main approach begins with households that are below $2/person/day in the survey
reports, as a robustness check we start from the full sample, combining the survey and administrative
data. In this alternative analysis, we rely on some of the survey reports in the case of earnings and
housing assistance. We do this because our source of administrative earnings data turns out to be
incomplete, missing categories of earnings and individuals without work authorization. The housing
data are incomplete as well, missing several million subsidized housing units that are not part of the
main programs administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). For all
other income sources, we simply replace the survey reports with the administrative records. The
results using this approach do not differ appreciably from our main results. We also confirm that our
main results hold at a cutoff of $4/person/day, for shorter and longer time intervals, and when
imputed values of hours or income components are set to zero.
More generally, this paper is one of the first from an unprecedented new project that
assembles and links survey and administrative data on income, program receipt, and closely related
information (Medalia, Meyer, O’Hara, and Wu 2019). The project’s goals include 1) improving
household surveys and statistically based tax administration and 2) better understanding poverty,
inequality, and the effects of government transfers. We initially focus on extreme poverty in this
paper because the results are so stark and they demonstrate the capacity of the linked data to change
our understanding of poverty. There is great value in linking survey and administrative data, even
relative to methods that attempt to formally adjust for misreporting within the survey. Two studies
have found that sophisticated adjustments like the Urban Institute’s Transfer Income Model (TRIM)
allocate SNAP and TANF benefits to those with very different survey incomes than true recipients,
likely biasing any poverty estimates.4
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 5 Section II reviews the literature on
extreme poverty and discusses why the rates using survey-reported cash income are so high. Section
III describes the survey and administrative data and the process used to link them. Section IV
discusses the methodology used to correct for errors in income reports. Section V describes the main
results from the SIPP, and Section VI describes results validating the survey-only corrections and
adjustments. Section VII replicates the analysis for the CPS and compares it to the SIPP, and
Section VIII presents the results of robustness checks and additional caveats. Section IX concludes.
4
5

See Shantz and Fox (2018) and Mittag (2019).
See Table 1 for a list of abbreviations used throughout the paper.
4

II. Literature
Past Claims of Extreme Poverty and Conflicting Evidence
In a series of papers and a best-selling book, Edin and Shaefer document the prevalence of
extreme poverty, which they define as having cash income less than $2/person/day. Using Wave 9
of the 2008 SIPP Panel, Shaefer and Edin (2013) find that 4.3% of all non-elderly households with
children (constituting 1.65 million households and 3.55 million children) lived in extreme poverty in
a given month in mid-2011.6 Using the 2012 CPS ASEC adjusted using the TRIM, Shaefer and
Edin (2017) contend that 1.3 million children (1.8% of all children) lived under $2/day based on
annual cash income during the 2011 calendar year. 7 Combining quantitative analyses with
ethnographic evidence on the day-to-day lives of the extreme poor, Edin and Shaefer (2015) further
shed light on the deprivation faced by such households. Concomitantly, Deaton (2018) uses survey
data from the CPS to assert that 5.3 million individuals in the United States lived under $4/day in
income after taxes and in-kind transfers during the 2015 calendar year. These striking numbers have
received a great deal of attention in the policymaking process and the press, 8 and they were featured
in a prominent United Nations report on the state of poverty in the United States (United Nations
2018).
A related literature has arisen around the plight of “disconnected” individuals and families,
who are defined as having little to no earnings and little or no government benefits (usually cash
welfare). Most of these studies focus on single mothers. Turner, Danziger, and Seefeldt (2006) use
survey data from the Women’s Employment Study and find that 9% of single mothers who received
cash welfare in February 1997 became disconnected for at least a quarter of the following 79 months
(following welfare reform in 1996). Using data from the SIPP and CPS, Blank and Kovak (2009)
find that more than 20% of single mothers who live below twice the official poverty line in the mid2000s have no annual earnings or welfare receipt. These high rates of disconnected single mothers
are echoed in Loprest (2011) and Loprest and Nichols (2011), who also utilize the SIPP.
We begin our empirical work by replicating these numbers.
Even though Shaefer and Edin examine reference year 2011 in both of their papers, the counts of children in extreme
poverty differ rather dramatically. We think this difference is due to a few reasons. First, the higher number using the
SIPP is based on the fourth reference month of a wave, rather than the monthly average in a wave. Second, as we
discuss in Section VII, the SIPP appears to have a non-trivial number of households with zero earnings but positive
reports of hours worked for pay – an inconsistency that does not appear in the CPS. Finally, the lower CPS number
relies on the Urban Institute’s TRIM micro-simulation model to adjust for underreporting of cash transfers in the survey.
8
For example, see https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2018/06/25/trump-team-rebukes-u-n-saying-itoverestimates-extreme-poverty-in-america-by-18-million-people/?utm_term=.1f7ba77d349a.
6
7

5

Importantly, a number of these studies argue that rates of extreme poverty and
disconnectedness have risen greatly over time in response to welfare reform. Shaefer and Edin
(2013) calculate that the number of households with children in extreme poverty grew by 159%
between 1996 and 2011. This rate of increase snowballs to 748% between 1995 and 2012 after
using TRIM to adjust for underreporting in the CPS, with Shaefer and Edin (2017) attributing the
growth entirely to cuts in cash welfare. Blank and Kovak (2009) also find that the rate of
disconnected single mothers nearly doubled between 1995 and 2005 using the CPS, and Loprest and
Nichols (2011) calculate a similar increase in the share of disconnected single mothers between 1996
and the 2004-2008 period.
At the same time, another literature provides evidence at odds with the results in Shaefer and
Edin (2013, 2017) and related papers on disconnectedness. Some studies improve the measurement
of income by including in-kind transfers and attempting to adjust for survey underreporting.
Winship (2016) re-examines rates of extreme poverty by applying a number of adjustments to
reported cash income in the CPS, which include incorporating in-kind transfers (non-medical and
medical benefits are separated), taxes and tax credits, and a less biased price index (the Personal
Consumption Expenditures (PCE) deflator) than the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers
(CPI-U).9 Winship also uses TRIM3 to correct for underreporting of various transfers and divides
household income by an equivalence scale to better account for resource sharing. Winship finds that
the adjusted rates of extreme poverty have fallen since welfare reform to approximately 0.1% among
all children and closer to 0.01% among children of single mothers in 2012. Using also the CPS,
Brady and Parolin (2018) calculate that 0.40% of individuals lived in households with incomes less
than $2/person/day in 2015, after accounting for taxes and transfers (including SNAP), correcting for
underreporting of TANF and SSI with TRIM, and accounting for household size. Parolin and Brady
(2018) employ a similar methodology (but additionally adjust for SNAP underreporting using
TRIM) to find that 0.08% of children lived in households with incomes less than $2/person/day in
2015.
Rather than relying on survey-reported cash income to measure extreme and deep poverty,
other studies focus on measures of consumption or hardship. In an early paper, Mayer and Jencks
(1989) find that 43% of a sample of Chicagoans surveyed in the mid-1980s with incomes below the
Both the Federal Reserve’s Federal Open Market Committee and the Congressional Budget Office use the PCE
Deflator rather than the CPI-U to calculate inflation, because the former suffers less from a series of biases that plague
the latter (Congressional Budget Office 2012, Bullard 2013).
9

6

official poverty line reported expenditures on food, housing, and medical care that exceeded their
incomes. For disadvantaged single mothers at the 10 th percentile in the 1990s, Meyer and Sullivan
(2003) also find that expenditures exceeded income by 47% and 24% in the Consumer Expenditure
(CE) and Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) surveys, respectively. In subsequent papers,
Meyer and Sullivan (2004, 2008, 2012) find that low percentiles of consumption rose in the period
following welfare reform and that deep consumption poverty has fallen sharply over time.
Additional papers in recent years have used the CE Survey to calculate decidedly low rates of
consumption-based extreme poverty (spending less than $2 or $4/person/day) or deep poverty
(spending less than half the official poverty line). Chandy and Smith (2014) find that only 0.07% of
the U.S. population spent less than $2/person/day in the fourth quarter of 2011. Hall and Rector
(2018) examine all households interviewed in the CE survey since 1980 and similarly find that
0.08% of the U.S. population spent less than $4/person/day. They also calculate an expenditurebased deep poverty rate of 0.5% in 2017, which is considerably lower than the official income-based
deep poverty rate of more than 6% in 2017. Much like the results in Meyer and Sullivan (2012), Hall
and Rector find that deep consumption poverty fell sharply from a rate of roughly 2% in the mid1980s, with this fall being especially precipitous for single parents after welfare reform.
Why are Extreme Poverty Rates from Survey-Reported Cash Income So High?
There are several major reasons why the literature has found such high rates of extreme
poverty when relying on survey reports of pre-tax cash income. First, these calculations ignore inkind transfers and tax credits. The majority of means-tested transfer dollars are in-kind, and a broad
range of authors has argued that non-medical in-kind benefits should be counted as income (see, for
example, Ellwood and Summers, 1985; Citro and Michael, 1995; Blank, 2008). In particular, SNAP
and WIC benefits can be plausibly treated as cash payments, since benefit amounts usually fall
below the pre-receipt food expenditures of recipient families (Hoynes and Schanzenbach, 2009; BenShalom et al. 2012). The gross rents that are used to calculate housing assistance amounts have also
been found to be close to market rents and thus similar to the valuation that private renters put on the
units (Olsen 2018). Several studies have even argued that the per-dollar value of benefits from
transfer programs may exceed cash earnings, as transfers play an important role in insuring earnings
shocks (Blundell, Pistaferri, and Preston 2008; Blundell 2014; Deshpande 2016).

7

Given that the nature of the safety net in the U.S. has changed dramatically, it is important to
account for in-kind transfers and tax credits when comparing outcomes over time. While cash
welfare (Aid to Families with Dependent Children or AFDC, which became TANF) payments fell by
two-thirds between 1996 and 2011, SNAP payments more than doubled and EITC benefits increased
by approximately half during the same time period, both transferring more new dollars than were cut
from TANF (Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan 2015). Other in-kind transfers like public and subsidized
housing followed a similar upward spending trajectory over time. 10 Consequently, focusing on
changes in poverty rates based solely on pre-tax cash income is anachronistic. These concerns, in
large part, motivated the reports that led the U.S. Census Bureau to start calculating the
Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) in 2011, which takes into account many of the non-cash
programs and tax credits not included in the official poverty measure. To their credit, Shaefer and
Edin (2013) find that SNAP, tax credits, and housing subsidies together cut the pre-tax cash extreme
poverty rate for households with children by 63% in 2011. But researchers and policymakers
continue to highlight estimates that exclude these – and other – important government programs.
Another reason for high extreme poverty rates in the literature is that studies almost
universally rely on survey income with substantial errors even after editing, despite many studies
demonstrating significant holes in the income data that arise from survey underreporting. For
example, Meyer and Mittag (2015) find that 63% of Public Assistance recipients in the CPS and
44% in the SIPP in New York do not report receipt, while 43% of SNAP recipients in the CPS and
19% in the SIPP do not report receipt. Bee and Mitchell (2017) find that 46% of pension income
recipients do not report receipt in the CPS.
While the CPS has often been found to suffer from more pronounced underreporting than the
SIPP, the latter is not immune to errors. Meyer and Wu (2018) find that, among single parent
families, the poverty reduction effects of SSI, OASDI, and Public Assistance from the SIPP are each
less than 44% of what the administrative data indicate.11 For all families, the SIPP yields effects on
near poverty of SNAP and Public Assistance that are two-thirds and one-half, respectively, what the
administrative data generate (Meyer and Wu 2018). These holes in the SIPP income data have also
grown over time. Since 2000, there has been a 7 percentage point increase in the share of dollars
missed by the SIPP for TANF, unemployment insurance, and workers’ compensation (Meyer, Mok,
See https://www.cbpp.org/research/housing/national-and-state-housing-fact-sheets-data.
Meyer and Wu (2018) take the administrative data to be truth, though the administrative data are likely incomplete.
For example, administrative tax data may miss individuals who do not file tax returns or whose employers fail to file.
10
11

8

and Sullivan 2015). The share of SIPP dollars that are imputed has also doubled since 1990, and
errors in reporting amounts for SSI and OASDI rose sharply between the 1996 and 2008 SIPP panels
(Gathright and Crabb 2014).
These errors in survey-reported income are likely most pronounced at the very bottom of the
reported income distribution. Many studies have suspected or found errors in income reports at the
tails of the distribution (Lillard, Smith, and Welch 1986; Blank and Schoeni 2003; Bollinger, Hirsch,
Hokayem, and Ziliak 2018).

Especially in the left tail, research has shown that reported

expenditures are often a multiple of reported incomes. This pattern has been found not only in U.S.
survey data (see Meyer and Sullivan 2004, 2008; Hall and Rector 2018), but in Canadian and British
survey data as well. Brzozowski and Crossley (2011) use data from the Canadian Survey of
Household Spending and the Family Expenditure Survey to show that total expenditures exceed
disposable income by approximately a multiple of five in the bottom decile of the income
distribution. Brewer, Etheridge, and O’Dea (2017) use data from the United Kingdom Living Costs
and Food Survey and find that households in the bottom 1% of the income distribution (who live on
less than £75/week) report a median expenditure level of £400/week, equivalent to the population
median! The authors find that median expenditures are actually decreasing in income for households
living on less than £110/week. They are best able to explain this puzzle by underreporting of income
rather than over-reporting of expenditures or consumption smoothing over time.

III. Data
This section describes the detailed sources of survey and administrative data we use in this
paper. The section also explains how we link these data and the advantages of using the combined
data over survey or administrative sources alone.
Survey Data
Our survey data primarily come from the 2008 Survey of Income and Program Participation
(SIPP). In Section VIII, we also describe results using the Current Population Survey Annual Social
and Economic Supplement (CPS). Each panel of the SIPP lasts several years, and individuals and
households are followed longitudinally within each panel. Specifically, each respondent is
interviewed every four months as part of an interview “wave”. In each wave, the SIPP collects
information about the income and government transfers received during the four months since the
9

last interview wave.

Nearly all of these income sources are reported at the month level.

Accompanying these income data is detailed information on demographics, assets and liabilities,
material well-being, and health status (among other items). Many of these characteristics are
available in the SIPP topical modules. These sets of questions on a specific subject differ across
interview waves and are asked on top of the core questions.
To begin from a known starting point in the literature, we focus on Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP
Panel, whose reference months span January 2011 to July 2011. 12 This sample includes the
observations used by Shaefer and Edin (2013). We also link topical modules from Wave 9 and other
waves that include questions on material hardships and housing quality (Wave 9), assets and
liabilities (Waves 7 and 10), and disability status (Wave 6). The proximity of Wave 9 to Waves 6, 7,
and 10 presents another advantage of focusing on Wave 9 in our analysis. This proximity aids the
comparability of the time periods and reduces sample attrition from wave to wave. An additional
benefit of examining Wave 9 is that it spans a single reference year, unlike many other waves. This
choice makes linkage to tax records, which are at the annual level, more convenient.
The SIPP sample is intended to be representative of the civilian non-institutional resident
population of the United States, excluding individuals living in institutions and military barracks.
We use households – rather than families, as official poverty estimates do – as our units of analysis
for two main reasons. First, many of the questions in the SIPP (such as equity values for specific
assets and material hardship) are asked at the household level. Second, individuals who are
particularly destitute may rely on the additional resources of those outside their immediate families.
If so, the household may be the more natural unit for analyzing the circumstances of the extreme
poor. In practice, the distinction is not especially important as 92% of all households and 94% of
reported extreme poor households have one family (see Appendix Table A.1).
Administrative Data
Our administrative records are derived from a number of sources, which we broadly classify
into two categories: tax records from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and Social Security
Administration (SSA), and program receipt records from various state and federal agencies. Table 2
The interview wave spans 7 calendar months because of the staggered nature of the interviews. Respondents are
divided into four groups, each of which has a different starting month in the wave. For example, one set of respondents
in Wave 9 has reference months spanning January-April 2011. The other three sets of respondents each have reference
months spanning February-May 2011, March-June 2011, and April-July 2011.
12

10

describes for each income component the source of the administrative data, the income unit, the
disbursement frequency, and the number of states covered.
Tax Records
Earnings data covering wage and salary jobs and self-employment are available from the
Detailed Earnings Record (DER) database of the SSA. The DER itself is derived from IRS W-2
Forms (for wage and salary jobs) and Schedule SE of IRS 1040 Forms (for self-employment). The
DER includes wage and salary earnings that are below the 1040 filings requirement, though it misses
other sources of earnings that we note later. We also have data on various forms of asset income
from IRS 1040 Forms, including taxable dividends and taxable and tax-exempt interest. Data on
retirement distributions come from IRS 1099-R Forms, which cover gross distributions from
employer-sponsored plans (defined benefit and defined contribution plans) and IRA withdrawals.
Finally, we calculate eligible EITC amounts based on filing status, earned income, and qualifying
dependents in the prior year’s IRS 1040 Forms.
As Table 2 indicates, the tax data contain universe records spanning the entire United States.
These data are at the level of the tax unit, which consists of a single individual or married couple
filing together with any eligible dependents. Note that the tax unit is conceptually distinct from a
household, even if the two units are equivalent for most people. Furthermore, we convert annual
data from the administrative tax records to monthly amounts by dividing the total amounts by twelve
and distributing them evenly across all months in the calendar year.
Program Participation Records
Administrative records for Social Security (OASDI) come from the SSA’s Payment History
Update System (PHUS) file, with our preferred measure of total benefits including any amounts that
are deducted for medical insurance premiums. Data on Supplemental Security Income (SSI) come
from the SSA’s Supplemental Security Record (SSR) file and include all federally-administered
payments that are initially split into federal payments and federally-administered state payments.
OASDI and SSI benefits are paid to individuals on a monthly basis. For housing assistance, our
administrative data come from the Public and Indian Housing Information Center (PIC) and Tenant
Rental Assistance Certification System (TRACS) files. These data cover almost all public and
subsidized housing assistance programs under the jurisdiction of HUD. We calculate the benefit
11

amount for a household as the difference between the gross rent and actual tenant payment. 13
However, the records miss large housing programs such as those under the Department of
Agriculture, which serve over a quarter million households (Scally and Lipsetz 2017), and those
requiring landlords to charge below-market rents, which cover more than two million units (Scally et
al. 2018). Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) records come directly from various
state agencies, and we have records for eleven states in 2011. Housing assistance and SNAP
benefits are recorded and disbursed to households on a monthly basis.
Linking Survey and Administrative Data
We link the administrative data to the SIPP using Protected Identification Keys (PIKs)
created by the U.S. Census Bureau’s Person Identification Validation System (PVS) (Wagner and
Layne 2014). Over 99% of most administrative records are associated with a PIK, and nearly 97%
of households in Wave 9 of the SIPP contain at least one member associated with a PIK. To account
for the likely small bias arising from non-random missing PIKs, we divide the household survey
weights by the predicted probability that at least one member of the household has a PIK, conditional
on observed characteristics in the survey (see Wooldridge 2007). This approach keeps the sample as
comprehensive as possible at the expense of understating the income from administrative sources for
household members who cannot be linked. The appendix provides a full discussion of the inverse
probability weighting adjustment. We have also conducted bounding exercises using the surveybased extreme poverty rates of unlinked households, which are sufficiently close to the rates for
linked households that the loss of 3% of the sample has a trivial impact. We link all benefit dollars
from an administrative SNAP or housing case to a survey household as long as there is a common
individual between each unit. For the EITC and asset income, we link only to individuals in survey
households who are primary and secondary filers in the tax data.14

Because the administrative data do not include gross rent amounts for public housing units (which constitute less than
a quarter of all households in the administrative data), we impute the market rent for these units based on the average
rent by five-digit zip code, household size, and year. If rent is still missing, we impute by three-digit zip code, household
size, and year – and subsequently by five-digit zip code and year and by three-digit zip code and year if needed. We
consider a household to be receiving subsidized housing for the twelve months since the most recent certification date as
long as the period is prior to any termination date.
14
If an administrative case links to multiple survey households, we distribute benefit dollars from the administrative case
proportionally to the number of individuals linked to each household.
13

12

IV. Methods
To begin, we define our baseline measure of extreme poverty (based on survey reports of
cash income) and explain the decisions involved in constructing this measure. We then describe
how we can improve on this reported measure using only the survey data. These adjustments
involve incorporating non-medical in-kind transfers, undertaking conservative corrections for errors
in reported earnings, and accounting for substantial assets. Next, we illustrate how bringing in the
administrative data further improves the measurement of extreme poverty beyond what is possible in
the survey. Lastly, we validate each of the survey-only adjustments by examining the administrative
incomes and survey-reported material hardships, housing circumstances, and demographics of the
groups removed from extreme poverty by the adjustments. Through confirming that those
characterized as not extreme poor are well-off according to other indicators, the resulting measure
reflects multiple dimensions of material well-being. As a check on our results, we examine the
prevalence of those who are not in extreme poverty according to the survey but are reclassified as
extreme poor after substituting in the administrative data. This group turns out to be miniscule.
Defining Extreme Poverty and Sample Construction
A number of different definitions of extreme poverty or “disconnectedness” have been used
in the literature. As discussed in Section II, one of the most well-known standards considers a
household to be in extreme poverty if the household’s income is less than or equal to $2 per-person,
per-day. Various papers use slightly different cutoffs or differ in what is included in income and the
period over which income is measured, though most report results for multiple definitions.15 We
start from pre-tax money income, which includes earnings, asset and retirement income, cash
transfers, and other money income that a household may receive. 16 This definition – which the
Census Bureau’s official poverty measure uses to calculate income – ignores in-kind transfers such
as SNAP and tax credits like the EITC, though the SPM includes them. These sources of income
have grown in importance over the last two decades. Subsequently, we show the degree to which a

Deaton (2018) uses a cutoff of $4 in income after taxes and in-kind transfers per-person, per-day. Blank and Kovak
(2009), in their study use three alternative definitions of disconnected single mother families: those with 1) no earnings
or welfare receipt over an entire year, 2) less than $2000 in earnings and $1000 in cash welfare, or 3) the income in (2)
plus annual SSI income less than $1000. United Nations (2018) relies on Deaton.
16
“Other money income” can include sources like child support, income assistance from charitable groups, and money
from friends or relatives.
15

13

measure of extreme poverty based on this cash income definition (hereafter referred to as “reported
extreme poor”) holds up after various corrections and adjustments.
In this paper, we consider a household to be in extreme poverty if its average monthly
income over the reference months in a wave is less than $2/person/day. 17 Empirically, we observe
considerable overlap between observations with reported cash income below $2/person/day and who
are “disconnected” based on various definitions from Blank and Kovak (2009), suggesting that our
results likely generalize to analyses of disconnectedness.18 Furthermore, we define extreme poverty
at the wave level, though the results are very similar at the month level. 19 There are several reasons
to analyze extreme poverty at the wave level. First, a wave provides a more comparable time period
than a month to use when linking with annual tax records. Second, to keep our results comparable to
measures in other surveys such as the CPS, we want to use a single retrospective interview rather
than the multiple interviews needed to construct calendar quarters or years.20
While previous analyses have focused on households with children (see Shaefer and Edin
2013, 2017), we study all households and investigate how the prevalence of extreme poverty differs
across five mutually exclusive and exhaustive household types: households headed by someone aged
65 or older (elderly) and four non-elderly household types (single parent, multiple parents, single
individual, and multiple adults without children).21 This disaggregation is informative given that
eligibility for transfer programs is often dependent on household type (e.g., being elderly, having
children).
Corrections and Adjustments Using Survey and Administrative Data
We now describe the corrections and adjustments made using survey and administrative data
to improve upon the reported extreme poverty rate. Our preferred specification implements the
In Section VIII, we also present results using a threshold of $4/person/day.
Suppose we define being “disconnected” as having less than $166.67 in monthly earnings, $83.33 in cash welfare, and
$83.33 in SSI income, which corresponds to one of the definitions in Blank and Kovak (2009) when the annual
thresholds are converted to monthly values. Then, among single mother-headed households (the focus of the literature on
disconnectedness), 86% with reported cash incomes below $2/person/day are disconnected while 42% that are
disconnected have reported cash incomes below $2/person/day. See Appendix Table A.21 for estimates corresponding to
alternative definitions of disconnectedness.
19
See Appendix Table A.6 for the month-level results and Table 3a for the wave-level results.
20
Starting with the 2014 Panel, the SIPP underwent a redesign where – among other changes – interviews are now
conducted annually rather than every four months. However, the accuracy of the redesigned SIPP remains in question
(National Academies of Sciences 2018).
21
As we note in the appendix, there are some very rare cases where we classify individuals under 18 as adults – e.g., a
17-year-old single mother living on her own with her children.
17
18

14

survey-only adjustments before bringing in the administrative data, since this anchors our results to a
literature that has relied only on survey data and allows many of our results to be replicated using
publicly available data. We also present results using alternative orders to our adjustments, such as
bringing in the administrative data first.
Survey Data
Here, we describe the corrections and adjustments made using only survey data to improve
upon the reported extreme poverty rate. We first incorporate the following in-kind transfers: SNAP,
WIC, and housing assistance. Following the methodology in Shaefer and Edin (2013) to account for
in-kind transfers, we reclassify a household as not extreme poor if 1) its total cash income plus
survey-reported values of SNAP and WIC benefits exceeds $2/person/day or 2) it receives any form
of housing assistance. 22
Among those still in extreme poverty after incorporating in-kind transfers, we calculate
lower-bound earnings based on survey reports of hours worked for pay, under the assumption that
workers earn at least the federal minimum wage ($7.25/hour). We then remove households from
extreme poverty if the earnings resulting from this correction for missing dollars exceed
$2/person/day. 23 We first identify the households removed by lower-bound earnings using only
reported wage and salary hours. Subsequently, we identify households removed by lower-bound
earnings for reported hours worked in self-employment jobs as well. One might worry that this
algorithm applies less well to off-the-books and/or self-employment jobs where the federal minimum
wage does not apply. As a robustness check, we apply half the federal minimum wage to hours
worked for pay, which leaves our final result unchanged. The vast majority of individuals removed
by these corrections report a full set of employment characteristics but zero earnings, and they work
in occupations typically paid above the minimum wage. This finding suggests that the zero earnings,
The assumption behind including housing assistance in this way is that the monetary value of public or subsidized
housing is worth at least $2/day per person. For this not to be true, the assistance amount for a two-person household
would have to be less than $120/month, which seems implausible. As a robustness check, we impute average housing
assistance amounts from the administrative data based on county, household size, and year (and county and year if still
missing) and designate a household as being lifted out of extreme poverty if its total cash income + survey-reported
SNAP and WIC benefits + imputed housing assistance amount exceeds $2/person/day. The results are identical.
23
Alternatively, we could add all other (non-earnings) survey-reported income to these lower-bound earnings and
compare the resulting amount to $2/person/day. We choose to use our more conservative correction because the extreme
poverty threshold is so low and, as is, very few hours are required to remove a household from extreme poverty. For
example, a single person needs to work only 9 hours in a month to earn above $2/day. In practice, whether or not we
choose to add other survey-reported income to minimum wage earnings changes the results by only a few hundredths of
a percentage point.
22

15

rather than the positive hours worked (most of which are not imputed), are anomalous and thus
recorded incorrectly.24 The appendix provides a thorough discussion of how we calculate these
lower-bound earnings and the occupations associated with households removed by these corrections.
Our last survey-only adjustment accounts for households holding substantial assets. Among
those still left in extreme poverty after incorporating in-kind transfers and lower-bound earnings, we
consider a household to not be in extreme poverty if its reported real estate equity exceeds $25,000,
liquid assets exceed $5,000, or total net worth exceeds $50,000.25 We include the restriction that
households must have positive total assets to be reclassified by this adjustment. We obtain asset
amounts from the topical modules to Waves 7 and 10 of the SIPP. While we acknowledge that
assets are not part of cash or in-kind income, it seems inappropriate to consider households with
sizeable assets that could be drawn upon to be in extreme poverty. We later show that the
preponderance of these households would be removed by the administrative data corrections, but we
feel it is important to show what can be done with the survey data alone. 26 It should be noted that
the SPM accounts for assets in its thresholds, and the Haig-Simons definition of income – along with
authoritative sources on poverty measurement like Ruggles (1990) and Citro and Michael (1995) –
explicitly recognizes that not accounting for assets is problematic. Asset tests are also part of the
eligibility requirements for most means-tested programs, and Ruggles (1990) states that a primary
reason for not accounting for assets in poverty measurement is simply that most surveys do not ask
about assets (p. 149).

Census Bureau employees indicated that editing choices that should probably be changed are responsible for at least a
substantial share of these cases. Among all individuals aged 15 or above with zero earnings and positive wage/salary
hours worked in Wave 9, 69.7% report an hourly wage, 95.4% of all hourly wage reports are above the federal minimum
wage, and 99.6% of all hourly wage reports are above half the federal minimum wage (per the public use data). This
implies that our minimum wage assumption is sensible and – if anything – an underestimate. We further verify that the
vast majority of households removed by these corrections have incomes above $2/person/day from the administrative
records, and they resemble the average household in the U.S. on various measures of reported well-being.
25
Real estate equity includes home equity and equity in any other real estate, including mobile homes. Liquid assets
include checking accounts, savings accounts, money market accounts, bonds, securities, mutual funds, debt or margin
accounts, certificates of deposits, and stocks. Total net worth equals total assets (liquid assets, retirement accounts, real
estate equity, vehicle equity, business equity, and the value of other financial investments - i.e., “equity in other assets”)
minus secured and unsecured debt.
26
In the end, the adjustment for substantial assets increases our final extreme poverty rate by only 0.13 percentage
points. This is because 0.46% of households are removed from extreme poverty by the assets adjustment (Table 3a), and
28.2% of these households have incomes below $2/person/day in the administrative data (Figure 3). Multiplying these
numbers results in 0.13% of all households that are removed from extreme poverty by the assets adjustment (our final
survey-only adjustment before bringing in the administrative data) but not the administrative data.
24

16

Administrative Data
Given the underreporting of many types of income such as government transfers and private
pensions, we bring in administrative data to further refine the extreme poverty rate. Among those
still in extreme poverty after all survey-only adjustments, we consider households to not be extreme
poor if their incomes exceed $2/person/day after replacing survey reports with administrative
measures for various income sources. The administrative data can help account for false negatives
among recipients of transfer programs and gross errors in reported amounts, among other survey
errors.

We first replace survey reports of earnings, interest and dividends, and retirement

distributions with values from administrative tax records.27 We then add EITC amounts calculated
from tax records. 28 We hereafter refer to these income sources collectively as “tax data income”.
Next, we replace survey reports of OASDI, SSI, housing assistance, and SNAP with values
from administrative program records.29 We hereafter refer to these income sources collectively as
“transfer income”. We are able to directly incorporate OASDI, SSI, and housing assistance for all
states, while we use administrative SNAP records for 11 states (covering 29% of the population) to
estimate the effect of the administrative SNAP data for all states. Specifically, we calculate our final
estimate of the extreme poverty rate by multiplying the rate after accounting for the survey-only
adjustments, the administrative tax data, and the administrative non-SNAP transfer data (calculated
over all 50 states) by the fraction of such households in the 11 states remaining in extreme poverty
after bringing in the administrative SNAP data. By taking this approach, we need only assume that
these 11 states are representative of the entire country in the marginal impact of the administrative
SNAP data, which is weaker than assuming they are representative in the level of extreme poverty.
However, Appendix Table A.8 shows these 11 states are indeed similar to the rest of the country on
Since survey reports may cover earnings from off-the-books and non-standard jobs that are not reported to the IRS (see
Abraham, Haltiwanger, Sandusky, and Spletzer 2013, 2017), it may instead be justified to take the maximum of survey
and administrative reports of earnings. By simply replacing survey reports of earnings with administrative tax earnings,
we run the risk of trivially overstating the extreme poverty rate. In practice, it does not matter for this analysis whether
or not we take the maximum of survey and administrative values. Since the survey values must lie below $2/person/day
at the stage when we bring in the administrative data, there is effectively no difference between taking just 1) the
administrative earnings values and 2) the maximum of the administrative earnings values and minuscule survey values
(the vast majority of which are zero).
28
We use eligible EITC amounts calculated based on the administrative tax data rather than actual amounts. While this
will overstate the true amount of the EITC disbursed, the upward bias associated with eligible EITC amounts is likely
substantially smaller than the downward bias in survey-based imputations of EITC amounts. We find that the actual
EITC dollars disbursed (from publicly available IRS totals) are 90% of the total eligible dollars that we calculate. In
contrast, aggregate EITC dollars imputed in the CPS understate disbursements by approximately 30% (Meyer 2017).
29
For SSI, we only have administrative data on federally-administered benefits, even though states can separately
administer benefits themselves. Thus, our preferred measure of total SSI benefit amounts sums administrative values for
federally-administered SSI and survey values for state-administered SSI.
27

17

a number of demographic and economic characteristics. 30 As we show in the next section, whether
or not we include the administrative SNAP data at all makes very little difference for our final
results.
Validating the Survey-Only Adjustments
We recognize that our adjustments using only the survey data are imperfect. For example,
some earnings, such as those from self-employment or off-the-books, are not subject to minimum
wage legislation. Moreover, the survey reports of hours worked and assets may themselves be
misreported. Consequently, we thoroughly validate the appropriateness of each survey-only
adjustment using information from the administrative data and detailed measures of well-being from
the SIPP topical modules. Poverty definitions should be examined to see how they accord with other
indicators of disadvantage, but – in practice – measures are typically chosen for other reasons
without such validation. 31 First, for each subgroup of the reported extreme poor removed by a
survey-only adjustment, we directly calculate the share of households with incomes above
$2/person/day after replacing survey values with the available administrative data values for various
income sources. To investigate the extent of gross errors, we also calculate the share of households
in each subgroup with incomes above half the poverty line (the deep poverty cutoff), the poverty
line, and twice the poverty line based on the administrative data. 32
As a second check on the validity of the survey-only adjustments, we compare the groups
removed from extreme poverty to the official poor and all households based on survey-reported
measures of hardship and housing quality.33 Conveniently, these measures of material well-being
are collected from the same interview wave (Wave 9) as the income measures. For material
hardships, we examine survey answers (yes/no) to nine separate questions on a range of hardships,
including not being able to pay all essential expenses, rent, mortgage, or an energy bill, having
energy or telephone service disconnected, being evicted, inability to see a doctor or dentist, and a
lack of food.

We also examine ownership of the following eight appliances: microwaves,

Households in the SNAP states have extreme, deep, and official poverty rates (measured based on cash income) that
are insignificantly different from the rates in the full sample. Fewer households in the SNAP states receive OASDI and
SSI, and more receive SNAP, Public Assistance, and housing assistance than those in the full sample, though only the
differences for SSI, SNAP, and housing assistance are statistically significant at the 5% level.
31
Exceptions include Mayer and Jencks (1989) and Meyer and Sullivan (2003, 2011, 2012).
32
For a single non-elderly individual, the average monthly poverty line in Wave 9 corresponds to $32.15/person/day.
33
For the analyses on survey-reported well-being and demographics, we use the full survey sample and original survey
weights (as opposed to the PIKed sample and adjusted survey weights).
30

18

dishwashers, air conditioners, color televisions, computers, in-unit washers, in-unit dryers, and cell
phones.34 We further investigate whether a household faces any of seven housing quality issues,
including problems with pests, a leaking roof, broken windows, exposed wires, plumbing problems,
and cracks or holes in the walls, ceiling, or floors. An advantage of examining material hardships
and housing problems is that these measures may be more indicative of deprivation, while an
advantage of examining appliances is that they can be easily and objectively measured. The
appendix provides a more detailed description of the specific hardship and material well-being
variables used. Finally, we assess additional demographic and economic characteristics reported in
the SIPP – such as student status, educational attainment, health insurance coverage, and asset
ownership – to obtain an even better picture of each group removed from extreme poverty.

V. Main Results
Extreme Poverty After Adjustments
Table 3a displays the share of households that are left in extreme poverty after successively
incorporating each adjustment.35 The first column starts with survey-reported cash income and finds
that 2.97% of all households report having less than $2/person/day of cash income. 36 However,
nearly a third of these households are reclassified as not extreme poor by survey-reported in-kind
transfers, with the extreme poverty rate for households falling to 2.04%. Nearly 95% of the impact
of survey-reported in-kind transfers is attributable to survey-reported SNAP (see Appendix Table
A.5). Correcting for errors in reported earnings based only on reported wage and salary hours
worked for pay decreases the extreme poverty rate for households to 1.83%. Further accounting for
reported self-employment hours worked decreases the extreme poverty rate for households to 1.30%.
All told, correcting for errors in reported earnings removes an additional 36% of households from
extreme poverty. Accounting for substantial assets again reduces the extreme poverty rate by over a
third, leaving us with 0.84% of households remaining in extreme poverty.

We exclude certain appliances (refrigerators, freezers, stoves, and regular telephones) that we think households are
likely to own regardless of their material circumstances, precisely in an effort to capture those appliances that are most
strongly indicative of well-being.
35
Standard errors are calculated using replicate weights corresponding to Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP.
36
The reported extreme poverty rate of 2.97% calculated using the PIKed subsample and adjusted survey weights is
nearly identical to the reported extreme poverty rate of 3% calculated using the entire sample and original survey
weights. See Appendix Tables A.2, A.3, and A.4 for versions of Tables 3a, 3b, and 6 using the public-use SIPP data.
34

19

While adjustments using only the survey data eliminate most of extreme poverty, the
administrative tax and program data provide additional information. Applying the administrative
earnings data alone removes an additional 50% of those remaining in extreme poverty and cuts the
extreme poverty rate to 0.42%. Incorporating the administrative data on asset and retirement income
decreases the extreme poverty rate to 0.35%, and adding the EITC further reduces the rate to 0.31%.
Bringing in administrative data on OASDI and SSI lowers the extreme poverty rate to 0.27%, which
decreases insignificantly to 0.24% after bringing in the administrative housing assistance and SNAP
data.37 Of the additional households removed from extreme poverty by the administrative data, 67%
have incomes above half the poverty line and 55% have incomes above the poverty line. 38 This
finding suggests that there are still non-trivial gross errors in the extreme poverty rate after the
survey-only adjustments. Together, the adjustments reduce extreme poverty by 92% from a reported
rate of 2.97%, with more than three-quarters of the total reduction due to corrections and adjustments
using the survey data alone.
We observe a similar pattern for individuals, with in-kind transfers cutting the extreme
poverty rate the most and each of the other adjustments also removing a sizable portion of
individuals out of extreme poverty. When looking at only reported cash income, we find that 2.60%
of individuals live on less than $2/day. After accounting in the survey for in-kind transfers, reported
hours worked, and substantial assets, the extreme poverty rate falls by more than three-quarters to
0.57%. Bringing in the administrative tax and transfer data further reduces the extreme poverty rate
to 0.11%. The extreme poverty rates for individuals are lower than those for households because
extreme poor households tend to have fewer members.
Extreme Poverty by Household Type
We now analyze how extreme poverty differs by household type. Shaefer and Edin focus on
two of the five household types (those with children), while the “disconnected families” literature
focuses on single parent households. We first consider elderly households, who tend to have a

Standard errors at the final step (bringing in administrative SNAP values) are calculated using the delta method.
These numbers are calculated from Figure 3. Among the remaining extreme poor (after survey-only adjustments), 71%
and 47.9% have incomes above the extreme and deep poverty lines, respectively. Because those with incomes above the
deep poverty line are a subset of those with incomes above the extreme poverty line, we can calculate that 67% (49.1%
divided by 72.3%) of those above the extreme poverty line are also above the deep poverty line. A similar logic follows
for the poverty line.
37
38

20

significantly lower extreme poverty rate than other household types. 39 The elderly begin with a
reported extreme poverty rate of 0.47%, less than one-sixth the rate for all households (Figure 3a,
Column 2). After incorporating each of the survey-only adjustments, 0.11% of elderly households
remain in extreme poverty. Bringing in the administrative tax and non-SNAP transfer data removes
nearly 90% of the remaining households from extreme poverty. Perhaps not surprisingly for these
elderly households, the role of the administrative data is driven entirely by improved measures for
three income sources: retirement distributions, OASDI, and SSI (Table 4, Column 2). The final
estimate of the elderly extreme poverty rate is 0.01% (insignificantly different from zero) prior to
bringing in administrative SNAP records, and it becomes zero after incorporating SNAP.
We next consider single parent households (Table 3a, Column 3), whose reported extreme
poverty rate of 8.99% is more than three times and statistically significantly above the rate for all
households.40 However, about two-thirds of single parent households are reclassified as not extreme
poor by survey-reported in-kind transfers. The extreme poverty rate for single parent households
then declines to 1.97% and 1.35% after correcting for underreported earnings and accounting for
substantial assets in the survey, respectively. After bringing in the administrative tax data, the
extreme poverty rate for single parents falls to 0.1%, which is insignificantly different from zero.
Most of this reduction is due to administrative earnings and the EITC (calculated from prior year
earnings). After including the administrative SNAP data, no single parent households remain in
extreme poverty. Among single parent households in the remaining extreme poor after the surveyonly corrections, 75% have positive earnings from the tax records and 69% receive at least one
transfer – usually SNAP or the EITC – per the administrative data (Table 4, Column 3).
Unlike single parent households, multiple parent households start with a reported extreme
poverty rate of 2.04% that is significantly below that of all households (Table 3a, Column 4). Inkind transfers noticeably decrease their extreme poverty rate by 43%, and the subsequent
adjustments for reported hours worked and assets bring down their extreme poverty rate to 0.27%.
Like single parents, multiple parent households have an estimated extreme poverty rate of zero after
incorporating the administrative data. This impact of the administrative data is driven again by the

The only exception to this rule is that the elderly do not have a significantly lower extreme poverty rate than
multiple parent households after the self-employment correction.
40
See Appendix Table A.7 for the results of two-sample t-tests comparing the extreme poverty rate for every household
type to all other household types, before and after every adjustment.
39

21

role of earnings and transfers, with more than 70% of the remaining extreme poor after survey-only
adjustments having positive earnings and 79% receiving a transfer (Table 4, Column 4).
Households containing a single non-elderly individual have a reported extreme poverty rate
of 6.85%, which – while lower than that of single parent households – is still 2.3 times and
statistically significantly higher than that of all households (Table 3a, Column 5). Single individuals
are not nearly as impacted by the adjustments and therefore have the highest extreme poverty rate of
any household type after every adjustment. We are left with 2.86% of single individual households
in extreme poverty after the survey-only adjustments, which is almost as high as the overall reported
extreme poverty rate. Bringing in the administrative data also has a smaller effect on single
individuals, removing just 61% of single individuals remaining in extreme poverty after the surveyonly adjustments. This relatively smaller reduction is due to several factors. First, single individuals
appear to be particularly disconnected from the safety net, with only 31% of the remaining extreme
poor after the survey-only corrections receiving at least one transfer. 41 Second, the majority of these
remaining extreme poor single individuals do not have earnings (Table 4, Column 5). We are
therefore left with a final extreme poverty rate of 1.12% for non-aged single individuals.
Multiple childless adult households have a reported extreme poverty rate (1.90%) not far
from that of multiple parent households (Table 3a, Column 6). The survey adjustments for in-kind
transfers, reported hours worked, and substantial assets together decrease their extreme poverty rate
by more than three-quarters to 0.44%. After adding in administrative tax and transfer data, the
extreme poverty rate for multiple adults becomes 0.07%. Among the remaining extreme poor after
survey-only adjustments, multiple adults have far more earnings than single individuals (Table 4,
Column 6) and have a high in-kind transfer receipt rate. Consequently, 85% of multiple adult
households among the remaining extreme poor after survey-only adjustments are removed by the
administrative data (compared to only 61% of single individuals).
In summary, the combined survey and administrative data indicate that extreme poverty is
extremely rare for the elderly, families with children, and multiple adult households, as we cannot
reject for each household type the null hypothesis that its final extreme poverty rate is equal to zero
at the 1% significance level (though we can reject the null at the 5% level for multiple parents and
multiple adults). Single individuals, of whom 252,000 population-weighted individuals are extreme
Tests of differences across household types are often indecisive when restricted to the smaller set of states with SNAP
data. Focusing on transfers besides SNAP and those remaining in extreme poverty after the survey corrections, single
individuals have a significantly lower receipt rate than all other household types except multiple adult households.
41

22

poor after all adjustments, constitute the only household type whose final extreme poverty rate is
statistically significantly different from zero at the 1% significance level.
Distribution of Household Types
Not only do the errors in the income data exaggerate the level of extreme poverty, but they
also lead to a distorted image of the type of households likely to be at the very bottom. Among the
reported extreme poor, single individuals make up the largest share at nearly 44% (Figure 1a).
Households with children form the next largest shares, with single and multiple parent households
together making up about 36% of the reported cash income extreme poor (about 18% each).
Multiple adult households also make up about 17% of the reported extreme poor, while elderly
households contribute only a little over 3%. However, as we add each adjustment, single individual
households constitute an increasingly larger share. After the survey-only adjustments, they
constitute 65% of the remaining extreme poor households. Once we incorporate the administrative
tax and non-SNAP transfer data, single individuals make up more than 83% of all extreme poor
households, with this share rising to nearly 92% after bringing in the administrative SNAP data.
While single individuals constitute a disproportionate share of the households in extreme
poverty, we may also want to consider the composition of extreme poverty in terms of the share of
individuals living in extreme poor households (Figure 1b). When analyzing extreme poverty at the
individual level, we find that only about 19% of the reported extreme poor are single individuals,
while 59% are members of households with children (about 23% single parent and 36% multiple
parent). Multiple adults make up another 19%, and the elderly contribute 2.7%. Nonetheless, we
see with each adjustment the same, albeit less dramatic, pattern that we saw with households, as
single individuals make up an ever-larger share of extreme poor individuals. Specifically, single
individuals make up 37% of the remaining extreme poor individuals after the survey-only
adjustments, and they make up almost 81% of extreme poor individuals after all adjustments.
Corrections and Adjustments Using Only the Administrative Data
Figure 2 illustrates the results of an alternative order to the adjustments that incorporates the
administrative data first. We can see that 55.1% of households among the reported extreme poor
have incomes above $2/person/day from the administrative earnings records alone. Bringing in the
other administrative sources of money income shows that a full 73% of reported extreme poor
23

households are misclassified due simply to errors in cash reports of earnings, asset income,
retirement distributions, OASDI, and SSI and the omission of the EITC. When we add in
administrative sources of in-kind transfers (housing assistance and SNAP), 83.1% have incomes
above the extreme poverty threshold. This implies that the administrative data alone can decrease
the extreme poverty rate from a reported cash base of 2.97% to 0.50%. The adjustments using only
the survey data then take the extreme poverty rate down by an additional 0.26 percentage points to
0.24%. Thus, when incorporated first, the administrative data can account for 90% of the change in
extreme poverty due to all adjustments.
Furthermore, nearly half of all reported extreme poor households have incomes above the
poverty line and over a fifth have incomes above twice the poverty line. This finding makes it clear
that there is a vast amount of error associated with classifying households as extreme poor based
solely on their survey-reported cash income. We can also show from Figure 2 that 79% of all
misclassified households are initially categorized as extreme poor due to direct errors in cash reports
of tax data income, OASDI, and SSI and the omission of the EITC.42 This share must be a lower
bound for those misclassified due to all errors in cash income, because the DER (our source of
administrative data) misses the income of low-paid household workers and undocumented
immigrants, as well as other income such as tips not reported to an employer. The DER will also
miss off-the-books income. Consequently, in-kind transfers play a secondary role relative to errors
in cash reports in explaining the high reported extreme poverty rate.

VI. Validation of Survey-Only Adjustments
We now describe the results obtained from validating each of the survey-only adjustments
through comparisons to administrative income data and survey reports of material well-being and
selected demographics. Throughout this subsection, the “remaining extreme poor” subgroup refers to
households that are left in extreme poverty after the survey-only adjustments.

To calculate this share, note that 92% of all reported cash extreme poor households are misclassified (since the
adjustments decrease the rate from a base of 2.97% to 0.24%). We also know from Figure 4 that 73% of reported
extreme poor households are misclassified due to errors in cash reports of tax data income, OASDI, and SSI and the
omission of the EITC. Because these households are a subset of all misclassified households, we divide 73% by 92% to
obtain the share of all misclassified households initially among the reported cash extreme poor due to errors or omissions
in cash reports.
42

24

Administrative Income Data
We first examine the share of households in each extreme poor subgroup with income above
$2/person/day (and other thresholds) according to the administrative data (see Figure 3). While the
administrative data are our most accurate source for many income components, they still have
important gaps. We lack administrative data on TANF, unemployment insurance, workers’
compensation, VA benefits, the child tax credit, and other income sources. In two of the key
domains (earnings and housing benefits) where we do have administrative data, the sources are
incomplete. The gaps in the DER are mentioned above, while the PIC/TRACS data miss housing
assistance benefits paid out by non-HUD programs. Yet, we are able to confirm the vast majority of
our corrections and adjustments with these incomplete data.
First, for the households reclassified as not extreme poor by survey-reported in-kind
transfers, over 99% have incomes above $2/person/day according to the administrative tax and
transfer data. As expected, the administrative transfer data play a relatively large role for this
subgroup, with nearly a third of its households removed from extreme poverty by administrative
transfers after accounting for income from the administrative tax records. The tiny percentage of
households not raised above $2/person/day by the administrative data may be due to incomplete
administrative data, incomplete linkage, or survey false positives. The correction for reported wage
and salary hours is similarly robust, with 93% of the households removed by this correction having
incomes from the administrative data confirmed above the extreme poverty threshold.
Convincingly, 89% of these households are removed from extreme poverty by the administrative
earnings alone. This subgroup also appears to have substantial gross errors, with 65% of households
having incomes above the poverty line and 45% having incomes above twice the poverty line.
There is slightly less confirmation of the corrections for reported self-employment hours and
substantial assets. Among the households removed due to reported self-employment hours, 70%
have incomes above $2/person/day based on administrative earnings alone and 78% have incomes
above the threshold using all administrative tax and transfer data. While these shares are still large,
they are smaller than those for the groups reclassified by in-kind transfers and wage and salary
hours. This discrepancy could be due in part to the underreporting of self-employment earnings on
tax returns (Internal Revenue Service 2016). The error is unlikely to result from the assumption of
minimum wage earnings being too high of a lower bound for self-employment earnings, given the
relatively high-earning self-employment occupations and industries reported for this group
25

(Appendix Tables A.15 and A.17) and the similarity of the results using half the minimum wage
(Table 7). Among the households removed from extreme poverty due to substantial assets, 67% are
not extreme poor based on the administrative tax data and 72% are not extreme poor based on the
administrative tax and transfer records. However, note once again the high fraction of gross errors in
this subgroup, with 47% of households having incomes above the poverty line and 27% above twice
the poverty line.
We therefore find strong evidence that these survey-only adjustments are by and large
confirmed by the administrative data. The adjustments for in-kind transfers and reported wage and
salary hours are particularly robust, with nearly all reclassified households having incomes above
$2/person/day in the administrative data. The adjustments for reported self-employment hours and
substantial assets are less strongly validated by the administrative data, but it is important to
remember that our administrative data do not completely cover all income sources and do not cover
assets at all.
Survey-Reported Material Well-Being
To assess the material well-being of the potentially misclassified reported extreme poor
households, we make use of detailed questions available in the SIPP topical modules. These
questions on material hardships, housing problems, and appliances owned allow us to perform yet
another test of the validity of our survey-only adjustments. Figure 4 displays the mean number of
material hardships experienced by households among the reported extreme poor and the groups
removed by each adjustment. The dotted line shows the mean for all official poor households, while
the dashed line shows the mean for all households. Figure 5 shows the share of households with at
least one hardship, while Figure 6 shows housing problems and Figure 7 appliance ownership. 43
Looking first at the number of hardships, which ranges from 0 to 9, a clear pattern appears.
The reported extreme poor experience 1.22 hardships on average. This count is slightly below but
insignificantly different from the number of material hardships, 1.29, experienced by official poor
households.44 Assuming that the truly extreme poor should experience more hardships than the
In Appendix Table A.11, we also report for all extreme poor and subgroups the percent with each of these hardships,
appliances, or problems, as well as the percent of households with at least one hardship, appliance, or problem (and for
material hardships, the percent of households with five or more material hardships). See Appendix Figures A.1-A.4 for a
breakdown of these patterns by household type.
44
See Appendix Table A.9 for the results of two-sample t-tests comparing the well-being measures for every extreme
poor subgroup with those of official poor and all households.
43

26

official poor, this finding suggests that there could be substantial classification error in the reported
extreme poor. Indeed, we see that sharp differences between subgroups of the reported extreme poor
add up to the overall result. Most of the subgroups do not experience hardships at a level
commensurate with extreme poverty, although one of the subgroups does.
Focusing first on the subgroup that appears especially disadvantaged, households that are
removed from extreme poverty by in-kind transfers experience on average of 1.98 hardships, 53%
more hardships than official poor households (with this gap being statistically significant).
Recipients of in-kind transfers are clearly among the worst-off non-institutionalized Americans,
which importantly suggests that these transfer programs are well-targeted. On the other hand, the
groups removed from extreme poverty by wage and salary hours, self-employment hours, and
substantial assets experience about the same number of hardships as a typical household in the U.S.
Specifically, those removed by wage and salary hours have 0.53 hardships, 13% fewer than the
average of 0.61 over all households, while those removed by self-employment hours and substantial
assets have 0.67 and 0.65 hardships, only 10% and 7% more, respectively, than the average
household. For none of these subgroups is the difference in mean hardships from all households
statistically significant. Thus, rather than being extreme poor or even poor, these households appear
to be close to average or better. The remaining extreme poor after the survey-only corrections
average 1.21 hardships, which is insignificantly different from the average number of hardships
experienced by the official poor. This last result suggests that some substantial errors still remain,
which is not surprising since the remaining group includes those households that are not in extreme
poverty when incorporating the administrative data. Similar patterns emerge when we analyze the
share of households reporting least one hardship (Figure 5) or having five or more hardships
(Appendix Table A.11).
Examining housing quality issues and appliance ownership reveals patterns that are similar
but often less dramatic than those for material hardships. The reported extreme poor have on
average 0.36 housing quality problems and 5.98 appliances, which is insignificantly different from
the 0.40 housing problems and 5.91 appliances of the official poor. These two comparisons again
suggest that there are problems with the designation of extreme poverty in the raw reported data.
Those households reclassified as not extreme poor due to in-kind transfers have a very high rate of
housing problems, 0.43 on average (though this is insignificantly different from the official poor),

27

and they own 5.49 appliances, significantly fewer than the official poor. Again, these gaps
demonstrate the good targeting of in-kind transfers.
On the other hand, the households removed from extreme poverty due to reported hours
worked or substantial assets have a mean number of housing problems closer to the overall average.
Households removed by wage and salary hours worked and by substantial assets have on average
0.28 and 0.30 problems respectively, which is in between (and insignificantly different from) the
average level for all households and the official poor. Those removed by self-employment hours
have on average 0.23 problems, significantly lower than those of the official poor and insignificantly
different from those of all households. The households removed by self-employment hours also own
6.90 appliances on average, a high level compared to the other subgroups,45 and the households
removed by wage and salary hours and substantial assets have 6.64 and 6.73 appliances,
respectively, or 4% and 2% fewer than all households. For none of these subgroups is the difference
from all households in mean appliances statistically significant. Finally, the remaining extreme poor
again are insignificantly different from the official poor on the mean number of housing problems,
but they own statistically significantly fewer appliances (almost 10% less) than the official poor.
In Appendix Table A.12, we also test whether the differences in material well-being between
the groups removed from extreme poverty by the survey-only adjustments remain after controlling
for demographic covariates. To do so, we regress an indicator of well-being (mean number of
hardships, appliances, or housing problems) on a dummy for whether a household is poor based on
pre-tax cash income, separate dummies for whether a household is removed from extreme poverty
by a given adjustment, and covariates for the age of the household head and the number of children
and adults in the household. Even after the inclusion of covariates, we find that the households
removed from extreme poverty by in-kind transfers continue to be significantly worse off than poor
households while those removed by the earnings and asset adjustments have hardships
insignificantly different from the average non-poor household.
In sum, while some of the indicators of well-being may be imperfect on their own, we
observe the same pattern across every measure – that the households removed from extreme poverty
by in-kind transfers are materially worse off than the official poor, while the households removed

This number is statistically significantly higher at the 1% level than that of households removed by in-kind
transfers and the remaining extreme poor after survey corrections, but it is not significantly different than that of
households removed by wage/salary hours or assets.
45

28

from extreme poverty by the earnings and assets adjustments have a level of material well-being
similar to the average over U.S. households.
Survey-Reported Demographics
To provide a clearer picture of the households among the reported extreme poor and each of
its subgroups, we report their demographic characteristics in Table 5. First, note that 12.0% of the
reported extreme poor are full-time students, significantly higher than the 7.2% of official poor
households and 2.6% of all households. We disaggregate this number across subgroups and find that
the remaining extreme poor have a high rate of student status, with full-time students heading 18.1%
of its households. Student status could proxy for access to other sources of financial support for
which we do not account, such as financial aid (cash or in-kind), unreported assistance from parents,
and student loans. Indeed, more than half of student-headed households among the remaining
extreme poor report receiving educational assistance not included in cash income.46
The patterns in educational attainment across each of the extreme poor subgroups also reflect
the patterns observed for material well-being. The heads of reported extreme poor households have
an average of 12.9 years of education, which is roughly midway between the average of 12.2 for the
official poor and the overall average of 13.6. Households that are considered to not be extreme poor
due to in-kind transfers have an average of 12.0 years of education, the lowest of any group and
significantly lower than the levels for the official poor and all households. The households removed
by self-employment hours and substantial assets have even more education than the average for all
households, but the differences are statistically insignificant. Those removed by wage and salary
hours have 13.0 years of education and the remaining extreme poor have 12.8 years of education,
both roughly midway between the levels for the official poor and all households.
We observe similar patterns in reported health insurance coverage. The subgroup reclassified
as not extreme poor by in-kind transfers has the highest rate of Medicaid coverage at 49.9%, 1.5
times the rate of official poor households. 47 Conversely, those households removed by reported
hours or substantial assets have very high rates of private insurance coverage, with near or above
50% of these households covered. While these private coverage rates are not as high as that of all
Our survey-reported measure of cash income includes GI bill education benefits, but none of our survey or
administrative income sources includes other measures of educational assistance. See p. 3-7 of the SIPP Users’ Guide:
https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/sipp/guidance/SIPP_2008_USERS_Guide_Chapter3.pdf
47
Note that our time period is before the Affordable Care Act broadened Medicaid eligibility.
46

29

households at 69.73%, they are significantly higher than the 25.7% rate of official poor households.
The households remaining in extreme poverty after the survey-only corrections have the lowest rate
of health insurance coverage, but over a quarter of their heads still have some form of health
insurance coverage (mostly private insurance).
Table 5 also examines ownership rates of several assets, including homes, vehicles, and
liquid assets. The households reclassified as not extreme poor by in-kind transfers and those
remaining in extreme poverty have very low asset ownership rates. In contrast, those households
removed by wage and salary earnings have similar asset ownership rates to the official poor, while
the households removed by self-employment earnings own assets at rates similar to the average for
all households. Among the households considered to not be extreme poor after accounting for
substantial assets, more than 63% have total net worth exceeding $100,000 and 31% have total net
worth over $250,000.48 Appendix Table A.13 provides an expanded version of Table 5 and looks at
a broader set of demographic and economic characteristics for these subgroups.

VII. Comparison to Current Population Survey Results
While we focus on the SIPP in this paper, we are also interested in examining whether our
results generalize to the CPS ASEC (hereafter referred to as the CPS). In addition to serving as the
official source of poverty and income statistics in the United States, the CPS is one of the most
widely used surveys. Because the CPS collects a sparser set of information on income and wellbeing than the SIPP, we can only incompletely replicate our analysis.
Data & Methods
We use the 2012 CPS, which interviewed 74,383 households in March 2012 about their
annual incomes in the previous calendar year. Thus, the reference period for the CPS includes the
seven months that comprise Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP. Our sample consists of households that have
at least one member with a PIK and no members that are whole imputes, with survey weights
adjusted to account for missing PIKs and the presence of whole imputes (see the appendix for more
information). We employ a set of adjustments similar to those used for the SIPP but proceed in a
slightly different order, allowing us to better compare the estimates of extreme poverty in the two
surveys. We start with households living on less than $2/person/day over the course of 2011
48

There are even a handful of households in this subgroup with net worth in the millions (i.e., extremely gross errors).
30

according to their survey-reported cash income. We first correct for underreported earnings based
on reported hours worked. We multiply a household’s annual hours worked (as reported in the
survey) by the federal minimum wage and remove households from extreme poverty if these lowerbound earnings are above the extreme poverty threshold. This is done separately for wage and salary
hours and for total hours worked (which include self-employment hours).
Next, we incorporate in-kind transfers by reclassifying a household as not extreme poor if 1)
its total cash income plus survey-reported SNAP benefits exceeds $2/person/day or 2) it receives
housing subsidies. 49 We do not include WIC payments because WIC amounts are not reported in the
CPS. We subsequently account for substantial assets in the CPS in a slightly different manner than
in the SIPP. The CPS does not contain as detailed information as the SIPP on the specific amounts
of various types of assets, but it does ask about home value and whether or not a household has a
mortgage. We therefore remove a household from extreme poverty if it has no mortgage and a home
value greater than $25,000, or if a household has a mortgage and a home value greater than
$100,000. Finally, we remove a household from extreme poverty if its annual income from cash and
in-kind transfers from the administrative data exceeds $2/person/day. The reference period of the
CPS actually aligns better than the SIPP with the administrative tax records because both are for the
calendar year. We follow these alternative methods in this Section for both the SIPP and the CPS to
allow a close comparison.
Results
Table 6 reports the extreme poverty rate after each adjustment in the CPS and compares it to
the rate after the same aligned adjustment in the SIPP. The reported extreme poverty rate in the CPS
of 2.08% (Column 1) is statistically significantly less than the corresponding rate of 2.97% in the
SIPP (Column 2). Correcting for underreported wage and salary earnings reduces the gap in the
estimates between surveys, with the extreme poverty rate declining by 0.29 percentage points to
2.68% in the SIPP and falling slightly by 0.03 percentage points to 2.05% in the CPS. Correcting for
underreported self-employment earnings remarkably closes this gap, with the extreme poverty rate
dropping to 2.07% in the SIPP and remaining almost unchanged at 2.03% in the CPS. We are
unable to reject the null hypothesis that these rates are equal to each other (see Column 3).
We assume that if a household reports receiving housing assistance, then it receives housing assistance for all 12
months of 2011. This follows the assumption that the U.S. Census Bureau makes when calculating the Supplemental
Poverty Measure (Johnson, Renwick, and Short 2011).
49

31

Including SNAP and housing assistance cuts the extreme poverty rate by approximately a
third in both surveys, yielding insignificantly different extreme poverty rates of 1.35% and 1.30% in
the CPS and SIPP, respectively. Note that SNAP and housing assistance are by far the most
important in-kind transfers, since including WIC (as our original SIPP adjustment for in-kind
transfers does) has virtually no impact on the extreme poverty rate (Column 4). Accounting for
substantial assets further reduces the extreme poverty rate to 0.96% in the SIPP and 0.80% in the
CPS.50 Bringing in administrative earnings cuts the extreme poverty rate by about half in both
surveys, and bringing in the additional tax data on asset income, retirement income, and the EITC
decreases the extreme poverty rate to 0.35% in the SIPP and 0.34% in the CPS. After incorporating
the administrative transfer data, we obtain a final extreme poverty rate among households of 0.18%
in the CPS and 0.29% in the SIPP, which are statistically significantly different at the 5%
significance level. Much of the final gap between the two surveys is due to the administrative data
for OASDI and SSI playing a larger role in reducing the extreme poverty rate in the CPS. However,
the difference in the final extreme poverty rate between the CPS and the original adjustments in the
SIPP is statistically insignificant (Column 5). We also calculate an extreme poverty rate of 0.13%
for individuals in the CPS, compared to the rate of 0.11% rate we reported earlier for the SIPP.
Consequently, the results for the two surveys are far more alike than they initially seem. The
sizeable errors that we find in the left tail of the SIPP income distribution appear with almost the
same frequency in the CPS. The primary difference is that households almost never report positive
hours worked and extremely low earnings in the CPS, while such a pattern is relatively common
among the reported cash extreme poor in the SIPP. 51 Our final estimates of the extreme poverty rate
in Column 7 are also consistent with the idea that poverty over the course of an entire year (CPS)
should be less frequent than poverty over the course of four months (SIPP). Finally, the larger
impact of the administrative transfer data on the CPS estimate is in line with work showing greater
underreporting of transfer programs in the CPS relative to the SIPP (Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan
2015).
Due to the more limited asset information available in the CPS, the adjustment for substantial assets that we utilize
here is narrower than what we utilize for the main SIPP results. Specifically, the extreme poverty rate in the SIPP after
accounting for assets is 0.96% using this more limited adjustment, compared to 0.84% using the original adjustment
(which also accounts for liquid and total assets).
51
In the CPS, all households that report 0 earnings also report 0 hours worked across all members. In the SIPP, 7.94% of
all households that report 0 earnings report positive average monthly hours worked for pay. Also in the SIPP, 72% of
households lifted out of extreme poverty by wage and salary hours reported 0 earnings, as did 88% of households lifted
out of extreme poverty by self-employment hours.
50

32

VIII. Robustness Checks and Caveats
Robustness Checks
We conduct a series of robustness checks to examine the sensitivity of our results to a wide
set of alternative specifications. Table 7 presents the results of several key checks. First, we apply
half the federal minimum wage (rather than the full minimum wage) to reported wage/salary and
self-employment hours worked. This modification increases the extreme poverty rate by a mere 0.01
percentage points after the survey corrections for underreported earnings, and leaves the final
extreme poverty rate after all adjustments unchanged (Column 1). We also calculate estimates
excluding survey-reported and administrative values of housing assistance, given concerns about the
lack of fungibility of housing assistance. The final extreme poverty rate after all adjustments, but
prior to bringing in the administrative SNAP records, is once again 0.01 percentage points above the
comparable rate accounting for housing assistance (Column 2). As expected, SNAP is responsible
for most of the impact of in-kind transfers.
We also examine whether our extreme poverty results extend to a higher income cutoff –
specifically $4/person/day (see Allen 2017, Deaton 2018). Column 3 of Table 7 shows that they do.
As expected, the extreme poverty rates are higher when measured using a higher income threshold.
The reported rate of 3.68% using $4/person/day is 24% higher than the rate using $2/person/day, and
the final rate of 0.34% after incorporating all adjustments using $4/person/day is 42% higher than
the rate using $2/person/day (but still very low). The similar patterns using $4/person/day are
consistent with a relatively large number of household reports of zero income, many of which are
likely to be gross errors. The survey-only adjustments also cut the reported extreme poverty rate by
73% when using the $4/person/day threshold, which is comparable to the 72% cut by the surveyonly adjustments when using the $2/person/day threshold.
Next, we examine whether our methodology misses households that should be extreme poor
but have survey-reported incomes greater than $2/person/day due to imputation or over-reporting.52
We find that a minuscule number of households have incomes greater than $2/person/day in the
survey but fall under $2/person/day after setting imputed earnings equal to zero and applying the
administrative data – specifically, taking the maximum of survey and administrative values for
earnings and housing assistance (since the administrative values for these sources are incomplete as
We consider an amount to be imputed if it is statistically imputed (i.e., hot or cold deck). We do not consider logically
imputed amounts to be imputed, because they are based on previous wave information that is likely to be of good quality.
52

33

noted earlier), replacing survey with administrative values for interest and dividends, retirement
income, OASDI, SSI, and SNAP, and adding EITC amounts calculated from the administrative tax
records.

We also analyze how our results change after basing our survey correction for

underreported earnings only on non-imputed hours worked and ignoring retirement accounts in the
survey adjustment for assets. Once again, the results barely budge following each modification.
We also calculate estimates of extreme poverty at the level of the fourth reference month,
which is regarded as having the most accurate survey reports (Moore 2008) and follows the
reference period in Shaefer and Edin (2013). Appendix Table A.6 displays estimates after each
survey-only adjustment using the fourth reference month and finds that they are only slightly higher
than our wave-level estimates. For example, using the fourth reference month, the reported extreme
poverty rate of 3.82% and the extreme poverty rate of 1.09% after accounting for substantial assets
are each 25-30% higher than the comparable wave-level rates. The similarity of the estimates across
the month and wave reference periods reflects the tendency of survey responses to be strongly
correlated when taken within the same interview (Moore 2008).
It is not clear what is the appropriate time interval for measuring income poverty. Most of
the literature on income and well-being has argued for looking over a full year, given transitory
fluctuations in income that may not be reflected in consumption or other outcomes. There is also a
long literature that emphasizes the persistence of poverty or argues for looking at income over
multiple years (see Duncan and Rogers 1991 or Solon 1992, for example). As well as looking at a
shorter time interval than a four month wave, we considered examining SIPP estimates over a
calendar year. While there are advantages to a longer period, we do not do so in the SIPP because of
attrition across interview waves. Furthermore, responses would be taken across three or four
interviews (rather than one), making it less comparable to surveys like the American Community
Survey (ACS) and CPS ASEC that cover a reference year in a single interview. However, the results
in the CPS strongly suggest that the patterns and levels of annual estimates mirror those of wavelevel estimates in the SIPP.
We also examine more closely the households removed from extreme poverty due to reported
hours worked. Among the top 10 occupations of workers in households removed by wage and salary
and self-employment hours, most are not exempt from the federal minimum wage and, in fact, would
seem to have average earnings that are generally far above minimum wage (see Appendix Tables

34

A.14 and A.15).53 For example, almost 9% of workers in households removed from extreme poverty
by wage and salary hours are computer scientists or engineers (compared to less than 2% of all wage
and salary workers). Additionally, while 1.41% of workers in this subgroup are waiters and
waitresses (an occupation that could conceivably earn less than minimum wage), a higher rate
(1.82%) of all wage and salary workers are waiters and waitresses. Additionally, the three most
common occupations for workers in households removed from extreme poverty by self-employment
hours are various kinds of managers (14% of such workers, as compared to 11.55% of all selfemployed workers). To get a sense of the extent to which these subgroups are likely to have errorridden earnings reports, Appendix Table A.18 also displays the share of households in these
subgroups with zero, single-digit, or double-digit reported average monthly earnings. We find that
72% of households removed by wage and salary hours report zero earnings and that 91% report zero,
single-digit, or double-digit earnings. Of the households removed by self-employment hours, 88%
report zero earnings and 94% report zero, single-digit, or double-digit earnings.
Finally, we check to see that imputed values in the survey only have a minor effect on our
estimates. For example, 59% of households reclassified by survey-reported in-kind transfers have
SNAP amounts imputed, but only 3% have receipt imputed (see Appendix Table A.19).
Encouragingly, 99% of the households reclassified by survey-reported in-kind transfers have
incomes above $2/person/day based on the administrative data. We also find that 9% of households
removed by wage and salary hours have imputed values for overall hours worked (see Appendix
Table A.20). Once again, 93% of the households removed by wage and salary hours have incomes
above the extreme poverty threshold based on the administrative data.
Caveats
In this subsection, we discuss some weaknesses in our data and their likely effect on our
results. We first discuss reasons why we may have understated the extent of extreme poverty and
then reasons why we may have overstated it. First, we rely on annual administrative tax data that we
allocate evenly across the four months of the SIPP wave. If the months of the year with low other
income are also those with low taxable income, then we will understate extreme poverty. The results
from the CPS suggest that this bias is small, since the CPS yields strikingly similar results to those in
the SIPP even though CPS income is annual and does not suffer from this potential misalignment.
53

Appendix Tables A.16 and A.17 show the top 10 industries of these workers.
35

Furthermore, we may be less worried about this possibility as it could only occur when a household
is only transitorily extreme poor. Given that most of those who we remove from extreme poverty
via the administrative data have income over twelve months above the poverty line, to be extreme
poor for four months would require these households to have income one and a half times the
extreme poverty line over the remaining months of the year. It is worth emphasizing that the
potential misalignment between annual and wave-level data does not apply to the administrative
program data, which are all at the month level.
Second, and probably most importantly, the SIPP and CPS survey frames cover only resident
households, meaning they miss homeless individuals (among other institutionalized populations).
Given that there were 636,000 homeless individuals in 2011 (based on HUD estimates) and that the
homeless are among the most destitute members of our communities, our final estimate of the
extreme poverty rate may be an understatement for the entire population. 54 While the extreme
poverty estimates in the literature discussed in Section II also rely on surveys that do not include the
homeless, a broader view of extreme poverty would include them.

Moreover, if homeless

individuals are more likely than the non-homeless to be single and childless, then incorporating the
homeless might further amplify the already large share of single childless extreme poor individuals.
There are also reasons why our data may overstate extreme poverty. First, we are unable to
include administrative data for a number of income sources, such as Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families, General Assistance, the Child Tax Credit, unemployment insurance, workers’
compensation, non-DER earnings, non-HUD housing assistance, and veterans’ benefits. 55 Figure 9
shows that we miss $216 billion from the four largest transfer programs or tax credits not in our
administrative data, with $107 billion attributable to unemployment insurance alone. The total
expenditures for these “excluded” programs are similar to the total expenditures for the non-OASDI
programs for which we have administrative data. 56 We likely also miss income from sources like
off-the-books employment and money from relatives (Jencks 1997). 57 Incorporating administrative
sources for these other income components may lead to further reductions in the extreme poverty
See https://www.hudexchange.info/resources/documents/2011AHAR_FinalReport.pdf.
While we have access to administrative TANF data and have used them in previous work (see Meyer and Wu 2018),
we only have these data for 30 states and are hesitant to base our extreme poverty estimates on the seven states for which
we have both administrative SNAP and TANF data.
56
According to Meyer, Mok, and Sullivan (2015), the expenditures in 2011 are $48.9 billion for SSI, $72.8 billion for
SNAP, and $62.9 billion for the EITC. Based on Table 8.7 in the OMB’s Historical Tables, the expenditures for housing
assistance in calendar year 2011 (calculated from amounts for fiscal years 2011 and 2012) are $46.8 billion.
57
There are good reasons to believe that the non-tax earnings in the survey are themselves underreported (Hurst, Li, and
Pugsley 2014; Hokayem, Bollinger, and Ziliak 2015).
54
55

36

rate. In fact, we find that more than 20% of the remaining extreme poor households contain
veterans, which may be due in part to our administrative data excluding information on veterans’
benefits.
Second, we are unable to access asset information for a substantial share of our households
since the asset information is from either a few months before or after our Wave 9 reference period.
Because of survey attrition and slight changes in household composition across waves, not all
households that appear in Wave 9 match to topical modules from the other waves (especially later
waves).58 Therefore, any households that do not link to the topical modules for Waves 7 or 10 are
not removed from extreme poverty by substantial assets. In fact, one-sixth of the un-weighted
households left in extreme poverty after accounting for substantial assets cannot be linked to the
Wave 7 or 10 topical modules. This missing data problem leads to an understatement of the asset
adjustment and therefore an overstatement of the final extreme poverty rate. We should also note
that incomplete linking of individuals means we cannot bring in administrative data for all survey
respondents, likely understating their income. Finally, the year we examine was near the peak of the
most severe recession in 70 years, so incomes were atypically low. Overall, we expect that the
incompleteness of our data – especially the linked administrative data – leads to an overstatement of
households in extreme poverty, but the omission of the homeless (who are not in households) is an
important gap in our information.

IX. Conclusions
Through closely examining the SIPP and augmenting the survey data with administrative tax
and transfer data, we find that 92% of the households categorized as extreme poor based on surveyreported cash income are misclassified. Our methodology yields a similar finding in the CPS, where
91% of the households categorized as extreme poor based on survey-reported cash income are
misclassified. Consequently, we estimate that 0.24% of households in the United States lived on
$2/person/day or less over a four-month period in 2011 (SIPP) and 0.18% of households lived on
$2/person/day or less over the course of the entire 2011 reference year (CPS). The corresponding
share of individuals in the SIPP is 0.11%. Many of the households included in survey-reported
From the publicly available SIPP data, 92.55% of the households (weighted) we use in Wave 9 link to the Wave 6
topical module. 97.88% of households we use in Wave 9 link to either Wave 10 or Wave 7: we link 90.83% to Wave 10
and 7.05% to Wave 7 (we only link households to Wave 7 if we could not link them to Wave 10).
58

37

extreme poverty appear to be better off than the average American household based on numerous
indicators of material well-being. These results are consistent with the literature showing that survey
data at the very bottom of the income distribution are especially error-ridden. The results also reflect
the very low rates of extreme and deep consumption poverty that various studies have found.
Importantly, we may yet overstate the true rate of extreme poverty, because our administrative data
miss a number of important income sources for which surveys underreport or miss altogether.
This paper further demonstrates that the face of extreme poverty is quite different from what
the literature has previously emphasized. Among the 285,000 households left in extreme poverty,
90% are made up of single individuals. Households with multiple childless individuals make up the
other 10% of the extreme poor. Strikingly, after implementing all adjustments, no SIPP-interviewed
households with children have incomes below $2/person/day. This result lies in stark contrast to the
focus in academic and policy circles on the plight of extreme poor households with children. This
result also indicates that extreme poverty among such households, given its low current level, cannot
have risen in an economically meaningful way due to welfare reform. It is worth re-emphasizing
that these dramatic results hold even in the absence of administrative data for TANF, which is
targeted towards single-parent households and is heavily underreported in surveys.
Our results also indicate that means-tested transfers – especially in-kind benefits – are welltargeted to the needy, as the households reclassified as not extreme poor by in-kind transfers appear
to be considerably worse off than those in official poverty. We therefore provide an explanation for
the imperfect ability of the U.S. Census Bureau’s Supplemental Poverty Measure to select those with
low material well-being (see Meyer and Sullivan 2012): it likely reclassifies as non-poor those
receiving in-kind transfers, who are very needy, and leaves as poor those who are misclassified
because of substantial assets or unreported income.
This paper leaves room for a number of extensions. First, one could examine post-tax
measures of extreme poverty. While this paper does calculate the EITC from administrative tax
records, it does not account for all tax credits (like the Child Tax Credit) and tax liabilities. Second,
one could incorporate more complete administrative data as they become available (e.g., on
veterans’ benefits, unemployment insurance, and workers’ compensation). Doing so would also help
us understand how many of the single individuals we categorize as being in extreme poverty are
misclassified because of missing administrative data. The wide variety of information in the SIPP
may also allow greater understanding of the significant number of extreme poor single individuals.
38

More generally, we lay out a novel methodology for how income data can be better used to
measure poverty. We show that our adjustments using exclusively the survey data go a long way in
addressing survey errors, accounting for 78% of the change in extreme poverty due to the
combination of survey-only and administrative-based adjustments. Although this paper focuses on
extreme poverty, we can apply a similar methodology to address survey errors at higher income
cutoffs such as the deep and official poverty thresholds. By combining the accuracy of the
administrative data with the detail of the SIPP data, one may also be able to better understand the
barriers to success faced by households that are truly poor.

39

References
Abraham, Katherine G., John Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James R. Spletzer. 2013.
Exploring Differences in Employment between Household and Establishment Data.
Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2): S129-S172.
_____. 2017. Measuring the Gig Economy. Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census
Bureau.
Allen, Robert C. 2017. Absolute Poverty: When Necessity Displaces Desire. American
Economic Review, 107(12): 3690-3721.
Bee, Adam and Joshua Mitchell. 2017. Do Older Americans Have More Income Than We
Think? SESHD Working Paper 2017-39. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Ben-Shalom, Yonatan, Robert Moffitt, and John K. Scholz. 2012. An Assessment of the
Effectiveness of Anti-Poverty Programs in the United States. In P.N. Jefferson (Ed.), The
Oxford Handbook of the Economics of Poverty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blank, Rebecca M. 2008. Presidential Address: How to Improve Poverty Measurement in the
United States. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(2): 233-254.
Blank, Rebecca and Brian Kovak. 2009. The Growing Problem of Disconnected Single Mothers.
In C. J. Heinrich and J. K. Scholz (Eds.) Making the Work-Based Safety Net Work Better.
New York: Russell Sage Press.
Blank, Rebecca M. and Robert F. Schoeni. 2003. Changes in the Distribution of Children's
Family Income over the 1990's. American Economic Review, 93(2): 304-308.
Blundell, Richard. 2014. Income Dynamics and Life-Cycle Inequality: Mechanisms and
Controversies. The Economic Journal, 124 (May): 289-318.
Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston. 2008. Consumption Inequality and Partial
Insurance. American Economic Review, 98(5): 1887-1921.
Bollinger, Christopher R., Barry T. Hirsch, Charles M. Hokayem, and James P. Ziliak. 2018.
Trouble in the Tails? What We Know about Earnings Nonresponse Thirty Years after
Lillard, Smith, and Welch. Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).
Brady, David and Zachary Parolin. 2018. Increasing Deep and Extreme Poverty in the U.S.,
1993-2015. Working Paper.
Brewer, Mike, Ben Etheridge, and Cormac O’Dea. 2017. Why are Households that Report the
Lowest Incomes so Well-Off? The Economic Journal, 127 (October): F24-F49.
40

Brzozowski, Matthew and Thomas F. Crossley. 2011. Viewpoint: Measuring the Well-Being of
the Poor with Income or Consumption: A Canadian Perspective. Canadian Journal of
Economics, 44(1): 88-106.
Bullard, James. 2013. President’s Message: CPI vs. PCE Inflation: Choosing a Standard
Measure. Regional Economist (Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis).
Chandy, Laurence and Cory Smith. 2014. How Poor Are America’s Poorest? U.S. $2 A Day
Poverty In A Global Context. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institute.
Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael, (Eds.). 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Congressional Budget Office. 2012. The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes,
2008 and 2009. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Budget Office.
Deaton, Angus. “The U.S. Can No Longer Hide From Its Deep Poverty Problem.” New York
Times. 24 Jan 2018.
Deshpande, Manasi. 2016. Does Welfare Inhibit Success? The Long-Term Effects of Removing
Low-Income Youth from the Disability Rolls. American Economic Review, 106(11):
3300–3330.
Duncan, Greg J. and Willard Rodgers. 1991. Has Children’s Poverty Become More Persistent?
American Sociological Review, 56(4): 538-550.
Edin, Kathryn J. and H. Luke Shaefer. 2015. $2.00 A Day: Living on Almost Nothing in America.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Ellwood, David T. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. Measuring Income: What Kind Should be
In? Conference on the Measurement of Noncash Benefits, U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Fox, Liana and Lewis Warren. 2018. Material Well-Being and Poverty: New Evidence Across
Poverty Measures. APPAM Presentation Slides. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Gathright, Graton and Tyler A. Crabb. 2014. Reporting of SSA Program Participation in SIPP.
Working Paper. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Hall, Jamie B. and Robert Rector. 2018. Examining Extreme and Deep Poverty in the United
States. Backgrounder No. 3285. Washington, D.C.: The Heritage Foundation.
Hokayem, Charles, Christopher Bollinger, and James P. Ziliak. The Role of CPS Nonresponse in
the Measurement of Poverty. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 110(511):
935-945.
41

Hoynes, Hilary W. and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2009. Consumption Responses to InKind Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamp Program. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4): 109-39.
Hurst, Erik, Geng Li, and Benjamin Pugsley. 2014. Are Household Surveys Like Tax Forms?
Evidence from Income Underreporting of the Self-Employed. Review of Economics and
Statistics, 96(1): 19-33.
Internal Revenue Service. 2016. Tax Gap Estimates for Tax Years 2008-2010.
Jencks, Christopher. 1997. Introduction to Making Ends Meet, by Kathryn Edin and Laura Lein.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Johnson, Paul D., Trudi J. Renwick, and Kathleen Short. 2011. Estimating the Value of Federal
Housing Assistance for the Supplemental Poverty Measure. SEHSD Working Paper
2010-13. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Lillard, Lee, James P. Smith, and Finis Welch. 1986. What Do We Really Know about Wages?
The Importance of Nonreporting and Census Imputation. Journal of Political Economy,
94(3): 489-506.
Loprest, Pamela J. 2011. Disconnected Families and TANF. Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families Program—Research Synthesis Brief Series. Washington, D.C.: The Urban
Institute.
Loprest, Pamela and Austin Nichols. 2011. Dynamics of Being Disconnected from Work and
TANF. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.
Mayer, Susan E. and Christopher Jencks. 1989. Poverty and the Distribution of Material
Hardship. Journal of Human Resources, 24(1): 88-114.
Medalia, Carla, Bruce D. Meyer, Amy O’Hara, and Derek Wu. 2019. Linking Survey and
Administrative Data to Measure Income, Inequality, and Mobility. International Journal
of Population Data Science 4:1:04.
Meyer, Bruce D. 2017. The Earned Income Tax Credit. In Robert Doar (Ed.), A Safety Net That
Works: Improving Federal Programs for Low-Income Americans, pp. 1–18. Washington,
D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Nikolas Mittag. Forthcoming. Using Linked Survey and Administrative
Data to Better Measure Income: Implications for Poverty, Program Effectiveness and
Holes in the Safety Net. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
42

Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2009. The Under-Reporting of
Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences. NBER Working Paper
No. 15181.
Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K.C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2015. Household Surveys in Crisis.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(4), 199–226.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2003. Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using
Income and Consumption. Journal of Human Resources, 38:S, 1180-1220.
_____. 2004. The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The Material Well-Being of Single
Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Public Economics, 88: 1387-1420.
_____. 2008. Changes in the Consumption, Income, and Well-Being of Single Mother Headed
Families. American Economic Review, 98(5): 2221-2241.
_____. 2011. Viewpoint: Further Results on Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor using Income
and Consumption. Canadian Journal of Economics, 44(1): 52-87.
_____. 2012. Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official Poverty, Consumption Poverty, and the
New Supplemental Poverty Measure. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(3): 111-136.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Derek Wu. 2018. The Poverty Reduction of Social Security and MeansTested Transfers. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 71(5): 1106-1153.
Mittag, Nikolas. 2019. Correcting for Misreporting of Government Benefits. American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy, 11(2).
Moore, Jeffrey C. 2008. Seam Bias in the 2004 SIPP Panel: Much Improved, but Much Bias Still
Remains. Survey Methodology 2008-3 Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2018. The 2014 Redesign of the
Survey of Income and Program Participation: An Assessment. Washington, D.C.: The
National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/24864.
Olsen, Edgar O. 2018. Reported and Actual Housing Assistance Based on CPS and AHS
Variables. Unpublished Note, January 30.
Parolin, Zachary and David Brady. Forthcoming. Extreme Child Poverty and the Role of Social
Policy in the United States. Journal of Poverty & Social Justice.
Ruggles, Patricia. 1990. Drawing the Line: Alternative Poverty Measures and their Implications
for Public Policy. The Urban Institute Press, Washington D.C.

43

Scally, Corianne P., Amanda Gold, Carl Hedman, Matt Gerken, and Nicole Dubois. 2018. The
Low-Income Housing Tax Credit. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.
Scally, Corianne P. and David Lipsetz. 2017. New Public Data Available on USDA Rural Housing
Service’s Single-Family and Multifamily Programs. Cityscape, 19(1): 295-304.
Shaefer, H. Luke, and Kathryn J. Edin. 2013. Rising extreme poverty in the United States and the
response of federal means-tested transfer programs. Social Service Review, 87(2): 250268.
_____. 2017. Welfare Reform and the Families it Left Behind. Pathways, Fall 2017: 22-27.
Stanford Center on Poverty and Inequality.
Shantz, Kathryn and Liana E. Fox. 2018. Precision in Measurement: Using State-Level
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families Administrative Records and the Transfer Income Model (TRIM3) to Evaluate
Poverty Measurement. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Short, Kathleen S. 2005. Material and Financial Hardship and Income-Based Poverty Measures
in the USA. Journal of Social Policy, 34(1): 21-38.
Solon, Gary. 1992. Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States. American Economic
Review, 82(3): 393–408.
Turner, Lesley J., Sheldon Danziger, and Kristin S. Seefeldt. 2006. Failing the Transition from
Welfare to Work: Women Chronically Disconnected from Employment and Cash
Welfare. Social Science Quarterly, 87(2): 227–249.
United Nations. 2018. Report of the Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights
on His Mission to the United States of America.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2005. Alternative Poverty Estimates in the United States: 2003. P60 -227
Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2015a. Income and Poverty in the United States: 2014. P60-252 Report.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2015b. The Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2014. P60-254 Report.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Census Bureau.
Wagner, Deborah and Mary Layne. 2014. The Person Identification Validation System (PVS):
Applying the Center for Administrative Records Research & Applications' (CARRA)

44

Record Linkage Software. CARRA Working Paper 2014-01. Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Census Bureau.
Winship, Scott. 2016. Poverty After Welfare Reform. Washington, D.C.: Manhattan Institute.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2007. Inverse Probability Weighted Estimation for General Missing Data
Problems. Journal of Econometrics, 141: 1281–1301.

45

Tables and Figures
Table 1. Abbreviated Terms Used Throughout the Article
AFDC
ASEC
CE
CPI-U
CPS
DER
EITC
HUD
IPW
IRA
IRS
LIHEAP
LIS
Numident
OASDI
PA
PCE
PHUS
PIC
PSID
PVS
SIPP
SNAP
SPM
SSA
SSI
SSR
TANF
TRACS
TRIM
UI
WC
WIC

Aid to Families with Dependent Children
CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement
Consumer Expenditure Survey (Bureau of Labor Statistics)
Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (Bureau of Labor Statistics)
Current Population Survey (Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Census Bureau)
Detailed Earnings Record (SSA)
Earned Income Tax Credit
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Inverse Probability Weighting
Individual Retirement Account
Internal Revenue Service
Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program
Luxembourg Income Study
Numerical Identification File (SSA)
Old Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Program (Social Security)
Public Assistance
Personal Consumption Expenditure
Payment History Update System (SSA)
Public and Indian Housing Information Center (HUD)
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (University of Michigan)
Person Identification Validation System
Survey of Income and Program Participation (U.S. Census Bureau)
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
Supplemental Poverty Measure (U.S. Census Bureau)
Social Security Administration
Supplemental Security Income
Supplemental Security Record (SSA)
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Tenant Rental Assistance Certification System (HUD)
Transfer Income Model (Urban Institute)
Unemployment Insurance
Workers’ Compensation
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children

Table 2. Administrative Data Sources
Income Source
Earnings
Asset Income

Administrative Source

Income Unit

Income Frequency

States Covered

DER (SSA)

Individual

Annual

All

Form 1040 (IRS)

Tax Unit

Annual

All

Form 1099-R (IRS)

Individual

Annual

All

PHUS (SSA)

Individual

Monthly

All

SSR (SSA)

Individual

Monthly

All

EITC

Form 1040 (IRS)

Tax Unit

Annual

All

SNAP

State Agencies

Household

Monthly

11 States

PIC & TRACS (HUD)

Household

Monthly

All

Retirement Distributions
OASDI
SSI

Housing Assistance

Notes: This table shows – for each income source in the administrative data – the source of the data, the unit at which the dollar amounts are
reported, the frequency at which the dollars are reported, and the states/years covered. Note that all of the administrative data, with the exception of
SNAP, cover the universe of recipients in the United States.

47

Table 3a. Percentage of Households in Extreme Poverty

0.46
(0.08)

(3)
Single
Parents
8.99
(0.91)

(4)
Multiple
Parents
2.04
(0.17)

(5)
Single
Childless
6.85
(0.44)

(6)
Multiple
Childless
1.90
(0.15)

2.04
(0.11)

0.42
(0.08)

2.80
(0.41)

1.16
(0.13)

5.58
(0.41)

1.58
(0.14)

Correct Wage/Salary Earnings

1.83
(0.10)

0.37
(0.08)

2.66
(0.40)

0.94
(0.12)

5.12
(0.39)

1.39
(0.13)

Correct Self-Employment Earnings

1.30
(0.08)

0.35
(0.08)

1.97
(0.38)

0.53
(0.08)

4.04
(0.32)

0.75
(0.09)

Account for Assets*

0.84
(0.07)

0.13
(0.05)

1.35
(0.32)

0.27
(0.06)

2.86
(0.31)

0.44
(0.07)

0.42
(0.05)

0.11
(0.04)

0.54
(0.20)

0.11
(0.04)

1.63
(0.22)

0.08
(0.03)

Correct Assets/Retirement Income

0.35
(0.04)

0.06
(0.03)

0.46
(0.19)

0.11
(0.04)

1.35
(0.19)

0.08
(0.03)

Add EITC

0.31
(0.04)

0.06
(0.03)

0.10
(0.07)

0.08
(0.03)

1.29
(0.19)

0.08
(0.03)

Correct OASDI/SSI

0.27
(0.04)

0.01
(0.01)

0.10
(0.07)

0.06
(0.03)

1.19
(0.18)

0.07
(0.03)

Correct Housing Assistance

0.27
(0.04)

0.01
(0.01)

0.10
(0.07)

0.06
(0.03)

1.18
(0.18)

0.07
(0.03)

Correct SNAP

0.24
(0.04)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

1.12
(0.18)

0.07
(0.03)

118,600,000
34,360,000

26,070,000
7,356,000

6,917,000
2,035,000

31,670,000
9,290,000

22,530,000
6,642,000

31,430,000
9,036,000

8,300
2,700

5,200
1,600

8,500
2,700

Specification
Survey-Reported Cash
Survey-Only Adjustments
Add In-Kind Transfers

Administrative Data Adjustments
Correct Earnings

Population Estimates
U.S.
SNAP States

(1)
All
Households
2.97
(0.13)

(2)
Elderly

Sample Sizes
U.S.
31,500
8,000
1,500
SNAP States
10,000
2,500
500
*Real estate equity > $25,000, liquid assets > $5,000, or total net worth > $50,000.

Source: Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Standard errors calculated using replicate weights in parentheses. Households in "extreme poverty" are those with average income across
the four months of the wave less than or equal to $2/person/day. Households with negative incomes in any month are defined as not in extreme
poverty. Sample consists of households with at least one member with a PIK and present in reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights
are adjusted for missing PIKs. When including housing assistance, all households that receive public housing or housing subsidies are defined as
not in extreme poverty. The number of hours that each person worked in a month is calculated as [average hours per week worked this reference
period in a paid job] × [number of weeks worked this month in a paid job]. Hours worked in a month are then multiplied by the federal minimum
wage ($7.25) to estimate lower-bound earnings for the month, and the estimated lower-bound earnings are summed across all household members.
We do not include unpaid family workers in this calculation. Assets are as reported in the Wave 10 topical module (or Wave 7, if a household does
not match to Wave 10). Counts rounded according to disclosure avoidance rules.
48

Table 3b. Percentage of Individuals in Extreme Poverty
(2)

(3)
9.56
(0.98)

(4)
Multiple
Parents
2.11
(0.17)

(5)
Single
Childless
6.85
(0.44)

(6)
Multiple
Childless
1.83
(0.15)

Elderly

Single Parents

0.47
(0.21)

1.57
(0.09)

0.43
(0.21)

2.65
(0.45)

1.20
(0.14)

5.58
(0.41)

1.50
(0.14)

Correct Wage/Salary Earnings

1.37
(0.09)

0.36
(0.18)

2.53
(0.44)

0.95
(0.12)

5.12
(0.39)

1.33
(0.14)

Correct Self-Employment Earnings

0.90
(0.06)

0.35
(0.18)

1.93
(0.45)

0.52
(0.09)

4.04
(0.32)

0.75
(0.11)

Account for Assets*

0.57
(0.05)

0.11
(0.04)

1.49
(0.45)

0.28
(0.06)

2.86
(0.31)

0.46
(0.10)

0.24
(0.03)

0.09
(0.04)

0.64
(0.28)

0.10
(0.04)

1.63
(0.22)

0.09
(0.04)

Correct Assets/Retirement Income

0.21
(0.03)

0.06
(0.03)

0.56
(0.25)

0.10
(0.04)

1.35
(0.19)

0.09
(0.04)

Add EITC

0.17
(0.03)

0.06
(0.03)

0.12
(0.10)

0.07
(0.03)

1.29
(0.19)

0.09
(0.04)

Correct OASDI/SSI

0.14
(0.02)

0.01
(0.01)

0.12
(0.10)

0.05
(0.02)

1.19
(0.18)

0.07
(0.04)

Correct Housing Assistance

0.14
(0.02)

0.01
(0.01)

0.12
(0.10)

0.05
(0.02)

1.18
(0.18)

0.07
(0.04)

Correct SNAP

0.11
(0.02)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

1.12
(0.18)

0.07
(0.04)

305,600,000
88,610,000

45,540,000
13,030,000

18,770,000
5,358,000

138,300,000
39,990,000

22,530,000
6,642,000

80,460,000
23,590,000

37,000
12,000

5,500
1,700

21,000
6,700

Specification
Survey-Reported Cash
Survey Only Adjustments
Add In-Kind Transfers

Administrative Data Adjustments
Correct Earnings

Population Estimates
U.S.
SNAP States

(1)
All
Households
2.60
(0.14)

Sample Sizes
U.S.
82,500
14,500
4,500
SNAP States
26,500
4,500
1,400
*Real estate equity > $25,000, liquid assets > $5,000, or total net worth > $50,000.

Source: Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Standard errors calculated using replicate weights in parentheses. Individuals in "extreme poverty" are those living in households with
average income across the four months of the wave less than or equal to $2/person/day. Individuals with negative household incomes in any month
are defined as not in extreme poverty. Sample consists of individuals living in households with at least one member with a PIK and present in
reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights are adjusted for missing PIKs. When including housing assistance, all households that
receive public housing or housing subsidies are defined as not in extreme poverty. The number of hours that each person worked in a month is
calculated as [average hours per week worked this reference period in a paid job] × [number of weeks worked this month in a paid job]. Hours
worked in a month are then multiplied by the federal minimum wage ($7.25) to estimate lower-bound earnings for the month, and the estimated
lower-bound earnings are summed across all household members. We do not include unpaid family workers in this calculation. Assets are as
reported in the Wave 10 topical module (or Wave 7, if a household does not match to Wave 10). Counts rounded according to disclosure
avoidance rules.
49

Table 4. Income Receipt Rates (%) for Remaining Extreme Poor Households After Survey-Only Adjustments

15.41
(14.97)
15.41
(14.97)
43.08
(18.77)

(3)
Single
Parents
74.76
(10.01)
0.00
(0.00)
6.59
(7.07)

(4)
Multiple
Parents
70.15
(11.57)
6.67
(3.73)
3.90
(4.04)

(5)
Single
Individuals
47.92
(4.29)
9.17
(2.89)
12.75
(3.40)

6.14
(1.69)
2.83

58.50
(19.83)
35.47

0.00
(0.00)
0.00

7.18
(5.04)
14.46

5.15
(2.06)
0.00

1.58
(1.71)
2.69

Housing

(1.18)
3.55
(1.47)

(19.21)
20.60
(15.54)

(0.00)
1.11
(1.08)

(9.00)
11.00
(9.69)

(0.00)
2.79
(1.69)

(2.20)
0.00
(0.00)

EITC

30.19

0.00

67.95

73.34

19.19

36.18

(3.40)
19.06
(4.26)

(0.00)

SNAP

(11.41)
61.40
(14.34)

(9.18)
73.40
(19.23)

(3.74)
3.80
(2.49)

(11.38)
21.79
(11.19)

Any Transfer

42.68

89.51

69.26

78.73

30.97

51.40

(6.81)

(11.12)

(20.81)

(20.08)

(8.14)

(18.07)

Source
Earnings
Asset Income
Retirement Distributions
OASDI
SSI

(1)
All
Households
55.93
(3.34)
9.77
(2.30)
11.75
(2.25)

(2)
Elderly

(6)
Multiple
Adults
81.24
(7.05)
19.61
(7.93)
7.88
(4.06)

Source: Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Standard errors calculated using replicate weights in parentheses. These shares reflect the percent of households among the remaining
extreme poor after the survey-only adjustments that receive each source of income in the administrative data. Sample consists of households with
at least one member with a PIK and present in reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights are adjusted for missing PIKs. All income
sources are calculated over all 50 states except for SNAP and “Any Transfer”, which are calculated over the 11 states for which we have
administrative SNAP data. For the elderly, we omit SNAP from the “Any Transfer” category.

50

Table 5. Selected Demographics for Extreme Poor Subgroups and Comparison Households
(1)

(2)

Reported Cash
Extreme Poor

Removed by
In-Kind
Transfers1

26.09
(1.61)

38.32
(3.58)

5.77
(3.23)

5.29
(2.07)

24.42
(3.86)

31.75
(3.04)

18.23
(0.59)

8.59
(0.16)

…a displaced worker

1.22
(0.37)

1.93
(0.83)

5.34
(3.09)

0.00
(0.00)

0.77
(0.78)

0.45
(0.45)

1.73
(0.22)

1.41
(0.08)

…a child with a severe disability

1.69
(0.43)

3.71
(1.25)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

2.12
(1.13)

0.65
(0.68)

3.17
(0.29)

1.87
(0.09)

…severely disabled

19.50
(1.56)

27.26
(2.77)

3.77
(2.71)

11.70
(2.99)

23.14
(3.87)

17.62
(3.31)

33.68
(0.77)

25.29
(0.25)

…severely disabled (mental/emotional)

6.84
(0.96)

10.97
(2.10)

2.46
(2.36)

6.86
(2.48)

4.99
(1.93)

4.28
(1.56)

9.93
(0.47)

5.97
(0.17)

…a care provider for an ill or disabled person

4.48
(0.66)

3.49
(0.87)

4.52
(2.79)

7.74
(1.96)

6.38
(2.24)

2.53
(0.98)

4.86
(0.33)

5.84
(0.14)

12.00
(1.23)

13.68
(2.49)

4.67
(2.85)

1.14
(0.93)

13.18
(2.92)

18.09
(2.75)

7.19
(0.47)

2.63
(0.11)

Full or part time student (%)

13.48
(1.25)

16.26
(2.76)

8.46
(3.69)

1.63
(1.00)

13.18
(2.92)

19.20
(2.77)

10.07
(0.55)

5.00
(0.15)

Receives educ. assistance if a student (%)

52.74
(5.08)

57.70
(7.63)

26.71
(19.00)

23.72
(26.24)

54.79
(12.88)

51.90
(8.80)

57.59
(2.49)

50.42
(1.44)

Years of education

12.90
(0.09)

11.98
(0.13)

12.99
(0.43)

13.70
(0.22)

13.89
(0.19)

12.85
(0.18)

12.26
(0.04)

13.59
(0.02)

3,565,000
3.00
900
2,972,000
2.71
750

1,099,000
0.93
300
931,000
0.85
250

255,000
0.21
70
206,000
0.19
60

636,000
0.54
150
550,000
0.50
150

540,000
0.45
150
489,000
0.45
150

1,035,000
0.87
250
795,000
0.72
200

Household Characteristics
Someone in household is… (%)
…unemployed

Education of Household Head
Full time student (%)

Weighted number of households
Share of households (%)
Unweighted number of households
Weighted number of households (Wave 6)
Share of households (Wave 6) (%)
Unweighted number of households (Wave 6)

(3)
Removed by
Wage/Salary
Earnings Based
on Hours 2

(4)
Removed by SelfEmployment
Earnings Based
on Hours 3

1. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 1 (survey cash) but not in row 2 (add in-kind transfers).
3. All wage/salary hours and self-employment hours. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 3 but not in row 4 (correct self-employment earnings).
(See next page for additional notes.)

51

(5)
Removed by
Substantial
Assets4

(6)
Remaining
Extreme Poor
(After Survey
Adjustments)

(7)

(8)

Official
Poor

All
Households

17,710,000
14.92
4,800
15,760,000
14.35
4,300

118,700,000
100
32,500
109,800,000
100
30,000

2. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 2 but not in row 3 (correct wage/salary earnings).
4. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 4 but not in row 5 (account for survey assets).

Table 5. Selected Demographics for Extreme Poor Subgroups and Comparison Households (continued)

Health Insurance of Household Head (%)
Medicaid
Private Insurance
Medicaid or Medicare or Private Insurance
Assets (%)

Own a home
Total real estate equity > $25,000
Own a car, van, or truck
Liquid assets > $5,000
Total assets > $50,000
Total assets > $100,000
Total assets > $250,000
Total assets > $500,000

Weighted number of households
Share of households (%)
Unweighted number of households
Weighted number of households (Wave 6)
Share of households (Wave 6) (%)
Unweighted number of households (Wave 6)

(1)

(2)

(3)
Removed by
Wage/Salary
Earnings Based
on Hours 2

(4)
Removed by SelfEmployment
Earnings Based
on Hours 3

Reported Cash
Extreme Poor

Removed by
In-Kind
Transfers1

19.07
(1.56)
28.62
(1.89)
48.08
(2.16)
33.95
(1.66)
26.31
(1.57)
64.69
(1.91)
11.68
(1.17)
31.07
(1.75)
21.92
(1.45)
12.02
(1.27)
6.09
(0.92)
3,565,000
3.00
900
2,972,000
2.71
750

49.93
(3.66)
4.12
(1.20)
53.46
(3.68)

1.87
(1.95)
57.49
(6.46)
60.24
(6.35)

4.41
(1.79)
49.87
(4.49)
55.40
(4.55)

3.21
(1.57)
53.60
(4.45)
58.04
(4.55)

14.24
(2.09)
9.95
(1.86)
47.40
(3.55)
1.15
(0.68)
9.31
(1.77)
4.27
(1.16)
1.29
(0.71)
0.33
(0.32)
1,099,000
0.93
300
931,000
0.85
250

32.37
(5.83)
27.43
(5.77)
69.28
(5.97)
6.15
(3.21)
31.92
(6.31)
24.07
(5.79)
12.19
(4.11)
3.27
(2.28)
255,000
0.21
70
206,000
0.19
60

69.21
(3.84)
48.41
(3.79)
89.71
(2.26)
20.65
(3.71)
67.57
(4.62)
51.99
(4.33)
33.65
(4.36)
20.47
(3.53)
636,000
0.54
150
550,000
0.50
150

72.79
(3.88)
74.96
(3.76)
78.41
(3.59)
43.33
(3.98)
81.79
(3.17)
63.46
(4.43)
31.39
(4.33)
13.91
(3.57)
540,000
0.45
150
489,000
0.45
150

1. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 1 (survey cash) but not in row 2 (add in-kind transfers).
3. All wage/salary hours and self-employment hours. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 3 but not in row 4 (correct self-employment earnings).

(5)
Removed by
Substantial
Assets4

(6)
Remaining
Extreme Poor
(After Survey
Adjustments)

(7)

(8)

Official
Poor

All
Households

7.82
(1.75)
21.47
(3.35)
29.69
(3.52)

32.01
(0.69)
25.70
(0.78)
62.98
(0.74)

9.40
(0.18)
69.73
(0.29)
84.76
(0.23)

9.36
(2.25)
0.00
(0.00)
58.40
(4.20)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
0.00
(0.00)
1,035,000
0.87
250
795,000
0.72
200

31.25
(0.76)
24.38
(0.70)
63.57
(0.78)
8.50
(0.44)
25.37
(0.69)
18.01
(0.55)
8.78
(0.44)
3.75
(0.32)
17,710,000
14.92
4,800
15,760,000
14.35
4,300

61.73
(0.26)
50.08
(0.27)
84.37
(0.24)
33.05
(0.36)
55.29
(0.27)
43.88
(0.26)
25.99
(0.22)
12.86
(0.20)
118,700,000
100
32,500
109,800,000
100
30,000

2. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 2 but not in row 3 (correct wage/salary earnings).
4. Extreme poor in Table 3 row 4 but not in row 5 (account for survey assets).

Source: Wave 9 of the public use 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011.
Notes: Standard errors calculated using replicate weights in parentheses. See notes to Table 3 for definition of "extreme poor" for each income measure. See the appendix for a description of the linkage to topical modules and a full
description of the variables used. Sample consists of households present in the survey in reference month 4. Households are weighted by the weights they are assigned in reference month 4. Measures referring to disability are calculated only
over households that appear in Wave 6 (from the Wave 6 topical module). Counts rounded according to disclosure avoidance rules.

52

Table 6. Comparison of CPS and SIPP Extreme Poverty Estimates for All Households

Specification
Survey-Reported Cash
Survey Only Adjustments
Correct Wage/Salary Earnings
Correct Self-Employment Earnings
Add In-Kind Transfers1
Account for Assets2
Administrative Data Adjustments
Correct Earnings
Correct Assets/Retirement Income
Add EITC
Correct OASDI/SSI
Correct Housing Assistance
Correct SNAP
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

(1)
CPS
Rate (%)
2.08
(0.08)

(2)
(3)
SIPP – Aligned Adjustments
Diff. in Rates,
Rate (%)
CPS – SIPP (pp)
2.97
-0.89***
(0.13)

2.05
(0.06)
2.03
(0.06)
1.35
(0.06)
0.80
(0.05)

2.68
(0.13)
2.07
(0.11)
1.30
(0.08)
0.96
(0.07)

-0.63***

0.41
(0.04)
0.34
(0.03)
0.34
(0.03)
0.23
(0.03)
0.21
(0.03)
0.18
(0.03)

0.48
(0.05)
0.40
(0.04)
0.35
(0.04)
0.31
(0.04)
0.31
(0.04)
0.29
(0.04)

-0.07

-0.04
0.05
-0.16*

-0.05
-0.01
-0.08*
-0.10**
-0.11**

(4)
(5)
SIPP – Original Adjustments
Diff. in Rates,
Rate (%)
CPS – SIPP (pp)
2.97
-0.89***
(0.13)
2.68
(0.13)
2.07
(0.11)
1.30
(0.08)
0.84
(0.07)

-0.63***

0.42
(0.05)
0.35
(0.04)
0.31
(0.04)
0.27
(0.04)
0.27
(0.04)
0.24
(0.04)

-0.01

-0.04
0.05
-0.04

-0.01
0.03
-0.04
-0.06
-0.06

1. SNAP, WIC, and housing assistance in SIPP (original adjustments). SNAP and housing in CPS, SIPP (aligned adjustments).
2. For SIPP (original adjustments), owns real estate equity > $25,000, liquid assets > $5,000, or total net worth > $50,000. For CPS and SIPP
(aligned adjustments), household has home value > $25,000 and has no mortgage, or has home value > $100,000 and has a mortgage.
Source: For SIPP, we use Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. For CPS, we use the 2012 CPS ASEC corresponding to
reference year 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Standard errors calculated using replicate weights in parentheses. For SIPP, sample consists of households with at least one member with a
PIK and present in reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights are adjusted for missing PIKs. For CPS, sample consists of households
with at least one member with a PIK and no members that are whole imputes. Survey weights adjusted for missing PIKs and whole imputes.

53

Table 7. Robustness Checks (Percentage of Households in Extreme Poverty)
(1)
$2/Day:
Half Minimum Wage
2.97
(0.13)

(2)
$2/Day:
No Housing Assistance
2.97
(0.13)

2.04
(0.11)

2.08
(0.10)

2.48
(0.12)

Correct Wage/Salary Earnings

1.83
(0.10)

1.86
(0.10)

2.17
(0.11)

Correct Self-Employment Earnings

1.31
(0.08)

1.32
(0.07)

1.54
(0.08)

Account for Assets

0.84
(0.07)

0.86
(0.07)

1.00
(0.07)

0.42
(0.05)

0.43
(0.05)

0.50
(0.05)

Correct Assets/Retirement Income

0.35
(0.04)

0.36
(0.04)

0.42
(0.05)

Add EITC

0.31
(0.04)

0.32
(0.04)

0.39
(0.04)

Correct OASDI/SSI

0.27
(0.04)

0.28
(0.04)

0.35
(0.04)

Correct Housing Assistance

0.27
(0.04)

0.34
(0.04)

Correct SNAP

0.24
(0.04)

0.34
(0.04)

Specification
Survey-Reported Cash
Survey Only Adjustments
Add In-Kind Transfers

Administrative Data Adjustments
Correct Earnings

(3)
$4/Day
3.68
(0.13)

Source: Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Standard errors calculated using replicate weights in parentheses. Sample consists of households with at least one member with a PIK and
present in reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights are adjusted for missing PIKs. In the “Half Minimum Wage” column, half of the
federal minimum wage ($3.625/hour) is used when correcting wage/salary earnings and self-employment earnings based on reported hours worked
(in Table 3, the full federal minimum wage of $7.25/hour is used in these adjustments). In the “No Housing Assistance” column, housing
assistance is not included in the adjustment for in-kind transfers (in Table 3, households that receive housing assistance are removed from extreme
poverty in the in-kind transfer adjustment). In the “$4/Day” column, households in extreme poverty are those with average incomes across the four
months of the wave less than or equal to $4/person/day.

54

Figure 1a. Household Type Distribution of Extreme Poor Subgroups After Adjustments
Share of Households
100%

90%

80%

Share of Households

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Svy Cash

After Svy In- After Svy W/S After Svy SE
Kind Transfers
Earn.
Earn.
Single Parents

Multiple Parents

After Svy
Assets

Single Individuals

After Admin. After Other Tax After NonAfter Admin.
Earn.
Data Income SNAP Admin.
SNAP
Transfers
Multiple Adults

Elderly

Figure 1b. Household Type Distribution of Extreme Poor Subgroups After Adjustments
Share of Individuals
100%

90%

80%

Share of Individuals

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Svy Cash

After Svy In- After Svy W/S After Svy SE
Kind Transfers
Earn.
Earn.
Single Parents

Multiple Parents

After Svy
Assets

Single Individuals

After Admin. After Other Tax After NonAfter Admin.
Earn.
Data Income SNAP Admin.
SNAP
Transfers
Multiple Adults

Elderly

Source: Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Sample consists of households with at least one member with a PIK and present in reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights
are adjusted for missing PIKs.

Share of Households Raised Above Income Threshold (%)

Figure 2. Share of Reported Cash Extreme Poor Households Raised Above Income Thresholds by
Administrative Data
100
90
80

70
60

SNAP

Housing
OASDI/SSI

Other Tax
Data Income

7.1
3.0
3.4

In-Kind Transfers
Cash

14.5

5.0

5.7
5.0

50

9.3

40
30

4.1
3.3

Earnings

7.0

55.1

20

1.4

38.6

25.0

10

0

7.5

0.6

0.8
4.1
14.5

$2/Day

Deep Poverty

Poverty

Poverty x 2

Source: Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Sample consists of households with at least one member with a PIK and present in reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights
are adjusted for missing PIKs. Other administrative tax data income includes asset income (taxable dividends, taxable and tax-exempt interest),
retirement distributions (gross distributions from employer-sponsored plans and IRA withdrawals), and the EITC.

56

Removed by
In-Kind Transfers

Figure 3. Share of Households in Extreme Poor Subgroups Raised Above Income Thresholds by
Administrative Data
Earnings

Other Tax
Data Income

Non-SNAP
Transfers

SNAP

47.2

19.7

14.3

18.0

$2/Day

Deep Poverty

27.0

Poverty

9.5

Poverty x 2

9.9

4.0

15.0

25.0

13.7

15.6

2.4

4.2 4.3

Removed by
Self-Employment Hours

Removed by
Wage/Salary Hours

0.4

2.9

$2/Day

89.3

Deep Poverty

0.6

0.6

83.0

Poverty
Poverty x 2

40.6

1.9

4.7

$2/Day

1.9

4.0

59.4

69.8

Deep Poverty

7.2

56.6

Poverty

10.2

38.5

Poverty x 2

10.6

25.8

0.7

0.6

5.5

0.7

3.8
1.5

Remaining Extreme Poor
(After Svy Corrections)

Removed by
Substantial Assets

2.5
$2/Day

46.7

Deep Poverty

20.7

30.0

Poverty

16.3

26.6

Poverty x 2

15.6

14.1
8.7

$2/Day

4.9
4.6

1.7

2.5

50.5

Deep Poverty

12.9

33.3

Poverty

6.2

23.8

Poverty x 2

11.4

0

4.5

10

1.9

5.6

6.9

4.5 3.1

1.5

5.0 4.9

0.7

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Share of Households Raised Above Income Threshold (%)

Source: Wave 9 of the 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011. Administrative data sources described in text.
Notes: Sample consists of households with at least one member with a PIK and present in reference month 4. Reference month 4 survey weights
are adjusted for missing PIKs. Other administrative tax data income includes asset income (taxable dividends, taxable and tax-exempt interest),
retirement distributions (gross distributions from employer-sponsored plans and IRA withdrawals), and EITC. Non-SNAP transfers include
OASDI, SSI, and housing assistance.
57

Figure 4. Mean Number of Material Hardships for Extreme Poor Subgroups
2.0
1.8

Number of Material Hardships

1.6
1.4

1.2
1.0
0.8

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Reported Cash
Extreme Poor

Removed by InKind Transfers

Removed by
Removed by
Wage/Salary Self-Employment
Earnings Based Earnings Based
on Hours
on Hours

Official Poor Average

Removed by
Substantial
Assets

Remaining
Extreme Poor
(After Survey
Adjustments)

Overall Average

Source: Wave 9 of the public use 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011.

Figure 5. Share of Households with Any Material Hardship for Extreme Poor Subgroups

Share of Households with Any Material Hardship

70%

60%
50%
40%

30%
20%
10%

0%

Reported Cash Removed by InExtreme Poor Kind Transfers

Removed by
Removed by
Wage/Salary Self-Employment
Earnings Based Earnings Based
on Hours
on Hours

Official Poor Average

Removed by
Substantial
Assets

Overall Average

Source: Wave 9 of the public use 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011.
58

Remaining
Extreme Poor
(After Survey
Adjustments)

Figure 6. Mean Number of Home Problems for Extreme Poor Subgroups
0.5

Number of Home Problems

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

Reported Cash
Extreme Poor

Removed by InKind Transfers

Removed by
Removed by
Wage/Salary Self-Employment
Earnings Based Earnings Based
on Hours
on Hours

Official Poor Average

Removed by
Substantial
Assets

Remaining
Extreme Poor
(After Survey
Adjustments)

Overall Average

Source: Wave 9 of the public use 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011.

Figure 7. Mean Number of Appliances Owned by Extreme Poor Subgroups
8

Number of Appliances Owned

7
6
5

4
3
2
1

0

Reported Cash
Extreme Poor

Removed by InKind Transfers

Removed by Removed by Self- Removed by
Remaining
Wage/Salary
Employment Substantial Assets Extreme Poor
Earnings Based Earnings Based
(After Survey
on Hours
on Hours
Adjustments)

Official Poor Average

Overall Average

Source: Wave 9 of the public use 2008 SIPP Panel, spanning January-July 2011.
59

Figure 8. Expenditures on Four Largest Transfer Programs Not in Administrative Data

Unemp. Insurance: 107

Veterans' Benefits: 51

Workers' Comp.: 30

Child Tax Credit: 28

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

2011 Expenditures (billions of dollars)

Notes: Does not include Medicare and Medicaid. OASDI, EITC, SSI, housing assistance, and SNAP are in the administrative data. Unemployment
insurance, veterans’ benefits, workers’ compensation, child tax credit, Public Assistance, school food programs, WIC, and LIHEAP are not in the
administrative data. Expenditures data from National Income and Product Account Table 3.12 and other sources; see appendix.

60

