                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

         DESIGNING EFFECTIVE TEACHER PERFORMANCE PAY PROGRAMS:
                  EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM TANZANIA

                                           Isaac Mbiti
                                         Mauricio Romero
                                         Youdi Schipper

                                       Working Paper 25903
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25902

                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2019

We are especially grateful to Karthik Muralidharan for his collaboration in the early
stages of this project and subsequent discussions. We thank the leadership and staff at
Twaweza for their collaboration and support on this project.            We would also like to
thank Austin Dempewolff, Mitch Downey, David Evans, John Friedman, Delia Furtado,
Guthrie Gray-Lobe, Ronak Jain, Joseph Mmbando, Molly Lipscomb Johnson, Terence
Johnson, Michael Kremer, Derek Neal, Omer Ozak, Bobby Pakzad-Hurson, Wayne Aaron
Sandholtz, Enrique Seira, Daniela Scur, Jay Shimshack, Bryce Millet Steinberg, Tavneet
Suri, and seminar/conference participants at UC San Diego, Universidad del Rosario,
NEUDC, PacDev, RISE, SOLE, and SREE for their comments. Erin Litzow and Jessica
Mahoney provided excellent research assistance through Innovations for Poverty Action. We are
also grateful to EDI Tanzania for their thorough data collection and implementation efforts. The
EDI team included Respichius Mitti, Phil Itanisia, Timo Kyessey, Julius Josephat, Nate
Sivewright, and Celine Guimas. This evaluation was funded by Twaweza with supplemental
funding from the REACH Trust Fund at the World Bank. We are grateful to Peter Holland,
Jessica Lee, Arun Joshi, Owen Ozier, Salman Asim, and Cornelia Jesse for their support
through the REACH initiative. Financial support from the Asociacion Mexicana de Cultura, A.C.
is gratefully acknowledged by Romero. This paper was partly written while Mbiti was visiting the
Brown University Economics Department and the Population Studies and Training Center (PSTC).
We received IRB approval from Innovations for Poverty Action, UC San Diego, and University
of Virginia. The protocol was also reviewed and approved by the Tanzania Commission for
Science and Technology (COSTECH). A randomized controlled trials registry entry and the pre-
analysis plan are available at: https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1009 The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25903.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Isaac Mbiti, Mauricio Romero, and Youdi Schipper. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Designing Effective Teacher Performance Pay Programs: Experimental Evidence from Tanzania
Isaac Mbiti, Mauricio Romero, and Youdi Schipper
NBER Working Paper No. 25903
May 2019
JEL No. C93,H52,I21,M52,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

We use a field experiment in Tanzania to compare the effectiveness on learning of two teacher
performance pay systems. The first is a Pay for Percentile system (a rank-order tournament). The
second rewards teachers based on multiple proficiency thresholds. Pay for Percentile can (under
certain conditions) induce optimal effort among teachers, but our threshold system is easier to
implement and provides teachers with clearer goals and targets. Both systems improved student
test scores. However, the multiple-thresholds system was more effective in boosting student
learning and is less costly.

Isaac Mbiti                                                     Youdi Schipper
Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy                   Twaweza
University of Virginia                                          127 Mafinga Road
P. O. Box 400893                                                off Kinondoni Road
Charlottesville, VA 22904                                       P.O. Box 38342
and NBER                                                        Dar es Salaam
imbiti@virginia.edu                                             Tanzania
                                                                yschipper@twaweza.org
Mauricio Romero
Centro de Investigacion Economica
ITAM
Mexico
mtromero@itam.mx




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1009
1     Introduction
Over the past two decades, global education priorities have shifted from increasing pri-
mary school enrollment to promoting policies that improve learning. This shift has been
driven in part by evidence revealing poor and stagnant levels of learning among stu-
dents in developing countries, despite significant investments in education (World Bank,
2018). Given the central role of teachers in the education production function (Hanushek
& Rivkin, 2012; Chetty, Friedman, & Rockoff, 2014b, 2014a), as well as the large share
of the education budget devoted to their compensation, policy makers and researchers
are increasingly interested in interventions that increase the effectiveness of teachers.
Teacher performance pay programs are seen as a potential policy response to address
these concerns because they strengthen the links between teacher renumeration and stu-
dent learning outcomes (World Bank, 2018; Bruns, Filmer, & Patrinos, 2011).1 However,
there is limited evidence on how to best structure teacher incentives.
   Insights from economic theory suggest that sophisticated teacher incentive designs,
such as those based on rank-order tournaments, are more effective and may induce
greater — and potentially socially optimal — levels of effort among teachers as opposed
to those based on proficiency thresholds (Neal & Schanzenbach, 2010; Neal, 2011; Bar-
levy & Neal, 2012; Loyalka, Sylvia, Liu, Chu, & Shi, in press). However, the theoretical
advantages of rank-order tournament incentive schemes may not materialize in practice
because participants need to “think strategically about their co-workers’ efforts to find
a Nash equilibrium” (Charness & Kuhn, 2011). That is, it may be more difficult for
teachers to determine how to react optimally to such schemes. In contrast, incentive
schemes based on proficiency thresholds are perceived as more transparent and easier
to implement compared to tournaments. Such incentive designs are commonly used
in education systems, despite their well-known shortcomings — including encouraging
teachers to focus on marginal students (Neal & Schanzenbach, 2010). Since each incen-
tive system has its own set of practical and theoretical advantages and disadvantages,
there is a need for empirical studies that compare the effectiveness of different designs.
   We conduct a randomized experiment that examines the effectiveness of two differ-
ent incentive schemes in a nationally representative set of 180 Tanzanian public schools.
The first is a “Pay for Percentile” (a rank-order tournament) scheme based on research
    1 Teacherperformance pay programs have been implemented in both developed and developing con-
texts. For instance, the share of US school districts with teacher performance pay programs has increased
by more than 40% from 2004 to 2012 (Imberman, 2015). Less developed countries such as Brazil, Chile,
and Pakistan have also implemented performance pay programs, often as large pilot programs (Alger,
2014; Ferraz & Bruns, 2012; Barrera-Osorio & Raju, in press; Contreras & Rau, 2012).



                                                   1
by Barlevy and Neal (2012). The second is a “Levels” scheme that features multiple
proficiency thresholds. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first documented im-
plementation of proficiency-based teacher incentives with multiple (curricular-based)
thresholds. Both types of incentive programs rewarded teachers for the performance of
their students on externally administered tests in math, Kiswahili, and English in first,
second, and third grade.2 To facilitate comparisons, the per-student bonus budget was
equalized (ex-ante) across grades, subjects, and treatment arms. The average teacher
bonus was equal to approximately 3.5% of the annual net salary (roughly half a month’s
pay).3 Further, all teachers in our study were provided with baseline student reports so
they were aware of each students’ initial skill (or proficiency) level. Following Neal (2013)
and Mbiti et al. (in press), we evaluate the incentive programs using data from both the
incentivized (or “high-stakes”) test that was administered to all students to determine
teacher bonuses and a non-incentivized (or “low-stakes”) test that was administered to
a sample of students for research purposes.4
  In the 60 schools assigned to the Pay for Percentile arm, students were first tested and
then assigned to one of several “baseline ability groups” based on their learning level
(across all schools). At the end of the school year, students were re-tested and ranked
within their assigned group based on their test scores. Teachers were rewarded in pro-
portion to their students’ rankings within each group. By handicapping the differences
in initial student performance across teachers, the system does not penalize teachers
who serve disadvantaged students. To ensure that teachers understood the incentive
scheme, we developed information packets that used culturally appropriate scripts and
examples, and also budgeted extra time to explain the design details in this treatment.
  In the 60 schools assigned to receive incentives based on proficiency targets (the “Lev-
els” arm), teachers earned bonuses based on their students’ mastery of several grade-
specific skills. As incentive programs using single-proficiency thresholds encourage
teachers to focus on students close to the passing threshold, we included several thresh-
olds to mitigate this concern. The skill thresholds were salient milestones based on the
national curriculum and ranged from very basic (e.g., number recognition) to more com-
plex skills (e.g., multiplication) in order to allow teachers to earn rewards from a wide
   2 English  was dropped from the national curriculum in first and second grades in the middle of the
experiment. We therefore focus on our analysis on math and Kiswahili test scores and present the analysis
of English scores in the Appendix.
   3 Similar incentive sizes were used in Fryer (2013); Glewwe, Ilias, and Kremer (2010); Mbiti et al. (in

press); Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011); Lavy (2002); Ladd (1999); Vigdor (2008). See Leigh (2012)
for additional details.
   4 Both types of tests were conducted in control schools. However, the results of the “incentivized” test

did not trigger any payments in these schools.


                                                    2
range of students. This system retains the clarity of more basic single-proficiency thresh-
old systems. Since teachers in developing contexts are generally unfamiliar with incen-
tive schemes, such clarity can be an important factor in encouraging the widespread
acceptance of the system. Further, Miller and Babiarz (2013) argue that threshold (or
“bright-line”) designs are well-suited for situations where the thresholds correspond to
important goals or objectives. As reward payments for each skill were inversely pro-
portional to the number of students that attained the skill, harder-to-obtain skills were
rewarded more.5 Since the Levels system only requires students to be tested at the end
of the year, it is simpler to implement than the Pay for Percentile system which requires
linked beginning and end of year student test scores. However, as rewards are based on
absolute learning levels, the system may disadvantage teachers who serve students from
poorer backgrounds.
   We report two main findings. First, both types of teacher incentives are effective
at improving learning outcomes compared to the control group, especially when we
examine the results from the incentivized tests. Focusing on the results at the end of the
second year of the program, we find modest test score increases for students in Pay for
Percentile schools relative to students in control schools. Using a composite measure of
test-scores across subjects (math and Kiswahili), students in this treatment arm scored
.13σ higher (p-value .027) compared to the control group. The Levels treatment was also
effective at increasing student learning. At the end of the second year, the composite test
scores of students in the Levels treatment were .22σ higher (p-value < 0.01) compared
to the control group.
   Test score gains in both treatments were lower on the non-incentivized tests. Com-
posite test scores increased by .044σ (p-value .31) and .096σ (p-value .037) in Pay for
Percentile schools and Levels schools. As the test content was similar, the differences
in treatment effects are likely due to differences in student effort on test taking. The
incentivized tests involved the whole classroom and were typically used as official end
of school year tests. This could induce teachers to encourage their students to exert
(relatively) more effort on these tests. In contrast, the non-incentivized tests involved
a smaller number of students and were conducted in a more inconspicuous manner.6
The effects of student test-taking effort on test scores has been documented in previous
   5 As  bonus payments were determined ex-post based on pass rates, teachers face some uncertainty
about the exact bonus sizes. We abstract from this by assuming an individual teacher’s effort would
have a negligible effect on the aggregate pass rate and that teachers have sufficient ex-ante information
(e.g., through experience) to have reasonable predictions about the pass rates. Appendix B provides more
details.
    6 Appendix C provides more details about the testing procedures.




                                                   3
studies such as Levitt, List, Neckermann, and Sadoff (2016), Gneezy et al. (2017), and
Mbiti et al. (in press).
   Our second main finding suggests that the details of teacher incentive design mat-
ter. Despite the theoretical advantages of the Pay for Percentile system, in this setting
the Levels incentive system was more effective at improving learning than the Pay for
Percentile system. At the end of the second year, the estimated treatment effect on
the incentivized composite test score in Levels schools was .096σ higher (p-value .097)
relative to the estimates for Pay for Percentile schools. The treatment effect on the non-
incentivized composite test score shows a similar pattern, although the difference is
smaller (.052σ) and statistically insignificant (p-value .29). The greater learning gains in
Levels schools are also reflected in lower grade repetition rates in those schools relative
to Pay for Percentile schools. At the end of the second year, students in Levels schools
were 3.3 percentage points less likely (p-value .048) to repeat a grade compared the stu-
dents in the control group. As 14 percent of students in control schools repeated a grade,
this represents a 25 percent reduction. This reduction in repetition among Levels schools
was significantly different (p-value .041) from the limited (and insignificant) effect in the
Pay for Percentile treatment.
   We also use a comprehensive set of survey data collected from school administrators,
teachers, and students to shed light on theoretically relevant mechanisms. We do not
find any evidence of negative treatment effects on non-incentivized subjects such as sci-
ence, suggesting that learning gains in incentivized subjects were not at the expense of
learning in other subjects. Despite the concerns that the Levels system may induce teach-
ers to focus on marginal students, we find similar learning gains across all five quintiles
of the student baseline test score distribution in the second year (using composite test
scores) in both treatment arms.
   Given the well-documented concerns about teachers misunderstanding incentive de-
signs (Goodman & Turner, 2013; Fryer, 2013), teacher comprehension was high under
both systems, allowing us to rule out a differential lack of understanding as a major
driving factor. However, even if teachers understood how payments were made, those in
the Pay for Percentile schools may have had a relatively harder time determining how to
best react to the incentive. For instance, if teachers had limited information (or ambigu-
ity) about the efforts and capabilities of other teachers in the tournament, they may have
reduced their own effort in the Pay for Percentile scheme if they believed they were not
competitive. Consistent with this notion, teachers in the Pay for Percentile schools re-
ported they expected to receive 18 percent lower bonus payments, on average, compared
to their Levels counterparts. These lower expectations could have dampened teachers’


                                             4
responsiveness to the incentives and reduced effort. In addition, teachers in the Levels
system were better able to articulate clear and specific targets for their students on the
incentivized tests, perhaps due to the clearer reward structure and salient thresholds.
   Our study contributes to debate on the optimal design of teacher incentives. There are
only a limited set of adequately powered experimental studies that compare different
teacher incentive designs (e.g., Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011); Loyalka et al.
(in press); Fryer Jr, Levitt, List, and Sadoff (2012)).7 Our study provides the first evi-
dence on the effectiveness of a novel multiple threshold incentive system tied to specific
curriculum objectives. In addition, it shows that such system can elicit greater effort
from teachers and deliver greater learning outcomes in early grades when compared to
a more sophisticated cost-equivalent rank-order tournament scheme. This highlights the
importance of the practical limitations of tournaments outlined in Charness and Kuhn
(2011). In addition, salient learning targets, such as those used in our Levels design, can
promote teacher effectiveness, especially in settings where teacher capacity is relatively
limited.
   Overall, our results are consistent with the existing evidence suggesting that teacher
incentives tend to be more effective in contexts where there is low accountability in the
education system (Imberman, 2015; Ganimian & Murnane, 2016; Glewwe & Muralidha-
ran, 2016). However, only a limited number of studies have examined tournament style
teacher incentives, and we are only aware of two studies in developing country contexts
that specifically evaluate Pay for Percentile schemes (see Loyalka et al. (in press) and
Gilligan, Karachiwalla, Kasirye, Lucas, and Neal (2018)).8
   Since education systems in developing countries face numerous challenges including
accountability constraints and lower teacher capacity relative to global scales, evidence
that can provide policy makers with insights on the relative cost-effectiveness of pro-
grams that can improve learning outcomes is especially important (World Bank, 2014,
2018). Our results highlight the trade-offs faced by education authorities who have to
consider the effectiveness and feasibility of implementation of different teacher incentive
designs, often with limited information about the education production function.
   7 There  is a small but growing set of studies that compare the effectiveness of different types of provider
incentives in the healthcare sector in developing countries. Examples include Singh and Masters (2018)
and Mohanan, Donato, Miller, Truskinovsky, and Vera-Hernández (2019).
    8 Loyalka et al. (in press) find that Pay for Percentile incentives increased test scores among math

teachers in Chinese schools. Gilligan et al. (2018) find that Pay for Percentile have no impact on student
learning in Ugandan schools, except for top students in schools with textbooks. In the US context, Fryer Jr
et al. (2012) find that Pay for Percentile schemes are most effective when the rewards are framed as losses,
where teachers are first given a lump sum payment, and then required to return part of the payment if
their students do not meet the required targets.



                                                      5
2     Experimental Design

2.1     Context
Tanzania allocates about one-fifth of overall government spending (roughly 3.5 percent
of GDP) to education (World Bank, 2017). Much of this spending has been devoted to
promoting educational access. As a consequence, net enrollment rates in primary school
increased from 53 percent in 2000 to 80 percent in 2014 (World Bank, 2017). Despite these
gains in educational access, educational quality remains a major concern. Resources
and materials are scarce. For example, in 2017 only 14 percent of schools had access
to electricity and just over 40 percent had access to potable water (World Bank, 2017).
Nationwide, there are approximately 43 pupils per teacher (World Bank, 2017), although
early grades often have much larger class sizes. In 2013, approximately five pupils shared
a single mathematics textbook, while 2.5 pupils shared a reading textbook (World Bank,
2017). Student learning levels are also low. In 2012, data from nationwide assessments
showed that only 38 percent of children aged 9-13 are able to read and do arithmetic
at the grade 2 level, suggesting that educational quality is a pressing policy problem
(Uwezo, 2013).
  The poor quality of education is driven in part by limited accountability in the ed-
ucation system. Quality assurance systems (e.g., school inspectors) typically focus on
superficial issues such as the state of the school yard, rather than on issues that may
affect learning (Mbiti, 2016). The lack of accountability is further reflected in teacher ab-
sence rates. Data from unannounced spot checks shows that almost a quarter of teachers
were absent from school, and only half of the teachers who were at school were in the
classroom (World Bank, 2011). As a result, almost 60 percent of planned instructional
time is lost (World Bank, 2011).
  Tanzanian teachers’ unions have been actively lobbying for better pay as a way to
address quality concerns in the education system. Yet, the correlation between teacher
compensation and student learning is extremely low (Kane, Rockoff, & Staiger, 2008;
Bettinger & Long, 2010; Woessmann, 2011; de Ree, Muralidharan, Pradhan, & Rogers,
2018). Moreover, teachers salaries are currently relatively high — approximately 500,000
TZS per month (∼ US$300) or roughly 4.5 times GDP per capita (World Bank, 2017)
— and approximately 60 percent of the education budget is devoted to teacher com-
pensation.9 Despite the relatively attractive wages of Tanzanian teachers, the teachers’
union called a strike in 2012 to demand a 100 percent increase in pay (Reuters, 2012; PRI,
    9 The
        average teacher in a sub-Saharan African country earns almost four times GDP per capita, com-
pared to OECD teachers who earn 1.3 times GDP per capita (OECD, 2017; World Bank, 2017).


                                                 6
2013).10


2.2       Interventions and Implementation
The interventions in this study were developed in close collaboration with Twaweza, an
East African civil society organization that focuses on citizen agency and public service
delivery. The interventions were part of a series of projects launched under a broader
program umbrella known as KiuFunza (‘Thirst for learning’ in Kiswahili).11
   The KiuFunza program targets teachers in focal grades 1, 2 and 3 who are responsible
for teaching the focal subjects Kiswahili, English and math (arithmetic). A budget of
US$150,000 per year for teacher and head teacher incentives was split between the two
treatment arms in proportion to the number of students enrolled. As a result, the prize
money in each treatment arm was approximately US$3 per student. All interventions
were implemented by Twaweza in partnership with EDI (a Tanzanian research firm) and
a set of local district partners. Head teachers were offered a bonus of 20 percent of the
combined bonus of all incentivized teachers in his or her school.12
   Within each intervention arm, Twaweza distributed information describing the pro-
gram in early 2015 and 2016: first to focal grade and subject teachers and head teachers,
then to their respective communities via public meetings. From the program’s onset
Twaweza informed teachers the program would last two years. The implementation
teams also conducted mid-year school visits to re-familiarize teachers with the program,
gauge teacher understanding of the bonus payment mechanisms, and answer any re-
maining questions.
   At the end of the school year, all students in grades 1, 2, and 3 in every school,
including control schools, were tested in Kiswahili, English, and math. Because this
test was used to determine teacher incentive payments, it was considered “high-stakes”
(from the teachers’ perspective). Our non-incentivized research test was conducted on
a different day, but within a few weeks from the incentivized test. Both sets of tests
were based on the Tanzanian curriculum and were developed by Tanzanian education
professionals using the Uwezo learning assessment framework.13 We provide additional
  10 In recent years, other teacher strikes to demand pay increases have occurred in South Africa, Kenya,
Guinea, Malawi, Swaziland, Uganda, Benin and Ghana.
   11 The first set of interventions under this program were launched in 2013 and evaluated by Mbiti et al.

(in press).
   12 Twaweza included head teachers in the incentive design to ensure that they would be stakeholders in

improving learning outcomes. Likewise, any scaled-up teacher incentive program would feature bonuses
for head teachers.
   13 Uwezo learning assessments have been routinely conducted in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda since

2010.


                                                    7
details about the design and implementation of both types of tests in Appendix C.


2.2.1   Pay for Percentile design

The Pay for Percentile design used in our intervention is based on research by Barlevy
and Neal (2012). They show that this incentive structure can, under certain conditions,
induce teachers to exert socially optimal levels of effort. One important necessary con-
dition for Pay for Percentile to induce optimal effort is that teachers believe they are
competing in properly seeded (or fair) contests. To achieve this, the Pay for Percentile
uses a modified rank-order tournament structure that accounts for the heterogeneity in
students baseline learning levels across classrooms (and teachers). Specifically, the sys-
tem divides students into groups based on their academic achievement (or “ability”),
and a separate rank-order tournament is conducted for each group. Teacher’s are then
rewarded on the basis of their students’ rank-order within each ability group. With-
out this adjustment, teachers in schools that served students from affluent backgrounds
would be advantaged, and those serving less-affluent students may be discouraged from
exerting effort.
   In order to implement this system in practice, we created student groups with similar
initial learning levels based on test score data from the previous school year for each
subject-grade combination. Students without test scores in second and third grade were
grouped together in an “unknown” ability group.14 Since none of the first grade students
had incoming test scores, we created broad country-level ability groups and assigned all
first grade students within a school to the same group based on the historical average
test scores for the school. Thus, all first-grade students within a school were assigned to
the same group.15
   To compute the payment structure, we divide the total prize money in this treatment
arm equally across grades and subjects. We then apportion the subject-grade budget to
each ability-group in proportion to the total number of students in the grade who are in
each ability-group. At the end of the year, we ranked students within each ability-group
according to their endline test score. Within each ability-group we assigned teachers
points proportional to the rank of their students. For a given ability-group, a teacher
would receive 99 points for a student in the top 1% of the group and zero points for a
student in the bottom 1% of the group. In other words, the rewards increase linearly
in rank. The total amount of money paid per point is the same across all groups, in all
  14 Roughly 20% of students are grouped into the “unknown” ability group. This includes newly enrolled
students, as well as students who were enrolled but for some reason were not tested at baseline.
  15 Our results are robust to excluding grade 1 students from the sample. See Table D.1 in Appendix D.




                                                  8
subjects, and in all grades.
  For example, suppose there is a total of US$1,000 for teacher incentives and that there
are two ability groups with 40 and 60 students. Accordingly, the total budget for teacher
bonuses in each ability group would be US$400 and US$600. In each ability-group, the
total bonus would be equal to the sum of all teacher rewards or

                                       100
                                                        N
                                  X=   ∑ b ∗ (i − 1) ∗ 100
                                       i =1

where X is the total budget for teacher bonuses in each ability group, N is the number of
students in each ability group, i indexes a student’s percentile rank on the endline test,
and b is the teacher reward per point. Since ∑100
                                               i =1 (i − 1) = 4, 950, the reward per point (b)
is roughly ∼US$0.20 for both groups. Thus, in this example if a student was in the top
1% of the either ability-group, their teacher would earn 99 ∗ 0.2 or US$20. Conversely,
a median student would earn their teacher 50 ∗ 0.2 or US$10. In the first year of our
study, the total bonus available to teachers in Pay for Percentile schools was US$70,820
and total enrollment was 22,296. For each grade and subject, teachers earned US$1.77
for each student in the top 1% and US$0.89 for each student in the 50th percentile.
   Although this design can deliver socially optimal levels of effort, it may be challeng-
ing to implement at scale, particularly in settings with weak administrative capacity
such as Tanzania. For instance, maintaining child-level panel databases is a non-trivial
administrative challenge. Moreover, the Pay for Percentile system may prove difficult to
grasp for teachers. It presents each teacher with a series of tournaments (for each ability
group in each subject that they teach) and therefore the bonus payoff is relatively hard
to predict, even if the design guarantees a fair system. Furthermore, the uncertainty
introduced by competing against teachers from schools across the whole country may
dilute the incentive.


2.2.2   Proficiency thresholds (Levels) design

Proficiency based systems are easier for teachers to understand and provide more ac-
tionable targets than rank-order or value-added tournaments. Consequently, such sys-
tems are likely to increase motivation among teachers and head teachers; however, they
have well-known limitations. For example, they are unable to adequately account for
differences in the initial distribution of student preparation across schools and class-
rooms. Moreover, this type of system can encourage teachers to focus on students close
to the proficiency threshold, at the expense of students who are well above or below


                                              9
the threshold (Neal & Schanzenbach, 2010). To mitigate this concern, our Levels design
features multiple thresholds ranging from very basic skills to more advanced skills in
the curriculum. This design allows teachers to earn bonuses for helping a broader set
of students, including students with lower and higher baseline test scores.16 Miller and
Babiarz (2013) argue that incentive designs based on “bright-line” performance thresh-
olds (and goals) can be effective in helping service providers to focus on achieving these
goals. They also argue that bright-line designs are well suited to helping providers focus
on achieving important outcomes.17
   In Levels schools, teachers are paid in proportion to the number of skills students in
grades 1-3 are able to master in mathematics, Kiswahili, and English. The total budget
is split across grades in proportion to the number of students enrolled in each grade.
The budget is then divided equally among subjects and skills within each subject. For
example, suppose the budget allocated to one grade for demonstrating proficiency in
addition (a math skill) is US$1,000. If there are 500 students in the grade, and 250
pass the addition portion of the math test, then a teacher would receive US$4 for every
student in her class that was proficient in addition.
   Table 1 shows the skills (i.e., the thresholds) tested in each grade-subject combination
and the corresponding (ex-post) payment per student that each teacher would receive.
Since the per pass bonus paid ex-post is equal to the skill budget divided by the number
of students passing the skill, the budget for easier-to-obtain skills is spread across more
students — resulting in a lower per-pass bonus. Conversely, harder-to-obtain skills have
a higher per pass bonus. Thus, teachers have the potential to earn larger bonuses if their
students are proficient in a larger number of skills, especially harder-to-obtain skills.18


                                         [Table 1 about here.]
  16 As  discussed in Appendix B, a key practical challenge is ensuring that the thresholds are sufficiently
close together to prevent teachers from ignoring students who fall between two thresholds.
  17 In the health sector, Miller and Babiarz (2013) argue bright-lines may be especially appropriate when

thresholds have clinical significance (e.g., vaccination rates). In our early grade education setting, the
fundamental nature of the numeracy and literacy thresholds in our design corresponds with this criteria.
  18 Enrollment at each school is on average 1.6% of total enrollment across Levels schools. Hence, we can

rule out teachers strategically choosing how many students to push over a threshold to maximize earnings
because the total number of her students passing the threshold has a negligible effect on the overall pass
rate across schools.




                                                    10
2.3      A Note on English Language Teaching
As Kiswahili is the official language of instruction in primary schools in Tanzania, En-
glish is taught as a second language. However, English is rarely spoken outside of the
classroom, so English language skills are quite low in Tanzania. For instance, only 12
percent of grade 3 students were proficient at the grade 2 level in English (Uwezo, 2012).
Given the challenges of teaching English in Tanzania, the subject was removed from the
national curriculum in grade 1 and 2 in 2015 to allow teachers to focus on numeracy
and literacy in Kiswahili in those grades. English was still taught in grade 3, under a
revised curriculum. However, the Education Ministry provided little guidance on how
to transition to the new curriculum and as a result, there was substantial variation in
its implementation. Some schools stopped teaching English in 2015, while others con-
tinued until 2016. In addition, there was no official guidance on whether to use grade
1 English materials in grade 3, as no new books were issued that reflected the curricu-
lum changes. To maintain consistency between the curriculum and KiuFunza incentives,
Twaweza dropped English from the incentives in grade 1 and 2 in 2016, but included
grade 3 English teachers. To avoid confusion, we also communicated that our end-of-
year English test in 2016 would still use the pre-reform grade 3 curriculum. Given these
issues in the implementation of the curriculum reform, it is unclear how to interpret the
results for English. In addition, these estimates are less policy relevant after the reform.
Therefore, in order to facilitate a clearer analysis, we only present results for mathemat-
ics and Kiswahili in the main text. Table D.2 in Appendix D presents the effects of our
treatments on English test scores in grade 3.


3      Data and Empirical Specification

3.1      Sample Selection
The teacher incentive programs were evaluated using a randomized design. First, 10
districts were randomly selected (see Figure 1).19 The study sample of 180 schools was
taken from a previous field experiment — studied by Mbiti et al. (in press) — where all
students in grades 1, 2, and 3 had been tested at the end of 2014. These tests provided the
baseline student-level test score information required to implement the Pay for Percentile
treatment. As mentioned above, the Pay for Percentile design will deliver optimal levels
    19 The
         program was implemented in 11 districts, as one district was included non-randomly by Twaweza
for piloting and training. We did not survey schools in the pilot district.



                                                 11
of effort only if teachers believe they are competing in fair contests. Thus, having reliable
information about student initial learning levels was key.20
   Within each district, we randomly allocated schools to one of our three experimental
groups. Thus, in each district six schools were assigned to the Levels treatment, six
schools to the Pay for Percentile treatment, and six schools served as controls. In total,
there were 60 schools in each group. The treatment assignment was also stratified by
treatment of the previous RCT and by an index of the overall learning level of students
in each school. Further details are provided in Appendix A.

                                       [Figure 1 about here.]


3.2       Data and Balance
Over the two-year evaluation, our survey teams visited each school at the beginning
and end of the school year. We gathered detailed information about each school from
the head teacher, including: facilities, management practices, and head teacher charac-
teristics. We also conducted individual surveys with the teachers in our evaluation to
determine personal characteristics, including education and experience, and effort mea-
sures, such as teaching practices and teacher absence. In addition, we conducted two
types of classroom observations, in which we recorded teacher-student interactions.
  Within each school, we surveyed and tested a random sample of 40 students (10 stu-
dents from grades 1, 2, 3, and 4). Grade 4 students were included in our research sample
in order to measure potential spillovers to other grades. Students in grades 1, 2, and
3 who were sampled in the first year of the program were tracked over the two-year
evaluation period. Students in grade 4 in the first year were not tracked into grade 5
due to budget constraints. In the second year of the program we sampled an additional
10 incoming Grade 1 students. We collected a variety of data from our student sample
including test scores, individual characteristics such as age and gender, and perceptions
of the school environment. Crucially, the test scores collected on the sample of students
are “low-stakes” for teachers and students. We supplemented the results from this set
of non-incentivized student tests with the results from the incentivized tests that were
used to determine teacher bonus payments and were conducted in all schools, including
control schools. Most articles studying teacher performance pay use incentivized tests
to measure the overall treatment effects. However, it is unclear whether incentivized or
  20 We do not have data on whether teachers believe they are competing in a fair contest. However, before
receiving any payment over 90% of teachers agreed or strongly agreed that the amount paid by Twaweza
will be a fair, suggesting teachers think the contests are fair.


                                                   12
non-incentivized tests are better for measuring treatment effects. We therefore present
results from both tests for completeness.21
  Although the content (subject order, question type, phrasing, difficulty level) is consis-
tent across the incentivized and non-incentivized tests, there are a number of important
differences in the test administration. The non-incentivized test took longer (40 minutes)
than the incentivized test (15 minutes). The non-incentivized test had more questions
in each subject to avoid bottom- and top-coding, and also included an “other subject”
module at the end to test spillover effects. Further, even though both tests were adminis-
tered individually to students, the testing environment was different. Non-incentivized
tests were administered during a regular school day by survey enumerators. In contrast,
the incentivized test was more “official” as all students in grades 1-3 were tested on a
specified day. On the test day, a Twaweza test team would administer the tests in ded-
icated classrooms, with head teachers and teachers managing the flow of students. In
addition, most schools used the incentivized test as the official end-of-year test. A num-
ber of measures were introduced to enhance test security. First, to prevent test-taking by
non-target grade candidates, students could only be tested if their name had been listed
and their photo taken at baseline. Second, each student was assigned one test randomly
selected out of ten test versions to prevent copying during the test and to reduce the
benefits of leakage. Finally, tests were handled, administered, and electronically scored
by Twaweza teams without any teacher involvement.
  Most student, school, teacher, and household characteristics are balanced across treat-
ment arms (See Table 2, Column 4). The average student in our sample was 8.9 years
old in 2013, went to a school with 679 students, and was taught by a teacher who was 38
years old. We were able to track 88% of students in our sample at the end of the second
year, with no differential attrition. Teacher turnover rates over the two-year study period
were generally balanced across treatments (see Table D.3 in the Appendix D.).



                                          [Table 2 about here.]
  21 As  argued by Mbiti et al. (in press): “The confirmation that test-taking effort is a salient component of
measured test scores by Levitt et al. (2016) and Gneezy et al. (2017) presents a conundrum for education
researchers as to what the appropriate measure of human capital should be for assessing the impact of
education interventions. On one hand, low-stakes tests may provide a better estimate of a true measure of
human capital that does not depend on external stimuli for performance. On the other hand, test-taking
effort is costly, and students may not demonstrate their true potential under low-stakes testing, in which
case, an ‘incentivized’ testing procedure may be a better measure of true human capital.”




                                                      13
3.3         Empirical Specification
We estimate the effect of our interventions on students’ test scores using the following
OLS equation:

      Zisdt = δ0 + δ1 Levelss + δ2 P4Pctiles + δ3 Zisd,t=0 + Xi δ4 + Xs δ5 + γd + γg + ε isdt ,   (1)

where Zisdt is the test score of student i in school s in district d at the end of year t.
Levels and P4Pctile are binary variables which capture the treatment assignment of each
school. Xi is a series of student characteristics (age, gender and grade), Xs is a set of
school characteristics including facilities, students per teacher, school committee charac-
teristics, average teacher age, average teacher experience, average teacher qualifications,
the fraction of female teachers, and the stratification dummies. γd is a set of district fixed
effects, and γg is a set of grade fixed effects.
   We scale our test scores using an Item Response Theory (IRT) model and then nor-
malize them using the mean and standard deviation of the control schools to facilitate
a clear interpretation of our results. We include baseline test scores and district fixed
effects in our specifications to increase precision.22
   We examine the impact of the incentives using both the non-incentivized and incen-
tivized testing data. However, given the limited set of student characteristics in the in-
centivized test data, this analysis includes fewer student level controls. We use a similar
specification to examine teachers’ behavioral responses.


4      Results
In this section, we first explore how both incentive systems affected student test scores
and grade repetition. We then explore whether the incentives increase observable teacher
effort. We then turn to heterogeneity by students and teacher characteristics. Finally, we
explore some possible mechanisms that could explain our results on test scores.


4.1         Test Scores
We present the estimated treatment effects of the incentive programs on student learning
using data from both the non-incentivized test (Table 3, Panel A) and the incentivized
test (Table 3, Panel B). As discussed earlier, we focus our main analysis on math and
    22 We
       also balanced the timing of our survey activities, including the non-incentivized tests, across
treatment arms. Hence, the results are not driven by imbalanced survey timing.


                                                  14
Kiswahili due to the curriculum changes that occurred. We provide estimates of the
intervention on English test scores in Table D.2 in Appendix D. To ameliorate concerns
due to multiple testing, we present a composite index of learning computed using an
Item Response Theory model.
   In the first year, both incentive schemes resulted in small but imprecisely estimated
changes in test-scores on the non-incentivized test. Focusing on the composite learning
index (Panel A, Column 3), test-scores increased by about .057σ (p-value .24) in Levels
schools relative to the control group. Test scores were -.029σ smaller (p-value .46) in
Pay for Percentile schools relative to control schools. In the second year of the program,
the estimated treatment effects on the non-incentivized test are generally larger than the
first-year estimates (Panel A, Columns 4-6). Test scores on the composite index increased
by .096σ (p-value .037) in Levels schools and .044σ (p-value .31) in Pay for Percentile
schools.
   Most of the existing literature on teacher incentives relies on data from incentivized
tests that are used to determine teacher rewards (Muralidharan & Sundararaman, 2011;
Fryer, 2013; Neal & Schanzenbach, 2010). Following this norm, we also present the
treatment effects of our interventions using incentivized exams (Panel B). Generally,
the estimated treatment effects are larger compared to those estimated using the non-
incentivized test (Panel A). In the first year of the program our composite measure of
learning was .17σ higher (p-value < 0.01) in Levels schools relative to the control group,
and .059σ higher in Pay for Percentile schools but this was not statistically significant (p-
value .28, see Column 3). In the second year, learning was .22σ higher (p-value < 0.01)
in Levels schools and .13σ higher (p-value .027) in Pay for Percentile schools.23
   The estimated treatment effects (on the incentivized test) for Levels schools are com-
parable with those found in previous RCTs in India and Mexico (Muralidharan & Sun-
dararaman, 2011; Behrman, Parker, Todd, & Wolpin, 2015). The estimated effects for
the Pay for Percentile design are lower than those found in Loyalka et al. (in press),
but larger than those in Gilligan et al. (2018).24 In addition, the results suggest that the
Levels design outperforms the Pay for Percentile design. Focusing on the composite test
scores, the estimated differences between the incentive designs (α3 and β 3 in Columns 3
and 6) are always negative (i.e., Levels outperforms Pay for Percentile), and statistically
significant in three out of four cases.
  23 The treatment effects on threshold specific pass rates are shown in Tables D.4- D.7 in Appendix D.
  24 For the full sample Gilligan et al. (2018) find that Pay for Percentile incentives have a small (0.01σ)
and statistically insignificant effect on learning. However, there is important heterogeneity in treatment
effects. In schools with books, Pay for Percentile incentives improve learning outcomes by 0.11σ on the
grade-relevant sub-test. In schools without books, there is no significant treatment effect on learning.


                                                    15
   The larger treatment effects found in the incentivized test are likely driven by test-
taking effort, where teachers had incentives to motivate their students to take the tests
seriously. The importance of student test-taking effort has been documented in other set-
tings such as an evaluation of teacher and student incentives in Mexico City (Behrman
et al., 2015). As discussed in Section 3.2, administration of the incentivized test was
tightly controlled by our implementation team. This mitigates any concerns about out-
right cheating. Assuming that all the differences between our incentivized and non-
incentivized results are driven by test-taking effort, student effort can increase test score
results between 0.016σ and 0.11σ (see Panel C). This is generally in line with the findings
of Gneezy et al. (2017) and Levitt et al. (2016).
   Given the reward structure, teachers in both treatment arms were motivated to en-
sure that their students took the incentivized test. There were no incentives to exclude
academically-weaker students because learning gains from all students would be re-
warded. In the second year of the study, teachers in the Levels schools were able to
increase student participation in the incentivized test by 5 percentage points. Their coun-
terparts in Pay for Percentile schools increased participation by 3 percentage points (see
Table D.8 in Appendix D). Following Lee (2009), we compute bounds on the treatment
effects by trimming the excess test takers from the left and right tails of the incentivized
test distribution. Focusing on the year-two results for brevity, the 95% confidence inter-
val for the treatment effects from this bounding exercise for math is from -0.023 to 0.32
in the Levels treatment and 0.014 to 0.17 in the Pay for Percentile treatment. The bounds
for Kiswahili range from 0.027 to 0.35 in the Levels and -0.0032 to 0.17 in the Pay for
Percentile (see Table D.9 in Appendix D).
   As discussed previously, we had limited information to properly group grade 1 stu-
dents in Pay for Percentile schools. As this may limit the effectiveness of the Pay for
Percentile scheme, we examine the effects of our interventions by focusing on grade 2
and 3 students, where we are able to appropriately group most students by ability. Our
results are generally robust to this sample restriction (see Table D.1 in Appendix D.).



                                   [Table 3 about here.]


4.2   Grade repetition
Cross-country comparisons reveal there is a negative correlation between income per
capita and the grade repetition rate in primary school (Manacorda, 2012). Grade rep-
etition is commonplace in developing countries, and is thought to impose significant

                                             16
individual and social costs, such as an increase in the probability that a student drops
out of school (Manacorda, 2012).
   In Tanzania, the introduction of the 3R (Reading, wRiting and aRithmetic) curriculum
in 2015 was accompanied by a change in grade repetition policy in grades 1, 2 and 3.
Promotion is no longer automatic and pupils who do not master basic skills can be forced
to repeat, based on a decision by the school committee (automatic promotion remains
in place after grade 3). Thus, we can use grade repetition as an additional outcome
measure of learning in early grades.
   We examine the impact of both treatments on grade repetition in Table 4. In 2015, the
first year of both the incentive program and the new retention policy, we do not find any
statistically significant changes in repetition rates in Levels or Pay for Percentile schools
(Column 1). At the end of the second year, repetition rates in Levels schools were 3.3
percentage points lower than the control group (p-value .048), a 24 percent reduction.
Among students in Pay for Percentile schools there was a small positive and statistically
insignificant effect on grade repetition. Formal hypothesis tests show that the estimated
reduction in repetition in Levels schools was significantly lower (p-value .041) compared
to the estimated change in Pay for Percentile schools. Given that repetition rates reflect
academic performance, this provides additional evidence that the Levels system leads to
greater learning improvements than the Pay for Percentile system.



                                   [Table 4 about here.]


4.3   Spillovers to Other Grades and Subjects
As the teacher incentives only covered numeracy and literacy in grades 1, 2, and 3, a
potential concern is that teachers and schools focus on these grades and subjects to the
detriment of other grades and subjects. For example, schools may shift resources such as
textbook purchases from higher grades to grades 1, 2, and 3. In addition, teachers may
cut back on teaching non-incentivized subjects such as science. On the other hand, if our
incentive programs improve literacy and numeracy skills, they may promote student
learning in other subjects and these gains may persist over time. In order to assess
possible spillovers, we examine test scores in science for grades 1, 2, and 3. We also
examine test scores in grade 4 to test for any negative spillovers in higher grades, as well
as the persistence of any learning gains induced by the program (in the second year of
the evaluation).


                                             17
   Overall, we do not see decreases in test scores of fourth graders, which suggests that
schools were not disproportionately shifting resources away from higher grades (Table
5, Panel A). In the first year of the program, composite test scores for grade 4 students in
Levels schools increased by .099σ (p-value .052) (Column 3). In Pay for Percentile schools,
we find relatively small (-.027σ) and statistically insignificant (p-value .59) effects on
composite test scores. Since we tested fourth-grade students and collected information
on those students at baseline, we conjecture that fourth-grade teachers assumed they
would be included in the incentives. As a result of this belief, they may have exerted
effort in the first year, but not in the second year once their non-eligibility had been
confirmed. This type of spillover was also documented by Kremer, Miguel, and Thornton
(2009), where a student incentive program for girls improved the performance of non-
eligible boys who believed they would also benefit from the program.25
   As third graders in the first year of our program transitioned to the fourth grade in the
second year of the program, the fourth-grade results in the second year suggest that the
learning gains from both incentive programs fade over time (Table 5, Panel A, Columns
4 to 6).
   Contrary to the concerns of teacher performance pay critics, the effects of both pro-
grams on science test scores are generally positive, suggesting that any estimated gains
attributable to the incentives are not coming at the expense of learning in other subjects
or domains that are not directly incentivized (see Table 5, Panel B).



                                        [Table 5 about here.]


4.4       Teacher Effort
Since the treatments were designed to elicit teacher effort, in this section we examine
teacher responsiveness to the incentives. We use teacher presence in school and in the
classroom as broad measures of teacher effort. Teacher presence was measured by our
survey team and was collected shortly after our team arrived at a school in the morn-
ing. Overall, we do not find any effect in this dimension of teacher effort across our
treatments (see Table 6, Panel A). We use data from student reports to examine addi-
tional dimensions of teacher effort in Panel B. According to students, teachers do not
  25 We also test for any spillover effects on the seventh grade primary school national exit exam (PSLE).
We do not find any evidence that our incentives affected students performance on those tests. See Table
D.10 in Appendix D.



                                                   18
provide any extra support in response to either treatment (Panel B, Column 1). Rela-
tive to the control group, teachers do not assign more (or less) homework to students
in either treatment. However, there are diverging patterns in the estimated coefficients.
Students in the Levels treatment report a small (but statistically insignificant) increase in
homework, while students in Pay for Percentile schools report a small (but statistically
insignificant) reduction in homework. Formal hypothesis tests show that the difference
in these estimates is statistically significant (p-value .065), suggesting that teachers as-
signed relatively more homework in Levels schools (Panel B, Column 2). There is also
evidence that the treatments altered the interactions between students and teachers. Stu-
dents in Levels schools were 8 percentage points (p-value .033) more likely to report that
the teacher called them by name in class. Students in Pay for Percentile schools reported
a 4.7 percentage point (p-value .14) increase. Corporal punishment is very common in
Tanzania. Almost 40 percent of students in the control group report had experienced
some form of corporal punishment during the school year. Our results suggest that
both incentives reduced incidences of corporal punishment. Students in Levels schools
reported a 3 percentage point reduction (p-value .39) in corporal punishment. The re-
ported reduction in Pay for Percentile schools was 6.1 percentage points (p-value .056).
Overall, the results suggest that teacher incentives can foster a more positive learning
environment in the classroom.



                                        [Table 6 about here.]

  In addition, we measure teacher effort using two sets of classroom observations. First,
we conducted “external classroom observations,” where our survey teams observed
teacher behavior by standing outside the classroom for several minutes to prevent dis-
ruptions.26 We also conducted within-classroom observations following the World Bank
Service Delivery Indicator protocols. However, in-class observations are often affected
by Hawthorne effects, which can reduce the usefulness of these protocols (Muralidharan
& Sundararaman, 2010). Even though the external observations are less detailed, they
are arguably better able to capture broad measures of teacher behavior because they
are not affected by Hawthorne effects. We therefore focus on measures from the exter-
nal observations and present the results from the in-class observations in Table D.11 in
Appendix D.
  26 Schools in Tanzania have open layouts where classrooms are built around an open space in the middle.

This layout allows surveyors to simply stand in the open space and observe the class from a distance
through the windows.


                                                   19
  Our findings using the external observations are shown in Table 7. For brevity, we
focus on the estimated differences between the two incentive systems reported in the
bottom row (α3 ). We do not find any statistically significant differences in the likelihood
that teachers were observed to be actively teaching, although the point estimates are
larger for Levels teachers (Column 1). Teachers in Pay for Percentile schools were 2.2
percentage points (almost 50 percent) less likely to be engaged in classroom manage-
ment activities (such as taking attendance or disciplining students) compared to Levels
teachers (Column 2). Teachers in Pay for Percentile schools were also 7.7 percentage
points (29 percent) more likely to be off-task or engaged in unrelated activities such as
reading a newspaper or sending a text message (Column 3). Finally, we do not observe
differences between the two incentives in distracted or off-task students, although the
coefficient on Pay for Percentile schools shows a larger reduction in student distraction
(Column 4).



                                         [Table 7 about here.]


4.5    Heterogeneity by Student Characteristics
In this section, we explore the heterogeneity in treatment effects across the distribution
of student baseline composite test scores in Figure 2 (for the non-incentivized tests) and
Figure 3 (for the incentivized tests).27
   In the first year of the program, we find suggestive evidence that teachers in both
systems focused their attention on the best students. This pattern is more pronounced in
Pay for Percentile schools where we can reject that the estimated learning gains are the
same for all quintiles (p-value 0.016). In the second year of the program, the treatment
effects were more balanced across the distribution of students and we fail to reject the
hypothesis that the treatment effects of each quintile are equal.28 Our first year results
for the Pay for Percentile treatment are in line with Gilligan et al. (2018) who find that
learning gains were greater for above median students, especially in schools with books.
Our second year results for the Pay for Percentile treatment are in line with Loyalka et
al. (in press) who find learning gains across the entire distribution of students.

                                         [Figure 2 about here.]
   27 We also explore heterogeneity by additional student characteristics such as gender, as well as school

characteristics such as pupil teacher ratio, and find limited evidence of heterogeneity in those characteris-
tics (see Tables D.12 and D.13 in Appendix D for details).
   28 Subject specific results are available in Figures D.1 - D.4 in Appendix D.



                                                     20
                                  [Figure 3 about here.]


4.6   Heterogeneity by Teacher Characteristics
Empirical evidence shows that women are more averse to competition and exert rel-
atively less effort than men in competitive situations such as rank-order tournaments
(Niederle & Vesterlund, 2007, 2011). However, we do not find any significant hetero-
geneous treatment effects by gender (Table 8, Column 1). We also do not find any
heterogeneous effects by teacher age, which proxies for experience.
   Although previous studies (e.g., Metzler and Woessmann (2012) and Bietenbeck, Pi-
opiunik, and Wiederhold (2018)) have shown that teacher content knowledge is predic-
tive of student learning outcomes, we do not find any significant heterogeneity in our
treatment effects by teacher content knowledge, measured by our survey team through
math and word association tests (Column 3). More effective teachers, as measured by
the head teacher’s performance rating, were more responsive on average to the Levels
incentives compared to teachers in Pay for Percentile schools (Column 4). Teacher’s
who were more confident in their teaching abilities responded more to both incentives
(Column 5).



                                  [Table 8 about here.]


4.7   Why are treatment effects different across both programs?
We examine potential mechanisms that could drive differences in behavior and outcomes
between the two types of incentives, with a particular focus on differences in the incen-
tive structures of the two systems. For instance, the Levels system is easier to understand
and could provide clear learning targets for classrooms, relative to the Pay for Percentile
system. This difference in clarity could also affect teachers’ expectations about their po-
tential rewards from the incentive programs, which would ultimately affect the level of
effort exerted.


Teachers understand both programs. Complex teacher incentive programs may be less
effective if teachers cannot understand the program details and therefore do not opti-
mally allocate their effort (Goodman & Turner, 2013; Loyalka et al., in press). These
concerns are potentially more important in contexts with weak management capacity,


                                            21
which may be less able to effectively disseminate the details of a complex incentive pro-
gram to teachers. Because the Pay for Percentile system is more complex, our results
may reflect differences in teacher understanding of the incentive systems. To reduce
these concerns, we developed culturally appropriate materials, including Q&A formats,
examples, and illustrations, which we used to communicate the details of the incentive
program to teachers. For example, in Pay for Percentile schools we explained that stu-
dents would be grouped into separate contests based on their initial abilities, ensuring
that each contest would be fair. To make our explanation clear, we used an analogy of
a footrace. We explained that a race featuring one fast runner competing against slower
opponents would not be fair. A fairer system would group runners into separate races
based on their speed.29
   During baseline and midline school visits, teams reinforced teachers’ familiarity with
the main features of the program. During our visits, we tested teachers to ensure they
understood the details of the incentive program they were assigned to. We then con-
ducted a review session to discuss the answers to the test questions to further ensure
that teachers understood the design details. Because we asked different questions dur-
ing each survey round (baseline, midline and endline), we cannot compare the trends in
understanding over time. However, despite the lack of temporal comparability, teacher
comprehension was generally high and roughly equal across both types of incentive
programs. For example, at the end of the second year 70% of teachers in Level schools
knew that the amount of money paid per skill obtained by their students depended on
the total number of students that pass across Tanzania. Over 90% of teachers in Pay for
Percentile schools were aware that a student from a low ability group ranked at the top
of his group at the end of the year would give him or her a larger bonus than a student
in the highest ability group ranked low among their peers.30


Teachers expect higher earnings in the Levels system. Even though we equalized the
budgets across treatments, it is still possible that teachers’ beliefs about their potential
earnings could differ across the two incentive systems. In the Pay for Percentile system,
the fact that the final bonus payment depends on the relative performance of other
teachers in schools across the country is more salient. Hence, teachers may be less
  29 We  worked closely with Twaweza’s communications unit to develop our dissemination strategy and
communications. The communications unit is experienced and highly specialized in developing materials
to inform and educate the general public in Tanzania.
  30 Although teacher understanding was relatively high, we also test for heterogeneity in treatment effects

by teachers’ understanding (at endline). We do not find any significant relationship between teacher
understanding and student test scores. The results are shown in Table D.14 in Appendix D.



                                                    22
confident about their ability to receive large payouts compared to their peers in the
Levels treatment, where payouts are determined by students’ proficiency levels. Prior
to payout of the bonuses, we collected data on teachers’ earnings expectations from the
incentives, as well as their beliefs about their performance relative to other teachers in the
district. As these questions were only applicable to teachers in the incentive programs,
we compare teachers in the Pay for Percentile arm to the Levels scheme, which serves as
the omitted category in Table 9.
   Teachers in Pay for Percentile schools had lower bonus earnings expectations com-
pared to their peers in the Levels system. They expected almost 95,000 TZS (US$ 42) less
in bonus payments than teachers in the Levels system. This represents an 18% reduction
in bonus expectations relative to the mean expectations of teachers in the Levels system
(Column 1) and 36% of the realized mean bonus payment in 2016. The lower expecta-
tions among Pay for Percentile teachers could be driven by the greater uncertainty of
earnings in rank-order tournaments such as Pay for Percentile systems. While the com-
petitive pressure can be motivating, it can also be demotivating if an individual teacher
has low subjective beliefs about their probability to win relative to the probability of
competitors winning.
   We also examine differences in teachers’ beliefs about their relative ranking within
their district based on their (expected) bonus winnings in columns 2 to 4. Overall, we do
not find any differences across the treatments in teachers’ beliefs about their rankings.
Teachers were optimistic about their projected earnings: Only 9 percent of teachers ex-
pected to be among the bottom earners (Column 2) and 7 percent were worried about
earning a low bonus (Column 5). On the other hand, 80 percent expected to be among
the top earners in the district (Column 4).



                                       [Table 9 about here.]

Goal setting is easier for teachers in the Levels system. In addition to being relatively
easier to understand, the Levels system provides teachers with a clear set of learning
targets and goals for their students. This can help guide their instructional strategies and
areas of focus in the classroom, and perhaps even support individualized coaching.31
Our surveys collected information on the professional goals that teachers had set for
the academic year. In Table 10 we test whether the treatments affected teachers’ goal
  31 Recent  papers in behavioral economics provide evidence on general productivity effects of setting
goals, for example Koch and Nafziger (2011); Gómez-Minambres (2012) and Dalton, Gonzalez, and Nous-
sair (2015).

                                                  23
setting behavior. We do not find any differences in the likelihood of setting goals for the
general school exams between teachers in the treatment schools and their counterparts
in the control group (Column 1). However, teachers in the Levels system were almost 8
percentage points more likely to have set goals for the incentivized Twaweza test than
control group teachers (Column 2). In contrast, teachers in Pay for Percentile schools
were 2.5 percentage points (p-value .34) more likely to have set goals for the Twaweza
test (Column 2). Although we cannot reject the equality of the two estimates, the results
provide some suggestive evidence that the Levels systems facilitated more goal-setting
on the incentivized (Twaweza) test. Our surveys also collected information about specific
teacher goals on the Twaweza test. Because Twaweza tests were administered in all
schools, we were able to collect this information from teachers in treatment and control
schools. Teachers in both types of incentives schools were approximately 7 percentage
points more likely to set a general goal (e.g., “I want my students to pass”) for the test
than teachers in control schools (Column 3). Additionally, teachers in Levels schools
were almost 10 percentage points more likely to set a specific numerical target (e.g., “I
want 50 percent of my students to pass”) for the Twaweza incentivized test, compared
to just under 4 percent of teachers in Pay for Percentile schools (Column 4). Although
these differences are not statistically significant, the point estimates in Column 2 and 4
suggest greater incidences of goal-setting among teachers in the Levels design.32



                                      [Table 10 about here.]


5       Cost-effectiveness
We use accounting records to examine the cost-effectiveness of our interventions, fol-
lowing the framework outlined in Dhaliwal, Duflo, Glennerster, and Tulloch (2013). The
total annual cost of the teacher incentive programs was US$ 7.23 per student. This cost
estimate includes both the direct costs (value of incentive payments) as well as the imple-
mentation costs (test design and implementation, communications, audit, transfer costs,
etc.) of the program. However, the cost in the long run of the Pay for Percentile scheme
    32 This
          finding, in combination with the overall incentive effects, provides a link between our paper
and a fast growing empirical literature that finds positive associations between quality of management
practices (including provision of clear and well-defined targets, performance measurement and feedback,
and setting performance related rewards and sanctions) and organizational goal achievement (Bloom,
Lemos, Sadun, Scur, & Van Reenen, 2014).



                                                  24
is US$ 1.50 higher (US$ 8.73 total) due to pre-testing costs to determine ability groups.33
   For each intervention, we use the treatment effect on the composite index in the in-
centivized test in the second year to compute cost-effectiveness. We focus on the incen-
tivized test to facilitate comparability with other teacher incentive studies. Since the Pay
for Percentile treatment effects is 0.13σ in the second year, the cost-effectiveness of the
intervention is 1.48σ per US$ 100 spent per child. The Levels treatment effects is 0.22σ,
implying a cost-effectiveness of 3.04σ per US$ 100 spent per child. These estimates
suggest that both programs are cost-effective compared to several other interventions
in developing countries analyzed in the overview by (Kremer, Brannen, & Glennerster,
2013). For instance, the Levels treatments, our intervention is more cost-effective than
a computer-assisted learning program evaluated in India (1.54σ per US$ 100), but less
effective than the incentive program on attendance in India (2.28σ per US$ 100).


6      Conclusion
We use a randomized controlled trial to compare the effectiveness of two different
teacher incentive programs aimed at improving early-grade learning in Tanzanian public
schools. Specifically, we compare the effectiveness of an innovative multiple-threshold
proficiency incentive design relative to an ostensibly more sophisticated, rank-order
tournament-style Pay for Percentile system in terms of their impact on student test
scores.
   We report two main findings. First, both programs lead to increases in test scores,
compared to students in the control group. Second, despite the theoretical advantage of
the Pay for Percentile system, our multiple threshold proficiency system was more ef-
fective at increasing test scores and reducing grade repetition than the Pay for Percentile
system.
   Our results demonstrate some of the theoretical and practical considerations facing
education authorities interested in adopting teacher incentive programs. Although rank-
order tournament schemes can provide powerful incentives to increase effort, such sys-
tems can be more opaque, making it harder for teachers to determine how to best exert
effort. By contrast, the multiple threshold proficiency system used in this study com-
    33 The
         costs of pre-treatment testing required in Pay for Percentile for Grades 2 and 3 are not included
in the cost figure, since this cost would only be incurred once (ability groups could be based on endline
data after the first year of implementation). Our calculations also assume similar data management costs
for both programs, even though in reality the Pay for Percentile data costs were higher due to tasks such
as preparing the ability groups and programming the payment calculations. However, these are largely
fixed costs and relatively small relative to the variable costs, especially at scale.


                                                   25
municates clear student-level targets. These salient targets provide teachers with clear
signals about how to allocate their effort in the class. Since developing countries are of-
ten faced with implementation capacity constraints, the multiple threshold system may
be particularly well suited for these contexts given its relative administrative simplicity.
Further, such a system is arguably better suited for early grades, where the curriculum
is focused on a narrower set of key learning milestones such as number recognition and
subtraction. Consequently, this incentive system can serve as an important complement
to “teaching at the right level” programs, and education reforms that scale back overly
ambitious curricula in early grades (Cunningham, 2018).
   An important caveat is that our results focus on short run outcomes. In the long
run, concerns about gaming the system (e.g., teaching to the test) will be greater. Since
rank-order tournaments (such as Pay for Percentile) allow education systems to use
different tests and test-formats, they can minimize these concerns if administrators have
the willingness and capacity to implement such testing changes. Longer run studies
conducted at scale will be needed to better understand the long run advantages and
disadvantages of different teacher incentive systems.


References
Alger, V. E. (2014). Teacher incentive pay that works: A global survey of programs that improve
      student achievement.
Barlevy, G., & Neal, D. (2012). Pay for percentile. American Economic Review, 102(5),
      1805-31. Retrieved from http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer
      .102.5.1805 doi: 10.1257/aer.102.5.1805
Barrera-Osorio, F., & Raju, D. (in press). Teacher performance pay: Experimental evi-
      dence from Pakistan. Journal of Public Economics.
Behrman, J. R., Parker, S. W., Todd, P. E., & Wolpin, K. I. (2015). Aligning learning
      incentives of students and teachers: Results from a social experiment in Mexican
      high schools. Journal of Political Economy, 123(2), 325-364. Retrieved from https://
      doi.org/10.1086/675910 doi: 10.1086/675910
Bettinger, E. P., & Long, B. T. (2010, August). Does cheaper mean better? the impact
      of using adjunct instructors on student outcomes. The Review of Economics and
      Statistics, 92(3), 598-613. Retrieved from http://ideas.repec.org/a/tpr/restat/
      v92y2010i3p598-613.html
Bietenbeck, J., Piopiunik, M., & Wiederhold, S. (2018). Africa’s skill tragedy does teach-
      ers’ lack of knowledge lead to low student performance? Journal of Human Re-

                                              26
      sources, 53(3), 553–578.
Bloom, N., Lemos, R., Sadun, R., Scur, D., & Van Reenen, J. (2014). The new empirical
      economics of management. Journal of the European Economic Association, 12(4), 835–
      876.
Bruns, B., Filmer, D., & Patrinos, H. A. (2011). Making schools work: New evidence on
      accountability reforms. World Bank Publications.
Charness, G., & Kuhn, P. (2011). Lab labor: What can labor economists learn from the
      lab? In Handbook of labor economics (Vol. 4, pp. 229–330). Elsevier.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., & Rockoff, J. E. (2014a). Measuring the impacts of teachers
      i: Evaluating bias in teacher value-added estimates. American Economic Review,
      104(9), 2593–2632.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., & Rockoff, J. E. (2014b). Measuring the impacts of teachers
      ii: Teacher value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. American Economic
      Review, 104(9), 2633–79.
Contreras, D., & Rau, T. (2012). Tournament incentives for teachers: evidence from
      a scaled-up intervention in Chile. Economic development and cultural change, 61(1),
      219–246.
Cunningham, R. (2018). Unicef think piece series: Curriculum reform. Retrieved from
      https://www.unicef.org/esaro/EducationThinkPieces 5 CurriculumReform
      .pdf (UNICEF Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Office, Nairobi)
Dalton, P. S., Gonzalez, V., & Noussair, C. N. (2015). Paying with self-chosen goals: Incen-
      tives and gender differences. (CentER Discussion Paper Series No. 2016-036)
de Ree, J., Muralidharan, K., Pradhan, M., & Rogers, H. (2018). Double for nothing?
      experimental evidence on an unconditional teacher salary increase in indonesia*.
      The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2), 993-1039.
Dhaliwal, I., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Tulloch, C. (2013). Comparative cost-
      effectiveness analysis to inform policy in developing countries: a general frame-
      work with applications for education. Education Policy in Developing Countries, 285–
      338.
Ferraz, C., & Bruns, B. (2012). Paying teachers to perform: The impact of bonus pay in
      Pernambuco, Brazil. Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness.
Fryer, R. G. (2013). Teacher incentives and student achievement: Evidence from New
      York City public schools. Journal of Labor Economics, 31(2), 373–407.
Fryer Jr, R. G., Levitt, S. D., List, J., & Sadoff, S. (2012). Enhancing the efficacy of teacher
      incentives through loss aversion: A field experiment. NBER Working Paper(18237).
Ganimian, A. J., & Murnane, R. J. (2016). Improving education in developing countries:


                                              27
      Lessons from rigorous impact evaluations. Review of Educational Research, 86(3),
      719–755.
Gilligan, D., Karachiwalla, N., Kasirye, I., Lucas, A., & Neal, D. (2018). Educator incentives
      and educational triage in rural primary schools. (mimeo)
Glewwe, P., Ilias, N., & Kremer, M. (2010). Teacher incentives. American Economic
      Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3), 205-27. Retrieved from http://www.aeaweb.org/
      articles.php?doi=10.1257/app.2.3.205 doi: 10.1257/app.2.3.205
Glewwe, P., & Muralidharan, K. (2016). Chapter 10 - improving education outcomes
      in developing countries: Evidence, knowledge gaps, and policy implications. In
      S. M. Eric A. Hanushek & L. Woessmann (Eds.), (Vol. 5, p. 653 - 743). Elsevier.
Gneezy, U., List, J. A., Livingston, J. A., Sadoff, S., Qin, X., & Xu, Y. (2017, November).
      Measuring success in education: The role of effort on the test itself (Working Paper No.
      24004). National Bureau of Economic Research. doi: 10.3386/w24004
Gómez-Minambres, J. (2012). Motivation through goal setting. Journal of Economic
      Psychology, 33(6), 1223 - 1239. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/
      science/article/pii/S0167487012000967 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joep
      .2012.08.010
Goodman, S. F., & Turner, L. J. (2013). The Design of Teacher Incentive Pay and Edu-
      cational Outcomes: Evidence from the New York City Bonus Program. Journal of
      Labor Economics, 31(2), 409 - 420. Retrieved from http://ideas.repec.org/a/ucp/
      jlabec/doi10.1086-668676.html
Hanushek, E. A., & Rivkin, S. G. (2012). The distribution of teacher quality and implica-
      tions for policy. Annu. Rev. Econ., 4(1), 131–157.
Imberman, S. A. (2015). How effective are financial incentives for teachers? IZA World
      of Labor.
Kane, T. J., Rockoff, J. E., & Staiger, D. O. (2008, December). What does certification
      tell us about teacher effectiveness? evidence from New York City. Economics of
      Education Review, 27(6), 615-631. Retrieved from http://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/
      ecoedu/v27y2008i6p615-631.html
Koch, A., & Nafziger, J. (2011). Self-regulation through goal setting. The Scandinavian
      Journal of Economics, 113(1), 212-227. Retrieved from https://onlinelibrary.wiley
      .com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-9442.2010.01641.x doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9442.2010
      .01641.x
Kremer, M., Brannen, C., & Glennerster, R. (2013). The challenge of education and
      learning in the developing world. Science, 340(6130), 297–300.
Kremer, M., Miguel, E., & Thornton, R. (2009). Incentives to learn. The Review of Economics


                                             28
      and statistics, 3(91), 437-456.
Ladd, H. F. (1999). The dallas school accountability and incentive program: An eval-
      uation of its impacts on student outcomes. Economics of Education Review, 18(1),
      1–16.
Lavy, V. (2002). Evaluating the effect of teachers’ group performance incentives on pupil
      achievement. Journal of Political Economy, 110(6), pp. 1286-1317. Retrieved from
      http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/342810
Lee, D. S. (2009). Training, wages, and sample selection: Estimating sharp bounds on
      treatment effects. The Review of Economic Studies, 76(3), 1071–1102.
Leigh, A. (2012). The economics and politics of teacher merit pay. CESifo Economic
      Studies, 59(1), 1–33.
Levitt, S. D., List, J. A., Neckermann, S., & Sadoff, S. (2016). The behavioralist goes
      to school: Leveraging behavioral economics to improve educational performance.
      American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(4), 183–219.
Loyalka, P. K., Sylvia, S., Liu, C., Chu, J., & Shi, Y. (in press). Pay by design: Teacher
      performance pay design and the distribution of student achievement. Journal of
      Labor Economics.
Manacorda, M. (2012). The cost of grade retention. Review of Economics and Statistics,
      94(2), 596–606.
Mbiti, I. (2016). The need for accountability in education in developing countries. Journal
      of Economic Perspectives, 30(3), 109–32.
Mbiti, I., Muralidharan, K., Romero, M., Schipper, Y., Manda, C., & Rajani, R. (in press).
      Inputs, incentives, and complementarities in education: Experimental evidence
      from tanzania. The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Metzler, J., & Woessmann, L. (2012). The impact of teacher subject knowledge on student
      achievement: Evidence from within-teacher within-student variation. Journal of
      Development Economics, 99(2), 486–496.
Miller, G., & Babiarz, K. S. (2013). Pay-for-performance incentives in low-and middle-
      income country health programs. NBER Working Paper(No. 18932).
Mohanan, M., Donato, K., Miller, G., Truskinovsky, Y., & Vera-Hernández, M. (2019).
      Different strokes for different folks: Experimental evidence on the effectiveness of
      input and output incentive contracts for health care providers with varying skills.
      NBER Working Paper(25499).
Muralidharan, K., & Sundararaman, V. (2010). The impact of diagnostic feedback to
      teachers on student learning: Experimental evidence from India. Economic Journal,
      120, F187–F203.


                                            29
Muralidharan, K., & Sundararaman, V. (2011). Teacher performance pay: Experimental
     evidence from India. Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), pp. 39-77. Retrieved from
     http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/659655
Neal, D. (2011). Chapter 6 - the design of performance pay in education. In
     E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, & L. Woessmann (Eds.), Handbook of the eco-
     nomics of education (Vol. 4, p. 495 - 550). Elsevier. Retrieved from http://www
     .sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444534446000067 doi: https://
     doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53444-6.00006-7
Neal, D. (2013). The consequences of using one assessment system to pursue two
     objectives. The Journal of Economic Education, 44(4), 339–352.
Neal, D., & Schanzenbach, D. W. (2010, February). Left behind by design: Proficiency
     counts and test-based accountability. Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), 263–
     283. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/rest.2010.12318
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2007). Do women shy away from competition? do men
     compete too much? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3), 1067–1101.
Niederle, M., & Vesterlund, L. (2011). Gender and competition. Annual Review of Eco-
     nomics, 3(1), 601–630.
OECD. (2017). Teachers’ salaries (indicator). (data retrieved from https://data.oecd.org/
     eduresource/teachers-salaries.htm) doi: 10.1787/f689fb91-en
PRI. (2013). Tanzanian teachers learning education doesn’t pay. Retrieved 13/09/2017,
     from https://www.pri.org/stories/2013-12-20/tanzanian-teachers-learning
     -education-doesnt-pay
Reuters.     (2012).   Tanzanian teachers in strike over pay.        Retrieved 13/09/2017,
     from          http://www.reuters.com/article/ozatp-tanzania-strike-20120730
     -idAFJOE86T05320120730
Singh, P., & Masters, W. A. (2018). Performance bonuses in the public sector: Winner-
     take-all prizes versus proportional payments to reduce child malnutrition in in-
     dia. Journal of Development Economics. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect
     .com/science/article/pii/S0304387818300610 doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
     j.jdeveco.2018.10.003
Uwezo. (2012). Are our children learning? annual learning assessment report 2011
     (Tech. Rep.). Author. Retrieved from http://www.twaweza.org/uploads/files/
     UwezoTZ2013forlaunch.pdf (Accessed on 05-12-2014)
Uwezo. (2013). Are our children learning? numeracy and literacy across East Africa (Uwezo
     East-Africa Report). Nairobi: Uwezo. (Accessed on 05-12-2014)
Vigdor, J. (2008). Teacher salary bonuses in north carolina.


                                           30
Woessmann, L. (2011). Cross-country evidence on teacher performance pay. Economics
     of Education Review, 30(3), 404 - 418. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect
     .com/science/article/pii/S0272775710001731 doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
     j.econedurev.2010.12.008
World Bank. (2011). Service delivery indicators: Tanzania (Tech. Rep.). The World Bank,
     Washington D.C.
World Bank. (2014). Service delivery indicators: Tanzania (Tech. Rep.). The World Bank,
     Washington D.C.
World Bank. (2017). World development indicators. (data retrieved from, https://data
     .worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators)
World Bank. (2018). World development report 2018: Learning to realize education’s promise.
     The World Bank. Retrieved from https://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10
     .1596/978-1-4648-1096-1 doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648-1096-1




                                            31
Figures

                                     Figure 1: Districts in Tanzania from which schools are selected




                                          Note: We drew a nationally representative sample of 180 schools from a
                                          random sample of 10 districts in Tanzania (shaded).




                                                                           Figure 2: Composite — non-incentivized

                                 Levels                                                P4Pctile                                                     Levels                                              P4Pctile
  .5                                                   .5                                                            .5                                                   .5



.25                                                .25                                                             .25                                                .25
  Treatment effect




                                                        Treatment effect




                                                                                                                     Treatment effect




                                                                                                                                                                           Treatment effect




   0                                                    0                                                             0                                                     0



-.25                                              -.25                                                             -.25                                               -.25



 -.5                                                   -.5                                                          -.5                                                   -.5
                       1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4   5                                     1     2     3      4   5                              1      2    3      4   5
                                 Quintile                                              Quintile                                                     Quintile                                              Quintile
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .08                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .0033                                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .66                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .34
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .17                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .016                             p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .46                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .78



                                           (a) Year 1                                                                                                         (b) Year 2




                                                                                                              32
                                                                             Figure 3: Composite — incentivized

                                 Levels                                                P4Pctile                                                   Levels                                                P4Pctile
  .5                                                   .5                                                          .5                                                   .5



.25                                                .25                                                           .25                                                .25
  Treatment effect




                                                        Treatment effect




                                                                                                                   Treatment effect




                                                                                                                                                                         Treatment effect
   0                                                      0                                                         0                                                      0



-.25                                               -.25                                                          -.25                                               -.25



 -.5                                                   -.5                                                        -.5                                                   -.5
                       1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4   5                                   1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4   5
                                 Quintile                                              Quintile                                                   Quintile                                              Quintile
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .85                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .15                                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .64                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .51
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .49                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .8                             p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .49                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .8



                                           (a) Year 1                                                                                                       (b) Year 2




                                                                                                            33
Tables


                               Table 1: Skills tested in the Levels schools
Kiswahili                                   English                                      Math
                                                          Grade 1
Letters (TZS 1,992)                         Letters (TZS 5,838)                          Counting (TZS 513)
Words (TZS 1,619)                           Words (TZS 14,749)                           Numbers (TZS 750)
Sentences (TZS 2,057)                       Sentences (TZS 58,267)                       Inequalities (TZS 649)
                                                                                         Addition (TZS 748)
                                                                                         Subtraction (TZS 821)
                                                          Grade 2
Words (TZS 1,192)                           Words (TZS 5,071)                            Inequalities (TZS 803)
Sentences (TZS 1,297)                       Sentences (TZS 12,076)                       Addition (TZS 1,136)
Paragraphs (TZS 2,214)                      Paragraphs (TZS 61,938)                      Subtraction (TZS 1,374)
                                                                                         Multiplication (TZS 1,732)
                                                          Grade 3
                                                                                         Addition (TZS 694)
Story (TZS 1,709)                           Story (TZS 36,250)                           Subtraction (TZS 900)
Comprehension (TZS 1,530)                   Comprehension (TSZ 22,63)                    Multiplication (TZS 3,660)
                                                                                         Division (TZS 1,820)
  This table shows the skills tested in each subject and grade. In parentheses are the pay teachers received in the first year for
  each student that masters each skill. English payments are higher since the overall pass rate is much lower. In 2016, English
  instruction was removed from the curriculum in grades 1 and 2 and therefore dropped from the skills tests. See Section 2.3 for
  details.




                                                             34
Table 2: Summary statistics across treatment groups at baseline (February 2015)


                                                     (1)             (2)            (3)                (4)
                                                   Control         P4Pctile        Levels          p-value
                                                                                                  (all equal)
                 Panel A: Students
                 Poverty index (PCA)                 0.01            -0.08           0.01             0.42
                                                    (1.99)          (1.94)          (1.98)
                 Age                                 8.88            8.94            8.89             0.35
                                                    (1.60)          (1.67)          (1.60)
                 Male                                0.50            0.48            0.51            0.05∗
                                                    (0.50)          (0.50)          (0.50)
                 Kiswahili test score               -0.00            0.01            0.01             0.14
                                                    (1.00)          (0.99)          (0.98)
                 English test score                  0.00            0.04           -0.02             0.71
                                                    (1.00)          (1.03)          (1.04)
                 Math test score                    -0.00            -0.01          -0.01             0.56
                                                    (1.00)          (1.04)          (1.00)
                 Tested in yr0                       0.91            0.89            0.90             0.41
                                                    (0.29)          (0.31)          (0.30)
                 Tested in yr1                       0.87            0.87            0.88             0.20
                                                    (0.33)          (0.34)          (0.32)
                 Tested in yr2                       0.88            0.88            0.89             0.56
                                                    (0.33)          (0.32)          (0.32)
                 Panel B: Schools
                 Total enrollment                   643.42          656.35         738.37             0.67
                                                   (331.22)        (437.74)       (553.33)
                 Facilities index (PCA)              0.18            -0.11          -0.24            0.07∗
                                                    (1.23)          (0.97)         (1.01)
                 Urban                               0.15            0.13            0.17             0.92
                                                    (0.36)          (0.34)         (0.38)
                 Single shift                        0.63            0.62            0.62             0.95
                                                    (0.49)          (0.49)         (0.49)
                 Panel C: Teachers (Grade 1-3)
                 Male                                 0.42           0.38            0.35             0.19
                                                     (0.49)         (0.49)          (0.48)
                 Age (Yrs)                           37.89          37.02           37.70             0.18
                                                    (11.35)        (11.23)         (11.02)
                 Tertiary education                   0.87           0.88            0.87             0.74
                                                     (0.33)         (0.32)          (0.33)
                  This tables presents the mean and standard error of the mean (in parentheses) for several
                  characteristics of students (Panel A), schools (Panel B), and teachers (Panel C) across treat-
                  ment groups. Column 4 shows the p-value from testing whether the mean is equal across all
                  treatment groups (H0 := mean is equal across groups). The p-value is for a test of equality
                  of means, after controlling for the stratification variables used during randomization. The
                  poverty index is the first component of a principal component analysis of the following as-
                  sets: mobile phone, watch/clock, refrigerator, motorbike, car, bicycle, television, and radio.
                  The school facilities index is the first component of a principal component analysis of indi-
                  cator variables for: outer wall, staff room, playground, library, and kitchen. Standard errors
                  are clustered at the school level for the test of equality. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                              35
                            Table 3: Effect on test scores



                          (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)        (5)          (6)
                                     Year 1                             Year 2
                         Math     Kiswahili    Combined     Math     Kiswahili   Combined
Panel A: Non-incentivized
Levels (α1 )            .044         .051           .057     .071∗     .098∗        .096∗∗
                       (.044)        (.05)         (.048)   (.039)     (.053)       (.046)
P4Pctile (α2 )        -.0099        -.044           -.029   .077∗∗     .0045          .044
                       (.038)        (.04)         (.039)   (.037)      (.05)       (.044)
N. of obs.             4,781        4,781          4,781     4,869     4,869         4,869
α3 = α2 − α1           -.054       -.095∗∗         -.085∗    .0064     -.094∗        -.052
p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)    .2          .047           .053       .89      .078           .29

Panel B: Incentivized
Levels (β 1 )             .11∗∗    .13∗∗∗          .17∗∗∗   .14∗∗∗     .18∗∗∗      .22∗∗∗
                         (.047)    (.048)          (.064)   (.045)     (.046)      (.059)
P4Pctile (β 2 )           .066∗      .017            .059   .093∗∗      .085∗       .13∗∗
                         (.039)    (.043)          (.054)    (.04)     (.045)      (.056)
N. of obs.               48,077    48,077          48,077   59,680    59,680       59,680
β3 = β2 − β1              -.047    -.11∗∗           -.11∗    -.044    -.093∗∗      -.096∗
p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)     0.30     0.026           0.070     0.31      0.045       0.097

Panel C: Incentivized – Non-incentivized
β 1 − α1                 .06     .069                .1      .06         .07         .11
p-value(β 1 − α1 = 0)    .16      .13              .045      .13         .13        .025
β 2 − α2                .073     .056              .082     .016        .076        .077
p-value(β 2 − α2 = 0)    .09       .2               .12      .68        .078         .11
β 3 − α3                .013     -.012             -.021    -.044      .0059        -.037
p-value( β 3 − α3 = 0)   .76       .8                .7      .28         .91         .49
  Results from estimating Equation 1 for different subjects at both follow-ups. Panel A
  uses data from the non-incentivized test taken by a sample of students. Control vari-
  ables include student characteristics (age, gender, grade and lag test scores) and school
  characteristics (PTR, Infrastructure PCA index, a PCA index of how close the school is to
  different facilities, and an indicator for whether the school is single shift or not). Panel
  B uses data from the incentivized test taken by all students. Control variables include
  student characteristics (gender and grade) and school characteristics (PTR, Infrastructure
  PCA index, a PCA index of how close the school is to different facilities, and an indicator
  for whether the school is single shift or not). Panel C tests the difference between the
  treatment estimates in panels A and B. Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are
  in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                              36
Table 4: Effect on grade repetition



                         (1)       (2)
                        Year 1    Year 2
Levels (α1 )            -.0097    -.033∗∗
                          (.02)    (.016)
P4Pctile (α2 )            .025     .0014
                        (.017)     (.014)
N. of obs.              4,781      4,869
Mean control               .13       .14
α3 = α2 − α1             .035∗    .034∗∗
p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)     .062      .041
  Results from estimating Equation 1 for
  whether a student is in a lower grade
  than expected at the end of the first
  year (Column 1) and at the end of
  the second year (Column 2). Control
  variables include student characteristics
  (age, gender, grade and lag test scores)
  and school characteristics (PTR, Infras-
  tructure PCA index, a PCA index of
  how close the school is to different fa-
  cilities, and an indicator for whether the
  school is single shift or not). Standard
  errors, clustered at the school level, are
  in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05,
  ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                   37
                 Table 5: Spillovers to other grades and subjects



Panel A: Grade 4
                          (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)
                                     Year 1                             Year 2
                         Math     Kiswahili    Combined    Math     Kiswahili    Combined
Levels (α1 )             .16∗∗       .055        .099∗       .059      .042          .049
                         (.068)     (.046)        (.05)    (.066)     (.057)       (.053)
P4Pctile (α2 )            -.026     -.027         -.027    -.0018    .00071        -.0035
                         (.059)     (.049)        (.05)    (.063)     (.052)       (.051)
N. of obs.               1,513      1,513        1,513      1,482     1,482        1,482
α3 = α2 − α1            -.18∗∗∗    -.082∗        -.13∗∗     -.061     -.041         -.052
p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)    .0085       .087          .017       .33       .44           .32

Panel B: Science (Grades 1-3)
                        Year 1     Year 2
Levels (α1 )              .069      .083
                        (.063)      (.06)
P4Pctile (α2 )          -.0023      .079
                         (.05)     (.057)
N. of obs.              4,781      4,869
α3 = α2 − α1             -.072     -.0042
p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)      .25       .94
  Results from estimating Equation 1 for grade 4 students (Panel B) and for grade 3 stu-
  dents in science (Panel A). Control variables include student characteristics (age, gender,
  grade and lag test scores) and school characteristics (PTR, Infrastructure PCA index, a
  PCA index of how close the school is to different facilities, and an indicator for whether
  the school is single shift or not). Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in
  parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                              38
           Table 6: Treatment effects on teacher behavior



Panel A: Spot checks
                            (1)            (2)
                        In school    In classroom
Levels (α1 )               -0.0065       0.015
                           (0.038)      (0.039)
P4Pctile (α2 )             -0.0085     0.000017
                           (0.032)      (0.036)
N. of obs.                   360          360
Mean control                  .7          .36
α3 = α2 − α1                -.002        -.015
p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)        .96          .69

Panel B: Student reports
                            (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)
                        Extra help   Homework       Call by name      Hit
Levels (α1 )              0.0080           0.017       0.080∗∗       -0.030
                         (0.0097)         (0.015)      (0.037)      (0.035)
P4Pctile (α2 )            -0.0022          -0.014       0.047       -0.061∗
                         (0.0091)         (0.015)      (0.032)      (0.032)
N. of obs.                18,563          18,563        9,557         9,557
Mean control                .062             .12          .5           .37
α3 = α2 − α1                -.01           -.032∗       -.032         -.031
p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)         .3            .065         .34           .35
  Panel A presents teacher-level data on teacher absenteeism (Column 1),
  and time-on-task (Column 2). Panel B presents student-level data on
  teacher behavior (as reported by students) on extra help (Column 1),
  homework assignment (Column 2), calling by name (Column 3), and
  hitting/pinching/slapping students (Column 4). We pool the data for
  both years, except for calling students by name and corporal punishment,
  which was only collected in the second year. Standard errors, clustered at
  the school level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                     39
                        Table 7: External classroom observation



                           (1)              (2)                     (3)                (4)
                        Teaching   Classroom management       Teacher off task   Student off task
Levels (α1 )              0.011            -0.0016                 -0.011            -0.0068
                         (0.043)           (0.010)                (0.042)            (0.018)
P4Pctile (α2 )           -0.048            -0.024∗∗               0.066∗             -0.023∗
                         (0.036)            (0.011)               (0.035)            (0.014)
N. of obs.               2,080               2,080                 2,080              2,080
Control mean              .69                 .041                   .27               .048
α3 = α2 − α1             -.059              -.022∗∗                .077∗              -.016
p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)      .2                 .037                  .082                .28
  The outcome variables in this table come from independent classroom observations performed
  by the research team for several minutes, before teachers noticed they were being observed.
  Teachers are classified doing one of three activities: Teaching (Column 1), managing the class-
  room (Column 2), and being off-task (Column 3). If students are distracted we classify the class
  as having students off-task (Column 4). Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in
  parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                               40
        Table 8: Heterogeneity by teacher characteristics



                       (1)       (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)
                      Male      Age          IRT      HT Rating   Self Rating
Levels*Covariate      -0.011   -0.00036      0.026     0.10∗∗∗     0.059∗∗
                     (0.057)   (0.0012)     (0.033)    (0.023)      (0.029)
P4Pctile*Covariate   0.0049    -0.00017     0.0053     0.057∗∗     0.082∗∗∗
                     (0.054)   (0.0012)     (0.036)    (0.026)      (0.029)
N. of obs.           19,300    19,300       19,300      9,738       19,300
  The outcome variables are student test scores. The data is at the student-
  subject-year level and pools both follow-ups and both subjects (Kiswahili
  and math). Each column shows the heterogeneous treatment effect by
  different teacher characteristics: sex (Column 1), age (Column 2), content
  knowledge scaled by an IRT model (Column 3), head teacher rating (Col-
  umn 4) — only requested for math and Kiswahili teachers at the end of
  the second year — and self rating (Column 5), collected at the end of the
  school year in both years. We use three different measures of teacher abil-
  ity to explore the heterogeneity in treatment effects. Teachers were tested
  on all three subjects and we created an index of content knowledge us-
  ing an IRT model. Head teachers were asked to rate teacher performance
  in seven dimensions, including the ability to ensure that students learn,
  and classroom management skills. To create the self-perception metric,
  we create an index based on teacher responses to the following five state-
  ments: “I am capable of motivating students who show low interest in
  school”, “I am capable of implementing alternative strategies in my class-
  room”, “I am capable of getting students to believe they can do well in
  school”, “I am capable of assisting families in helping their children do
  well in school”, and “I am capable of providing an alternative explanation
  or example when students are confused”. Standard errors, clustered at
  the school level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                       41
                           Table 9: Teachers’ earning expectations



                 Bonus (TZS)        Bottom of the    Middle of the         Top of the     Worried low bonus
                                       district        district             district
                     (1)                 (2)             (3)                  (4)                (5)

P4Pctile (α2 )    -94,330∗∗             -.029             -.0092              .035               -.02
                   (37,169)             (.03)             (.059)             (.045)             (.026)
N. of obs.           653                 676                676               676                676
Mean Levels        525,641               .086               .48                .8                .074
  This table show the effect of treatment on teacher self-reported expectations: The expected
  payoff (Column 1), the expected relative ranking in the district (Columns 2-4), and whether the
  teacher is worried about receiving a low bonus payment (Column 5). Standard errors, clustered
  at the school level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                       Table 10: Goal-setting



                                                  Goals             Twaweza test goals
                                         School     Twaweza        General      Specific
                                          exam       exam                      (number)
                                           (1)        (2)            (3)          (4)

                   Levels (α1 )            -.02      .076∗∗         .067∗∗       .095∗
                                         (.053)      (.029)         (.031)       (.052)
                   P4Pctile (α2 )         -.047       .025         .076∗∗∗        .036
                                         (.048)      (.027)         (.022)       (.042)
                   N. of obs.            1,016        1,016          1,016       1,016
                   Mean control            .46         .078            .89         .19
                   α3 = α2 − α1           -.027        -.05          .0094        -.059
                   p-value(α3 = 0)         .58          .14             .7         .27
                     This table shows the effect of treatment on whether teachers
                     set professional goals (columns 1-2) and specific goals for
                     the Twaweza exam (columns 3-4); specifically, whether they
                     set goals for the school exams (Column 1) and the Twaweza
                     exams (Column 2). In addition, it indicates whether they
                     have general goals for student performance on the Twaweza
                     exam (Column 3) or specific (numeric) goals (Column 4).
                     Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in paren-
                     theses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                    42
FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION

A     Randomization Details
This study builds on the sample of 350 schools that participated in the 2013 to 2014
KiuFunza study (see Mbiti et al. (in press) for more details). In the 2013-14 study the
350 schools in the sample were randomly placed into one of four treatment groups: 70
schools received school grants, 70 schools received teacher incentives (using a single
threshold design), 70 schools received both grants and incentives, and 140 schools were
in the control group. In order to determine teacher awards, incentivized tests were
conducted in schools assigned to the incentives treatment or the combination treatment
(a total of 140 schools). To faciliate the computation of treatment effects on incentivized
tests, we also conducted these tests in 40 control schools.
   We take the set of 180 schools where endline “incentivized” tests had been conducted
in 2014. Specifically, 70 schools from the incentive arm (labeled C1), 70 schools from the
combination arm (C2), and 40 schools from the control arm (C3). We use these tests as
the baseline data to implement the teacher incentive schemes in this study. This baseline
data is especially important for the Pay for Percentile incentive scheme as we have to
split students into groups, and properly seed each contest.
   In each district, there were seven schools in C1 (teacher incentives), seven in C2 (combi-
nation), and four in C3 (the control group). We randomly assign schools from the previ-
ous treatment groups into two new treatments groups (Levels or Pay for Percentile) and
a control group. We stratify this randomization by district. However, in order to study
the long-term impacts of teacher incentives, we assign a higher proportion of schools
in C1 (which involved threshold teacher incentives) to Levels. Similarly, we assign a
higher proportion of schools in the control group from the previous experiment (C3) to
the control group of this experiment.
   For this experiment, we stratify the random treatment assignment by district, previous
treatment, and an index of the overall learning level of students in each school.34 Table
A.1 summarizes the number of schools randomly allocated to each treatment arm based
on their assignment in the previous experiment. Each district has 18 schools, such that
there are six schools in each of the new treatment groups (Levels, Pay for Percentile, and
control). Because the study was carried out in 10 districts, overall there are 60 schools in
each new treatment group: 30 above the median in baseline learning and 30 below.
 34 We    created an overall measure of student learning and categorized schools as above or below the
median.


                                                  44
  All regressions account for all three levels of stratification: district, previous treatment,
and an index of the overall learning level of students in each school.



                               Table A.1: Treatment allocation
                                                    KiuFunza II
                                        Levels P4Pctile Control Total
                  KiuFunza I      C1       40       20       10   70
                                  C2       10       30       30   70
                                  C3       10       10       20   40
                                Total      60       60       60  180




                                              45
B     Theoretical Framework
We present a set of simple models to clarify the potential behavioral responses of teach-
ers and schools in our interventions. We first characterize equilibrium effort levels of
teachers in both incentive systems, and then impose some additional assumptions and
use numerical methods to obtain a set of qualitative predictions about the distribution
of teacher effort across students of varying baseline learning levels.


B.1       Basic Setup
In our simple setup, there are different types of students (indexed by l). Students may
vary by initial level of learning or by socio-demographic characteristics. Further, each
classroom of students is taught by a single teacher, indexed by j. We assume student
learning levels (or test scores) at endline is determined by the following process:

                                           alj = alj(t−1) + γl elj + vlj

where alj is the learning level of a student of type l taught by teacher j, and alj(t−1) is the
student’s baseline level of learning.35 γl captures the productivity of teacher effort (elj )
and is assumed to be constant across teachers. In other words, we assume teachers are
equally capable.36 vlj is an idiosyncratic random shock to student learning. We assume
that effort is costly, and that the cost function, cl (elj ), is twice differentiable and convex
such that c0l (·) > 0, and c00l (·) > 0.
  A social planner would choose teacher effort to maximize the total expected value of
student learning, net of the total costs of teacher effort as follows:

                                 ∑ ∑ E(alj(t−1) + γl elj + vlj ) − cl (elj )
                                   j   l


The first order conditions for this problem are:

                                                  γl = c0l (elj )                                     (2)

for all l and all j. To keep the model simple, we assume teachers are risk-neutral and
abstract from multi-tasking concerns. To keep notation simple, we assume all teach-
  35 We   assume alj(t−1) is an adequate summary statistic for all previous inputs, including past teacher
effort.
   36 Barlevy and Neal (2012) also impose this assumption in their basic setup.




                                                        46
ers have identical ability (or productivity); however, this can easily be relaxed without
altering the results presented below.


B.1.1   Pay for Percentile

In the Pay for Percentile design there are L rank-order tournaments based on student
performance, where L is the number of student types or the number of groupings, such
that students in the same group are similar to each other. Under this incentive scheme,
teachers maximize their expected payoffs, net of costs, from each rank-order tournament.
The teacher’s maximization problem becomes:
                                                                              !
                                                                  
                                ∑ ∑                  πP( alj > alk ) − cl (elj ) ,
                                 l       k6= j


  where π is the payoff per percentile. The first order conditions for the teacher’s prob-
lem are:
                             ∑ πγl f l (γl (elj − ekl )) = c0l (elj )
                                     k6= j

for all l, where f l is the density function of εlj,k = vlj − vlk .
  In a symmetric equilibrium, then

                                         ( N − 1)πγl f l (0) = c0l (el )                               (3)

   where N is the number of teachers. Without loss of generality, if the cost function
is the same across groups (i.e., c0l ( x ) = c0 ( x )), but the productivity of effort varies (γl ),
then the teacher will exert higher effort where he or she is more productive (since the
cost function is convex). Pay for percentile can lead to an efficient outcome, as shown
by Barlevy and Neal (2012), if the social planner’s objective is to maximize total learning
and the payoff is π = ( N −11) f l (0) .


B.1.2   Levels

In our Levels incentive scheme, teachers earn bonuses whenever a student’s test score is
above a pre-specified learning threshold. As each subject has multiple thresholds t, we
can specify teacher j’s maximization problem as:
                                                                                !                  !
                                                          Πt
                    ∑ ∑        Cjl P( alj > Tt )
                                                 ∑l ∑n Cn P aln > Tt
                                                        l
                                                                                    − cl (elj )
                     l    t



                                                            47
  where Tt is the learning needed to unlock threshold t payment, Πt is the total amount
of money available for threshold t, and Cnl is the number of students of type l in teacher
n’s class.
  Assuming the number of teachers (N) is large, then the effect each teacher has on the
overall pass rates is negligible. In particular, we assume it is zero (i.e., teacher’s ignore
the effect of their effort on the overall pass rate). Thus, the first order conditions for the
teacher’s maximization problem become:

                                                                             Πt
          ∑ Cjl γl hl (Tt − alj(t−1) − γl elj )                                                           = c0l (elj )   (4)
           t                                      ∑l ∑n Cnl P vln > Tt −            aln(t−1)   − γl enl

for all l, where hl is the density function of vlj . Although we assume that each individ-
ual teacher’s effort does not affect the overall pass rate, we cannot ignore this effect in
equilibrium. Thus, we can characterize our symmetric equilibrium as:

                                                                             Πt
               ∑ Cjl γl hl (Tt − alj(t−1) − γl el )                                                     = c0l (el )      (5)
                t                                     ∑l NCnl P       vl   > Tt −   al(t−1)   − γl el

for all l.


B.1.3          Numerical Simulation Set-up

We simulate the equilibrium responses by teachers to both types of incentives in order
to better understand teacher behavioral responses to the two treatments in our study.
We assume that the teacher’s cost function is quadratic (i.e., c(e) = e2 ), and the shock to
student learning follows a standard normal distribution (i.e., vi ∼ N (0, 1)). We further
assume that there are 1,000 teachers, each with their own classroom. Within each class,
we assume that student baseline learning levels are uniformly distributed from -4 to 4,
in 0.5 intervals. As a result each classroom has 17 students with one student at each
(discrete) baseline learning level.37 We set the reward per student in both schemes at
                                                                                      2
$1. Therefore, in the Pay for Percentile scheme the reward per contest won is $ 99      (see
Section B.1.1) and in the Levels the total reward is $1 per student. In the multiple
threshold scenario the reward is held constant and split evenly across all thresholds.
For simplicity, we assume that there are three proficiency thresholds. We first compute
the optimal teacher response assuming a single proficiency threshold and then vary the
threshold value from -1 to 1. We then compute the multiple threshold case.
  37 InAppendix B.2 we show that our qualitative results are robust to a normal distribution of student
baseline learning levels.


                                                             48
B.1.4    Levels Equilibrium

We first simulate equilibrium behavior under the Levels scheme in Figure B.1 below.
Using the parameter values and functional forms discussed above, we simulate an in-
dividual teacher’s best response curve and plot it against the best response of all other
teachers using a wide range of initial parameter values. In our simulations we do not
observe any non-quasi-concave objective functions for any given ability level. Further,
since the curves are smooth, there is no indication that they would violate Brouwer’s
fixed point theorem. As Figure B.1 shows, in the context of our of simulations, there is
only one (rational expectations) equilibrium characterized by Equation 5.

          Figure B.1: Teacher i0 s Best Response curve to other teacher’s effort level
                                     1.0
                                     0.8
            Best response (effort)
                                     0.6
                                     0.4
                                     0.2
                                     0.0




                                           0.0   0.2   0.4           0.6            0.8            1.0
                                                       Other's effort
 Note: An example of a set of best response curves for a given initial parameter values. We assume all teachers are
giving the same value of effort for all thresholds except one (but the effort may be different across thresholds). In the
x-axis we show the level of effort exerted by all except i in the threshold of interest. In the y-axis we plot teachers i
effort level in that thresholds. The black line shows the best response of teacher i to the effort level of other teachers.
Therefore, we have a symmetric equilibrium when the black line crosses the red line.


                                                             49
  Our simulations also show that the choice of proficiency thresholds is important de-
sign decision. If the thresholds are too far apart then teachers may not exert any effort
on students who are in between thresholds. This concern can be ameliorated by setting
thresholds sufficiently close together as shown below in Figure B.2.

                           Figure B.2: Threshold Distance and Teacher effort
                     0.5




                                    Threshold=0
                                    Thresholds={−1,1}
                                    Thresholds={−2,2}
                     0.4




                                    Thresholds={−3,3}
                     0.3
            Effort
                     0.2
                     0.1
                     0.0




                           −4              −2                   0                 2                 4
                                              Initial levels of learning
 Note: Assuming a two threshold design, this figure shows the effect of increasing the distance between two thresholds
on teacher effort. The distance varies from 0, to 2 (thresholds at -1 and 1), 4 (thresholds at -2 and 2), and 6 (thresholds
at -3 and 3).


  As the equilibrium behavior for teachers under Pay for Percentile was described in
detail in Barlevy and Neal (2012), we refer our readers to consult their findings for
additional insights.




                                                           50
B.1.5   A Comparison of Optimal Teacher Effort

We compute equilibrium teacher responses under two different stylized scenarios (or
assumptions about the productivity of teacher effort in the production function) to il-
lustrate how changes in these assumptions can alter equilibrium responses. The goal of
this exercise is to highlight the impact of the production function specification on the
distribution of learning gains in both our treatments.
   Our numerical approach allows us to explore how teachers focus their efforts on stu-
dents of different learning levels under both types of systems. Following the baseline
model described in Barlevy and Neal (2012), we first assume that the productivity of
teacher effort (γ) is constant and equal to one, regardless of a student’s initial learning
level. We then solve the model numerically. Figures B.3a and B.3b show the optimal
teacher responses for different levels of student initial learning. Under the Pay for Per-
centile scheme, the optimal response would result in teachers exerting equal levels of
effort with all of their students, regardless of their initial learning level. In contrast, the
multiple threshold levels scheme would result in a bell-shaped effort curve, where teach-
ers would focus on students near the threshold and exert minimal effort with students
in the tails (see solid line graph in B.3b). Thus, our numerical exercise suggests that if
teacher productivity is invariant to the initial level of student learning, then the Pay for
Percentile scheme will better serve students at the tails of the distribution.




                                              51
Figure B.3: Incentive design and optimal effort with constant productivity of teacher
effort




                                                                              0.6
                                                                                         Threshold=−1
                                                                                         Threshold=0
         0.6




                                                                                         Threshold=1




                                                                              0.5
                                                                                         Multiple thresholds
         0.5




                                                                              0.4
                                                                     Effort
         0.4




                                                                              0.3
Effort
         0.3




                                                                              0.2
         0.2




                                                                              0.1
         0.1




                                                                              0.0
                                                                                    −4       −2            0                2   4
         0.0




                                                                                               Initial levels of learning
               −4       −2            0                2   4
                          Initial levels of learning                 (b) Levels - γ constant across initial levels of
                                                                     learning. The total effort exerted by teach-
(a) Pay for Percentile - γ constant across ini-
                                                                     ers is 1.55 under the -1 threshold, 1.88 un-
tial levels of learning. The total effort ex-
                                                                     der the 0 threshold, 2.37 under the 1 thresh-
erted by teachers is 3.39.
                                                                     old, and 1.97 under the mutiple threshold.




   We relax the assumption of constant productivity of teacher effort and allow it to vary
with initial learning levels of students. For simplicity, we specify a linear relationship
between teacher productivity (γl ) and student learning levels (al ) such that γl = 1 +
0.25al(t−1) .38 Figures B.4a and B.4b show the numerical solutions of optimal teacher
effort for different initial levels of student learning. In the Pay for Percentile system,
focusing on better prepared students increases the likelihood of winning the rank-order
contest (among that group of students), while the marginal unit of effort applied to the
least prepared students will have a relatively smaller effect on the likelihood of winning
the rank-order tournament among that group of students. Thus, in equilibrium, teachers
will focus more on better prepared students and will not have an incentive to deviate
from this strategy, given the structure and payoffs of the tournament. In contrast, the
Levels scheme would yield a similar but slightly skewed bell-shaped curve compared to
the baseline constant productivity case.
   Our numerical exercise suggests that testing for equality of treatment effects across
         38 Given   the uniform distribution of students across initial levels of learning, γl = 1 + 0.25al(t−1) yields
the same average cost as assuming γl is constant and equal to 1.


                                                               52
the distribution of student baseline test scores in the Pay for Percentile arm allows us to
better understand the specification of teacher effort in the education production function.

Figure B.4: Incentive design and optimal effort when the productivity of teacher effort
is correlated with the initial level of student learning




                                                                             0.6
                                                                                        Threshold=−1
                                                                                        Threshold=0
         0.6




                                                                                        Threshold=1




                                                                             0.5
                                                                                        Multiple thresholds
         0.5




                                                                             0.4
                                                                    Effort
         0.4




                                                                             0.3
Effort
         0.3




                                                                             0.2
         0.2




                                                                             0.1
         0.1




                                                                             0.0   −4       −2            0                2   4
         0.0




                                                                                              Initial levels of learning
               −4        −2           0                2   4
                          Initial levels of learning                (b) Levels - γ increases with initial levels of
                                                                    learning. The total effort exerted by teach-
(a) Pay for Percentile - γ increases with ini-
                                                                    ers is 1.12 under the -1 threshold, 1.73 un-
tial levels of learning. The total effort ex-
                                                                    der the 0 threshold, 2.53 under the 1 thresh-
erted by teachers is 3.39.
                                                                    old, and 1.88 under the mutiple threshold.




B.2               Robustness of Simulation Results
In this section we vary one of the central assumptions in our numerical simulations of
the effort exerted by teachers in equilibrium discussed in Section B.1.5. In particular, we
change the assumption that students are uniformly distributed across baseline test scores
(recall that we had assumed student baseline learning levels to be uniformly distributed
from -4 to 4, in 0.5 intervals). Instead, we assume that student baseline learning levels
are roughly distributed normally around zero, such that most students are near zero
and almost no students are in the tails.39 Figures B.5 and B.6 show the optimal effort of
teachers across both incentive schemes.
   As can be seen in the figures below, teacher responses are equal in the pay for per-
centile scheme (P4Pctile) regardless of the distribution of baseline student learning. This
         39 In   reality, we assume a binomial distribution centered around zero.



                                                               53
result is unsurprising given the equilibrium condition in Equation 3. On the other hand,
for the proficiency scheme (Levels) the optimal teacher effort changes when the distri-
bution of baseline test scores changes (see Equation 5). However, qualitatively the result
is the same as with a uniform distribution of baseline test scores.

Figure B.5: Incentive design and optimal effort with constant productivity of teacher
effort
             0.6




                                                                        0.7
                                                                                   Threshold=−1
                                                                                   Threshold=0




                                                                        0.6
                                                                                   Threshold=1
             0.5




                                                                                   Multiple thresholds




                                                                        0.5
             0.4




                                                                        0.4
    Effort




                                                               Effort
             0.3




                                                                        0.3
             0.2




                                                                        0.2
             0.1




                                                                        0.1
             0.0




                                                                        0.0




                   −4   −2           0                2   4                   −4       −2            0                2   4
                         Initial levels of learning                                      Initial levels of learning

    (a) P4Pctile - γ constant across initial levels (b) Levels - γ constant across initial levels
    of learning                                     of learning




                                                              54
Figure B.6: Incentive design and optimal effort when the productivity of teacher effort
is correlated with the initial level of student learning
             0.6




                                                                        0.8
                                                                                   Threshold=−1
                                                                                   Threshold=0
                                                                                   Threshold=1
             0.5




                                                                                   Multiple thresholds




                                                                        0.6
             0.4
    Effort




                                                               Effort
             0.3




                                                                        0.4
             0.2




                                                                        0.2
             0.1
             0.0




                                                                        0.0
                   −4   −2           0                2   4                   −4       −2            0                2   4
                         Initial levels of learning                                      Initial levels of learning

    (a) P4Pctile - γ increases with initial levels (b) Levels - γ increases with initial levels of
    of learning                                    learning




                                                              55
C     Test Design
The tests used in this evaluation were developed by Tanzanian education professionals.
The tests were based on the Tanzanian curriculum and followed a similar test develop-
ment process as the Uwezo annual learning assessment — a nationwide learning assess-
ment used to measure learning in Tanzania.40 Two types of tests were developed by the
test-developers: a non-incentivized (or low-stakes) test that was used for research pur-
poses and an incentivized (or high-stakes) test that was used to by Twaweza to determine
teacher bonuses. Both tests followed the testing procedures and protocols established in
Mbiti et al. (in press).


C.1   Non-Incentivized test
The non-incentivized (or low-stakes) test was administered on sample of 30 students in
each school (10 students each from Grades 1 through 3). To test for spillovers an addi-
tional 10 students from Grade 4 were also tested. Sampled students are then followed
over the course of the two-year study, except Grade 4 students who were not followed
into Grade 5. These non-incentivized tests were only used for research purposes. In
order to prevent confusion in schools, these non-incentivized tests were conducted by
a separate team to prevent confusion with the intervention team (or the incentivized
tests). Given the low levels of learning in Tanzania, we conducted one-on-one tests in
which a test enumerator sits with the student and guides her/him through a large font
test booklet. This improved data quality and also enabled us to capture a wide range of
skills in the event the student was not literate. Students are asked to read and answer
the test questions to the administrator who records the number of correctly read or an-
swered test items. For the numeracy questions and the spelling questions students were
allowed to use pencil and paper. In order to avoid ceiling and floor effects, we requested
the test-developers to include “easy”, “medium”, and “hard” items.
   Since this study was built on the RCT by Mbiti et al. (in press), we used the endline
tests that were administered in 2014 for that study as the baseline for this study. The
material covered by our tests in Kiswahili and English included reading syllables, read-
ing words, and a reading comprehension. In math, the tests covered simple counting,
number recognition, inequalities of number (i.e., which is greater), addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division.
   During both endline tests (in 2015 and 2016), we tested students based on the grade
 40 More   information is available at https://www.twaweza.org/go/uwezo



                                                 56
we expected them to be enrolled. Both of these tests were grade specific tests designed
to measure the main competencies outlined in the curriculum. The content of the tests
is summarized in in Table C.1. The number of items of each test varied. In the first
year the Kiswahili and English tests included 27 items for grade 1, 20 items for grade 2,
and 9 items for grade 3. In the second year, the number of items was reduced mainly
by dropping items that required students to write (or spell). For math, there were 34
items for grade 1, 24 items for grade 2, and 24 items for grade 3. In the second year, the
number of items on the grade 1 math test was reduced. However, we added a number
of easier items to the grade 3 test, and left the length of the grade 2 test unchanged.
   We standardize test scores using the mean and standard deviation of the control group
to compute Z-scores. We also scale the test scores using Item Response Theory (IRT)
methods so that all students are on the same scale. The IRT scaling allows us to convert
the estimated treatment effects (measured in SDs) to equivalent years of schooling.


C.2   Incentivized test
The incentivized (or high-stakes) tests were used to determine teacher bonuses. These
tests were taken by all students in grades 1, 2, and 3. Although there are no bonuses
in the control schools, we administer the same type of “incentivized tests” in control
schools so that we could compute treatment effects using the incentivized test data. A
number of measures were introduced to enhance test security. First, to prevent test-
taking by non-target grade candidates, students could only be tested if their name had
been listed and their photo taken at baseline. Second, there were ten versions of the
tests to prevent copying and leakage; each student was assigned a randomly generated
number from a table to identify the test version, with the choice of the number based on
day of the week and the first letter of the student’s name. Finally, tests were handled,
administered, and scored by Twaweza without any teacher involvement. Several checks
were done ex-post by Twaweza to ensure there was not any cheating on the high-stakes
test.


C.3   Comparability of tests
Both types of tests followed the same test-development framework. As a result, the sub-
ject order, question type, and phrasing was similar across both tests. The main difference
is the incentivized test is shorter (about 15 mins per student) and uses a variety of stop-
ping rules to reduce testing time. The non-incentivized test took about 40 minutes and



                                            57
covered more skills. It also included more questions to avoid bottom- and top-coding.
The specific skills tested are outlined in Table C.1.
   Although the content between the two types of test is similar, there are a number of im-
portant differences in the administration of the tests. The non-incentivized tests included
an “other subject” module to measure potential spillover effects. Non-incentivized tests
were administered by taking sampled students out of their classroom during a regular
school day. In contrast, the incentivized tests were more “official” as all students in
Grades 1-3 were tested on a prearranged test day. On the test day, students in other
grades would sometimes be sent home to avoid distractions. Extra-curricular activities
were also canceled during the Twaweza test. In addition, most schools used the incen-
tivized test as the end of year test. This also likely encouraged students in the control
group to exert effort on the test.




                                            58
                  Table C.1: Comparison of low-Stakes and high-Stakes test content


                                                                        Low- Stakes                                                            High-stakes
                                                    Year 1                                         Year 2                                      Both Years
                                                  Kiswahili                                      Kiswahili                                      Kiswahili
                                   Grade 1         Grade 2         Grade 3        Grade 1         Grade 2         Grade 3        Grade 1         Grade 2          Grade 3
Syllables                             +               -               -              +               +               +              +               -                -
Words                                 +               +               -              +               +               +              +               +                -
Sentences                             +               +               -              +               +               +              +               +                -
Writing words                         +               +               +              -               -               -              -               -                -
Reading one paragraph                 -               +               +              -               +               +              -               +                -
Reading comprehension                 -               -               +              -               -               +              -               -                +

                                                    English                                       English                                        English
                                   Grade 1         Grade 2         Grade 3        Grade 1         Grade 2         Grade 3        Grade 1         Grade 2          Grade 3

Letters                                 +               -              -              +               +               +              +                -               -
Words                                   +               +              -              +               +               +              +                +               -
Sentences                               +               +              -              +               +               +              +                +               -
Writing words                           +               +              +              -               -               -              -                -               -
Reading One paragraph                   -               +              +              -               +               +              -                +               -
Reading Comprehension                   -               -              +              -               -               +              -                -               +

                                                     Math                                           Math                                           Math
                                   Grade 1         Grade 2         Grade 3        Grade 1         Grade 2         Grade 3        Grade 1         Grade 2          Grade 3

Counting                                +               -              -              +               +               +              +                -               -
Number identification                   +               -              -              +               +               +              +                -               -
Inequality of numbers                   +               +              -              +               +               +              +                +               -
Addition                                +               +              +              +               +               +              +                +               +
Subtraction                             +               +              +              +               +               +              +                +               +
Multiplication                          -               +              +              -               +               +              -                +               +
Division                                -               -              +              -               -               +              -                -               +
 The Table summarizes the test content for each subject across different grades and data collection rounds. Both high-stakes and low-stakes tests were developed using the same
 test-development framework as the Uwezo national assessments. The main difference between the high-stakes and low-stakes test is the high-stakes test is designed to measure
 proficiency so the test has a variety of stopping rules to reduce testing time.




                                                                                 59
D     Additional Tables

D.1   Properly seeded contests



                      Table D.1: Effect on test scores (without grade 1)



                                (1)        (2)            (3)      (4)        (5)          (6)
                                           Year 1                              Year 2
                               Math    Kiswahili     Combined     Math     Kiswahili    Combined
      Panel A: Non-incentivized
      Levels (α1 )            .061         .04            .058     .11∗∗     .13∗∗        .14∗∗∗
                             (.047)      (.055)          (.051)    (.05)     (.054)        (.05)
      P4Pctile (α2 )         .0013        -.051           -.029     .1∗∗     .088∗         .11∗∗
                             (.045)      (.051)          (.047)   (.045)     (.052)       (.048)
      N. of obs.             3,120       3,120           3,120    3,163      3,163         3,163
      α3 = α2 − α1            -.06       -.091∗          -.087∗   -.0089      -.039        -.034
      p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)    .18        .084            .065       .87       .46          .51

      Panel B: Incentivized
      Levels (β 1 )          .13∗∗∗       .12∗∗          .18∗∗∗   .17∗∗∗     .14∗∗       .22∗∗∗
                               (.05)     (.054)          (.068)   (.051)    (.055)       (.069)
      P4Pctile (β 2 )         .079∗        .034            .08     .09∗∗      .063        .11∗
                             (.045)      (.048)           (.06)   (.045)    (.045)       (.059)
      N. of obs.             30,206      30,206          30,206   32,956    32,956       32,956
      β3 = β2 − β1            -.054        -.09            -.1    -.083∗     -.073        -.11
      p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)   0.26        0.10           0.11     0.097      0.19        0.11

      Panel C: Incentivized – Non-incentivized
      β 1 − α1                 .06       .07               .11    .055       .0048         .066
      p-value(β 1 − α1 = 0)    .23       .15              .067     .26         .93          .28
      β 2 − α2                .074      .078                .1     -.01      -.024        .0004
      p-value(β 2 − α2 = 0)    .15       .11              .089     .83          .6          .99
      β 3 − α3                .014     .0078             -.0057   -.065      -.029        -.066
      p-value( β 3 − α3 = 0)   .79       .88               .92     .19        .64           .31
        Results from estimating Equation 1 for different subjects at both follow-ups. Panel A
        uses data from the non-incentivized test taken by a sample of students. Control vari-
        ables include student characteristics (age, gender, grade and lag test scores) and school
        characteristics (PTR, Infrastructure PCA index, a PCA index of how close the school is to
        different facilities, and an indicator for whether the school is single shift or not). Panel
        B uses data from the incentivized test taken by all students. Control variables include
        student characteristics (gender and grade) and school characteristics (PTR, Infrastructure
        PCA index, a PCA index of how close the school is to different facilities, and an indicator
        for whether the school is single shift or not). Panel C tests the difference between the
        treatment estimates in panels A and B. Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are
        in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



                                                    60
D.2   Results for English



                   Table D.2: Effect on English test scores



                                                      (1)           (2)
                                                     Year 1        Year 2
                                                    English       English
                     Panel A: Non-incentivized
                                           English                English
                     Levels (α1 )            .019                    .11
                                            (.087)                 (.085)
                     P4Pctile (α2 )          -.03                  .19∗∗
                                            (.077)                 (.081)
                     N. of obs.             1,532                  1,533
                     α3 = α2 − α1           -.048                   .078
                     p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)    .53                    .31
                     Panel B: Incentivized
                     Levels (β 1 )                   .28∗∗∗        .28∗∗∗
                                                     (.066)        (.069)
                     P4Pctile (β 2 )                 .16∗∗∗        .23∗∗∗
                                                     (.057)        (.055)
                     N. of obs.                      46,018        15,458
                     α3 = α2 − α1                     -.12∗         -.047
                     p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)            .079           .53
                     Panel C: Incentivized – Non-incentivized
                     β 1 − α1                  .14       .15
                     p-value(β 1 − α1 = 0)     .15       .14
                     β 2 − α2                  .18     .043
                     p-value(β 2 − α2 = 0)    .031       .63
                     β 3 − α3                 .043      -.11
                     p-value( β 3 − α3 = 0)    .62       .29
                       Results from estimating Equation 1 for different sub-
                       jects at both follow-ups. Panel A uses data from
                       the non-incentivized test taken by a sample of stu-
                       dents. Control variables include student character-
                       istics (age, gender, grade and lag test scores) and
                       school characteristics (PTR, Infrastructure PCA in-
                       dex, a PCA index of how close the school is to dif-
                       ferent facilities, and an indicator for whether the
                       school is single shift or not). Panel B uses data from
                       the incentivized test taken by all students. Control
                       variables include student characteristics (gender and
                       grade) and school characteristics (PTR, Infrastruc-
                       ture PCA index, a PCA index of how close the school
                       is to different facilities, and an indicator for whether
                       the school is single shift or not). Panel C tests the
                       difference between the treatment estimates in pan-
                       els A and B. Standard errors, clustered at the school
                       level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
                       p < 0.01



                                              61
D.3   Balance in Teacher Turnover



                           Table D.3: Teacher turnover



                                           (1)             (2)
                                          Still teaching incentivized
                                                 grades/subjects
                                           Yr 1           Yr 2

                  Levels (α1 )             .066           .065
                                          (.043)          (.04)
                  P4Pctile (α2 )           .054          .088∗∗
                                          (.036)         (.034)
                  N. of obs.                882            882
                  Mean control              .73            .59
                  α3 = α2 − α1             -.013          .022
                  p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)     .75            .56
                    Proportion of teachers of math, English or
                    Kiswahili in grades 1, 2, and 3 who were teach-
                    ing at the beginning of 2015 and still teaching
                    those subjects (in the same school) at the end of
                    2015 (Column 1) and 2016 (Column 2). Standard
                    errors, clustered at the school level, are in paren-
                    theses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                          62
D.4   Pass Rates



                         Table D.4: Pass rates across all skill levels



                                 (1)        (2)              (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
                                           Year 1                                 Year 2
                                Math      Kiswahili        English     Math      Kiswahili   English
      Levels (β 1 )            .0358∗∗    .0582∗∗∗         .0359∗∗∗   .0366∗∗∗   .0682∗∗∗    .0149∗∗
                                 (.015)       (.02)        (.0092)      (.013)     (.016)     (.006)
      P4Pctile (β 2 )           .0224∗      .00739         .0169∗∗    .0331∗∗∗     .0227     .0132∗∗
                                 (.012)      (.018)        (.0075)      (.012)     (.017)    (.0056)
      N. of obs.               210,358     129,676         129,676     248,250   181,288      30,986
      Control mean                 .58          .5           .041         .58        .5        .041
      β3 = β2 − β1                -.013    -.051∗∗         -.019∗∗      -.0035   -.046∗∗∗     -.0018
      p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)       .36        .014           .043         .77      .0051         .8
        The independent variable is whether a student acquired a given skills as evidenced by
        performance on the incentivized test. Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are
        in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                      63
                  Table D.5: Pass rates using levels thresholds in Kiswahili



                          Syllables   Words       Sentences   Paragraph   Story        Reading
                                                                                    Comprehension
                             (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)

Panel A: Year 1
Levels (β 1 )              .064∗∗     .059∗∗       .071∗∗∗     .075∗∗∗      .038          .024
                            (.026)    (.024)        (.023)      (.022)     (.024)       (.026)
P4Pctile (β 2 )            -.0057      .015          .011        .026      -.0099       -.0034
                            (.025)    (.022)        (.021)       (.02)     (.021)       (.022)
N. of obs.                 17,886     33,440        33,440      15,554    14,678        14,678
Control mean                  .4        .59            .5         .37        .52           .56
β3 = β2 − β1              -.069∗∗∗    -.044∗        -.06∗∗     -.049∗∗    -.048∗∗        -.027
p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)      .0086      .081          .011        .017       .045           .27

Panel B: Year 2
Levels (β 1 )               .09∗∗∗     .085∗∗∗      .08∗∗∗      .046∗∗     .0032        .053∗∗
                            (.021)        (.02)      (.018)      (.019)   (.026)        (.021)
P4Pctile (β 2 )            .047∗∗        .036∗       .032∗      -.0089     -.027         .012
                            (.023)        (.02)      (.019)       (.02)   (.022)        (.019)
N. of obs.                 26,746       44,262      44,262      17,516    15,493        33,009
Control mean                  .3            .6         .48         .43      .61           .56
β3 = β2 − β1               -.044∗∗    -.049∗∗∗     -.048∗∗∗    -.055∗∗∗     -.03        -.041∗
p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)       .027        .0082       .0058       .0042      .22          .053
  The independent variable is whether a student acquired a given skills as evidenced by perfor-
  mance on the incentivized test. Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in parentheses.
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                   64
                    Table D.6: Pass rates using levels thresholds in math



                         Counting   Numbers     Inequalities   Addition    Subtraction   Multiplication   Division
                           (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)

Panel A: Year 1
Levels (β 1 )              .0034        .014         .03∗∗       .05∗∗       .043∗∗          .038∗∗          .035∗
                          (.0091)     (.021)        (.014)      (.021)        (.02)          (.017)         (.018)
P4Pctile (β 2 )           .031∗∗∗      .031∗       .033∗∗∗        .018         .016            .023          .0095
                          (.0078)     (.018)        (.012)      (.018)       (.016)          (.016)         (.018)
N. of obs.                 17,886     17,886        33,440      48,118       48,118          30,232         14,678
Control mean                 .93         .64          .74          .59           .5             .23           .22
β3 = β2 − β1              .028∗∗∗       .017         .0027       -.033        -.027           -.015          -.026
p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)     .0012          .4          .85          .12          .16             .37           .17

Panel B: Year 2
Levels (β 1 )            .000686      .0411∗∗      .0265∗∗      .0442∗∗      .0462∗∗        .0514∗∗∗       .0395∗∗
                          (.0078)      (.019)       (.011)       (.019)       (.019)          (.014)        (.017)
P4Pctile (β 2 )            .0108     .0595∗∗∗     .0388∗∗∗      .0394∗∗        .026          .0254∗∗         .0223
                          (.0071)      (.017)        (.01)       (.017)       (.017)          (.013)        (.017)
N. of obs.                26,746       26,746       44,262       59,755       59,755          15,493        15,493
Control mean                 .94         .68          .79           .6          .56             .11           .18
β3 = β2 − β1                 .01        .018         .012        -.0049        -.02            -.026         -.017
p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)      .12          .31          .23          .78          .24             .11           .34
  The independent variable is whether a student acquired a given skills as evidenced by performance on the
  incentivized test. Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗
  p < 0.01




                                                   65
                  Table D.7: Pass rates using levels thresholds in English



                         Syllables   Words    Sentences    Paragraph     Story        Reading
                                                                                   Comprehension
                            (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)

Panel A: Year 1
Levels (β 1 )              .095∗∗∗   .05∗∗∗    .023∗∗∗       .015∗∗      .0079∗          .013∗
                            (.021)   (.013)    (.0087)       (.0065)    (.0046)        (.0078)
P4Pctile (β 2 )             .036∗∗   .028∗∗     .0041         .0073      .0079∗        .019∗∗∗
                            (.016)   (.011)     (.007)       (.0055)    (.0046)        (.0064)
N. of obs.                  17,886   33,440     33,440       15,554      14,678         14,678
Control mean                  .087    .075       .023          .007       .021            .036
β3 = β2 − β1              -.059∗∗∗   -.022∗    -.019∗∗       -.0073     -.00001          .0057
p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)       .0034    .074       .043           .29         1              .44

Panel B: Year 2
Levels (β 1 )                                                             .0074        .022∗∗
                                                                         (.0061)       (.0086)
P4Pctile (β 2 )                                                           .012∗         .02∗∗
                                                                         (.0068)       (.0079)
N. of obs.                   0         0          0             0        10,735        10,735
Control mean                 .         .          .             .          .017          .025
β3 = β2 − β1                                                              .0048        -.0016
p-value (H0 : β 3 = 0)                                                       .5           .88
  The independent variable is whether a student acquired a given skills as evidenced by perfor-
  mance on the incentivized test. Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in parentheses.
  ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                66
D.5   Effects on Test Takers and Lee Bounds on the Incentivized Test



               Table D.8: Number of test takers, incentivized test



                                                (1)        (2)
                                               Year 1     Year 2
                     Levels (α1 )                0.02     0.05∗∗∗
                                                (0.02)     (0.01)
                     P4Pctile (α2 )              -0.00    0.03∗∗
                                                (0.02)    (0.01)
                     N. of obs.                  540        540
                     Mean control group          0.78       0.83
                     α3 = α2 − α1               -0.02     -0.03∗∗
                     p-value(α3 = 0)             0.20       0.04
                       The independent variable is the proportion
                       of test takers (number of test takers divided
                       by the enrollment in each grade) of the in-
                       centivized exam. The unit of observation
                       is the school-grade level. Standard errors,
                       clustered at the school level, are in paren-
                       theses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                          67
                          Table D.9: Lee bounds for the incentivized test



                                              (1)              (2)       (3)            (4)
                                                      Year 1                   Year 2
                                             Math        Kiswahili     Math      Kiswahili

                 Levels (α1 )               0.11∗∗          0.13∗∗∗   0.14∗∗∗      0.18∗∗∗
                                            (0.05)           (0.05)    (0.04)       (0.05)
                 P4Pctile (α2 )              0.07∗           0.02      0.09∗∗       0.09∗
                                             (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.05)
                 N. of obs.                 48,077          48,077    59,680       59,680
                 α3 = α2 − α1               -0.047          -0.11∗∗   -0.044      -0.093∗∗
                 p-value(α3 = 0)             0.30            0.026     0.31         0.045
                 Lower 95% CI (α1 ) 0.00066                  0.021     -0.023       0.027
                 Higher 95% CI (α1 )  0.23                    0.25      0.32         0.35
                 Lower 95% CI (α2 )         -0.012          -0.070     0.014       -0.0032
                 Higher 95% CI (α2 )         0.14            0.10       0.17         0.17
                 Lower 95% CI (α3 )          -0.16           -0.24     -0.22        -0.27
                 Higher 95% CI (α3 )         0.063          0.00099    0.11         0.057
                    The independent variable is the standardized test score for different sub-
                    jects. For each subject we present Lee (2009) bounds for all the treatment
                    estimates (i.e., trimming the left/right tail of the distribution in Levels
                    and P4Pctile schools so that the proportion of test takers is the same as
                    the number in control schools). Standard errors, clustered at the school
                    level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


D.6      National Assessments
We test the effect of both interventions on the Primary School Leaving Examination
(PSLE) taken by students in grade 7. We retrieved records for all schools in Tanzania
from the National Examinations Council of Tanzania (NECTA) website (https://necta
.go.tz/psle results) and then merged them with out data using a fuzzy merge based
on the school name, region, and district. We were able to match over 80% of schools in
our data.
  The PSLE is a high-stakes test for students: their progression to secondary school is
related to the results of this test. Recent reforms publicized the rankings of schools based
on the results of these tests. Overall, we do not find any impact of our treatment on PSLE
test scores, pass rates, or the number of test takers (see Table D.10).41
 41 We   do find that test scores decrease on the SNFA examination in 2015. However, this is not consistent


                                                       68
                    Table D.10: Effect on national assessments (Grade 7 - PSLE)



                                 (1)         (2)            (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)

                                       Grade 7 PSLE 2015                        Grade 7 PSLE 2016                 Grade 7 PSLE 2017
                                Pass       Score      Test takers        Pass       Score    Test takers   Pass       Score    Test takers
 Levels (α1 )                   -0.02       -0.07          6.99           0.00       -0.05      4.02        0.03       0.10       7.00
                               (0.04)      (0.08)         (6.99)         (0.03)     (0.07)     (7.56)      (0.03)     (0.06)     (8.76)
 P4Pctile (α2 )                 -0.04       -0.07          -4.00          -0.02      -0.03     -2.29        -0.00      0.02       0.59
                               (0.03)      (0.08)         (6.48)         (0.03)     (0.06)     (5.75)      (0.03)     (0.06)     (7.08)
 N. of obs.                   11,616      11,616           165           10,031    10,031        155       12,070    12,070        155
 N. of schools                 167          167            165            158        158         155        158       158          155
 Mean control group            0.71         2.98          55.3            0.67      2.83        52.4        0.69      2.86        61.9
 α3 = α2 − α1                 -0.020      -0.0043         -11.0          -0.029     0.016       -6.32      -0.032    -0.074       -6.41
 p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)         0.63         0.96          0.10            0.42      0.84        0.39        0.30      0.23        0.47
   Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in parentheses.

with our higher-quality data on grade 4 students (see Table 5). We find an increase in test takers in 2016
(insignificant) and 2017 (significant) in the Levels treatment, which could be viewed as a positive effect of
the treatment. Results available upon request.




                                                                   69
D.7   Classroom observations



                          Table D.11: Classroom observations



                                       (1)                        (2)           (3)
                              Classroom Environment            Teaching      Sleeping

         Levels (α1 )                     -0.030                  0.077        0.0013
                                          (0.14)                  (0.14)       (0.044)
         P4Pctile (α2 )                    0.12                  -0.064         -0.041
                                          (0.12)                 (0.14)        (0.034)
         N. of obs.                       2,080                   1,481          772
         α3 = α2 − α1                     .005                    -.012          .13
         p-value(α3 = 0)                   .25                     .36           .27
           The outcome here are index created taking the first component from a PCA
           analysis of different items measured during classroom observations. The
           outcome in Column 1 is an index that measures whether the classroom
           ’s environment is conductive to learning. It is composed of the following
           measures: whether student’s work is display on the walls, whether there
           are charts on the walls, and the number of charts in the wall. The outcome
           in Column 2 is an index that measures teacher’s behavior during class time.
           It is composed of the following measures: whether the teacher threatens
           students, and whether the teacher hits students. Finally, the outcome in
           Column 3 shows whether any students were sleeping during class time.
           Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10,
           ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                              70
D.8                        Additional Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects

                                                                           Figure D.1: Math — non-incentivized

                                 Levels                                                P4Pctile                                                   Levels                                                P4Pctile
  .5                                                   .5                                                          .5                                                   .5



.25                                                 .25                                                          .25                                                .25
  Treatment effect




                                                        Treatment effect




                                                                                                                   Treatment effect




                                                                                                                                                                         Treatment effect
   0                                                    0                                                           0                                                     0



-.25                                               -.25                                                          -.25                                               -.25



 -.5                                                -.5                                                           -.5                                                   -.5
                       1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4    5                                  1     2     3       4  5                              1     2     3      4   5
                                 Quintile                                              Quintile                                                   Quintile                                              Quintile
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .15                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .00017                                  p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .9                                 p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .48
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .52                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .0019                          p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .84                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .35



                                            (a) Year 1                                                                                                      (b) Year 2



                                                                                 Figure D.2: Math — incentivized

                                 Levels                                                P4Pctile                                                   Levels                                                P4Pctile
  .5                                                   .5                                                          .5                                                    .5



.25                                                 .25                                                          .25                                                .25
  Treatment effect




                                                        Treatment effect




                                                                                                                   Treatment effect




                                                                                                                                                                         Treatment effect


   0                                                      0                                                         0                                                      0



-.25                                               -.25                                                          -.25                                               -.25



 -.5                                                   -.5                                                        -.5                                                   -.5
                       1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4   5                                   1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4   5
                                 Quintile                                              Quintile                                                   Quintile                                              Quintile
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .65                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .11                                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .15                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .83
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .49                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .8                             p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .49                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .8



                                            (a) Year 1                                                                                                      (b) Year 2




                                                                                                            71
                                                              Figure D.3: Kiswahili — non-incentivized

                                 Levels                                                P4Pctile                                                    Levels                                              P4Pctile
  .5                                                   .5                                                           .5                                                   .5



.25                                                .25                                                            .25                                                .25
  Treatment effect




                                                        Treatment effect




                                                                                                                    Treatment effect




                                                                                                                                                                          Treatment effect
   0                                                     0                                                           0                                                     0



-.25                                               -.25                                                           -.25                                               -.25



 -.5                                                   -.5                                                         -.5                                                   -.5
                       1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4   5                                    1     2     3      4   5                              1      2    3      4   5
                                 Quintile                                              Quintile                                                    Quintile                                              Quintile
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .06                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .012                                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .91                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .95
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .44                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .16                             p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .35                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .66



                                           (a) Year 1                                                                                                        (b) Year 2



                                                                           Figure D.4: Kiswahili — incentivized

                                 Levels                                                P4Pctile                                                    Levels                                              P4Pctile
  .5                                                    .5                                                          .5                                                    .5



.25                                                .25                                                            .25                                                .25
  Treatment effect




                                                        Treatment effect




                                                                                                                    Treatment effect




                                                                                                                                                                          Treatment effect
   0                                                      0                                                          0                                                      0



-.25                                               -.25                                                           -.25                                               -.25



 -.5                                                   -.5                                                         -.5                                                   -.5
                       1     2     3      4   5                              1     2     3      4   5                                    1     2     3      4   5                              1      2    3      4   5
                                 Quintile                                              Quintile                                                    Quintile                                              Quintile
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .42                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .34                                      p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .57                                p-value(H0:Q1=Q5)= .37
                     p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .49                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .8                              p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .49                       p-value(H0:Q1=Q2=Q3=Q4=Q5)= .8



                                           (a) Year 1                                                                                                        (b) Year 2




                                                                                                             72
                     Table D.12: Heterogeneity by student characteristics



                                           (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)           (6)
                                                        Math                                Swahili
                                         Male           Age        Test(Yr0)   Male         Age       Test(Yr0)
          Levels*Covariate (α2 )          -0.022        0.014        0.034      0.017     -0.031∗         0.015
                                         (0.037)       (0.014)      (0.032)    (0.051)    (0.018)        (0.029)
          P4Pctile*Covariate (α1 )        0.020        0.0076      0.068∗∗∗     -0.024    0.0066          0.030
                                         (0.041)       (0.015)      (0.026)    (0.051)    (0.019)        (0.030)
          N. of obs.                     9,650         9,650         9,650     9,650        9,650        9,650
          α3 = α2 − α1                    .042         -.006          .035     -.041        .038∗         .015
          p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)             .3          .69            .23      .42          .05           .62
            Each column interacts the treatment effect with different student characteristics: sex
            (columns 1, 4, and 7), age (columns 2, 5, and 8), and baseline test scores (columns
            3, 6, and 9). Standard errors, clustered at the school level, are in parentheses. ∗
            p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                      Table D.13: Heterogeneity by school characteristics



                               (1)               (2)                (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)
                                                   Math                                            Swahili
                            Facilities           PTR       Fraction Weak       Facilities      PTR           Fraction Weak
 Levels*Covariate (α2 )       0.035         -0.00031                -0.22        -0.023        -0.0010              -0.13
                             (0.022)        (0.0015)               (0.17)       (0.026)       (0.0014)             (0.17)
 P4Pctile*Covariate (α1 )     -0.022       -0.0026∗∗                -0.24        -0.028        -0.0017             -0.28∗
                             (0.026)        (0.0011)               (0.15)       (0.030)       (0.0014)             (0.17)
 N. of obs.                   9,650          9,650                 9,650         9,650         9,650               9,650
 α3 = α2 − α1                -.057∗∗         -.0023                -.025         -.0048       -.00069               -.16
 p-value (H0 : α3 = 0)         .018            .18                  .87            .87           .7                 .37
   Each column interacts the treatment effect with different school characteristics: a facilities index
   (columns 1, 4, and 7), the pupil-teacher ratio (columns 2, 5, and 8), and the fraction of students that
   are below the median student in the country (columns 3, 6, and 9). Standard errors, clustered at the
   school level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


D.9    Teacher Understanding
Since there is no comparable test for control group teachers, we cannot interact the treat-
ment variable with teacher understanding. Instead, we split each treatment group into
a high (above average) understanding group and a low (below average) understand-
ing group, and estimate the treatment effects for these sub-treatment groups relative

                                                              73
to the entire control group (i.e., the control group is the omitted category). Within
each treatment arm, we test for differences between the high-understanding and low-
understanding groups to determine if better understanding leads to better student test
scores. As some teachers were not present when we conducted the teacher comprehen-
sion tests, we created an additional group for teachers with no test in both treatments.




                Table D.14: Heterogeneity by teacher’s understanding



                                                          (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                         Math     Swahili   English
               Levels (high-understanding)               0.032    0.075∗     0.052
                                                        (0.044)   (0.042)   (0.060)
               Levels (low-understanding)               0.073∗    0.083∗∗    0.074
                                                        (0.042)   (0.037)   (0.049)
               P4Pctile (high-understanding)            0.0093     0.029    0.12∗∗
                                                        (0.035)   (0.036)   (0.051)
               P4Pctile (low-understanding)              0.052    -0.0059    0.032
                                                        (0.043)   (0.041)   (0.052)
               N. of obs.                                9,650    9,650      6,314
               Levels:High-Low                           -.042    -.0073     -.022
               p-value (Levels:High-Low=0)                .28       .84        .73
               P4Pctile:High-Low                         -.042     .035       .089
               p-value (P4Pctile:High-Low=0)              .31       .41        .15
               P4Pctile:High-Levels:High                 -.022     -.047      .069
               p-value (P4Pctile:High-Levels:High=0)      .63       .28         .3
               P4Pctile:Low-Levels:Low                   -.022     -.088     -.042
               p-value (P4Pctile:Low-Levels:Low=0)        .67      .058         .5
                 The outcome variables are student test scores in math (Column 1),
                 Kiswahili (Column 2), and English (Column 3). Each regression
                 pools the data for both follow-ups. Teachers are classified as above
                 or below the median in each follow-up in treatment schools. Since
                 we do not have “understanding” questions for teachers in control
                 schools, all teachers in the control group are compared for teachers
                 above and below the median in treatment schools. Standard errors,
                 clustered at the school level, are in parentheses. ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗
                 p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                               74
