                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RELATIVE WAGES, EFFICIENCY WAGES, AND
                         KEYNESIAN UNEMPLOYMENT




                           Lawrence H. Summers




                          Working Paper No. 2590




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1988




The ideas in this paper are developed much more fully in Summers (1988a)
where a much fullvr list of references to prior work is provided. I am
indebted to Larry Katz for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this
paper. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2590
                                               May 1988



      Relative Wages. Efficiency Wages, and Keynesian Unemployment




                                ABSTRACT




        While modern economic theorists have produced a variety of

   explanations for the failure of wages to fall in the face of

   unemployment. Keynes emphasis on relative wages has not been reflected

   in most contemporary discussions. This short paper suggests that

   relative wage theories in which workers' productivity depends

   primarily on their relative wage provide the best available apparatus

   for understanding actual unemployment and its fluctuations. Such

   theories are very closely related to the efficiency wage theories that

   have received widespread attention in recent years.




Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
     Keynes's General Theory in explaining involuntary unemployment advanced the

idea that "any individual or group of individuals, who consent to a reduction of

money wagea relatively to others will suffer a relative reduction in real wages,

which is sufficient justification for them to resist it. On the other hand, it

would be impracticable to resist every reduction of real wages due to changes in

the purchasing power of money, which affects all workers alike," (p.lte)

While modern economic theorists have produced a variety of explanations for the

failure of wages to fall in the face of unemployment, Keynes emphasis on

relative wages has not been reflected in most contemporary discussions, This

short peper suggests that relative wage theories in which workers' productivity

depends primarily on their relative wage provide the beat available apparatus

for understanding actual unemployment end its fluctuations. Such theories are

very closely related to the efficiency wage theories that have received

widespread attention in recent years.

     Section I motivates and then lays out a simple relative wage model

describing the determination of equilibrium unemployment and highlights the

fragility of the equilibris that are likely to result when firms are concerned

about their relative wage. Section II develops the close relationship between

relative wage models and models that stress the role of insider power in

understanding unemployment. Section III shows how efficiency wsge modeia can he

extended to account for cyclical unemployment fluctuations once the rote of

relstive wages in influencing worker productivity is recognized. Section IV

offers some concluding observstions.
                                      -2-

     I, Relative Wages and Equilibrium Unemployment



     For simplicity, consider a labor market in which workers and jobs are

homogeneous. In addition to the virtue of tractability, these assumptions

reaove many of the ambiguities associated with the concept of involuntary

unemployment. If the labor market were perfectly competitive and free of

information problems, the demand and supply of labor would be equated. In the

competitive equilibrium, all firms would pay the prevailing wage, end any worker

would be able to immediately obtain work at this wage.

        This very simple perfect competition model offers a manifestly

inadequate account of the labor markets. Firms do not act as if they face

perfectly elastic labor-supply schedules. Small changes in wages do nor produce

infinite changes in the available supply of labor. In fact, firms focus on

variables other than the quantity of labor available to them in setting wages.

A large institutional literature has documented that firms go to considerable

expense to gain information in order to set en eppropriete wage rate relative to

other firms in their labor market. In Chicsgo alone, more than 100 surveys of

the wages paid to clerical workers were performed in a single year, while firms

went to relatively little expense to determine how many clerical workers ware

unemployed. Most strikingly, even in settings where unemployment is high, firms

do not cut wages end sometimes even raise them.

     The natural way for en economist to sccount for the observation that firms

sometimes raise wages even when they sre not having trouble staffing their

workplace is to postulate that reducing wages in the face of unemployment would

reduce profits. Profits may fall when wages are reduced, if reducing wages

influences productivity by affecting workers' effort, or by raising the firs's
                                       -3-

costs of recruiting, training and retaining its labor force. This is the

central theme of the burgeoning efficiency literature (surveyed by Stigtitz

(1986) and Katz (1986)) which spells out a variety of mechsnispis linking the

wages a firm pays to the productivity of its workforce. While the point is

rarely emphasized, most efficiency wage arguments suggest that rather than

depending on absolute wages, productivity depends on the relative

attractiveness of opportunities inside and outside the firm. Opportunites

outside the firm in turn depend on both the wages paid by other firas and the

rate of unemployment. Think about stories based on turnover, recruiting

workers' perceptions of what is fair as examples.

    A simple functional form allowing for the possibility that increasing

relative wages raises productivity holds that:1

     (1) 9(w•x)° OSal
    where 9 measures the effort put forth by the representative worker, x

reflects its workers' opportunities in a sense defined precisely belcw and a

measures the productivity-enhancing effects of paying higher wages. If aO,

efficiency wage considerations are absent. As a increases, they hecoae more

important.

     The representative firm's problem is to choose a level of wages that

minimizes costs per unit of effective labor input, w/9. Differentiating (1)

yields the result:

     (2) w*_x/(la)

which implies that the firm pays workers their opportunity cost if efficiency

wage considerations are absent but generally pays a preaium whose magnitude

depends on the the size of o.

     Characterizing market equilibrium requires a description of how x is
                                      -4-




determined. A convenient functional form capturing the idea that outsids

opportunities depend both on wages-paid by other firma and on unemployment is:

     (3) x-w(l-(l-b)u)

where u is the unemployment rate, w is the average wage paid by other fines, and

b reflects their relative importance in determining a workers' outside

opportunities. The value of b in a fully worked out model would depend

positively on the utility of leisure, the value of unemployment benefits, and

negatively on the duration of unemployment.

    Substituting (3) into (2) and requiring that w—w, since all firms are

identical, we obtain a very simple expresaion for the market equilibrium

unemployment rate:

     (4) uo/(l-b)

Equation (4) indicates that the equilibrium unemployment rate depends positively

on the size of the productivity-enhancing effects of wage increases as reflected

in m, and on the attractiveness of unemployment as reflected in b, Notice that

only in the special and plausible case where n—O will there be no unemployment

in equilibrium. Notice that the functional form used here has the special and

attractive property that the equilibrium level of unemployment does not depend

at all on the form of the labor-demand schedule. The labor-demand nurve only

determines the level of wagea. This is an attractive property of the model. It

is striking that real wages have doubled several times over the last century

without having a large impact on average unemployment rates.

       Substituting plausible parameter values into equation (4), it is clear

that only small efficiency wage effects are needed to account for observed

levels of unemployment. Even if b—U, a productivity-relative wage elasticity,
                                         .5-




a, of only .06 is sufficient to rationalize a 6 percent unemployment rate. For

larger valuss of b. even smaller efficiency wage effects are sufficient to

rationalize observed levels of unemployment. Furthermore, the image of

unemployment suggested by the model also accords with observation in two

important reapects.

         First, the unemployment generated here is involuntary arid socially

costly. In complex models it is sometimes difficult to sake the concept of

involuntary unemployment operationsl. But here its meaning is clear enough.

All jobs and workers are identical. All workers want jobs at the prevailing

wages but only some workers can get then. Furthermore, aince workers and firms

sre identical, the unemployment modelled here does not arise from desirable

reallocations of labor power to its highest value use. In this sense, it is

consistent with observations highlighting the concentration of unemployment

among a small segment of the population that experiences long unemployment

durations.

        Second, the model is suggestive regarding differences between demographic

groups in unemployment rates. Those who value leisure highly and whose turnover

is quick are most sensitive to relative wages and will have the highest

unemployment rates, Think of teenagers as an obvious example. Alternatively,

think of constructioi workers who can easily move from job to job.

        The determination of equilibrium unemployment in a general relative wage

model is depicted in Figure 1.2     The equilibrium unemployment rate has the

special property that the representative firm optimizes by paying the prevailing

wage.    At lower unemployment rates, the representative firm wants to pay a wage

that exceeds that paid by other firms. At higher unemployment rates, it desires
                                      -6-




to pay a wage that is lower than the wage paid by other firma. Notice that as

long as the representative firm would like to pay a higher than average wage in

the face of completely full employment, the market equilibrium unemployment rate

will be positive

    Looking at Figure 1, it is clear that if the two schedulea intersect at a

narrow angle, small movements in either schedule will hsve a large effect on

equilibrium unemployment. For instance in the example cited above, a reIativey

modest increase in the value of the "unemployment benefit," h from .5 to .6

would be sufficient to increase the unemployment rate from 6 to 7.5 percent as

the WW schedule shifted upwards. The sensitivity of the unemployment to small

shocks is a consequence of the relative wage model's basic logic. Developments

that cause some firms to raise wages heve their effects magnified because each

firm's optimal wage is a postive function of average wages.

     The principle, that concerns with conformity can lead to volatility and

instability, is a very general one. It must help to explain why the demand for

hula.hoops or Rubik's cube is so much more volatile than the demand for care

standard products whose value depends less on whether they sre used by others.

In the next two sections, I argue that conformity effects cen help to explain

why structural and cyclical unemployment vary so widely.



     II, Relative ¶Jages. Insider Power and Structural Unemployment



     The preceding diacussion has maintained the assumption that firms sre able

to set wages in order to maxinime their profits. A major theme of recant

discussions of unemployment particularly in the European context is the idea
                                      -7-




that wages are set by bargaining, implicit or explicit, between firss and

workers. Such bargaining obviously occurs in union contexts. Lindbeck and

Snower's (1987) insider-outsider theories suggest that bargaining may be

relevant in non-union settings as well. Lindbeck and Snower treat insider-

outsider theories as en alternative to efficiency wage theories in explaining

unemployment.

     From the perspective of the model presented in the first section It seems

more natural to regard them as complementary, mutually reinforcing expanationa

for uneisployisent. The relative and efficiency wage considerations scresed in

the previous section magnify greatly any effects of bargaining power in two

reepedts. First, in the model developed above, firms reach an interior optimue

in setting wages. It is a property of such en optimum that sufficiently small

changes in wages have no effect on profits, and larger changes in wages have

only second-order effects on profits. This means that in an efficiency wags

environment, firms that are forced to pay their workers premium wages suffer

only second order losses. In almost any plausible bargaining framework, this

makes it easier for workers to extract concessiona.3

     Second, a key aspect of any relative wage theory is that the optinal wage

for a firm to pay depends positively on the wages paid by other firms. This

means that when insiders raise wages at some firms, the effect spills ever

leading other firms to raise their wages. Katz and Dickens' (198]) survey of

the literature reports some evidence that, contrary to the predictions of     at
least simple competitive theories, the presence of--unions in an industry raises

the wages of both union and non-union workers. Similarly, it is often argued

that increases in the minimum wage lead to changes in other wages as well in
                                           -8-




order to preserve relativities. Relative wage effects on productivity can

explain why insider power can create unemployment, even if there are some freely

competitive sectors of the economy.

     These two points can be illustrated by a simple calculation. Imagine thet

insiders at a fraction fi   of   all firms have the power to extract a premium of c

over wages at unorganzied firms. Then the equilibrium unemployment rate may he

calculated by solving the equations:

     (5) w
          0       n

     (6) w°—5wm+(l-)w°)(1-U-b)u)/(l-a)

where w0 and wm represent respectively the wages in the organized and non-

organized sectors. This yields:

     (7) u—(a+p)/(l-b)(l-t-i$)

Equilibrium unemployment increases with the size of the organired sector and

with the size of the wage premiums it can extract. The results of inserting

plausible parameter values are striking. Assume, as before, that a—Ui and

b—.O. Then, if p and $ are each equal to .15, insider power will increase the

unemployment rate from 6 percent to BI percent. Yet, union firms incur iahcr

costs that are only 6 percent greater than in non-unionized firms because of the

productivity-enhancing effects of wage premia.

     The role of relative wages explains why unemployment outcomes are so

sensitive to small amounts of insider power. This comports with the common

observation that "corporstist" countries, where labor bargaining is centralized,

tend to have lower average rates of unemployment than other nations where

bargaining is decentralized.
                                          -g-




     ill, Cyclical Unemployment



     The basic problem in understanding cyclical fluctuations involves imolating

the impulaea and propagation mechanisms that cauaa the economy to fluctuate,

The relative wage approach to understanding unemployment developed here suggests

propagation effects are likely to be strong, and ao only smell impulses are

necessary to account for observed cyclical fluctuationa. In particular, the

equilibria   described in Figure 1 are "fragile,     that is, very sensitive to

small diaturbancea.      Small teal ahocks may have large effects particularly if

they are transitory and so do not affect workers' perception of "x' representing

outside opportunities.

       The relative wage aodel here auggeata that unemployment will be very -

sensitive   to perception errors that might plausibly follow changes in ronatary

policies. Essentially misperceptions by workers of average wages shift the EE

curve in Figure 1 upwards. If relative wage effects are strong, even asall

misperceptions can have large effects. Imagine that the money stock is reduced.

but firma believe that the workers who still have jobs do not yet recognize that

equilibrum wages have declined. Then it would not he profitable for thea to

reduce wages to the level that would be an equilibrium if workera did not

misperceive their opportunities. Furthermore, firms that recognized that other

firms were not reducing their wages to the new equilibrium level would recognize

that they should not either, even if their workers were fully inforned.

     This misperceptions story ia reinforced by two further considerations which

diatinguiah it   eharply   from misperception interpretations of business cycles put

forward by classical theorists. First, the central problem here is one of
                                        -10-




coordination Notice that it is sufficient to prevent reattainment of

equilibrium following a shock, for some firms to suspect that some firms will

suspect that some firms will suspect that,, either workers or same firms... will

not assume that the new equilibrium is to be attained immediately. The

informationsl requirement for the costless attainment of a new equilibrius is

much more than individual rationality--it is common knowiedge that all

individuals will be rational.

     Second, the plausibility of rapid adjustment is further undercut by the

observation that, at least in the face of an adverse shock, workers who are

perceived as ignorant of the new equilibrium wiil benefit, in that their wages

will not be reduced. This makes it even less likely that transitions between

equilibria will occur smoothly, The idea of persistent misperceptions is

supported by evidence. Caskey (1985) demonatrates that inflation was

consistently underestimated for tan   years    during the 1970a and has been

conaistentiy overestimated during the 1970s.

     The description of wage setting sketched here aeema more compelling than

the asaumption of sticky nominal wages that is contained in "Keynesian"

macroeconomics textbooks. Keynesian formulations have been successful in

identifying   reasons why firms might find it costly or undesirable to vary wages

continuously. But most of the reaaona they have given for wage rigidity are at

least   equally plausible as justifications for keeping the level of emplcyaent

constant and not firing workers during receasiona        On the other hand, the

misperceptions idea stressed here explains why firms choose to adjust wages

slowly and fire workers when adverse shocks come. There is also the further

point stressed in some of the implicit contracts literature that layoffs help to
                                         -11-




educate workers who have jobs about adverse changes in market conditions.

     An analogy developed in Summers (1988b) may be helpful in seeing the point

of this section. Daylight savings time is purely a change in the 'units used

in measuring time. Yet it clearly has real effects in the sense that stores

open at a different time relative to the sunrise because of its existence. Why?

Probably because most individuals care much more about being on the same time

standard as their neighbors than they care about what that time standard is.

Therefore, coordinating actions can succeed in achieving a better outcome in    the
summertime than the market would generate. Much the same may be true of

expansionary policy during recessions.



     IV. Conclusions




    Unemployment,   like cancer,   is a multi-faceted phenomenon that comes in many

forms. But one would hope that theory could isolate aspects common to different

types of unemployment in different places and times. I suspect thac recognizing

the role of relative vegas in influencing workers' performance will help

economists in understanding different types of unemployment, Keynes emphasized

the volatility associated with situations where people try to guess the guesses

of others in financial markets. This essay has tried to argue that the lesson

is a general one applying to labor markets as welL
                     Figure 1

Relative   Wages and Equilibrium Unemployment




                                  ww



                                         u
                                        -12-



                                      ENDNOTES




1.   There   are a wide variety of devices discussed in the efficiency wage

literature that firms can use to enhance workers' productivity without

increasing their wages. In considering the effects of wage changes, I

that firms have already optimized on all these margina.

2. A very similar discussion of the determination of the "natural rate of

unemployment" is presented in Johnson and Layard (1986).

3. The reaults of Abowd (1987) corroborate the efficiency wage hypothesis in

this respect. Taking a long horizon into consideration, Abovd finds that

surprise increases in wages resulting from collective bargaining agreements

reduce firms' market values by much less than the projected increase in labor

costs.
                                         -13-




                                      REFERENCES



Caskey, John, "Modelling the Formation of Price Expectations: A Bayesian

    Approach," American Economic Review, September 1985, fl        768-777.

Dickens, William, and Lawrence Katz, "Interindustry Wage Differences and

     Industry Characteristics," in K. tang and J. Leonard, ed., Unemployment      and

     the ..Structute   of Labor Markets, London: Basil Blackwell, 1986, 48-89.

Katz, Lawrence, "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation" in Stanley

     Fischer, ed. NEER Macroeconomics &p.nuei, 1986, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

     2 35-276.

Keynes, John Maynard, The General Theory of Employment. Interest and Money, New

     York: Harcourt Brace and Company, 1936.

Johnson, George, and Richard Layard, "The Natural Rate of Unemployment:

     Explanation and Policy" in 0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds. , Handbook of

     Lahor Economica, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986, 2, ch 16, 921-999.

Lindheck, Asset, and Dennis Snower, "Efficiency Wages Versus Insiders and

     Outsiders," Oxford Econonic Papers, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987, ,

     forthcoming.
Stiglitz, Joseph, "Theories of Wage Rigidity," in J. L. Butkiewicz, K. J.

     Koford, and 3. B. Miller, eds. ,    Keynes's Economic Legacy: Contemporary
     Economic Theories, New York: Preeger Publishers, 1986.

Summers, Lawrence, Understandina Unemo]o'nBen.t, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988a.

Summers, Lawrence, "Should Keynesian gconomics Dispense With the Phillips

     Curve?" in Rodney Cross, ed. ,    Hysteresis,   forthcoming, London: Basil

     Bleckwell, 1988b.
