NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN DAD CAN STAY HOME:
FATHERS' WORKPLACE FLEXIBILITY AND MATERNAL HEALTH
Petra Persson
Maya Rossin-Slater
Working Paper 25902
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25902

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019, Revised October 2019

We thank Marcella Alsan, Marianne Bitler, Marika Cabral, Claudia Goldin, Caroline Hoxby, Erin
Kelly, Samuel Lee, Emily Oster, Isaac Sorkin, Betsey Stevenson, Barbara Wolfe, and seminar
and conference participants at the NBER Summer Institute, the AEA meetings, Stanford
University, Princeton University, Cornell University, University of Chicago, University of Bonn,
Tinbergen Institute, Yale University, Duke University, UC Berkeley School of Public Health, UC
Berkeley Goldman School of Public Policy, Arizona State University, Stockholm University
IIES, the Western Economics Association International Conference, and the Annual Health
Economics Conference for helpful comments. We are grateful to Lindsey Uniat for excellent
research assistance. Research reported in this article was supported by the Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development of the National Institutes of
Health under award number R03HD096184. Persson additionally acknowledges funding from Jan
Wallanders och Tom Hedelius stiftelse. Rossin-Slater additionally acknowledges funding from
the National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award No. 1752203. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Petra Persson and Maya Rossin-Slater. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

When Dad Can Stay Home: Fathers' Workplace Flexibility and Maternal Health
Petra Persson and Maya Rossin-Slater
NBER Working Paper No. 25902
May 2019, Revised October 2019
JEL No. I12,I18,I31,J12,J13,J38
ABSTRACT
While workplace flexibility is perceived to be a key determinant of maternal labor supply, less is
known about fathers’ demand for flexibility or about intra-household spillover effects of
flexibility initiatives. This paper examines these issues in the context of a critical period in family
life—the months immediately following childbirth—and identifies the impacts of paternal access
to workplace flexibility on maternal postpartum health. We model household demand for paternal
presence at home as a function of domestic stochastic shocks, and use variation from a Swedish
reform that granted new fathers more flexibility to take intermittent parental leave during the
postpartum period in a regression discontinuity difference-in-differences (RD-DD) design. We
find that increasing the father’s temporal flexibility reduces the risk of the mother experiencing
physical postpartum health complications and improves her mental health. Our results suggest
that mothers bear the burden from a lack of workplace flexibility—not only directly through
greater career costs of family formation, as previously documented—but also indirectly, as
fathers’ inability to respond to domestic shocks exacerbates the maternal health costs of
childbearing.

Petra Persson
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
perssonp@stanford.edu
Maya Rossin-Slater
Department of Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
615 Crothers Way
Encina Commons, MC 6019
Stanford, CA 94305-6006
and NBER
mrossin@stanford.edu

1

Introduction

Temporal flexibility in the workplace is increasingly important for modern households in which
both parents work. Workplace flexibility allows parents to rearrange their work hours in case
of an unforeseen family need—such as a child’s sickness or a snow day—while minimizing
work interruption. In other words, workplace flexibility often generates flexibility in when to
stay home from work. As mothers are more likely to be “on call” for unanticipated domestic
events (Weeden et al., 2016), a burgeoning literature identifies workplace flexibility as a key
factor for improving maternal labor market outcomes and further reducing the gender pay
gap (Bertrand et al., 2010; Goldin, 2014; Goldin and Katz, 2016).
Yet other important aspects of workplace flexibility remain less well understood. First,
little is known about fathers’ demand for workplace flexibility. Second, while a few studies
show that work-related stress propagates throughout the family—e.g., individuals’ work hours
negatively affect their relationship quality and their partners’ wellbeing (Shafer et al., 2018;
Fan et al., 2019)—there is scarce evidence on the possible intra-household spillover effects of
workplace flexibility policies. Such impacts would be consistent with a broad range of economic
models of the household, which posit that an expansion of the choice set for one spouse (as a
result of workplace flexibility initiatives, for example) would induce household re-optimization
that may alter the wellbeing of the other spouse (see, e.g., Becker, 1973; Chiappori, 1992;
Lundberg and Pollak, 1993; Persson, Forthcoming). Third, relative to our understanding of
the consequences of workplace flexibility for the career cost of family formation, we know less
about its impacts on the other costs associated with having children.
This paper begins to fill these gaps by analyzing fathers’ demand for workplace flexibility
and the spillover effects of fathers’ access to workplace flexibility on maternal wellbeing. We
focus on a critical period in family life, when spillovers may be especially important: the
months immediately following childbirth. In this period, for a mother, the major cost of
having a family is not the cost to her career—which grows in magnitude and importance over
time since childbirth (see, e.g., Kleven et al., 2018)—but instead the health cost associated
with postpartum recovery. A substantial share of all new mothers experience physical health
problems, and many have complications that require medical care.1 Postpartum mental health
1

Studies from multiple countries document that between 23 and 83 percent of new mothers experience pain

1

issues are also common and inflict large private and social costs.2 Thus, we ask whether
workplace flexibility for new fathers generates spillover benefits through improvements in
maternal postpartum health.
To answer this question, we take advantage of a Swedish social insurance reform that
effectively increased workplace flexibility for new fathers by relaxing a central restriction in the
parental leave system. At the time of the reform, Swedish households were granted 16 months
of job-protected paid leave (per child), to be allocated across the two parents.3 However,
parents were generally not allowed to be on leave at the same time—in fact, simultaneous
leave use was permitted for only 10 days around childbirth (hereafter referred to as “baseline
leave”). Since nearly all mothers take full-time leave in the months following childbirth, this
rule effectively limited fathers’ ability to use paid leave alongside the mother.4
The “Double Days” reform, implemented on January 1, 2012, relaxed this restriction by
allowing both parents to use full-time leave benefits at the same time for up to 30 additional
days during the child’s first year of life. These days could be taken on an intermittent basis.
Importantly, the reform did not alter the total duration of leave available to households. Thus,
fathers were granted more flexibility to choose, on a day-to-day basis, whether to claim a paid
leave benefit to stay home with the mother and child or whether to save the benefit for the
family’s future use.
To understand household demand for father presence at home as well as the potential
impacts of father presence on maternal wellbeing, we begin with a theoretical analysis of the
flexibility reform. Based on four parsimonious assumptions about the benefits and costs of
parental leave, our dynamic model describes how parents divide a household’s allocation of
in various parts of their bodies (including the perineum, cesarean-section incisions, the back or the head) in
the months following childbirth (see Cheng et al., 2006 for an overview). In the United States, more than one
out of every 100 new mothers is readmitted into the hospital within 30 days after childbirth (Clapp et al.,
2017). In Sweden, our data show that 5 percent of new mothers are hospitalized in the first 6 months after
childbirth, while 8 and 16 percent require prescription painkiller and antibiotic drugs, respectively.
2
Recent estimates suggest that about one in nine women in the U.S. report symptoms of postpartum
depression (Ko et al., 2017). In Sweden, around 11 and 14 percent of new mothers are found to have depressive
symptoms based on the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale at two months and one year post-childbirth,
respectively (Rubertsson et al., 2005). Our data also show that 4 percent of new mothers are prescribed
anti-depressant or anti-anxiety medication in the first 6 months after giving birth.
3
Parents faced some restrictions on how to split this leave. In particular, at the time of the reform, two
months were earmarked for each parent. See Section 2 for details.
4
Among parents of firstborn singleton children born in 2008-2011, the median mother was at home alone on
full-time leave for about 14 months, after which she returned to work and the median father took two months
of leave. See Section 2 for more details.

2

parental leave days, taking into account the evolution of the labor market costs and household
benefits of the presence of each parent. We first derive parents’ optimal division of leave when
they are not allowed to take leave simultaneously. This characterization is highly consistent
with actual parental leave use in Sweden in the pre-reform period, which underscores the
model’s applicability to our setting. We then introduce a reform that relaxes the restriction on
simultaneous leave. Our analysis of optimal household behavior in this framework emphasizes
that, in a setting where households have the flexibility to decide when to take simultaneous
leave, the timing of the take-up of a joint day of parental leave is not random. Instead,
households optimally respond to the need for maternal support by removing the father from
the labor force on precisely the days when the household has private information that the
benefit of doing so is the highest. For example, additional support for the mother may be
more valuable to the household on days when she is not feeling well (e.g., because she is coming
down with an infection), is fatigued or stressed, or is having mental health issues.
To provide a comprehensive empirical analysis of the effects of the “Double Days” reform
on fathers’ leave use and maternal health, we link multiple sources of Swedish administrative
data, including birth records, parental leave claims, as well as inpatient, specialist outpatient,
and prescription drug records. We use data on parents with first births of singleton children
in 2008-2012, and implement a Regression Discontinuity Difference-in-Differences (RD-DD)
research design. Our preferred specification compares the outcomes of parents of children born
in the 3 months before and after the reform, relative to the analogous difference between these
birth months in the three preceding years. Our empirical strategy thus exploits the change in
eligibility for simultaneous leave for parents of children born shortly after the reform, while
differencing out other sources of variation in family outcomes between October-December and
January-March births.5
We first document households’ demand for paternal workplace flexibility. The “Double
Days” reform raises the likelihoods that fathers use more than the 10 days of baseline leave
(hereafter referred to as “post-baseline leave”) in the first 60 and 180 days after childbirth
by 3.9 and 5.9 percentage points, respectively, corresponding to 50 and 24 percent effects
5

Such differences may stem from a variety of factors, including seasonality in births, differences in holiday
time off work, and differential sorting because of school starting-age laws (see, e.g., Buckles and Hungerman,
2008; Currie and Schwandt, 2013; Black et al., 2011).

3

relative to the sample means. Interestingly, while the effects on any post-baseline leave use
are substantial, we only observe a one to two day average increase in the total number of leave
days taken by fathers in the first six months post-childbirth. Thus, it appears that the reform
primarily affects fathers’ leave use on the extensive, rather than intensive, margin.
Next, we show that workplace flexibility for fathers has positive spillover effects on maternal
postpartum health. We find that the reform leads to a 1.5 percentage point (14 percent)
reduction in the likelihood of a mother having an inpatient or specialist outpatient visit for
childbirth-related complications, and a 1.9 percentage point (11 percent) reduction in the
likelihood of her having an antibiotic prescription drug in the first six months postpartum.
We show that the decline in health care visits is entirely driven by unplanned rather than
scheduled appointments, which is consistent with an improvement in underlying maternal
health as opposed to a sub-optimal decline in health care utilization. With regard to maternal
mental health, we observe a marginally significant 0.3 percentage point (26 percent) reduction
in the likelihood of any anti-anxiety prescription drug in the first six months post-childbirth.
When examining the timing of these effects, we find that the reduction in anti-anxiety drugs is
particularly strong (and statistically significant at the 5% level) in the first three months after
childbirth. The effects on maternal physical and mental health are larger in both absolute
and relative terms for mothers with pre-birth medical histories.6
The large maternal health effect magnitudes are consistent with the theoretical prediction
that fathers take leave on days when the marginal benefit of doing so is especially high. To
provide further support for this conjecture, we show that among families in which mothers have
pre-birth medical histories, the “Double Days” reform increases the likelihood that the father
takes at least one day of leave on the same day as when the mother has an encounter with
the health care system. This result suggests that the option to take simultaneous leave allows
fathers to stay home and care for their infants while mothers get medical care. The fact that we
also find an overall reduction in maternal health care encounters with hospitals and specialist
providers (as well as in prescription drug use) additionally suggests that fathers’ flexibility to
be able to stay home averts health complications that necessitate medical intervention in the
6

We define mothers with a pre-birth medical history as those who have either any inpatient visit in months 124 before childbirth or any specialist outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth
or any anti-anxiety or anti-depressant prescription drug in months 1-36 before childbirth. See Section 4 for
more details.

4

first place.7
Our study contributes to a large literature on parental leave (for some overviews, see:
Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2017; Rossin-Slater, 2018; Rossin-Slater and Uniat, 2019). However,
unlike most studies that identify the impacts of program implementation or extensions, our
paper instead provides insights into the details of program design. In the pre-reform period,
Sweden constrained fathers’ ability to take leave at the same time as the mothers. Similar
inflexibility is built into parental leave systems in numerous other countries because policymakers view paternity leave as a way of promoting father-child bonding, changing gender
norms, and improving maternal labor market outcomes. These goals are perceived to be more
attainable if fathers are encouraged to stay at home alone with the child and for a consolidated
time period.8 While the evidence on the potential (bonding or labor market) benefits of such
inflexibility is mixed,9 our study demonstrates that doing the opposite—letting fathers take
leave intermittently and jointly with the mother—could be critical to maternal postpartum
recovery.10
Our results further suggest that moral hazard concerns about workers taking leave to shirk
from their jobs—which are prevalent in discussions of other workplace flexibility initiatives
such as sick leave (e.g., see Pichler and Ziebarth, 2017)—are not supported by the data: Post7

We do not have any data on primary care visits. It is possible that allowing fathers the option to take
leave at the same time as mothers allows mothers to seek prompt primary care and thus avoid more serious
health complications that require specialist or inpatient treatment.
8
Indeed, nearly all existing studies of paternity leave focus on the consequences of so-called “Daddy Month”
reforms, which are inflexible by construction, in that they generate a lumpy leave-taking pattern, where fathers
take leave after mothers return to work. See, e.g., Duvander and Johansson, 2012; Ekberg et al., 2013; Duvander
and Johansson, 2014, 2015; Avdic and Karimi, 2018; Rege and Solli, 2013; Dahl et al., 2014; Cools et al., 2015;
Dahl et al., 2016; Eydal and Gislason, 2008; Schober, 2014; Bünning, 2015; Patnaik, 2016; Luna and Farré,
2017; Olafsson and Steingrimsdottir, 2019; Andresen and Nix, 2019.
9
While correlational studies suggest that Swedish fathers who take longer leaves share household tasks and
childcare more equally than those who take shorter leaves (Almqvist and Duvander, 2014), studies that exploit
quasi-experimental variation from the reforms find less consistent results with regard to parental childcare
duties or labor market trajectories (Ekberg et al., 2013; Duvander and Johansson, 2015).
10
We are aware of one prior study from Great Britain, which uses multivariate regressions to show that
self-reported health outcomes of postpartum women whose partners took two weeks of paternity leave are
better than those of postpartum women whose partners took no leave, controlling for selected observable
characteristics (Redshaw and Henderson, 2013). Related, a correlational study using Swedish data finds that
infants of fathers who do not take any paternity leave are less likely to be breastfed than infants of fathers who
do (Flacking et al., 2010). Månsdotter et al. (2007) also use Swedish data and show that among all fathers
of first-born children born in 1978, those who took paternity leave were less likely to have died by 2001 than
those who did not. We address endogeneity concerns associated with unobservable differences between these
families with fathers who do and do not use paternity leave by exploiting the “Double Days” reform in an
RD-DD design.

5

reform, the average father takes just a few additional days of leave alongside the mother out
of the full 30 days that they are allowed. This limited response likely stems from the fact
that parents incur the marginal cost of taking a “Double Day” by foregoing the option to take
an additional parental leave day in the future. This feature makes the policy potentially less
costly than other interventions that could be used to support mothers during the postpartum
period, such as nurse home visiting programs. By leveraging families’ private information
about when it is most desirable to stay home relative to the cost of missed time at work,
workplace flexibility allows households to ensure that they reap large benefits relative to the
number of leave days used.
In sum, the central insight that emerges from our analysis is that mothers bear the majority of the cost of a lack of workplace flexibility—not only directly through greater career
costs of family formation (as documented in prior literature)—but also indirectly, as fathers’
inability to respond to domestic shocks exacerbates the maternal health costs of childbearing.11 More broadly, our results contribute to our understanding of how policy influences
maternal postpartum health. While discussions about maternal health often center around
the role of the medical system,12 less attention has been paid to the mother’s postpartum
environment at home, where women spend the majority of their time in the months following
childbirth.13 This paper emphasizes the importance of a particular aspect of a new mother’s
home environment: the presence of the father.
11

Work-family conflict is a major source of stress (Shockley et al., 2017) that is associated with adverse
physical and mental health outcomes (Frone, 2000; Allen and Armstrong, 2006; Backé et al., 2012; Berkman
et al., 2015; O’Donnell et al., 2019). While there is some evidence that public and organizational policies that
promote workplace flexibility can mitigate this relationship (Dionne and Dostie, 2007; Kelly et al., 2011; Moen
et al., 2013; Ziebarth and Karlsson, 2014; Bloom et al., 2014; Moen et al., 2016; Pichler and Ziebarth, 2017;
Stearns and White, 2018), most studies use relatively small samples of workers in specific firms or industries,
and focus on interventions that increase workers’ autonomy in navigating their typical day-to-day workloads
(e.g., shortened work hours, work-from-home options, and sick leave days). Further, little is known about the
potentially distinct impacts of workplace flexibility during critical periods in workers’ lives, such as shortly
after the birth of a child.
12
For example, the “Lost Mothers” special series by the National Public Radio (NPR) largely focuses on
the role of the medical system in contributing to rising maternal mortality in the United States. See: https:
//www.npr.org/series/543928389/lost-mothers.
13
Consistent with the idea that the home environment could be important for maternal health, a growing
literature shows that maternity leave benefits are associated with improvements in mothers’ health outcomes
(Hyde et al., 1995; Staehelin et al., 2007; Baker and Milligan, 2008; Chatterji and Markowitz, 2012; Aitken et
al., 2015; Avendano et al., 2015; Beuchert et al., 2016; Butikofer et al., 2017; Hewitt et al., 2017; Heymann et
al., 2017; Jou et al., 2018; Guertzgen and Hank, 2018; Bullinger, 2019).

6

2

Institutional Setting

Sweden implemented its gender-neutral paid parental leave policy in 1974, replacing the previous maternity leave system that only covered mothers.14 The program is largely funded
through employer social security contributions. Since the early 2000s, the program has featured a per-child benefit of 13 months of wage-replaced leave, as well as an additional 3 months
of leave with a flat-rate benefit.15 Parental leave benefits do not need to all be used in one
spell; they can be claimed at any point until the child turns 8 or, more recently, 12 years old.16
Moreover, the benefits can be claimed on a part-time basis.17
Parental leave is job protected in Sweden, with different rules applying during the first 18
months post-childbirth and beyond. During the first period, parents are entitled to full-time
leave with job protection. Then, until the child turns 8 (or 12) years old, parents are legally
able to reduce their working hours by as much as 25 percent while still working at the same
job.18
Additionally, although leave in the original system was completely transferrable between
parents, the vast majority of the leave days was taken by mothers.19 In an effort to promote
a more gender-equitable division of parental leave, the Swedish government has implemented
three reforms (in 1995, 2002, and 2016) that each earmarked one month of wage-replaced
leave to each parent. In other words, if a parent does not use his/her earmarked leave, the
family loses that amount of leave. Since virtually all mothers take more than three months of
14

Sweden’s parental leave program is not tied to marital status. Thus, it confers benefits to the (biological
or adoptive) parents of a child regardless of whether they are married or not. In practice, a substantial share of
parents are unmarried but cohabiting at childbirth (Persson, Forthcoming), and, as we discuss further below,
we control for marital status in our empirical models.
15
During the time period covered in our analysis, the replacement rate was approximately 78 percent of
prior gross earnings, up to a ceiling. The flat-rate benefit has increased over time: from 180 SEK per day in
the mid-2000s to 250 SEK (approximately $27) per day in 2016. To be eligible for the wage-replaced benefits,
individuals must have had at least 240 days of employment paid at or above the flat-rate (e.g., 250 SEK per
day in 2016) before the expected date of childbirth. Individuals who do not meet this employment requirement
receive the lower flat-rate benefit only (Duvander et al., 2017).
16
Specifically, for children born before January 1, 2014, parental leave benefits can be claimed until the child
turns 8 or finishes the first year of school; for children born thereafter, benefits can be claimed until the child
turns 12 years old.
17
In particular, a parent can file for 100% leave (corresponding to 8 hours), 87.5% leave (corresponding to
7 hours), and so on, down to the smallest claim amount of 12.5% leave (1 hour).
18
An employer is not allowed to deny this request as long as the parent notifies the employer of the intent
to take parental leave at least two months in advance.
19
Duvander and Johansson (2012) report that men used 0.5 percent of all parental leave days at the time
of the program’s inception in 1974, and this number rose only slightly over the next two decades.

7

leave throughout this time period, these reforms are in actuality only binding for fathers, and
therefore colloquially referred to as the “Daddy Month” reforms.
Restrictions on simultaneous leave use. While both parents have access to paid leave in
Sweden, there are important restrictions on the simultaneous use of parental leave. Specifically,
until 2012, fathers were only entitled to ten “baseline days” of wage-replaced leave that could
be used while mothers claim full-time leave, and they could only use them during the first 60
days after childbirth.20 Beyond these ten days, parents could only be on leave simultaneously
part-time while also working part-time, as long as the total amount of leave claimed by the
two parents did not exceed the equivalent of a full-time job. In practice, however, since nearly
all mothers were taking full-time leave in the months following childbirth, a father could only
claim paid leave if the mother did not claim her benefit on that day (i.e., she took unpaid
leave for the day).
Appendix Figure A1 presents a stylized representation of how the median Swedish family
allocated leave between parents, using data on parents of firstborn singleton children born
in 2008-2011. The figure shows that other than a maximum of ten baseline leave days that
could be taken by fathers shortly after childbirth, the median mother was at home alone on
full-time leave for about 14 months. After she returned to work, the median father took two
months of leave. Children then typically entered public daycare, and the parents could use
any remaining days of leave on a sporadic basis until the child’s 8th birthday. As children’s
summer school breaks are usually longer than parental vacation time off, in practice these
days are often used to cover the childcare gap during the summer.
This figure highlights that most policy efforts surrounding encouraging fathers to take leave
are focused on sequential (rather than simultaneous) and lumpy (rather than intermittent)
leave. Indeed, as evidenced by the picture, the median Swedish father was taking the full two
“Daddy Months” that were available during the 2008-2011 time period, but he was doing so
in one stretch after the mother returned to work. Yet while policies that incentivize fathers to
stay home on their own for a consolidated stretch of time may be important for father-child
bonding and promoting paternal participation in household work (despite mixed evidence on
20
These ten days of baseline paternity leave do not count toward the total amount of wage-replaced parental
leave that the parents divide between them.

8

these outcomes), they also preclude the father from having flexibility to be home during the
vulnerable postpartum period.
“Double Days” reform. On January 1, 2012, Sweden implemented a “Double Days” reform, which changed the parental leave system such that parents were now allowed to take
full-time wage-replaced leave at the same time for up to 30 additional days (beyond the baseline days) during the child’s first year of life. Importantly, all other policy details—including
total leave duration, the wage replacement rate, and the amount of earmarked leave—remained
unchanged. Thus, the reform essentially provided families with more flexibility in choosing
how to allocate the timing of their leave; fathers could now take full-time paid leave during
the postpartum period while the mothers were also at home on paid leave.
Other benefits. In the pre-reform period, when fathers were restricted to only ten baseline
days during which they could take full-time paid parental leave at the same time as mothers,
fathers could in principle rely on other benefits to stay home if necessary. While Sweden
does not provide any family leave benefits to care for adult family members (i.e., postpartum
mothers), it is possible that fathers relied on own sick leave benefits for these purposes. In
addition, if a mother claims her sick leave benefit instead of her parental leave benefit on
a given day, then the father can claim a full-time parental leave benefit on that same day.
However, sick leave benefits are reimbursed at a lower rate than parental leave benefits for most
parents, making this a potentially unappealing option for families. Nevertheless, if parents
were using sick leave for these purposes before the “Double Days” reform, we would expect
there to be a decline in sick leave use among both mothers and fathers in the post-reform
period.
As sick leave data are only available at an annual level, we compare the annual number
of sick leave days used by parents of firstborn singleton children born in January-March 2011
and January-March 2012 in Appendix Table A1. We do not detect any statistically significant
differences either in the average number of sick leave days or in the share of parents with any
sick leave across the two groups, suggesting that substitution from sick leave toward parental
leave is not affecting the interpretation of our main estimates.
Unfortunately, we do not have data on other benefits such as vacation days. However, in
9

Sweden, vacation benefits are not very temporally flexible, as vacation time has to be scheduled
with the employer in advance (moreover, employees are typically required to take at least a
portion during the summer months). Thus, vacation benefits are far less flexible than sick
leave benefits, which we do observe. Nonetheless, if anything, substitution from other time
off to paid parental leave among fathers would imply that our effects of fathers’ workplace
flexibility on maternal health are attenuated.

3

A Model of Household Parental Leave Use

We develop a framework of parental leave use that describes how parents divide a household’s
allocation of parental leave days, taking into account the labor market costs as well as the
household benefits of the presence of each parent. We start from a set-up that mimics Sweden’s
parental leave system before the introduction of “Double Days,” and then examine how this
reform alters the allocation of parental leave and household wellbeing.

3.1

General Notation

Consider a household consisting of a child, mom m, and dad d. Let t denote discrete time
(in days), with childbirth at t = 0. Time is divided into two intervals, before and after
publicly-provided childcare becomes available.21 Specifically, there exists some t̄ > 0, such
that:
• For t < t̄, public childcare is not available. We refer to these days as “core” days.
• For t ≥ t̄, public childcare is generally available, except on some days (e.g., school
holidays). We refer to days without childcare during this period as “miscellaneous”
days.
The total number of parental leave days available to the family is T > t̄. The total number of
core and miscellaneous days exceeds T .22
21

Children are eligible for publicly-provided childcare at age 1. In practice, most childcare slots open up
in August (when all children are “shifted” one year forward). Thus, many children do not gain access to a
desired childcare slot until August in the year after they turn one year old.
22
Consistent with this conjecture, parents generally exhaust their leave days. (Recall that parental leave
can be claimed until the child turns 8 years old; thus, the period t ≥ t̄ essentially lasts until the child’s eighth

10

Let Bp (t) and Cp (t) denote the benefit and cost of a leave day taken (alone) by parent
p ∈ {m, d}, respectively, on a day before childcare is available (i.e., during a core day t < t̄).
The corresponding benefit and cost of taking leave on a miscellaneous day during t ≥ t̄ is
given by bp (t) and cp (t), respectively.23 Let the value of parental leave be strictly positive,
Bp − Cp > 0 and bp − cp > 0, on days without childcare; and negative otherwise.

3.2

Assumptions

We assume that household decisions are efficient, and (for simplicity) abstract away from
discounting.24 The general household problem of choosing an allocation of leave days among
the large set of permissible ones is complex and dynamic. To obtain specific predictions for
how parents divide the leave, we need to impose more structure. We make four parsimonious
assumptions about the benefits and costs of parental leave. They are not meant to reflect the
reality of all families, but simply to be plausible for the “typical” family in our data.
The first two assumptions concern the benefits of parental leave. We define the difference between the benefit of the mom and the benefit of the dad taking leave on core and
miscellaneous days, respectively, as: ∆B (t) ≡ Bm (t) − Bd (t) and ∆b (t) ≡ bm (t) − bd (t).
Assumption 1 (Early care). Bp (t) is strictly decreasing and converges to bp (t) = bp > 0.
Intuitively, the benefit of parental care is the largest immediately after childbirth, and then
gradually falls to bp , the benefit of a miscellaneous day.
Assumption 2 (Maternal advantage). ∆B (t) is positive, strictly decreasing, and converges to
∆b (t) = ∆b ≥ 0.
The relative advantage of the mother staying home being decreasing over time is consistent
with, for example, the fact that breastfeeding is usually concentrated in the beginning of a
child’s life.
birthday.)
23
These benefits and costs pertain to those subjectively “perceived” by the family. To the extent that they
differ from the true benefits and costs (i.e., their perceptions may be wrong), it is the perceived benefits and
costs that matter for our analysis because they drive parental leave choices.
24
As discussed in footnote 14, Sweden’s parental leave program grants benefits to both parents of a child
regardless of their marital or cohabitation status. In our model, we refer to the mom and dad as residing in one
household; strictly speaking, however, we only require that parents are able to make efficient joint decisions.

11

The next two assumptions concern the costs of parental leave. Let Cp (t) ≡ (1−α)wp +κ(τp ),
where wp is the (constant) current wage, α is the wage replacement rate, κ(τp ) is a future career
cost, and τp is total number of core leave days taken by parent p (up to t). By contrast, assume
that leave taken on miscellaneous days does not have any long-term career consequences, i.e.,
cp (t) ≡ (1 − α)wp .
Assumption 3 (Parental income difference). wd > wm .
Consistent with this assumption, the intra-household median earnings difference (father minus
mother earnings) in our analysis sample is positive.25
Assumption 4 (Career cost). Let κ > 0 and

κ(τp ) =

t̄
2

< τ c < t̄ such that




κ

if τp ≥ τc



0

otherwise

Intuitively, this assumption captures the idea that absence from the labor market for an
extended period of time (longer than τ c ) comes with a career cost. While we use a simple step
function for tractability only, the idea that career costs are particularly pronounced when a
parent takes a long period of leave is consistent with empirical evidence.26 Here, the critical
time threshold τ c is chosen such that the career cost can be avoided if and only if the core
days are (suitably) shared by both parents.27

3.3

Parental Leave System Before the “Double Day” Reform

We start by defining a “basic parental leave system” as one in which parents can freely divide
the total allowance T , but where leave cannot be taken simultaneously by both parents. This
25

This fact is also true at the mean in our data. As can be seen in Table 1, the mean of mothers’ earnings is
approximately 75 percent of the mean of fathers’ earnings. Note that we do not observe wages, only earnings
(i.e., wage × hours).
26
Multiple studies document negative labor market impacts of prolonged leave (Lalive and Zweimüller, 2009;
Lequien, 2012; Schönberg and Ludsteck, 2014; Bičáková and Kalíšková, 2016; Canaan, 2017). In general, crosscountry comparisons suggest that provisions of leave of up to one year in length have zero or positive impacts
on maternal employment, whereas longer leave entitlements can negatively affect women’s long-term labor
market outcomes (Ruhm, 1998; Blau and Kahn, 2013; Thévenon and Solaz, 2013; Olivetti and Petrongolo,
2017; Rossin-Slater, 2018).
27
This is likely true in the typical Swedish setting, where the core period often extends beyond the child’s
first birthday (as discussed in footnote 22), while the literature documents career costs associated with leave
entitlements longer than a year (as discussed in footnote 26).

12

represents a simplified version of Sweden’s parental leave system before 1995 (when the first
earmarked month of leave was introduced) and, more generally, is akin to typical parental
leave systems around the world in which parents can divide up a total “budget” of leave days.
Corollary 1 (Basic system). Under the basic parental leave system, leave is taken during the
entire core period, with residual leave days used in the miscellaneous period. Either mom takes
all leave days, or mom takes all leave days except for a single interval of leave days taken by
dad at the end of the core period.
Proof. See Appendix B.
This allocation intuitively reflects the above assumptions: Parental leave is concentrated
at the start of a child’s life due to the importance of early care (Assumption 1). Further,
leave is taken predominantly, if not exclusively, by moms because of maternal advantages in
childrearing and parental income differences (Assumptions 2 and 3); a countervailing effect is
that extended leave by one parent negatively affects that parent’s future career (Assumption
4). Thus, dad may take some core days when doing so allows the household to avoid the
maternal career cost.
In Sweden, under the basic parental leave system (prior to 1995) only a small share of all
fathers chose to take any leave (Duvander and Johansson, 2012)—this low rate of paternal
leave use was in fact the motivation for introducing the first “Daddy Month.” In light of the
model, this pattern suggests either that parents’ income differences were so large that not even
career costs could overcome them, or that income differences were modest but career costs
were not substantial enough to neutralize them.
Next, we add earmarked leave. Specifically, out of the family’s total allowance of T leave
days, E < T days are earmarked for each parent (but leave days still cannot be taken simultaneously). This structure resembles Sweden’s parental leave system right before the “Double
Day” reform that we study, when Sweden had implemented two “Daddy Months” (in 1995
and 2002). We assume that T − E > t̄; that is, the household is able to cover the core period
with only one parent taking leave.28
28

This assumption reflects the Swedish system at the time of the “Double Day” reform: T was 16 months,
E was 2 months, and childcare eligibility occurred at 12 months.

13

Corollary 2 (Earmarked leave and the value of a miscellaneous day). In a basic parental
leave system with earmarked leave, if dad takes leave, then he takes it at the end of the core
period or during the miscellaneous period. The magnitude of a household’s response to the
introduction of earmarked leave reflects the household’s valuation of a miscellaneous day.
Proof. See Appendix B.
Intuitively, earmarking affects households in which the dad would have otherwise taken
less than E leave days by raising the opportunity cost of not taking a paternity leave day—
without earmarking the mother can stay home instead; with earmarking, the day is lost. A
father induced to take leave allocates it either to the end of the core period (when it can
reduce maternal career costs) or during the miscellaneous period (when the household benefit
differential is the smallest).
Corollaries 1 and 2 are important for two reasons. First, they provide the model’s prediction
about parental division of leave before the introduction of “Double Days”: Mothers take leave
starting at childbirth and for the majority of the core period, while fathers take leave at the end
of the core period or during (a subset of the) miscellaneous days. To gauge the plausibility of
the model’s predictions, we can use data on actual parental leave use in the pre-reform period.
Appendix Figure A1 illustrates that Corollaries 1 and 2 are highly consistent with actual
parental leave use in Sweden in the period before the “Double Days” reform, underscoring the
model’s applicability to our empirical setting.
Second, the last statement in Corollary 2 links a household’s response to the introduction
of earmarking to its valuation of a miscellaneous day. While we do not empirically analyze the
impact of earmarking in our paper, this result provides an important link between existing
evidence on earmarking and the model’s predicted household responses to the reform that
we study. In particular, multiple studies have documented that Sweden’s earmarking reforms
substantially increased paternity leave take-up (Duvander and Johansson, 2012; Ekberg et
al., 2013; Duvander and Johansson, 2014, 2015; Avdic and Karimi, 2018). By Corollary 2,
this finding implies that households place a high valuation on a miscellaneous day.29 This, in
turn, has important implications for our analysis because, as we show in Section 3.4 below, a
29

Intuitively, as we show in the Proof of Corollary 2, when earmarking induces a father to take an extra
leave day (that he otherwise would not have taken), the household gains one miscellaneous day.

14

household’s benefit from using a “Double Day” is directly related to a household’s valuation of
a miscellaneous day. Thus, Corollary 2 provides a theoretical link between existing studies on
earmarking and the findings that we present in this paper. We explain this in detail below.

3.4

“Double Days” Reform

The “Double Days” reform relaxes the assumption that parents cannot take leave at the
same time by allowing “double days.” During the core period, parents can now take leave on
the same day, using two units of leave. However, “double day” units do not count toward
earmarked units.30
To capture the value of taking a double day, we introduce some additional notation. Let
Bpp0 (t) capture the direct benefit of parent p taking leave to join parent p0 at home on day t.
Let Cp (t) be the corresponding direct cost.
Assumption 5 (Flexibility and the value of a “double day”). Bpp0 (t) contains a stochastic
element. The double-day decision can be made flexibly, at time t, when the daily realization
of Bpp0 (t) is observed.
In principle, Bpp0 (t) may encompass benefits to parent p who takes the additional leave
(e.g., joy of leisure or domestic work), benefits to parent p0 from having the second parent
at home (e.g., help with household chores or emotional support), and benefits to the child
from being home with two parents as opposed to one. We let this aggregate household benefit
contain a stochastic element to capture the fact that it may be subject to domestic shocks
that necessitate a flexible response. For example, additional support for the mother may be
more valuable to the household on some days (e.g., when she is not feeling well, is fatigued,
or is having mental health issues) than others.31
30

This structure closely resembles Sweden’s reform, which allowed the use of “double days” before the child’s
first birthday (and thus before the child is eligible for public childcare), and which did not allow for “double
days” to count toward either parent’s earmarked allowance.
31
In principle, another example of a domestic shock that could affect Bpp0 (t) in this general set-up is child
illness. However, since one parent is already at home during the core days—and thus able to flexibly respond
to unexpected child health shocks by, for example, taking the infant to the doctor—the marginal value of the
second parent also staying home in response to a child health shock is likely to be low. Consistent with this
conjecture, we find no empirical evidence of effects of the “Double Days” reform on measures of child health
available in our data (specialist outpatient and inpatient visits as well as prescription drugs like antibiotics).

15

Further, for simplicity, we assume that the number of potential double days to be used is
strictly smaller than T − E − t̄. This simplifies our analysis as it ensures that use of a double
day will not preclude use of a later (desired) double day.32
Prediction 1 (Double days). A double day is used if and only if
Bpp0 (t) > bm + (1 − α)(wp − wp0 ).

(1)

Proof. See Appendix B.
Prediction 1 contains two insights that are important for our empirical analysis. First,
households choose to take a double day on days when the direct household benefit from
parent p joining p0 exceeds the threshold in (1). Thus, when parents have the flexibility to
decide when to take joint leave on a day-to-day basis, the optimal response is to remove the
additional parent from the labor force only on days when the benefit of doing so is perceived
to be sufficiently high.
Second, the right-hand side of condition (1) formalizes the notion of “sufficiently high.”
Intuitively, a double day has a shadow cost beyond the foregone wage of parent p: it eliminates
a future miscellaneous leave day that could be taken by mom.33 This makes the overall
opportunity cost of taking a double day potentially large. Specifically, for a double day taken
by the dad to join the mom at home, condition (1) becomes
Bdm (t) > bm + (1 − α)∆w
where ∆w = wd − wm > 0 is the wage difference between the dad and the mom. That is, the
added benefit of dad joining mom on a core day allocated to mom would have to exceed the
32

This assumption is made for convenience and can be relaxed. If relaxed, the household will be more
conservative in its use of a double day (relative to the case when this assumption holds); consequently, the
right-hand side of equation (1) is the lower bound of the direct benefit that must be obtained from taking a
double day.
33
Corollary 1 and 2 together imply that any miscellaneous day taken by the father are taken in response
to earmarking; thus, they count toward the father’s earmarked allowance. Because double days do not count
toward the earmarked allowance, a double day (taken by any parent) replaces a miscellaneous day taken by
the mother in the future. See the Proof of Proposition 1 for a more formal treatment.

16

gross benefit of mom taking leave on a future miscellaneous day without childcare, plus the
difference in the non-replaced wage income.34
Thus, the higher is the household’s valuation of a future miscellaneous day, the higher is
the cutoff in (1) at which the household decides to take a double day. Further, a higher cutoff
in (1) implies fewer days taken as double days, and a higher perceived household benefit of
each claimed double day. This relates to our above discussion of Corollary 2: The strong
response in paternity leave take-up to Sweden’s earlier earmarking reforms suggests that the
value of a miscellaneous leave day is high. We thus obtain a clear prediction: the “Double
Days” reform (i) induces a relatively small average increase in the number of double days
taken, but (ii) ensures that the claimed double days are associated with substantial benefits
to the household.

4

Data

Our empirical analysis uses multiple Swedish administrative data sets: birth records data from
the National Board of Health and Welfare (NBHW; in Swedish Socialstyrelsen), population
register data from Statistics Sweden containing demographic and labor market information
on the parents, data on parental leave claims from the Swedish Social Insurance Agency
(Forsakringskassan), as well as inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug claims data from
NBHW to measure maternal health outcomes.
Births data. We have data on all Swedish births from 2000 to 2016, with unique parental
and child identifiers, and with detailed information on pregnancy and delivery characteristics
and birth outcomes, including child gender, birth order, birth type (singleton versus multiple
birth), gestational age in days, expected due date, birth weight in grams, the Apgar score, an
indicator for small-for-gestational-age (SGA), and indicators for cesarean section (c-section)
deliveries, inductions of labor, and various pregnancy risk factors and labor/delivery complications. We use these data to identify firstborn singleton live births during our analysis time
34

Similarly, for a double day in which the mom joins dad at home, condition (1) becomes Bmd (t) > bm
(without career costs). In practice, however, as illustrated in Appendix Figure A1, the typical mother’s first
spell extends beyond the time period when double days can be used.

17

frame, and to calculate the children’s exact dates of birth using information on gestational
age and expected due date.35
Demographic information and parental leave claims. We use administrative data from
Statistics Sweden to obtain information about each mother’s and father’s age, educational
attainment, marital status, and income in the year before the first child’s birth. To measure
take-up of parental leave, we add spell-level data from the Swedish Social Insurance Agency.
For each child, we observe the universe of parental leave spells taken from 1993 until 2016.
For each spell, the data contain the exact start and end dates, as well as information about
the type of compensation (wage-replaced or flat-rate day), as described in Section 2 above.
We merge the two data sets to the birth records data using parental identifiers.
Our main measures of parental leave are indicators for any post-baseline leave taken by
fathers during various time periods in the year following childbirth. We also calculate the
total number of leave days taken by fathers (including baseline leave) during these periods.
Maternal health outcomes. We merge information from inpatient care, specialist outpatient care, and prescription drug records using maternal identifiers. We have access to
inpatient records from 1995 to 2016, specialist outpatient records from 2001 to 2016, and
prescription drug records from 2005 to 2017. The inpatient records contain information on
the universe of a patient’s visits to the hospital that result in hospital admission, including
cases where the individual is admitted and discharged on the same day. The outpatient data
records all visits excluding primary care. In Sweden, primary care (e.g., regular postpartum
check-ups and annual physical exams) is provided at municipal “care centers” (Vårdcentraler),
which are mostly staffed with nurses. “Care centers” can provide referrals to more specialized
outpatient care, which is what we observe in the outpatient records. The drug records contain
the universe of an individual’s prescription drug purchases made in pharmacies, but do not
include drugs administered in hospitals.
For each visit to an inpatient or specialized outpatient provider, the data contain information on the date of the visit, the associated International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10)
35

Specifically, we subtract 280 days (40 weeks) from the expected due date to obtain the conception date,
and then add the gestational age in days to obtain the actual date of birth.

18

diagnosis codes, the length of stay (for inpatient data only), whether the visit originated in the
emergency room, and whether the visit was planned (i.e., scheduled in advance) or unplanned
(i.e., originated in the emergency room or due to a same-day appointment or an immediate
referral from primary care). For each occasion when a prescription drug was bought, the prescription data contain information about the drug name, active substance, average daily dose,
and the drug’s exact Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) code.36 The ATC classification
allows us to link the drugs to the conditions they are most commonly used to treat.
Our main analysis focuses on maternal health outcomes measured in the first 180 days (6
months) following childbirth, but we also explore other time periods, as discussed in Section
6 below. Using the inpatient and outpatient data, we define indicators for any inpatient or
outpatient visit following the child’s birth (excluding the birth itself), as well as indicators for
any visits associated with the following three distinct diagnosis groups: (i) conditions related
to pregnancy, childbirth, or the puerperium period, (ii) diagnoses for mental, behavioral, and
neurodevelopmental disorders,37 and (iii) external causes and medical counseling.38
In the prescription drug data, we create indicators for any drug claims in the following
four categories: anti-anxiety, anti-depressant, antibiotic, and painkiller. Appendix C lists the
exact ICD and ATC codes for all of our outcomes.39
Finally, to examine a particularly vulnerable sub-group of mothers, we use information from
the inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug records to measure pre-birth medical histories.
We classify mothers as having a medical history if they satisfy any of the following conditions:
(i) any inpatient visit in months 1-24 before childbirth, (ii) any specialist outpatient visit
for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth, or (iii) any anti-anxiety or anti36

The ATC classification system is controlled by the World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for
Drug Statistics Methodology (WHOCC), and was first published in 1976.
37
Note that inpatient and outpatient visits with a mental health diagnosis are generally associated with
severe and/or chronic mental illness. Milder or more temporary cases of mental health issues may instead
show up in our data in the form of prescription drug treatment. To that point, one does not need to have a
formal mental health diagnosis in order to be prescribed anti-anxiety or anti-depressant medications.
38
We refer to visits that are coded as “factors influencing health status and contact with health services” as
medical counseling. These codes, which all start with the letter Z in the ICD-10 system, are used for occasions
when there are circumstances other than a disease, injury, or other diagnosed external cause that lead to a
health encounter. Most relevant to our study, these codes can be used to classify visits in which a new mother
receives medical counseling or advice, but is not diagnosed with any particular condition (e.g., she may receive
advice regarding postpartum “baby blues,” but is not formally diagnosed with depression).
39
We also explored effects on the total number of inpatient and outpatient visits, as well as the total number
of prescription drug claims. We found that our estimated effects are driven entirely by extensive margin
responses (results for total visits and drug claims are available upon request).

19

depressant prescription drug in months 1-36 before childbirth.40
Analysis sample and summary statistics. To analyze the effects of the 2012 “Double
Days” reform, we first limit our data to the 233,981 firstborn singleton children born in 20082012. In order to implement an RD design that uses the running variable expressed in days,
we further limit our analysis to the 222,638 observations for which we can calculate exact dates
of birth.41 Additionally, in most of our specifications, we use a three-month bandwidth, and
therefore constrain our sample to only include children born in October through December
of 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2011 and January through March of 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2012
(hereafter referred to as the RD-DD sample).
Table 1 reports sample means of selected parental background characteristics and maternal
health outcomes measured in the first six months after childbirth. Column (1) includes all
firstborn singleton children born in 2008-2012. Column (2) limits the sample to children with
information on exact date of birth. Column (3) uses our primary RD-DD sample, while column
(4) further limits the RD-DD sample to families with mothers who have a pre-birth medical
history. About 45 percent of mothers and 57 percent of fathers have a low education level
(defined as high school or less), respectively, and the average mother (father) is 29 (32) years
old in the year before birth. Maternal and paternal average annual employment income in the
year before birth is 208,000SEK ($29,060) and 276,000SEK ($38,498) in 2010, respectively.
About 21 (22) percent of the mothers (fathers) in our data are born outside of Sweden. There
are no large differences in these characteristics across the first three columns, while families
in which mothers have a pre-birth medical history (column 4) have lower average education
levels and incomes.
The table further shows that about five percent of new mothers have at least one inpatient
visit in the first six months postpartum, while 33 percent have at least one specialist outpatient
40

We choose these time frames such that we capture women with a medical history in a time period sufficiently close to childbirth, and that we retain enough sample size to have sufficient statistical power. We
choose to focus on outpatient visits and prescription drugs related to mental health since most women have at
least some kind of (non-mental-health-related) specialist outpatient visit or prescription drug in the months
before childbirth. Our results are not sensitive to small alterations to the time windows used to measure
medical histories.
41
We are unable to calculate exact dates of birth for the approximately 5 percent of observations that are
missing data on the expected due date. However, all observations have information on the month and year of
birth. We have estimated all of our models including the observations with missing data and expressing the
running variable in months instead of days, obtaining very similar results, which are available upon request.

20

visit during the same time frame. Ten percent of mothers have an inpatient or outpatient visit
for childbirth-related complications, two percent have a visit with a mental health diagnosis,
while one percent have a visit for external causes or medical counseling. Consistent with the
idea that one does not need to have a formal mental health diagnosis in order to be prescribed
a mental health-related medication (see footnote 37), we observe that four percent of new
mothers have an anti-anxiety or anti-depressant drug prescription, which is double the share
of women with a diagnosis. Eight and 16 percent of new mothers have painkiller and antibiotic
prescriptions, respectively, during the first six months after giving birth. Not surprisingly, the
means of the maternal health outcomes are higher among mothers with pre-birth medical
histories in column (4).

5

Empirical Methods

Our goal is to examine the causal link between fathers’ access to workplace flexibility and
maternal postpartum health. We study this question by exploiting the natural experiment
stemming from the ‘Double Days” reform on January 1, 2012. Our analysis essentially compares individuals whose children are born very close to, but on opposite sides of, the reform
date, and we difference out seasonality effects using parents of children born in the same
months but in other non-reform years. Specifically, our primary specification compares the
outcomes of mothers and fathers of firstborn singleton children born in January-March 2012
and October-December 2011 (“reform sample”), relative to the difference in outcomes in the
same months in the previous three years (January-March 2011, 2010, and 2009 versus OctoberDecember 2010, 2009, and 2008; “non-reform sample”). Our regression model, which uses the
child’s day of birth, d, as the running variable, can be expressed as follows:
yidp = α + β1 1[d ≥ c] + β2 Ri × 1[d ≥ c]
+f (d − c) + 1[d ≥ c] × f (d − c) + x0 i κ + θp + εidp

(2)

for each family of first-born singleton child i born on day of the year d in time period p, where
we refer to each October through March as a separate period (e.g., October 2008 - March
2009, October 2009 - March 2010, etc.) yidp is an outcome of interest, such as an indicator for
21

any post-baseline leave use in the two months after childbirth or an indicator for a maternal
inpatient or outpatient visits in the six months following childbirth. c denotes January 1, the
day of the reform. Ri is an indicator set to 1 for children who are in the reform sample (i.e.,
October 2011 - March 2012 births), and 0 otherwise. The dummy variable 1[d ≥ c] is set to 1
for children born in January-March in any year. f (d − c) is a flexible function of the running
variable, day of birth centered around January 1, for which we use a quadratic polynomial
in our main specifications and allow for it to have a different shape on opposite sides of the
threshold in all periods. We also include fixed effects for every time period, θp .42
The vector xi includes a dummy for child gender, as well as the following family control
variables, measured in the year before birth: maternal and paternal earnings (in 1000s of real
SEK in year 2010 terms), indicators for each parent’s age groups (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+),
indicators for each parent’s education levels (high school or less, some college, university
degree or more), an indicator for the parents being married, and indicators for each parent
being foreign-born. εidp is an unobserved error term. The key coefficient of interest is on the
interaction between the reform sample dummy, Ri and the dummy for January-March births,
1[d ≥ c], and is denoted by β2 . It represents an estimate of the difference in parental outcomes
between January-March and October-December births in the reform sample, relative to the
analogous difference in outcomes in the non-reform sample.
Identifying assumption. The standard RD design relies on the assumption that only
the treatment variable—in our case, eligibility for the “Double Days” reform at the time
of childbirth—is changing discontinuously at the reform date; all other variables possibly related to our outcomes of interest should be continuous functions of the assignment variable
(Imbens and Lemieux, 2008; Lee and Lemieux, 2010). In our application, this assumption
implies that parents should not be able to strategically manipulate the timing of childbirth
and that there are no other discontinuous policy changes at the same time as the reform.
As documented in multiple prior studies, there are important differences in the number
and composition of births across months of the year due to non-random fertility patterns
and environmental or health factors such as the timing of the influenza season (Buckles and
42
Note that the main effect of Ri , the dummy for being in the reform sample, is absorbed with the inclusion
of period fixed effects.

22

Hungerman, 2008; Currie and Schwandt, 2013). Additionally, January 1 is the school starting
age cut-off date in Sweden, implying that parents who wish to have their children be the
oldest or youngest in the class may strategically sort on different sides of the cut-off. Further,
and relevant to our study of leave use, there are differences in the number of holidays when
parents can stay home from work across these months. To net out all the differences between
January and December births unrelated to the “Double Days” reform, we use births in the
same months in three years before the reform, as described above. Thus, for our setting, we
rely on an assumption that any discontinuities in other variables at the reform date are not
distinguishable from those in the non-reform years.
To assess the plausibility of the identifying assumption, we first perform the RD-DD version
of the McCrary (2008) test. Specifically, we collapse our data into week-of-birth bins, and
estimate a version of model (2) using the collapsed data with the number of firstborn singleton
births as the dependent variable and a 26-week (6 month) bandwidth. The running variable
is the week of birth normalized relative to the first week of January in every period, and
we report coefficients from RD-DD models that use 1st through 6th order polynomials in
the running variable. Table 2 presents the results, and we also report the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) in the bottom row of each table. The results are very stable across the different
specifications, and, importantly, we detect no significant discontinuities in the number of births
at the time of the reform. Figure 1 presents analogous graphical evidence: sub-figure (a) plots
the total number of births by birth week in the reform sample, while sub-figure (b) plots the
average of the total number of births by birth week across all years in the non-reform sample.
The fitted lines are predicted from 4th order polynomial models; we follow Lee and Lemieux
(2010) by selecting the model with the smallest AIC value.
We next check for any discontinuities in pre-determined characteristics at the reform date.
Appendix Tables A2 and A3 report results from estimating versions of model (2), omitting
the controls in vector xi and instead using parental characteristics, children’s birth outcomes,
and maternal pre-birth medical history indicators as the dependent variables. Out of the 20
coefficients reported across the two tables, only one is statistically significant at the 5% level.
Moreover, in both tables, a joint F -test from seemingly unrelated regression models yields
insignificant results. These results are reassuring and suggest that differential selection into

23

birth at the reform date is unlikely to bias our main estimates reported below.

6

Results

Effects of the “Double Days” reform on paternity leave use. We begin by providing
evidence that the “Double Days” reform affects paternity leave use in the months following
childbirth. Figure 2 plots means of three paternity leave outcomes by the child’s birth week for
births in 2011-2012, along with the predictions and 95% confidence intervals from estimating
local linear polynomial models on each side of the reform threshold. We show graphs for the
following leave outcomes for fathers: (a) any post-baseline leave in the first 60 days postchildbirth, (b) any post-baseline leave in the first 180 days post-childbirth, and (c) the total
number of leave days in the first 180 days, including both baseline and post-baseline leave.
The figure shows increases in leave use in the first two and six months after childbirth, and
a more muted impact on the total number of days of leave. The fact that leave use appears
to increase starting with births in the weeks preceding the reform (i.e., the last few weeks of
2011) is consistent with parents of children born shortly before the reform becoming eligible for
“Double Days” on the reform date. Thus, for example, a father of a child born on December
1, 2011 can take post-baseline leave at the same time as the mother starting when his child
turns one month old. To account for this treatment pattern, we assess the robustness of our
results to dropping families of children born in the last few weeks of the year, and to estimating
models that use as the treatment variable the share of days that a family is eligible for “Double
Days” during different windows in the child’s first year of life. We discuss these results further
below.
Table 3 presents results from estimating equation (2) using the three paternity leave variables as outcomes, separately for the whole sample and for the sub-sample of families with
mothers who have a pre-birth medical history. In the overall sample, columns (1) and (2) show
3.9 and 5.9 percentage point increases in the likelihoods of any post-baseline leave use among
fathers in the first two and six months postpartum, respectively. The magnitudes correspond
to 50 and 24 percent increases relative to the sample means. We observe bigger impacts in
absolute terms among fathers in families with mothers who have a medical history, although

24

in relative terms the magnitudes are comparable to those in the overall sample. Additionally,
while the effects on any post-baseline leave use are fairly large, we only observe a one to two
day average increase in the total number of days of leave in the first six months post-childbirth.
These estimates suggest that the “Double Days” reform primarily impacts fathers’ leave use
shortly after childbirth on the extensive, rather than intensive, margin.
To explore the impacts of the reform on the distribution of post-baseline leave days taken by
fathers in the first 6 months post-childbirth, Figure 3 plots the RD-DD treatment coefficients
and 95% confidence intervals from separate regression models that use as outcomes indicator
variables for fathers taking different numbers of post-baseline leave days denoted in bins on
the x−axis of each graph. We show results for the overall sample in sub-figure (a), and
for families with mothers who have a medical history in sub-figure (b). Consistent with the
estimates in Table 3, we observe significant extensive margin effects—in both samples, there
are large reductions in the shares of fathers who take zero post-baseline leave days. In the
overall sample, fathers are both more likely to take one to five days of leave and 11 or more
days of leave.43 In the sample of families with mothers who have a medical history, we only
see statistically significant increases in the shares of fathers taking 11-20, 21-30 or 31+ days
of post-baseline leave. Thus, it appears that the one to two day increase in the total number
of leave days taken on average is driven both by some fathers being more likely to take a few
days of leave and a (small) share of fathers—concentrated in families where mothers may be
most prone to health problems—taking a more extended period of time off.
Importantly, our theoretical framework in Section 3 highlights that households may reap
gains from a reform that grants flexibility in the use of simultaneous parental leave, even if
fathers, ex post, end up shifting only a few extra days of leave to the immediate postpartum
period. The availability of simultaneous leave allows families to keep the father in the household on precisely the days when his presence is particularly valuable for the family. Next, we
examine the impacts of such leave on maternal postpartum health.
43

We see a statistically significant increase in the share of fathers taking 31 or more days of post-baseline
leave. Recall that this is possible because while families are limited to at most 30 “double days” in the first
year post-childbirth, fathers can take additional post-baseline leave days if mothers do not claim paid leave
benefits on the same days.

25

Effects of the “Double Days” reform on maternal health. Figures 4 and 5 present
graphical evidence for our main maternal health outcomes in the inpatient/outpatient and prescription drug data, respectively. As with the paternity leave variables, we plot week-of-birth
means overlayed with predictions and 95% confidence intervals from local linear polynomial
models estimated separately on each side of the reform date. Sub-figures (a) and (b) of Figure
4 suggest that there is a decline in the likelihood of a maternal inpatient or specialist outpatient
visit in the first six months after childbirth, driven by a reduction in visits for childbirth-related
complications.44 There appears to be no change in visits with mental health-related diagnoses
or those associated with external causes and medical counseling (sub-figures (c) and (d)).
When it comes to the outcomes measured with prescription drug data, the graphs suggest
declines in the likelihoods of any anti-anxiety and antibiotic drug use (sub-figures (a) and (d)
of Figure 5), and no apparent change in anti-depressant or painkiller medications (sub-figures
(b) and (c)).
Tables 4 and 6, which present estimates from model (2) using inpatient/outpatient and
prescription drug data, respectively, confirm the graphical evidence. In the overall sample, we
observe a 1.5 percentage point (14 percent) decrease in the likelihood of a mother having an
inpatient or outpatient visit for childbirth-related complications (Table 4, Panel A). We also
find a 1.9 percentage point (11 percent) decline in the likelihood of any antibiotic prescription
in the first six months after childbirth (Table 6, Panel A). When it comes to mental health,
we observe a marginally significant reduction in the likelihood of any anti-anxiety prescription
drug during this time period of 0.3 percentage points (26 percent). These effects are larger in
both absolute and relative terms for mothers with pre-birth medical histories (see Panel B in
each table). We do not find any significant impacts on inpatient or specialist outpatient visits
with mental health diagnoses (i.e., representing more chronic and/or severe mental health
issues), driven by external causes, or for medical advice, or on the other prescription drugs
that we consider.
Are the observed reductions in health care visits and prescription drugs consistent with
an improvement in maternal health or do they instead reflect a (potentially welfare-reducing)
44

When examining inpatient and outpatient visits separately, we find that the reduction is more pronounced
for outpatient visits (results available upon request). We aggregate the two types of visits into one indicator
to increase our statistical power.

26

decline in health care utilization? To shed light on this question, we analyze whether the
effects on inpatient and outpatient visits are driven by those that are scheduled in advance
or those that are unplanned (either because they originate in the emergency room or because
they involve a same-day appointment or immediate referral from primary care) in Table 5. We
find that the reduction in health care visits is entirely due to unplanned rather than scheduled
appointments, suggesting that underlying maternal health becomes better as a result of the
“Double Days” reform.
Timing of effects. We next explore the timing of the effects on paternity leave use and
maternal health. Figure 6 plots the RD-DD treatment coefficients scaled by the dependent
variable means (i.e., such that the magnitudes can be interpreted as percent changes relative
to sample means) and corresponding 95% confidence intervals from regression models that
use outcomes measured in the periods since childbirth denoted on the x-axis of each graph.
Sub-figure (a) demonstrates that most of the effect on the likelihood of any post-baseline
leave use among fathers occurs in the first six months after childbirth, with a stronger relative
impact in the first three months. Sub-figure (b) shows that the decline in maternal inpatient
and outpatient visits for childbirth-related complications is most pronounced in months four
through six postpartum, although the confidence intervals overlap across all of the time periods
we consider. In sub-figure (c), we find that the reduction in anti-anxiety prescriptions is
particularly large and statistically significant at the 5% level during the first three months
post-childbirth, while there is no significant effect in the subsequent time periods. Sub-figure
(d) shows that the reduction in antibiotic prescriptions is of similar magnitude for the first
nine months postpartum. These results underscore the idea that the ability of the household
to flexibly choose to keep the father at home alongside the mother, if need be, in the first
few months post-childbirth, has large and nearly immediate impacts on multiple measures of
maternal postpartum health.
Mechanisms. Our theoretical framework suggests that households choose to keep the father
at home on days when the marginal benefit of doing so is particularly high. This is consistent
with the fact that the magnitudes of our estimated effects on maternal health are large when
compared to the modest increase in the total number of leave days that fathers use. The
27

reduction in inpatient and specialist outpatient visits, as well as in prescription drugs, suggests
that fathers’ ability to take a day or two of paid leave when this is especially needed may avert
maternal health complications that require medical intervention.45
We next examine whether, conditional on a mother needing medical care, the father takes
leave on days when she has a health care encounter. Appendix Table A4 presents results from
the RD-DD model, in which the outcome is an indicator for whether the father takes leave on a
day that overlaps with when the mother has either an inpatient or outpatient visit or fills a drug
prescription. For families with mothers who have a pre-birth medical history (Panel B), we
find a 1.6 percentage point (26 percent) increase in the likelihood of this event occurring. This
result points to the possibility that in families in which mothers are particularly vulnerable
to postpartum health issues, the “Double Days” reform grants fathers the flexibility to take
leave and stay home with their infants on days when mothers need medical care.
In addition, we analyze whether the effects of the “Double Days” reform differ across
families who do and do not have at least one grandparent aged 74 years or less residing in
the same county.46 Fathers’ ability to take full-time leave in the postpartum period may be
especially important for families who do not have another family member—such as the child’s
grandparent—who can step in to help when a mother experiences health issues. As such, we
expect the impacts of the “Double Days” reform on maternal health to be stronger in families
without a relatively young grandparent residing in close proximity. Appendix Tables A5,
A6, and A7 report the results of this heterogeneity analysis for the paternity leave, maternal
inpatient/outpatient, and maternal prescription drug outcomes, respectively. Interestingly,
we find that the impacts on paternity leave use are similar for families with and without a
grandparent in the same county, suggesting that the reform induced fathers in both groups to
take post-baseline leave. However, the impacts on maternal physical health—as measured by
inpatient and outpatient visits for childbirth-related complications and antibiotic prescriptions
in the 6 months post-childbirth—appear larger for families without a grandparent in the same
county. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that fathers’ ability to take full45

As noted in Section 4, we do not have data on primary care visits. Thus, it is possible that the “Double
Days” reform allows fathers to take leave so that mothers seek prompt primary care and thereby avoid more
serious complications that would have required specialist visits or hospitalizations.
46
The age restriction on grandparents is due to a data constraint as we only observe demographic information
including county of residence for individuals aged 74 or less in our data.

28

time paid leave in the postpartum period is particularly important when no other potential
caregivers are available to help mothers recover and rest. We do not detect significant effects on
anti-anxiety prescription drugs in the 6 months post-childbirth in either sub-sample, possibly
due to power concerns from reducing the sample size.47
Sensitivity analysis. While our main analysis uses an RD-DD design in order to account for
seasonal differences in births, we also present results for our main outcomes from standard RD
specifications. Specifically, we start with data on all firstborn singleton births in 2008-2015,
and then estimate RD models with local linear polynomials that compare births before and
after January 1, 2012 and use different optimal bandwidth algorithms to select the bandwidths
of the number of days used on each side of the cutoff. We follow the RD methodological
literature (Calonico et al., 2014b,a, 2018a,b), and use triangular kernels and robust biascorrected inference procedures in all models.48 In Panel A of each table, we show results that
include the same vector of controls xi as in model (2); while Panel B presents results without
covariates.49
The results for any paternal post-baseline leave use in the two months post-birth, any paternal post-baseline leave use in the six months post-birth, maternal physical health measured
in the first six months post-childbirth (any inpatient or outpatient visit for childbirth-related
complications and any antibiotic prescription drug), and any maternal anti-anxiety prescription drug in the first three months post-childbirth are presented in Appendix Tables A8, A9,
A10, A11, and A12, respectively. Our estimates are mostly statistically significant and reasonably robust across the different bandwidths. The discontinuity in paternity leave use becomes
47

When we examine at maternal anti-anxiety prescription drugs in the 90 days post-childbirth, we find a
statistically significant decline among families with a grandparent in the same county. However, this is likely
due to the larger sample size in that sub-sample than in the sub-sample of families without a grandparent.
We cannot reject that the two coefficients are the same across the two groups.
48
The optimal bandwidth algorithms are: (1) one common mean squared error (MSE)-optimal bandwidth
selector for both sides of the cutoff; (2) two different MSE-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the
cutoff); (3) one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to
difference thereof); (4) minimum of (1) and (3); (5) median of (1), (2), and (3) for each side of the cutoff
separately; (6) one common coverage error rate (CER)-optimal bandwidth selector; (7) two different CERoptimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the cutoff); (8) one common CER-optimal bandwidth selector
for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (9) minimum of (6) and (8); (10) median
of (6), (7), and (8) for each side of the cutoff separately. We follow Calonico et al. (2014b), Calonico et al.
(2018a), and Calonico et al. (2018b) in using these algorithms. We report the number of days used in the left
and right-hand bandwidths in each model at the bottom of the table.
49
See Calonico et al. (2018b) for a discussion of RD models with and without covariates.

29

small (and at times insignificant) with very narrow bandwidths, which is consistent with the
fact that parents of children born shortly before the reform become eligible for “Double Days”
at the time of the reform.
To account for the timing pattern of treatment, we calculate the share of days between
the child’s first and 60th day of life that parents are eligible for the “Double Days.” Thus, a
child who is born on December 31, 2011 gets a value of
2011 gets a value of

1
.
60

59
,
60

while a child born on November 3,

We analogously calculate the share of days between the child’s first

and 180th day of life that the parents are eligible for the “Double Days”. We then estimate
a version of model (2) in which we replace the main interaction term, Ri × 1[d ≥ c], with
this variable. The rest of the variables included in the model are the same as before. We
can interpret the coefficient on the new treatment variable as the effect of moving from 0 to
100 percent eligibility during the relevant time frame. The results for our main outcomes
are reported in Panels A and B of Appendix Table A13. The magnitudes of the impacts on
fathers’ post-baseline leave use are larger than those from our main RD-DD specifications,
consistent with the idea that we are now more accurately capturing eligibility for families
in the weeks and months leading up to the reform. For instance, we now find that moving
from 0 to 100 percent eligibility for “Double Days” during the child’s first six months of life
increases the likelihood of any paternal post-baseline leave use during that time period by
20.2 percentage points, or 83 percent. We also find that the total number of days of leave
used by fathers increases by 6.4 days. When it comes to maternal health, we find that moving
from 0 to 100 percent eligibility in the first six months post-birth reduces the likelihood of an
inpatient or outpatient visit for childbirth complications by 3.9 percentage points (38 percent)
and the likelihood of an antibiotic prescription by 5.2 percentage points (31 percent). We
also document that moving from 0 to 100 percent eligibility in the first two months post-birth
decreases the likelihood of a maternal anti-anxiety prescription in the first three months after
birth by 0.3 percentage points (45 percent, marginally significant).
Lastly, as Figure 2 suggests that most of the increase in post-baseline leave use among
fathers of children born pre-reform occurs in the few weeks immediately before it, we estimate
our main RD-DD models, dropping all December births. The results are presented in Panel C
of Appendix Table A13, and are similar to those from our main specifications. Taken together,

30

our sensitivity tests suggest that the impacts of the “Double Days” reform on paternity leave
use and maternal postpartum health are robust across various modeling choices.

7

Conclusion

When a woman gives birth to a child, much of the attention is typically placed on the health
and wellbeing of the newborn baby. There are many medical and social policy interventions
targeting infants, and a plethora of research has been dedicated to understanding the causes
and consequences of early-life health (see, e.g., Currie, 2011; Almond and Currie, 2011; Chen
et al., 2016; Almond et al., 2017; Persson and Rossin-Slater, 2018; Chen et al., 2019). New
mothers, who undergo a significant physical and emotional transition after childbirth, are
comparably under-discussed and under-studied.
A recent influential medical study in The Lancet journal has raised awareness about the
state of maternal postpartum health by documenting that the United States has experienced
a disturbing increasing trend in maternal mortality in the last several decades (Kassebaum et
al., 2016). A lot of the resulting discussion has centered around the role of the health care
system in delivering prenatal and postpartum care.50 But the mother’s environment at home
can have significant influence on her well-being during the often emotional and overwhelming
months of new parenthood. In fact, in recent commentary about the rise in maternal mortality
in the U.S., Dr. Neel Shah, a leading maternal health expert at the Harvard Medical School,
argues:
“What’s important to understand is that most maternal deaths happen after women
have the baby and the fundamental failure is not unsafe medical care but lack of
adequate social support...a lot of the risks around childbirth happen after the baby
is born during that vulnerable time when you’re trying to care for an infant while
also taking care of your household and doing all the things we expect of moms.”51
50

For examples of these discussions in the press, see:
https://www.vox.com/science-andhealth/2017/6/26/15872734/what-no-one-tells-new-moms-about-what-happens-after-childbirth
https://www.npr.org/2017/05/12/528098789/u-s-has-the-worst-rate-of-maternal-deaths-in-the-developedworld
https://www.npr.org/2017/05/12/527806002/focus-on-infants-during-childbirth-leaves-u-s-moms-in-danger.
51
See: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/whats-behind-americas-rising-maternal-mortality-rate.

31

Our paper attempts to isolate the effect of a key factor in the mother’s postpartum home
environment: the presence (or absence) of the child’s father in the weeks and months immediately following childbirth. To study this question, we take advantage of linked Swedish
administrative data and quasi-experimental variation from a social insurance reform in January 2012, which granted fathers the flexibility to take paid leave on an intermittent basis
alongside the mother. Using an RD-DD design, we document that this reform leads to 50 and
24 percent increases in the likelihoods of fathers using any post-baseline leave in the first two
and six months after childbirth, respectively.
Then, we present consistent evidence that fathers’ access to flexible leave in the postpartum
period improves maternal health. We find a 14 percent decrease in the likelihood of a mother
having an inpatient or specialist outpatient visit for childbirth-related complications, and 11
and 26 percent reductions in the likelihoods of her getting any antibiotic and anti-anxiety
prescription drugs, respectively, in the first six months post-birth. Moreover, we show that
the decline in anti-anxiety medications is especially pronounced in the first three months after
childbirth. The effects on maternal health are larger in both absolute and relative terms
for mothers with a pre-birth medical history, who may be particularly vulnerable and thus
benefit the most from a policy that grants fathers the flexibility so stay home from work in
the postpartum period. These large effects are consistent with our theoretical framework, in
which households use their private information to optimally choose to keep the father at home
on precisely the days when his presence is especially valuable.
In addition to informing questions about determinants of maternal postpartum health, our
findings have important implications for debates about workplace flexibility and the design
of paid family leave (PFL) policies. The United States remains the only high-income country
without a national PFL policy, although six states and Washington, D.C., have either implemented or passed PFL legislation that provides partially paid parental leave to both mothers
and fathers.52 Just as in other countries that have had paid parental leave policies for decades,
fathers in states with PFL programs take much less leave than mothers do.53 While discus52

These are: California (in 2004), New Jersey (in 2009), Rhode Island (in 2014), New York (in 2018), D.C.
(will go into effect in 2020), Washington state (will go into effect in 2020), and Massachusetts (will go into
effect in 2021).
53
Bartel et al. (2018) estimate that the introduction of California’s 6-week PFL program only increased
fathers’ leave duration from about 1 to 1.5 weeks on average. Bana et al. (2018) document that only 12

32

sions about encouraging men to take paternity leave typically focus on policies that promote
sequential and consolidated leave use (such as “Daddy Month”-style programs), our findings
imply that policies that restrict fathers’ flexibility in being able to take leave at the same time
as mothers on an intermittent basis could have negative spillover effects on maternal health.
Finally, our results suggest that workplace flexibility for fathers may be a highly costeffective way of improving maternal postpartum health, when compared with other public
programs such as nurse home visiting. The “Double Days” reform does not change the total
number of days of leave allocated to the household; rather, it grants parents agency to allocate
their leave in a way that maximizes the household’s benefits. The medical and psychological
literature suggests that these benefits may be long-lasting—maternal postpartum health issues
have important consequences for the mother’s long-term wellbeing as well as the family’s
welfare overall (see Meltzer-Brody and Stuebe, 2014 and Saxbe et al., 2018 for some overviews).
Thus, our finding of short-term benefits for maternal health may underestimate the total value
of paternal access to workplace flexibility.

References
Aitken, Zoe, Cameryn C Garrett, Belinda Hewitt, Louise Keogh, Jane S Hocking,
and Anne M Kavanagh, “The maternal health outcomes of paid maternity leave: A
systematic review,” Social Science & Medicine, 2015, 130, 32–41.
Allen, Tammy D. and Jeremy Armstrong, “Further Examination of the Link Between
Work-Family Conflict and Physical Health: The Role of Health-Related Behaviors,” American Behavioral Scientist, 2006, 49 (9), 1204–1221.
Almond, D. and J. Currie, “Human Capital Development before Age Five,” in O. Ashenfleter and D. Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, 2011, pp. 1315–1486.
Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque, “Childhood circumstances and
adult outcomes: Act II,” Working Paper w23017, National Bureau of Economic Research
2017.
Almqvist, Anna-Lena and Ann-Zofie Duvander, “Changes in gender equality? :
Swedish fathers’ parental leave, division of childcare and housework,” Journal of family
studies, 2014, 20 (1), 19–27. AuthorCount:2;.
percent of eligible new fathers in California made a PFL claim in 2014, ten years after the introduction of the
program. In contrast, in the same year, 47 percent of eligible new mothers made a PFL claim. Moreover,
while fathers in California are eligible for 6 weeks of paid leave, over three-quarters of those who take leave
take less than the maximum amount.

33

Andresen, Martin Eckhoff and Emily Nix, “What Causes the Child Penalty? Evidence
from Same Sex Couples and Policy Reforms,” 2019. University of Southern California,
unpublished manuscript.
Avdic, Daniel and Arizo Karimi, “Modern Family? Paternity Leave and Marital Stability,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2018, 10 (4), 283–307.
Avendano, Mauricio, Lisa F Berkman, Agar Brugiavini, and Giacomo Pasini, “The
long-run effect of maternity leave benefits on mental health: evidence from European countries,” Social Science & Medicine, 2015, 132, 45–53.
Backé, Eva-Maria, Andreas Seidler, Ute Latza, Karin Rossnagel, and Barbara
Schumann, “The role of psychosocial stress at work for the development of cardiovascular
diseases: a systematic review,” International Archives of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Jan 2012, 85 (1), 67–79.
Baker, Michael and Kevin Milligan, “Maternal employment, breastfeeding, and health:
Evidence from maternity leave mandates,” Journal of Health Economics, 2008, 27 (4), 871–
887.
Bana, Sarah, Kelly Bedard, and Maya Rossin-Slater, “Trends and Disparities in Leave
Use Under California’s Paid Family Leave Program: New Evidence from Administrative
Data,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, May 2018.
Bartel, Ann, Maya Rossin-Slater, Christopher Ruhm, Jenna Stearns, and Jane
Waldfogel, “Paid Family Leave, Fathers’ Leave-Taking, and Leave-Sharing in Dual-Earner
Households,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2018, 37 (1), 10–37.
Becker, Gary S, “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,” The Journal of Political Economy, 1973,
81 (4), 813–846.
Berkman, Lisa F, Sze Yan Liu, Leslie Hammer, Phyllis Moen, Laura Cousino
Klein, Erin Kelly, Martha Fay, Kelly Davis, Mary Durham, Georgia Karuntzos
et al., “Work–family conflict, cardiometabolic risk, and sleep duration in nursing employees.,” Journal of occupational health psychology, 2015, 20 (4), 420.
Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F Katz, “Dynamics of the gender
gap for young professionals in the financial and corporate sectors,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2010, 2 (3), 228–55.
Beuchert, Louise Voldby, Maria Knoth Humlum, and Rune Vejlin, “The length of
maternity leave and family health,” Labour Economics, 2016, 43, 55–71.
Bičáková, Alena and Klára Kalíšková, “Career Breaks after Childbirth: The Impact of
Family Leave Reforms in the Czech Republic,” Discussion Paper 10149, Institute for the
Study of Labor (IZA) 2016.
Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes, “Too young to leave the
nest? The effects of school starting age,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93
(2), 455–467.
34

Blau, Francine D and Lawrence M Kahn, “Female labor supply: Why is the United
States falling behind?,” The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (3), 251–256.
Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying, “Does
working from home work? Evidence from a Chinese experiment,” The Quarterly Jounral of
Economics, 2014, 130 (1), 165–218.
Buckles, Kasey S and Daniel M Hungerman, “Season of birth and later outcomes: Old
questions, new answers,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 95 (3), 711–724.
Bullinger, Lindsey Rose, “The Effect of Paid Family Leave on Infant and Parental Health
in the United States,” Journal of Health Economics, 2019.
Bünning, Mareike, “What Happens after the ’Daddy Months’? Fathers’ Involvement in
Paid Work, Childcare, and Housework after Taking Parental Leave in Germany,” European
Sociological Review, 2015, 0 (0), 1–11.
Butikofer, Aline, Julie Riise, and Meghan Skira, “The Impact of Paid Maternity Leave
on Maternal Health,” 2017. Norwegian School of Economics, unpublished manuscript.
Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D Cattaneo, and Max H Farrell, “On the effect of bias
estimation on coverage accuracy in nonparametric inference,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2018, 113 (522), 767–779.
, , and Rocio Titiunik, “Robust data-driven inference in the regression-discontinuity
design,” The Stata Journal, 2014, 14 (4), 909–946.
,
, and , “Robust Nonparametric Confidence Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity
Designs,” Econometrica, 2014, 82 (6), 2295–2326.
,
, Max H Farrell, and Rocio Titiunik, “Regression discontinuity designs using
covariates,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018, (0).
Canaan, Serena, “Parental Leave, Household Specialization and Children’s Well-Being,”
2017. American University of Beirut, unpublished manuscript.
Chatterji, Pinka and Sara Markowitz, “Family leave after childbirth and the mental
health of new mothers,” Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 2012, 15 (2), 61.
Chen, Alice, Emily Oster, and Heidi Williams, “Why is infant mortality higher in the
United States than in Europe?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2016, 8
(2), 89–124.
Chen, Yiqun, Petra Persson, and Maria Polyakova, “The Roots of Health Inequality and the Value of Intra-family Expertise,” Working Paper 25618, National Bureau of
Economic Research February 2019.
Cheng, Ching-Yu, Eileen R Fowles, and Lorraine O Walker, “Postpartum maternal
health care in the United States: A critical review,” The Journal of Perinatal Education,
2006, 15 (3), 34.
35

Chiappori, P. A., “Collective Labor Supply and Welfare,” Journal of Political Economy,
1992, 100 (3), 437–467.
Clapp, Mark A, Sarah E Little, Jie Zheng, Anjali J Kaimal, and Julian N Robinson, “Hospital-level variation in postpartum readmissions,” Jama, 2017, 317 (20), 2128–
2129.
Cools, Sara, Jon H Fiva, and Lars J Kirkebøen, “Causal effects of paternity leave on
children and parents,” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2015, 117 (3), 801–828.
Currie, Janet, “Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences,” The American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (3), 1–22.
and Hannes Schwandt, “Within-mother analysis of seasonal patterns in health at birth,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110 (30), 12265–12270.
Dahl, Gordon B, Katrine V Løken, and Magne Mogstad, “Peer effects in program
participation,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (7), 2049–2074.
, , , and Kari Vea Salvanes, “What is the case for paid maternity leave?,” Review
of Economics and Statistics, 2016, 98 (4), 655–670.
Dionne, Georges and Benoit Dostie, “New Evidence on the Determinants of Absenteeism
Using Linked Employer-Employee Data,” ILR Review, 2007, 61 (1), 108–120.
Duvander, A.-Z., L. Haas, and P. Hwang, “Sweden country note,” in S. Blum,
A. Koslowski, and P. Moss, eds., International Review of Leave Policies and Research,
2017.
Duvander, Ann-Zofie and Mats Johansson, “What are the effects of reforms promoting
fathers’ parental leave use?,” Journal of European Social Policy, 2012, 22 (3), 319–330.
and , “Parental leave use for different fathers: a study of the impact of three Swedish
parental leave reforms,” Fatherhood in the Nordic welfare states: Comparing care policies
and practice, 2014, pp. 349–374.
and , “Reforms in the Swedish Parental Leave System and Their Effects on Gender
Equality,” Working Paper 2015:2, Swedish Social Insurance Inspectorate 2015.
Ekberg, John, Rickard Eriksson, and Guido Friebel, “Parental leaveâA policy evaluation of the Swedish âDaddy-Monthâ reform,” Journal of Public Economics, 2013, 97,
131–143.
Eydal, G.B. and I.V. Gislason, “Paid parental leave in Iceland ? History and context,”
in G.B. Eydal and I.V. Gislason, eds., Equal rights to earn and care ? Parental leave in
Iceland, 2008.
Fan, Wen, Phyllis Moen, Erin L Kelly, Leslie B Hammer, and Lisa F Berkman,
“Job strain, time strain, and well-being: A longitudinal, person-centered approach in two
industries,” Journal of Vocational Behavior, 2019, 110, 102–116.
36

Flacking, Renée, Fiona Dykes, and Uwe Ewald, “The influence of fathersâ socioeconomic status and paternity leave on breastfeeding duration: a population-based cohort
study,” Scandinavian journal of public health, 2010, 38 (4), 337–343.
Frone, M.R., “Workâfamily conflict and employee psychiatric disorders: The national comorbidity survey,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 2000, 85 (6), 888–895.
Goldin, Claudia, “A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter,” The American Economic
Review, 2014, 104 (4), 1091–1119.
and Lawrence F Katz, “A most egalitarian profession: pharmacy and the evolution of
a family-friendly occupation,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (3), 705–746.
Guertzgen, Nicole and Karsten Hank, “Maternity Leave and Mothersâ Long-Term Sickness Absence: Evidence From West Germany,” Demography, 2018, 55 (2), 587–615.
Hewitt, Belinda, Lyndall Strazdins, and Bill Martin, “The benefits of paid maternity leave for mothers’ post-partum health and wellbeing: Evidence from an Australian
evaluation,” Social Science & Medicine, 2017, 182, 97–105.
Heymann, Jody, Aleta R Sprague, Arijit Nandi, Alison Earle, Priya Batra, Adam
Schickedanz, Paul J Chung, and Amy Raub, “Paid parental leave and family wellbeing
in the sustainable development era,” Public health reviews, 2017, 38 (1), 21.
Hyde, Janet Shibley, Marjorie H Klein, Marilyn J Essex, and Roseanne Clark,
“Maternity leave and women’s mental health,” Psychology of Women Quarterly, 1995, 19
(2), 257–285.
Imbens, Guido W and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to
practice,” Journal of econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 615–635.
Jou, Judy, Katy B Kozhimannil, Jean M Abraham, Lynn A Blewett, and Patricia M McGovern, “Paid Maternity Leave in the United States: Associations with
Maternal and Infant Health,” Maternal and child health journal, 2018, 22 (2), 216–225.
Kassebaum, Nicholas J, Ryan M Barber, Zulfiqar A Bhutta, Lalit Dandona, Peter W Gething, Simon I Hay, Yohannes Kinfu, Heidi J Larson, Xiaofeng Liang,
Stephen S Lim et al., “Global, regional, and national levels of maternal mortality, 1990–
2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015,” The Lancet,
2016, 388 (10053), 1775–1812.
Kelly, Erin L, Phyllis Moen, and Eric Tranby, “Changing workplaces to reduce workfamily conflict: Schedule control in a white-collar organization,” American Sociological Review, 2011, 76 (2), 265–290.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard, “Children and gender
inequality: Evidence from Denmark,” Working Paper 24219, National Bureau of Economic
Research 2018.

37

Ko, Jean Y, Karilynn M Rockhill, Van T Tong, Brian Morrow, and Sherry L Farr,
“Trends in postpartum depressive symptomsâ27 states, 2004, 2008, and 2012,” MMWR.
Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 2017, 66 (6), 153.
Lalive, Rafael and Josef Zweimüller, “How Does Parental Leave Affect Fertility and
Return to Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1363–1402.
Lee, David S. and Thomas Lemieux, “Regression Discontinuity Designs in Economics,”
Journal of Economic Literature, June 2010, 48 (2), 281–355.
Lequien, Laurent, “The Impact of Parental Leave Duration on Later Wages,” Annals of
Economics and Statistics, 2012, 107/108 (July/December), 267–285.
Luna, Libertad González and Lidia Farré, “The effects of paternity leave on fertility and
labor market outcomes,” Discussion Paper 10865, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA) 2017.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage
Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (6), 988–1010.
Månsdotter, Anna, Lars Lindholm, and Anna Winkvist, “Paternity leave in SwedenâCosts, savings and health gains,” Health Policy, 2007, 82 (1), 102–115.
McCrary, Justin, “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
design: A density test,” Journal of econometrics, 2008, 142 (2), 698–714.
Meltzer-Brody, Samantha and Alison Stuebe, “The long-term psychiatric and medical prognosis of perinatal mental illness,” Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, 2014, 28 (1), 49–60.
Moen, Phyllis, Erin L Kelly, Wen Fan, Shi-Rong Lee, David Almeida, Ellen Ernst
Kossek, and Orfeu M Buxton, “Does a flexibility/support organizational initiative improve high-tech employees’ well-being? Evidence from the work, family, and health network,” American Sociological Review, 2016, 81 (1), 134–164.
, Wen Fan, and Erin L Kelly, “Team-level flexibility, work–home spillover, and health
behavior,” Social Science & Medicine, 2013, 84, 69–79.
O’Donnell, Emily, Lisa F. Berkman, Erin Kelly, Leslie Hammer, Jessica Marden,
and Orfeu M. Buxton, “Cardiometabolic risks associated with work-to-family conflict:
findings from the Work Family Health Network,” Community, Work & Family, 2019, 22
(2), 203–228.
Olafsson, Arna and Herdis Steingrimsdottir, “How Does Daddy at Home Affect Marital
Stability?,” Economic Journal, 2019. Forthcoming.
Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo, “The economic consequences of family policies: lessons from a century of legislation in high-income countries,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (1), 205–230.
38

Patnaik, Ankita, “Reserving Time for Daddy: The Short and Long-Run Consequences of
Fathers’ Quotas,” 2016. Unpublished manuscript.
Persson, Petra, “Social Insurance and the Marriage Market,” Journal of Political Economy,
Forthcoming. Forthcoming.
and Maya Rossin-Slater, “Family Ruptures, Stress, and the Mental Health of the Next
Generation,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (4-5), 1214–52.
Pichler, Stefan and Nicolas R. Ziebarth, “The pros and cons of sick pay schemes: Testing
for contagious presenteeism and noncontagious absenteeism behavior,” Journal of Public
Economics, 2017, 156, 14 – 33.
Redshaw, Maggie and Jane Henderson, “Fathersâ engagement in pregnancy and childbirth: evidence from a national survey,” BMC pregnancy and childbirth, 2013, 13 (1), 70.
Rege, Mari and Ingeborg F. Solli, “The Impact of Paternity Leave on Fathers’ Future
Earnings,” Demography, 2013, 50 (6), 2255–2277.
Rossin-Slater, Maya, “Maternity and Family Leave Policy,” in Susan L. Averett, Laura M.
Argys, and Saul D Hoffman, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Women and the Economy, Oxford
University Press, 2018.
and Lindsey Uniat, “Paid Family Leave Policies And Population Health,” Health Affairs
Policy Brief, March 2019.
Rubertsson, Christine, B Wickberg, P Gustavsson, and Ingela Rådestad, “Depressive symptoms in early pregnancy, two months and one year postpartum-prevalence
and psychosocial risk factors in a national Swedish sample,” Archives of Womenâs Mental
Health, 2005, 8 (2), 97–104.
Ruhm, C J, “The economic consequences of parental leave mandates: Lessons from Europe,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, feb 1998, 113 (1), 285–317.
Saxbe, Darby, Maya Rossin-Slater, and Diane Goldenberg, “The transition to parenthood as a critical window for adult health.,” American Psychologist, 2018, 73 (9), 1190.
Schober, Pia S, “Parental leave and domestic work of mothers and fathers: A longitudinal
study of two reforms in West Germany,” Journal of Social Policy, 2014, 43 (02), 351–372.
Schönberg, Uta and Johannes Ludsteck, “Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and
Mothers’ Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 32
(3), 469–505.
Shafer, Emily Fitzgibbons, Erin L. Kelly, Orfeu M. Buxton, and Lisa F. Berkman,
“Partnersâ overwork and individualsâ wellbeing and experienced relationship quality,” Community, Work & Family, 2018, 21 (4), 410–428.

39

Shockley, K. M., W. Shen, M. M. DeNunzio, M. L. Arvan, and E. A. Knudsen,
“Disentangling the relationship between gender and workâfamily conflict: An integration
of theoretical perspectives using meta-analytic methods.,” Journal of Applied Psychology,
2017, 102 (12), 1601–1635.
Staehelin, Katharina, Paola Coda Bertea, and Elisabeth Zemp Stutz, “Length of
maternity leave and health of mother and child–a review,” International Journal of Public
Health, 2007, 52 (4), 202–209.
Stearns, Jenna and Corey White, “Can paid sick leave mandates reduce leave-taking?,”
Labour Economics, 2018, 51, 227–246.
Thévenon, Olivier and Anne Solaz, “Labour market effects of parental leave policies in
OECD countries,” Working Paper 141, OECD Social, Employment, and Migration 2013.
Weeden, Kim A, Youngjoo Cha, and Mauricio Bucca, “Long work hours, part-time
work, and trends in the gender gap in pay, the motherhood wage penalty, and the fatherhood
wage premium,” RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, 2016, 2
(4), 71–102.
Ziebarth, Nicolas R. and Martin Karlsson, “The effects of expanding the generosity of
the statutory sickness insurance system,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2014, 29 (2),
208–230.

40

8

Figures

41

Figure 1: Number of Births by Birth Month in Reform and Non-Reform Samples

200

400

600

800

1000

(a) Reform Sample

-26

-22

-18

-14 -10
-6
-2
2
6
10
14
Week Relative to 1st Week of January

18

22

26

18

22

26

300

400

500

600

700

800

(b) Non-Reform Sample

-26

-22

-18

-14 -10
-6
-2
2
6
10
14
Week Relative to 1st Week of January

Note: The sample includes all firstborn singleton children born in 2008-2012 with information on exact date of birth. Sub-figure (a) plots the total number of births by birth
week in the reform sample with a 6-month bandwidth (July 2011 - June 2012). Sub-figure
(b) plots the average of the total number of births by birth week across all years in the
non-reform sample with the same bandwidth (July 2008 - June 2011). The fitted lines
are predicted from 4th order polynomial models. We follow Lee and Lemieux (2010) by
selecting the model with the smallest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) value.
42

Figure 2: Effects of 2012 “Double Days” Reform on Paternity Leave Take-Up
(a) Any Post-Baseline Leave in First 60 Days
.4

.05

.2

.25

.1

.3

.15

.35

.2

(b) Any Post-Baseline Leave in First 180 Days

2011w1

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

2011w1

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

25

30

35

(c) Tot. # Leave Days in First 180 Days

2011w1

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

Note: The sample includes all firstborn singleton children born in 2011-2012 with information on exact date of birth. The figures display the means of outcome variables by the
child’s birth week. The 2012 reform is denoted with a vertical red dashed line. The fitted curves and 95% confidence intervals are predicted from local linear polynomial models on each side of the cut-off. The paternity leave outcomes are listed in the sub-figure
headings. The total number of leave days in first 180 days post-childbirth (sub-figure c)
includes both baseline and post-baseline leave.

43

Figure 3: Effect of 2012 “Double Days” Reform on Distribution of Post-Baseline Leave Days
Taken by Fathers During First 180 Days

-.08

-.06

-.04

-.02

0

.02

(a) RD-DD Sample (All Families)

0

1-5
6-10
11-20
21-30
Number Post-Baseline Leave Days During First 180 Days

31+

-.1

-.05

0

.05

(b) Sample: Mothers with Medical History

0

1-5
6-10
11-20
21-30
Number Post-Baseline Leave Days During First 180 Days

31+

Note: The figures plot the RD-DD treatment coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from
separate regression models that use as the outcome an indicator for the father taking the
number of post-baseline leave days denoted in bins on the x−axis of each graph. Subfigure (a) uses our primary RD-DD analysis sample, while sub-figure (b) limits the RD-DD
analysis sample to children of mothers who have a pre-birth medical history. See notes
under Table 3 for more details on the specifications and controls.
44

Figure 4: Effects of 2012 “Double Days” Reform on Maternal Health Outcomes in First 180
Days Post-Childbirth, Inpatient and Outpatient Data

2011w1

.08

.34

.36

.1

.38

.4

.12

.42

.14

(b) Visit for Childbirth Complications

.44

(a) Any Inpatient/Outpatient Visit

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

2011w1

2012w52

2011w1

0

.01

.005

.02

.01

.03

.015

.02

(d) Visit for External Causes or Counseling

.04

(c) Visit for Mental Health Issues

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

2011w1

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

Note: The sample includes all firstborn singleton children born in 2011-2012 with information on exact date of birth. The figures display the means of outcome variables by the
child’s birth week. The 2012 reform is denoted with a vertical red dashed line. The fitted
curves and 95% confidence intervals are predicted from local linear polynomial models on
each side of the cut-off. The outcomes are measured using inpatient and specialist outpatient records data. See Appendix C for more details on the exact ICD codes for outcomes.

45

Figure 5: Effects of 2012 “Double Days” Reform on Maternal Health Outcomes in First 180
Days Post-Childbirth, Prescription Drug Data
(b) Any Anti-Depressant Drug

2011w1

.02

.005

.03

.01

.04

.015

.02

.05

.025

.06

(a) Any Anti-Anxiety Drug

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

2011w1

2012w52

2011w1

.14

.06

.16

.08

.18

.1

.2

.22

(d) Any Antibiotic Drug

.12

(c) Any Painkiller Drug

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

2011w1

2012w1

Week of Birth

2012w52

Note: The sample includes all firstborn singleton children born in 2011-2012 with information on exact date of birth. The figures display the means of outcome variables by the
child’s birth week. The 2012 reform is denoted with a vertical red dashed line. The fitted
curves and 95% confidence intervals are predicted from local linear polynomial models on
each side of the cut-off. The outcomes are measured using prescription drug records data.
See Appendix C for more details on the exact ATC codes for outcomes.

46

Figure 6: Timing of Effects of 2012 “Double Days” Reform on Paternity Leave and Maternal
Health Outcomes
(a) Fathers: Any Post-Baseline Leave

-.2

-1

0

-.8

-.6

.2

-.4

.4

-.2

0

.6

(b) Mothers: Visit for Childbirth Complications

1-90

91-180
181-270
Days After Birth

271-360

1-90

271-360

(d) Mothers: Any Antibiotic

-.3

-1

-.2

-.5

-.1

0

0

.1

.5

(c) Mothers: Any Anti-Anxiety Drug

91-180
181-270
Days After Birth

1-90

91-180
181-270
Days After Birth

271-360

1-90

91-180
181-270
Days After Birth

271-360

Note: The figures plot the RD-DD treatment coefficients divided by the dependent variable
means (i.e., the magnitudes can be interpreted as percent changes relative to the sample
means) and 95% confidence intervals from regression models that use outcomes measured
in the periods since childbirth denoted on the x−axis of each graph. The outcomes are
listed in the sub-figure headings. See Appendix C for more details on the exact ICD and
ATC codes for outcomes. See notes under Table 3 for more details on the specifications
and controls.

47

9

Tables

48

Table 1: Means of Background Characteristics and Maternal Health Outcomes

Mother low education
Father low education
Mother age
Father age
Mother income (1000s)
Father income (1000s)
Mother foreign-born
Father foreign-born
49

Any
Any
Any
Any
Any
Any
Any
Any

inpatient
specialist outpatient
visit for childbirth complications
visit for mental health
visit for external causes/medical counseling
anti-anxiety/anti-depressant drug
painkiller drug
antibiotic drug

Observations

All

Exact DOB

RD-DD Sample

Med. History

0.45
0.57
28.83
31.90
207.78
275.26
0.21
0.22

0.45
0.57
28.79
31.86
206.94
274.22
0.21
0.22

0.45
0.57
28.85
31.91
205.53
273.32
0.21
0.22

0.53
0.62
28.63
31.61
179.17
258.54
0.18
0.20

0.05
0.33
0.10
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.08
0.16

0.05
0.35
0.10
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.09
0.17

0.05
0.34
0.10
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.08
0.17

0.06
0.43
0.12
0.05
0.01
0.12
0.12
0.21

233981

222638

88502

25454

Notes: This table reports the means of selected parental background characteristics and maternal health outcomes measured in the first 180 days
post-childbirth. Column (1) includes all firstborn singleton children born in 2008-2012. Column (2) limits the sample to children with information on
exact date of birth. Column (3) uses our primary RD-DD analysis sample, which consists of firstborn singleton children with information on exact
dates of birth born in the months of October-December of 2008-2011 and January-March of 2009-2012. Column (4) limits the RD-DD analysis sample
to children of mothers who have a pre-birth medical history, which we define as either having any inpatient visit in months 1-24 before childbirth or any
specialist outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth or any anti-anxiety or anti-depressant prescription drug in months
1-36 before childbirth. See text for more details. Appendix C provides more details on the exact ICD and ATC codes for maternal health outcomes.

Table 2: McCrary Test Using Different Polynomials in Week of Birth
1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

6th

Reform × Birth Jan-June

36.00
(61.02)

36.00
(60.62)

36.00
(60.24)

36.00
(59.52)

36.00
(59.69)

36.00
(59.92)

Reform

36.91
(43.15)

36.91
(42.86)

36.91
(42.59)

36.91
(42.09)

36.91
(42.21)

36.91
(42.37)

Dummy for Birth Jan-June

1.302
(68.25)

1.302
(67.80)

-78.52
(85.92)

-78.52
(84.90)

-41.85
(100.4)

-41.85
(100.8)

Observations
AIC

104
1349.8

104
1349.4

104
1349.0

104
1347.4

104
1348.9

104
1350.6

Notes: Each column reports coefficients from separate regressions. The data are collapsed into week-of-birth
bins, with the outcome being the total number of firstborn singleton births. The reform sample includes births
in July 2011 - June 2012, while the non-reform sample includes births in July 2008 - June 2011. We report
results from models that use 1st through 6th order polynomials in the running variable, which is the week of
birth normalized relative to the first week of January in each year. We report the Akaike Information Criterion
(AIC) values in the bottom row. Robust standard errors in brackets.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

50

Table 3: Effects of “Double Days” Reform on Paternity Leave Take-Up
Any Post-Baseline (Days 1-60)

Any Post-Baseline (Days 1-180)

Tot # Days (Days 1-180)

0.0388∗∗∗
[0.00470]

0.0594∗∗∗
[0.00705]

1.887∗∗
[0.825]

0.0783
82558

0.244
82558

31.43
82558

0.0487∗∗∗
[0.00933]

0.0664∗∗∗
[0.0132]

1.112
[1.647]

0.0971
23935

0.260
23935

34.52
23935

A. All first births
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
Dep. var mean
N
B. Mothers with medical history
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
51

Dep. var mean
N

Notes: Each column in each panel reports coefficients from separate regressions. The outcomes are: (1) indicator for any post-baseline paternity leave
in days 1-60 after childbirth, (2) indicator for any post-baseline paternity leave in days 1-180 after childbirth, and (3) total number of paternity leave
days (including baseline leave) in days 1-180 after childbirth. The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model. We compare the differences in
outcomes for fathers of firstborn singleton children born in January-March 2012 and October-December 2011 (“reform sample”), relative to the difference
in outcomes in the same months in the previous three years (January-March 2009, 2010, and 2011 versus October-December 2008, 2009, and 2010,
“non-reform sample”). See equation (2) in the text for more details. We report the coefficient and standard error on the interaction between being
born in January-March and being in the reform sample. All regressions include controls for child gender and for the following family characteristics
measured in the year before birth: maternal and paternal earnings (in 1000s of SEK), indicators for each parent’s age groups (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+),
indicators for each parent’s education levels (high school or less, some college, university degree or more), an indicator for the parents being married,
indicators for each parent being foreign-born. We also include birth year fixed effects. Robust standard errors in brackets. Panel A reports results for
the whole analysis sample, while Panel B limits the sample to mothers with a pre-birth medical history, which we define as either having any inpatient
visit in months 1-24 before childbirth or any specialist outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth or any anti-anxiety
or anti-depressant prescription drug in months 1-36 before childbirth.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 4: Effects of “Double Days” Reform on Maternal Health Outcomes in Inpatient and Outpatient Data
Any

A. All first births
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
Dep. var mean
N
52

Childbirth Comp.

Mental

External/Counseling

-0.00764
[0.00779]

-0.0148∗∗∗
[0.00507]

0.00310
[0.00223]

0.000829
[0.00149]

0.366
82558

0.103
82558

0.0182
82558

0.00900
82558

-0.0343∗∗∗
[0.0101]

0.00604
[0.00664]

0.00105
[0.00300]

0.128
23935

0.0516
23935

0.0127
23935

B. Mothers with medical history
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
-0.0171
[0.0147]
Dep. var mean
N

Diagnosis Categories

0.461
23935

Notes: Each column in each panel reports coefficients from separate regressions. The maternal health outcomes are measured in days 1-180 after
childbirth. The outcomes are indicators for: (1) any inpatient or specialist outpatient visit, (2) any visit for childbirth complications, (3) any visit for
mental health reasons, and (4) any visit for external causes or counseling. The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model. See notes under Table
3 for more details on the specifications. Robust standard errors in brackets. Panel A reports results for the whole analysis sample, while Panel B limits
the sample to mothers with a pre-birth medical history, which we define as either having any inpatient visit in months 1-24 before childbirth or any
specialist outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth or any anti-anxiety or anti-depressant prescription drug in months
1-36 before childbirth. Appendix C provides more details on the exact ICD and ATC codes for maternal health outcomes.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 5: Effects of “Double Days” Reform on Maternal Inpatient and Outpatient Visits: Emergency, Planned, or Unplanned
Visit Type
Emergency Planned Inpatient Unplanned Inpatient Planned Outpatient Unplanned Outpatient

53

A. All first births
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar -0.0000170
[0.00243]

-0.00157
[0.00138]

0.00315
[0.00342]

-0.00376
[0.00715]

-0.0117∗∗
[0.00585]

Dep. var mean
N

0.00681
82558

0.0423
82558

0.259
82558

0.154
82558

-0.00258
[0.00306]

0.00293
[0.00722]

0.000133
[0.0140]

-0.0396∗∗∗
[0.0117]

0.0109
23935

0.0583
23935

0.343
23935

0.200
23935

0.0210
82558

B. Mothers with medical history
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar -0.00119
[0.00519]
Dep. var mean
N

0.0293
23935

Notes: Each column in each panel reports coefficients from separate regressions. The maternal health outcomes are measured in days 1-180 after
childbirth. The outcomes are indicators for: (1) any visit that originates in the emergency room, (2) any planned (i.e., scheduled in advance) inpatient
visit, (3) any unplanned inpatient visit (includes visits that originate in the emergency room and those that are same-day appointments or immediate
referrals from primary or outpatient care), (4) any planned (i.e., scheduled in advance) specialist outpatient visit, (5) any unplanned specialist outpatient
visit (including same-day appointments and immediate referrals from primary care). The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model. See notes
under Table 3 for more details on the specifications. Robust standard errors in brackets. Panel A reports results for the whole analysis sample,
while Panel B limits the sample to mothers with a pre-birth medical history, which we define as either having any inpatient visit in months 1-24 before
childbirth or any specialist outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth or any anti-anxiety or anti-depressant prescription
drug in months 1-36 before childbirth. Appendix C provides more details on the exact ICD and ATC codes for maternal health outcomes.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table 6: Effects of “Double Days” Reform on Maternal Health Outcomes in Prescription Drug Data

A. All first births
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
Mar
Dep. var mean
N
54

Any Anti-Anxiety

Any Anti-Depressant

Any Painkiller

Any Antibiotic

-0.00290∗
[0.00176]

0.000669
[0.00299]

-0.00461
[0.00445]

-0.0193∗∗∗
[0.00602]

0.0112
82558

0.0338
82558

0.0831
82558

0.170
82558

0.000661
[0.00906]

-0.00322
[0.00965]

-0.0301∗∗
[0.0120]

0.102
23935

0.123
23935

0.213
23935

B. Mothers with medical history
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
-0.00863∗
[0.00486]
Dep. var mean
N

0.0274
23935

Notes: Each column in each panel reports coefficients from separate regressions. The maternal health outcomes are measured in days 1-180 after
childbirth. The outcomes are indicators for: (1) any anti-anxiety drug, (2) any anti-depressant drug, (3) any painkiller drug, and (4) any antibiotic
drug. The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model. See notes under Table 3 for more details on the specifications. Robust standard errors in
brackets. Panel A reports results for the whole analysis sample, while Panel B limits the sample to mothers with a pre-birth medical history, which we
define as either having any inpatient visit in months 1-24 before childbirth or any specialist outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60
before childbirth or any anti-anxiety or anti-depressant prescription drug in months 1-36 before childbirth. Appendix C provides more details on the
exact ICD and ATC codes for maternal health outcomes.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

ONLINE APPENDIX
A

Additional Results

Figure A1: How Parents Allocate Leave: The Case of the Median Household, 2008-2011

Dad can take max
10 days of full-time
(baseline) leave

Dad on full-time leave:
60 days
(2 months)

Child enters daycare

Child Age
Birth

2 years

1 year

Both parents can continue to use up their
leave until child turns 8

Mom on full-time leave:
423 days
(approx.) 14 months

Note: The figure represents how the median family in Sweden allocates leave between parents, using data on parents of firstborn singleton children born in 2008-2011. The number
of days on full-time leave for each parent (423 days for mothers and 60 days for fathers)
are the medians of the two respective distributions in the data.

55

Table A1: Parental Sick Leave Use: Jan-Mar 2011 vs. Jan-Mar 2012 Births
Jan-Mar 2011

Jan-Mar 2012

P-value

A. Fathers
Days of Sick Leave
Any Sick Leave

2.707
0.045

2.652
0.043

0.844
0.543

B. Mothers
Days of Sick Leave
Any Sick Leave

6.181
0.202

6.619
0.206

0.132
0.499

Observations

11353

11509

Notes: This table reports the means of the annual number of sick leave days and the share of parents who use
any sick leave for parents of firstborn singleton children born in January-March 2011 and January-March 2012.
Panel A presents the statistics for fathers, while Panel B for mothers. The last column reports the p-values
from testing the differences between the values in the previous two columns.

56

Table A2: The 2012 “Double Days” Reform and Parental Characteristics

Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
Dep. var mean
Indiv. obs.

(1)
M. Low Ed

(2)
F. Low Ed

(3)
M. F-born

(4)
F. F-born

(5)
M. Age

(6)
F. Age

(7)
M. Inc

(8)
F. Inc

-0.00307
[0.00782]

0.000424
[0.00779]

-0.00289
[0.00651]

-0.00377
[0.00656]

-0.0941
[0.0806]

-0.0624
[0.0995]

5369.0∗∗
[2420.3]

5788.4
[4286.4]

0.448
85954

0.570
85954

0.215
85954

0.218
85954

28.82
85954

31.89
85954

204867.3
84253

271989.0
83875

57

F-Statistic: 1.57 P-value: 0.13
Notes: Each column reports coefficients from separate regressions. The dependent variables are the following parental characteristics measured in the
year before the child’s birth: indicators for the mother having a low education level, the father having a low education level, the mother being foreignborn, the father being foreign-born, the mother’s age in years, the father’s age in years, the mother’s income (1000s of SEK), and the father’s income
(1000s of SEK). The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model, excluding the controls for parental characteristics. We compare the differences
in characteristics of parents of firstborn singleton children born in January-March 2012 and October-December 2011 (“reform sample”), relative to the
difference in characteristics in the same months in the previous three years (January-March 2009, 2010, and 2011 versus October-December 2008, 2009,
and 2010, “non-reform sample”). See equation (2) in the text for more details. We report the coefficient and standard error on the interaction between
being born in January-March and being in the reform sample. Robust standard errors in brackets. In the bottom row, we report the F -statistic and
associated p-value from a joint test of significance of all the coefficients using a seemingly unrelated regression model.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A3: The 2012 “Double Days” Reform, Birth Outcomes, and Maternal Pre-Birth Medical History Indicators
Birth Outcomes
(1)
(2)
Bweight LBW

(3)
Gest.

(4)
(5)
Preterm Apgar<7

Maternal Pre-Birth Medical History
(6)
SGA

(7)
(8)
Induced C-section

(9)
Inp

(10)
Outp

(11)
Drug

(12)
Any

Reform ×
11.21 -0.00490 0.0314 -0.000684 -0.00204 -0.00371 -0.00150 -0.00176 -0.00264 0.00406 0.00279 -0.000669
Birth Jan-Mar [8.689] [0.00310] [0.0296] [0.00368] [0.00368] [0.00282] [0.00568] [0.00601] [0.00597] [0.00440] [0.00571] [0.00728]
Dep. var mean 3448.4
Indiv. obs.
85856

0.0398
85954

39.85
85954

0.0584
85954

0.0585
85954

0.0317
85954

0.141
85954

0.181
85954

0.165
84640

0.0749
84640

0.144
84640

0.287
84640

58

F-Statistic: 0.60 P-value: 0.85
Notes: Each column reports coefficients from separate regressions. The dependent variables include the following birth outcomes: birth weight (in
grams), indicator for low-birth-weight (<2,500g), gestation length (in weeks), indicator for preterm birth (<37 weeks), indicator for Apgar score <7,
indicator for small-for-gestational-age, indicator for induction of labor, and indicator for delivery by cesarean section. In the last four columns we use as
the dependent variables the following maternal pre-birth medical history indicators: any inpatient visit in months 1-24 before childbirth, any specialist
outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth, any anti-anxiety or anti-depressant prescription drug in months 1-36 before
childbirth, as well as an indicator for any of these three conditions holding (i.e., our indicator for the mother having a pre-birth medical history).
The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model, excluding the controls for parental characteristics. We compare the differences in outcomes for
firstborn singleton children born in January-March 2012 and October-December 2011 (“reform sample”), relative to the difference in outcomes in the
same months in the previous three years (January-March 2009, 2010, and 2011 versus October-December 2008, 2009, and 2010, “non-reform sample”).
See equation (2) in the text for more details. We report the coefficient and standard error on the interaction between being born in January-March and
being in the reform sample. Robust standard errors in brackets. In the bottom row, we report the F -statistic and associated p-value from a joint test
of significance of all the coefficients using a seemingly unrelated regression model.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A4: Effect of “Double Days” Reform on the Likelihood of Father Taking Leave on Days
When Mother Needs Medical Care
Dad Leave During Mom Medical Care
A. All first births
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar

0.00436
[0.00344]

Dep. var mean
N

0.0420
82558

B. Mothers with medical history
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar

0.0159∗∗
[0.00751]

Dep. var mean
N

0.0618
23935

Notes: Each coefficient in each panel is from a separate regression. The outcome is an indicator that is equal
to 1 if a father takes at least one day of leave on the same day as a mother has an inpatient or specialist
outpatient visit or fills a prescription during days 1-180 after childbirth. The reported coefficients are from
the RD-DD model. See notes under Table 3 for more details on the specifications. Robust standard errors in
brackets. Panel A reports results for the whole analysis sample, while Panel B limits the sample to mothers
with a pre-birth medical history, which we define as either having any inpatient visit in months 1-24 before
childbirth or any specialist outpatient visit for mental health reasons in months 1-60 before childbirth or any
anti-anxiety or anti-depressant prescription drug in months 1-36 before childbirth.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

59

Table A5: Heterogeneity in Effects on Paternity Leave Take-Up by Grandparent Proximity
Any Post-Baseline (Days 1-60)

Any Post-Baseline (Days 1-180)

A. 1+ grandparent lives in mother’s county in year before birth
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
0.0436∗∗∗
[0.00537]
Dep. var mean
N

0.0813
65244

60

B. No grandparent lives in mother’s county in year before birth
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
0.0215∗∗
[0.00960]
Dep. var mean
N

0.0667
17314

Tot # Days (Days 1-180)

0.0648∗∗∗
[0.00803]

1.839∗∗
[0.915]

0.254
65244

32.23
65244

0.0401∗∗∗
[0.0145]

2.081
[1.891]

0.204
17314

28.43
17314

Notes: Each column in each panel reports coefficients from separate regressions. The outcomes are: (1) indicator for any post-baseline paternity leave
in days 1-60 after childbirth, (2) indicator for any post-baseline paternity leave in days 1-180 after childbirth, and (3) total number of paternity leave
days (including baseline leave) in days 1-180 after childbirth. The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model. See notes under Table 3 for more
details on the specifications. Robust standard errors in brackets. Panel A reports results for families in which at least one grandparent aged 74 or less
lives in the mother’s county of residence in the year before birth, while Panel B reports results for families with no grandparents aged 74 or less living
in the mother’s county of residence in the year before birth.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A6: Heterogeneity in Effects on Maternal Health Outcomes in Inpatient and Outpatient Data by Grandparent Proximity
Any

Diagnosis Categories
Childbirth Comp.

A. 1+ grandparent lives in mother’s county in year before birth
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
-0.00123
-0.0105∗
[0.00875]
[0.00564]
Dep. var mean
N

0.365
65244

0.101
65244

61

B. No grandparent lives in mother’s county in year before birth
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
-0.0314∗
-0.0306∗∗∗
[0.0171]
[0.0115]
Dep. var mean
N

0.371
17314

0.114
17314

Mental

External/Counseling

0.00318
[0.00254]

-0.0000252
[0.00171]

0.0191
65244

0.00906
65244

0.00292
[0.00460]

0.00406
[0.00302]

0.0147
17314

0.00878
17314

Notes: Each column in each panel reports coefficients from separate regressions. The maternal health outcomes are measured in days 1-180 after
childbirth. The outcomes are: (1) indicator for any inpatient or specialist outpatient visit, (2) any visit for childbirth complications, (3) any visit for
mental health reasons, and (4) any visit for external causes or counseling. The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model. See notes under Table
3 for more details on the specifications. Robust standard errors in brackets. Panel A reports results for families in which at least one grandparent aged
74 or less lives in the mother’s county of residence in the year before birth, while Panel B reports results for families with no grandparents aged 74 or
less living in the mother’s county of residence in the year before birth.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A7: Heterogeneity in Effects on Maternal Health Outcomes in Prescription Drug Data by Grandparent Proximity
Any Anti-Anxiety

Any Anti-Depressant

A. 1+ grandparent lives in mother’s county in year before birth
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
-0.00271
-0.000500
[0.00206]
[0.00350]
Dep. var mean
N

0.0118
65244

0.0364
65244

62

B. No grandparent lives in mother’s county in year before birth
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
-0.00334
0.00598
[0.00313]
[0.00530]
Dep. var mean
N

0.00884
17314

0.0240
17314

Any Painkiller

Any Antibiotic

-0.00445
[0.00491]

-0.0168∗∗
[0.00675]

0.0792
65244

0.169
65244

-0.00478
[0.0104]

-0.0283∗∗
[0.0133]

0.0976
17314

0.177
17314

Notes: Each column in each panel reports coefficients from separate regressions. The maternal health outcomes are measured in days 1-180 after
childbirth. The outcomes are indicators for: (1) any anti-anxiety drug, (2) any anti-depressant drug, (3) any painkiller drug, and (4) any antibiotic
drug. The reported coefficients are from the RD-DD model. See notes under Table 3 for more details on the specifications. Robust standard errors in
brackets. Panel A reports results for families in which at least one grandparent aged 74 or less lives in the mother’s county of residence in the year
before birth, while Panel B reports results for families with no grandparents aged 74 or less living in the mother’s county of residence in the year before
birth.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A8: RD Estimates Using Different Optimal Bandwidth Algorithms: Any Post-Baseline Paternity Leave in Days 1-60
Post-Childbirth
MSE

MSE-2

MSE-Sum Min-MSE Med-MSE

CER

CER-2

CER-Sum Min-CER Med-CER

A. With Controls
RD Estimate 0.0209∗∗∗ 0.0242∗∗∗
[0.00635] [0.00626]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

203.3
203.3
48070

229.3
191.7
49881

0.0297∗∗∗
[0.00568]

0.0209∗∗∗
[0.00635]

0.0243∗∗∗
[0.00616]

251.3
251.3
59799

203.3
203.3
48070

229.3
203.3
51243

0.0231∗∗∗
[0.00614]

0.0230∗∗∗
[0.00615]

0.0230∗∗∗
[0.00615]

210.4
210.4
51831

209.7
209.7
51591

209.7
210.4
51717

0.0216∗∗ 0.0196∗∗
[0.00876] [0.00861]
107.5
107.5
24622

121.2
101.4
25538

0.0221∗∗∗
[0.00788]

0.0216∗∗
[0.00876]

0.0211∗∗
[0.00849]

132.9
132.9
30712

107.5
107.5
24622

121.2
107.5
26276

0.0226∗∗∗
[0.00849]

0.0225∗∗∗
[0.00850]

0.0226∗∗∗
[0.00849]

111.0
111.0
26686

110.7
110.7
26418

110.7
111.0
26552

B. No Controls
63

RD Estimate 0.0230∗∗∗ 0.0241∗∗∗
[0.00615] [0.00599]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

209.7
209.7
51591

208.7
233.8
54602

0.0225∗∗∗ 0.0232∗∗∗
[0.00850] [0.00830]
110.7
110.7
26418

110.2
123.4
28060

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The outcome for all regressions is an indicator for any post-baseline paternity leave in days 1-60
after childbirth. We estimate an RD model with local linear polynomials, triangular kernels, and robust bias-corrected inference procedures, comparing
births before and after January 1, 2012, using different optimal bandwidth algorithms to select the bandwidths of the number of days used on each side
of the cutoff. Panel A includes the same controls as in Table 3, Panel B omits the controls. The optimal bandwidth algorithms are: (1) one common
mean squared error (MSE)-optimal bandwidth selector for both sides of the cutoff; (2) two different MSE-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and
above the cutoff); (3) one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (4) minimum
of (1) and (3); (5) median of (1), (2), and (3) for each side of the cutoff separately; (6) one common coverage error rate (CER)-optimal bandwidth
selector; (7) two different CER-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the cutoff); (8) one common CER-optimal bandwidth selector for the
sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (9) minimum of (6) and (8); (10) median of (6), (7), and (8) for each side of the cutoff
separately. We follow Calonico et al. (2014b), Calonico et al. (2018a), and Calonico et al. (2018b) in using these algorithms. We report the number of
days used in the left and right-hand bandwidths in each model at the bottom of the table. Robust standard errors in brackets.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A9: RD Estimates Using Different Optimal Bandwidth Algorithms: Any Post-Baseline Paternity Leave in Days 1-180
Post-Childbirth
MSE

MSE-2

MSE-Sum Min-MSE Med-MSE

CER

CER-2

CER-Sum Min-CER Med-CER

A. With Controls
RD Estimate 0.0553∗∗∗ 0.0781∗∗∗
[0.0115] [0.00931]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

129.7
129.7
29929

289.6
143.5
51234

0.109∗∗∗
[0.00795]

0.0553∗∗∗
[0.0115]

0.0739∗∗∗
[0.00945]

0.0108
[0.0160]

0.0330∗∗
[0.0128]

0.0611∗∗∗
[0.0110]

0.0108
[0.0160]

0.0314∗∗
[0.0130]

267.1
267.1
63572

129.7
129.7
29929

267.1
143.5
48541

68.60
68.60
15490

153.1
75.89
26677

141.3
141.3
32871

68.60
68.60
15490

141.3
75.89
25129

0.115∗∗∗
[0.00772]

0.0930∗∗∗
[0.00914]

0.101∗∗∗
[0.00844]

0.0698∗∗∗
[0.0107]

0.0448∗∗∗
[0.0127]

0.0536∗∗∗
[0.0117]

275.8
275.8
68243

198.4
198.4
48805

275.8
198.4
58348

145.6
145.6
35251

104.7
104.7
24857

145.6
104.7
30177

B. No Controls
64

RD Estimate 0.0930∗∗∗ 0.0838∗∗∗
[0.00914] [0.00919]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

198.4
198.4
48805

286.9
146.7
53173

0.0448∗∗∗ 0.0404∗∗∗
[0.0127] [0.0127]
104.7
104.7
24857

151.4
77.43
27728

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The outcome for all regressions is an indicator for any post-baseline paternity leave in days 1-180
after childbirth. We estimate an RD model with local linear polynomials, triangular kernels, and robust bias-corrected inference procedures, comparing
births before and after January 1, 2012, using different optimal bandwidth algorithms to select the bandwidths of the number of days used on each side
of the cutoff. Panel A includes the same controls as in Table 3, Panel B omits the controls. The optimal bandwidth algorithms are: (1) one common
mean squared error (MSE)-optimal bandwidth selector for both sides of the cutoff; (2) two different MSE-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and
above the cutoff); (3) one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (4) minimum
of (1) and (3); (5) median of (1), (2), and (3) for each side of the cutoff separately; (6) one common coverage error rate (CER)-optimal bandwidth
selector; (7) two different CER-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the cutoff); (8) one common CER-optimal bandwidth selector for the
sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (9) minimum of (6) and (8); (10) median of (6), (7), and (8) for each side of the cutoff
separately. We follow Calonico et al. (2014b), Calonico et al. (2018a), and Calonico et al. (2018b) in using these algorithms. We report the number of
days used in the left and right-hand bandwidths in each model at the bottom of the table. Robust standard errors in brackets.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A10: RD Estimates Using Different Optimal Bandwidth Algorithms: Any Maternal Inpatient/Outpatient Visit for Childbirth Complications
MSE

MSE-2

MSE-Sum Min-MSE Med-MSE

CER

CER-2

CER-Sum Min-CER Med-CER

A. With Controls
RD Estimate -0.0152∗∗∗ -0.0166∗∗∗ -0.0152∗∗∗ -0.0152∗∗∗ -0.0152∗∗∗ -0.0174∗∗∗ -0.0184∗∗ -0.0174∗∗∗ -0.0174∗∗∗ -0.0174∗∗∗
[0.00473] [0.00524] [0.00477] [0.00477] [0.00477] [0.00656] [0.00727] [0.00661] [0.00661] [0.00661]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

382.0
382.0
89839

318.0
304.8
73988

376.4
376.4
88683

376.4
376.4
88683

376.4
376.4
88683

202.0
202.0
47832

168.2
161.2
38691

199.0
199.0
47147

199.0
199.0
47147

199.0
199.0
47147

-0.0167∗∗
[0.00661]

-0.0167∗∗
[0.00661]

-0.0167∗∗
[0.00661]

191.0
191.0
46837

191.0
191.0
46837

191.0
191.0
46837

B. No Controls
65

RD Estimate -0.0142∗∗∗ -0.0156∗∗∗ -0.0142∗∗∗ -0.0142∗∗∗ -0.0142∗∗∗
[0.00474] [0.00520] [0.00477] [0.00477] [0.00477]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

366.8
366.8
89894

309.5
300.8
75504

361.9
361.9
88824

361.9
361.9
88824

361.9
361.9
88824

-0.0167∗∗ -0.0181∗∗
[0.00657] [0.00721]
193.6
193.6
47593

163.4
158.7
39203

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The outcome for all regressions is an indicator for any maternal inpatient or specialist outpatient
visit for childbirth complications in days 1-180 after childbirth. We estimate an RD model with local linear polynomials, triangular kernels, and robust
bias-corrected inference procedures, comparing births before and after January 1, 2012, using different optimal bandwidth algorithms to select the
bandwidths of the number of days used on each side of the cutoff. Panel A includes the same controls as in Table 3, Panel B omits the controls.
The optimal bandwidth algorithms are: (1) one common mean squared error (MSE)-optimal bandwidth selector for both sides of the cutoff; (2) two
different MSE-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the cutoff); (3) one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression
estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (4) minimum of (1) and (3); (5) median of (1), (2), and (3) for each side of the cutoff separately; (6) one
common coverage error rate (CER)-optimal bandwidth selector; (7) two different CER-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the cutoff); (8)
one common CER-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (9) minimum of (6) and (8); (10)
median of (6), (7), and (8) for each side of the cutoff separately. We follow Calonico et al. (2014b), Calonico et al. (2018a), and Calonico et al. (2018b)
in using these algorithms. We report the number of days used in the left and right-hand bandwidths in each model at the bottom of the table. Robust
standard errors in brackets.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A11: RD Estimates Using Different Optimal Bandwidth Algorithms: Any Maternal Antibiotic Prescription Drug
MSE

MSE-2

MSE-Sum Min-MSE Med-MSE

CER

CER-2

CER-Sum Min-CER Med-CER

A. With Controls
RD Estimate -0.0204∗∗∗ -0.0224∗∗∗ -0.0200∗∗∗ -0.0200∗∗∗ -0.0210∗∗∗ -0.0191∗∗ -0.0191∗∗
[0.00585] [0.00593] [0.00650] [0.00650] [0.00613] [0.00811] [0.00821]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

344.3
344.3
81585

459.3
246.9
83480

279.9
279.9
66538

279.9
279.9
66538

344.3
279.9
74375

182.1
182.1
42960

242.9
130.6
44104

-0.0205∗∗
[0.00904]

-0.0205∗∗
[0.00904]

-0.0187∗∗
[0.00851]

148.0
148.0
34552

148.0
148.0
34552

182.1
148.0
38882

-0.0206∗∗
[0.00902]

-0.0206∗∗
[0.00902]

-0.0191∗∗
[0.00860]

143.3
143.3
34757

143.3
143.3
34757

168.9
143.3
38046

B. No Controls
66

RD Estimate -0.0202∗∗∗ -0.0212∗∗∗ -0.0196∗∗∗ -0.0196∗∗∗ -0.0201∗∗∗ -0.0192∗∗ -0.0180∗∗
[0.00595] [0.00585] [0.00648] [0.00648] [0.00618] [0.00827] [0.00813]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

320.0
320.0
78997

443.3
249.7
85161

271.4
271.4
67229

271.4
271.4
67229

320.0
271.4
73159

168.9
168.9
41129

234.0
131.8
44838

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The outcome for all regressions is an indicator for any maternal antibiotic prescription drug in
days 1-180 after childbirth. We estimate an RD model with local linear polynomials, triangular kernels, and robust bias-corrected inference procedures,
comparing births before and after January 1, 2012, using different optimal bandwidth algorithms to select the bandwidths of the number of days used
on each side of the cutoff. Panel A includes the same controls as in Table 3, Panel B omits the controls. The optimal bandwidth algorithms are: (1)
one common mean squared error (MSE)-optimal bandwidth selector for both sides of the cutoff; (2) two different MSE-optimal bandwidth selectors
(below and above the cutoff); (3) one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof);
(4) minimum of (1) and (3); (5) median of (1), (2), and (3) for each side of the cutoff separately; (6) one common coverage error rate (CER)-optimal
bandwidth selector; (7) two different CER-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the cutoff); (8) one common CER-optimal bandwidth selector
for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (9) minimum of (6) and (8); (10) median of (6), (7), and (8) for each side of
the cutoff separately. We follow Calonico et al. (2014b), Calonico et al. (2018a), and Calonico et al. (2018b) in using these algorithms. We report the
number of days used in the left and right-hand bandwidths in each model at the bottom of the table. Robust standard errors in brackets.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A12: RD Estimates Using Different Optimal Bandwidth Algorithms: Any Maternal Anti-Anxiety Prescription Drug
MSE

MSE-2

MSE-Sum Min-MSE Med-MSE

CER

CER-2

CER-Sum Min-CER Med-CER

A. With Controls
RD Estimate -0.00333∗∗∗ -0.00358∗∗∗ -0.00333∗∗∗ -0.00333∗∗∗ -0.00333∗∗∗ -0.00458∗∗ -0.00409∗∗ -0.00458∗∗ -0.00458∗∗ -0.00458∗∗
[0.00127] [0.00133] [0.00127] [0.00127] [0.00127] [0.00180] [0.00189] [0.00180] [0.00180] [0.00180]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

384.2
384.2
90541

402.3
294.0
82658

384.1
384.1
90541

384.1
384.1
90541

384.2
384.1
90541

203.2
203.2
48070

212.7
155.5
43389

203.1
203.1
48070

203.1
203.1
48070

203.2
203.1
48070

B. No Controls
67

RD Estimate -0.00243∗∗ -0.00356∗∗∗ -0.00335∗∗∗ -0.00335∗∗∗ -0.00335∗∗∗ -0.00438∗∗∗ -0.00422∗∗ -0.00440∗∗ -0.00440∗∗ -0.00440∗∗
[0.00108] [0.00130] [0.00124] [0.00124] [0.00124] [0.00153] [0.00183] [0.00176] [0.00176] [0.00176]
Left BW
Right BW
Num. Obs.

501.6
501.6
123174

374.7
332.1
87107

387.4
387.4
94972

387.4
387.4
94972

387.4
387.4
94972

264.7
264.7
65445

197.8
175.3
45697

204.5
204.5
50278

204.5
204.5
50278

204.5
204.5
50278

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The outcome for all regressions is an indicator for any maternal anti-anxiety prescription drug in
days 1-90 after childbirth. We estimate an RD model with local linear polynomials, triangular kernels, and robust bias-corrected inference procedures,
comparing births before and after January 1, 2012, using different optimal bandwidth algorithms to select the bandwidths of the number of days used
on each side of the cutoff. Panel A includes the same controls as in Table 3, Panel B omits the controls. The optimal bandwidth algorithms are: (1)
one common mean squared error (MSE)-optimal bandwidth selector for both sides of the cutoff; (2) two different MSE-optimal bandwidth selectors
(below and above the cutoff); (3) one common MSE-optimal bandwidth selector for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof);
(4) minimum of (1) and (3); (5) median of (1), (2), and (3) for each side of the cutoff separately; (6) one common coverage error rate (CER)-optimal
bandwidth selector; (7) two different CER-optimal bandwidth selectors (below and above the cutoff); (8) one common CER-optimal bandwidth selector
for the sum of regression estimates (as opposed to difference thereof); (9) minimum of (6) and (8); (10) median of (6), (7), and (8) for each side of
the cutoff separately. We follow Calonico et al. (2014b), Calonico et al. (2018a), and Calonico et al. (2018b) in using these algorithms. We report the
number of days used in the left and right-hand bandwidths in each model at the bottom of the table. Robust standard errors in brackets.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

Table A13: Effects on Main Outcomes Using Alternative Specifications
Fathers’ Post-Baseline Leave

Maternal Health

Any, Days 1-60 Any, Days 1-180 Tot # Days (Days 1-180) Childbirth Comp. Antibiotic Anti-Anxiety
A. Share Days Eligible in Days 1-60 Post-Birth
Share Days Eligible
in Days 1-60 Post-Birth

0.0527∗∗∗
[0.00546]

0.0840∗∗∗
[0.00834]

2.632∗∗∗
[0.993]

-0.0149∗∗
[0.00614]

-0.0195∗∗∗
[0.00730]

-0.00268∗
[0.00158]

0.202∗∗∗
[0.0207]

6.414∗∗∗
[2.444]

-0.0388∗∗
[0.0153]

-0.0519∗∗∗
[0.0182]

-0.00607
[0.00387]

0.0479∗∗∗
[0.00513]

0.0753∗∗∗
[0.00772]

2.651∗∗∗
[0.920]

-0.0157∗∗∗
[0.00566]

-0.0215∗∗∗
[0.00674]

-0.00301∗∗
[0.00150]

0.078

0.244

31.4

0.103

0.170

0.006

B. Share Days Eligible in Days 1-180 Post-Birth
Share Days Eligible
in Days 1-180 Post-Birth

0.128∗∗∗
[0.0133]

68

C. Drop December Births (N=69953)
Reform × Birth Jan-Mar
Dep. var mean

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression. Indicators for maternal inpatient/outpatient visits for childbirth-related complications and
antibiotic prescriptions are measured in the first 180 days post-childbirth, while the indicator for anti-anxiety prescriptions is measured in the first 90
days post-childbirth. Panel A uses specifications in which the main treatment variable is the share of days between the child’s first and 60th day of life
that parents are eligible for the “Double Days”. Panel B uses specifications in which the main treatment variable is the share of days between the child’s
first and 180th day of life that parents are eligible for the “Double Days”. We uses this treatment variables instead of the interaction term between
the reform sample dummy and the indicator for a birth in January-March. The rest of the variables are the same as in our main RD-DD specification.
Panel C uses our main RD-DD specifications, but drops all December births. See notes under Table 3 for more details about specifications and control
variables. Robust standard errors in brackets.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01

B

Mathematical Proofs

B.1

Proof of Corollary 1

First, we show that the dad under the “basic parental leave system” does not take leave on
any miscellaneous days, but may take leave on core days. Under the assumptions in Section
3.2, we have that ∆c (t) = cm (t) − cd (t) < 0 while ∆b ≥ 0; thus, if a miscellaneous leave day
is taken, then it is taken by mom. Under the assumptions in Section 3.2, we also have that
∆C (t) = Cm (t) − Cd (t) can be positive on days when mom would incur a career cost; thus,
dad may take leave on core days when this allows the household to avoid the maternal career
cost.
Second, we show that it is optimal for the household to claim leave during the entire core
period. By Assumption 1, it is generally optimal to fill up core days before allocating leave
to miscellaneous days. While the career cost can make taking more than τ c of core leave
days by one parent expensive, the family as a whole would always find it optimal to cover
any remaining core days using the other parent (rather than have no one stay at home). This
follows from the following two observations: (i) Mom and dad can allocate leave between them
in a way that enables them to cover core days without incurring any career costs ( 2t̄ < τ c < t̄).
(ii) Absent career costs, the household strictly prefers to take leave during a core day over not
taking leave (Bp − (1 − α)wp > bp − (1 − α)wp > 0).
Third, we show that, if dad takes leave, then it is taken as a single interval of leave days at
the end of the core period. Within the core period, it follows directly from Assumptions 2 and 3
that it is optimal to allocate at least τ c of core leave days to mom. If (1−α)wm +κ−(1−α)wd ≡
∆cC > 0, then it is potentially optimal to allocate some core leave days to dad.
• Specifically, on core days where ∆B − ∆cC < 0, dad takes leave.
• Given ∆cC , the left-hand side is smaller for higher t, because ∆B is smaller for higher t
by Assumption 2. Hence, if dad takes any leave days, those will form a single interval
at the end of the core period.
Fourth, we show that, once the core period is accounted for, any remaining leave days will
be taken as miscellaneous days (by mom, as per the first argument in this proof). Because
69

bm − (1 − α)wm > 0, the household prefers to use any miscellaneous day over not using it.

B.2

Proof of Corollary 2

First, for the T − E days that mom can use without any impact on the total allowance, the
same arguments apply as under the basic parental leave system (see proof of Corollary 1 in
Section B.1 above). Given that T − E > t̄, the above arguments imply that the core period
will be covered under any allocation of leave in the presence of earmarking.
Second, the residual question is what the household does with the E days earmarked
for dad. If dad takes more than E days under the basic parental leave system, then the
earmarking reform does not affect the household’s allocation of leave (described in Corollary
1). We thus henceforth focus on the case in which dad takes less than E leave days under the
basic system. It is useful to note that, in this case, if dad had to take more leave days, then
he would optimally take those extra days either during the miscellaneous period (because the
benefit differential is smallest there, ∆b ≤ ∆B ), or towards the end of the core period (where,
while the differential may be larger, he can reduce career costs for the mom).
Third, we show that if dad takes less than E leave days under the basic system, then the
earmarking reform will strengthen his incentives to take more leave days. This is because the
earmarking reform raises the household’s opportunity cost of dad not taking a day of leave (up
to E days): under the basic system, mom can take the day of leave instead; under earmarking,
the household loses the leave benefit on that day. To see this, consider the following:
• Under the basic system, suppose dad considers taking a leave day. Since under the basic
system, all T days are always used, this would effectively replace mom on that leave day
who would have taken that leave day otherwise. If the candidate day is a late-period
core day, then the marginal value of dad replacing mom on that day is
∆B − ∆cC ,
and if the candidate day is a miscellaneous day, then the marginal value is
∆b − ∆c .
70

• Now, suppose dad considers using an earmarked day to replace mom on the above
candidate days. Because he uses an earmarked day, the family allowance effectively
grows; that is, mom being replaced on that day means that she can allocate the “freed
up” allowance to another miscellaneous day (all core days are filled). So, the marginal
benefit of dad using an earmarked day to replace mom on a late-period core day is
∆B − ∆cC + [bm (t) − (1 − α)wm ],
and to replace mom on a miscellaneous leave day is
∆b − ∆c + [bm (t) − (1 − α)wm ].
When comparing these to the analogous conditions under the basic system, we see that
the term [bm (t) − (1 − α)wm ] is the added incentive that earmarking creates for dads to
take more leave: the value of an additional miscellaneous leave day taken by mom.

B.3

Proof of Prediction 1

First, we show that the use of a double day always reduces the number of miscellaneous leave
days. Recall that, under any allocation, the core period will be fully covered. Hence, if the
use of double days reduces the total number of covered days, then the reduction will always
come out of the set of miscellaneous days.
Second, it is useful to note the following on the take-up of miscellaneous days: Because
∆b − ∆c < 0, non-earmarked miscellaneous leave days are not taken by dad. Thus, any
miscellaneous leave days taken by dad are earmarked for dad. All other miscellaneous leave
days are taken by mom.
Third, we show that when a double day is taken, then it replaces one of mom’s miscellaneous leave days.
• When all miscellaneous leave days are taken by mom, the use of a double day will replace
one of mom’s miscellaneous leave days.
• When some miscellaneous leave days are taken by dads, the use of a double day will
71

(still) replace one of mom’s miscellaneous leave days. This is because double days cannot
be counted against earmarked days; hence, if a double day is used, eliminating a dad’s
miscellaneous leave day (which, by step 2 of this argument, is an earmarked day) does
not prevent that a mom-only miscellaneous leave day is taken away. To see this, let
T̂ denote the total number of leave units taken, some possibly already on double days.
Suppose T − E < T̂ ≤ T , i.e., dad uses some but not more than his earmarked days (this
is the necessary condition for dad to take miscellaneous leave days). Now suppose that
the family decides to take another double day. To do this, the use of a unit of leave on
another day must be eliminated. One could eliminate the use of another unit earmarked
for dad, but this would reduce the number of allowed units T̂ by one unit, so that the
need to eliminate another, non-earmarked, unit in response to the added double day
remains. As per previous arguments, if a non-earmarked unit must be eliminated and
dad only uses earmarked days, then it is optimal to eliminate one of mom’s miscellaneous
leave days (rather than one of mom’s core days).
Fourth, by the preceding arguments, a double day is taken when the value of “doubling up”
exceeds the loss of a mom’s miscellaneous leave day, i.e., Bpp0 (t) − (1 − α)wp > bm − (1 − α)wm .

72

C

Definitions of Health-Related Outcomes

Diagnosis (ICD) codes For all mothers, we obtain comprehensive inpatient and outpatient
medical records. We create indicators for visits associated with the following diagnosis codes
(ICD-10) within different time periods from the birth of the child (in the inpatient records,
we exclude the visit associated with the birth itself):
• Conditions related to or aggravated by the pregnancy, childbirth, or by the puerperium
(maternal causes or obstetric causes) (O00-O99)
• Mental, behavioral and neurodevelopmental disorders (F00-F98)
• External causes and medical counseling
– Injury, poisoning and certain other consequences of external causes (S00-S99, T00T32, T66-T78)
– Assault (X92-Y09)
– Factors influencing health status and contact with health services (Z00-Z99)
Prescription drug (ATC) codes Prescription drugs are classified according to the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (ATC). To associate certain prescription
drugs to certain diagnoses, we use the classification system below:
• Anti-anxiety: ATC code begins with “N05B”
• Anti-depressant: ATC code begins with “N06A”
• Antibiotic: ATC code begins with “J01”
• Painkiller (analgesic): ATC code begins with “N02”

73

