                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     FACTIONS, LOCAL ACCOUNTABILITY, AND LONG-TERM DEVELOPMENT:
                         THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                       Hanming Fang
                                         Linke Hou
                                       Mingxing Liu
                                       Lixin Colin Xu
                                       Pengfei Zhang

                                     Working Paper 25901
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w25901


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2019




We would like to thank Laura Baily, Loren Brandt, Shuo Chen, Angus Deaton, Melissa Dell, Yue
Hou, Ruixue Jia, Asim Khwaja, Michael Kremer, Aaditya Mattoo, Michael Zheng Song, Wuyue
You, Qi Zhang and seminar/conference participants in Princeton, the Second IMF/Atlanta Fed
Conference on Chinese Economy (2017), Penn-UCSD Conference on “Chinese Institutions and
Economic Performance” (2018), Fudan Conference on Chinese Political Economy (2018), and
World Bank Policy Research Talk for helpful discussions and suggestions. We thank Shuo Chen
and Bingjing Li for sharing their data. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from
Penn China Research Engagement Fund (CREF), and from DFID through its World Bank
Strategic Research Program. Part of the research was conducted when Fang was visiting the
Department of Economics at Princeton University. We are responsible for all remaining errors.
The views of this paper reflect the authors’ own and do not implicate the World Bank or the
countries it represents, nor do they necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Hanming Fang, Linke Hou, Mingxing Liu, Lixin Colin Xu, and Pengfei Zhang. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Factions, Local Accountability, and Long-Term Development: Theory and Evidence
Hanming Fang, Linke Hou, Mingxing Liu, Lixin Colin Xu, and Pengfei Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 25901
May 2019
JEL No. D72,H70,O1,O43

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop a theoretical model of how factional affiliation and local accountability can shape the
policy choices of local officials who are concerned about political survivals, and subsequently
affect the long-term local development. We provide empirical evidence in support of the
theoretical predictions using county-level variations in development performance in Fujian
Province in China. When the Communist armies took over Fujian Province from the Nationalist
control circa 1949, communist cadres from two different army factions were assigned as county
leaders. For decades the Fujian Provincial Standing Committee of the Communist Party was
dominated by members from one particular faction, which we refer to as the strong faction.
Counties also differed in terms of whether a local guerrilla presence had existed prior to the
Communist takeover. We argue that county leaders from the strong faction were less likely to
pursue policies friendly to local development because their political survival more heavily relied
on their loyalty to the provincial leader than on the grassroots support from local residents. By
contrast, the political survival of county leaders from the weak faction largely depended on local
grassroots support, which they could best secure if they focused on local development. In
addition, a guerrilla presence in a county further improved development performance either by
intensifying the local accountability of the county leader, or by better facilitating the provision of
local public goods beneficial to development. We find consistent and robust evidence supporting
these assumptions. Being affiliated with weak factions and having local accountability are both
associated with sizable long-term benefits that are evident in terms of a county’s growth and level
of private-sector development, its citizens’ education levels, and their survival rates during the
Great Chinese Famine. We also find that being affiliated with the strong faction and adopting
pro-local policies are associated with higher likelihood of a local leader’s political survival.

Hanming Fang                                        Mingxing Liu
Department of Economics                             Peikin University No. 5
Ronald O. Perelman Center                           Yiheyuan Road Haidian District
for Political Science and Economics                 Beijing, 100871
133 South 36th Street                               China
Suite 150                                           mxliu@ciefr.pku.edu.cn
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER                                            Lixin Colin Xu
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu                         MC 3-420, World Bank
                                                    1818 H Street, N.W.
Linke Hou                                           Washington, DC 20433
Shandong University,                                lxu1@worldbank.org
No.27 Shandana Road
Licheng District                                    Pengfei Zhang
Jinan, Shandong 250100                              School of Economics
China                                               Peking University
abramhlk@sdu.edu.cn                                 Beijing, 100871
                                                    China
                                                    jxpengfei@aliyun.com
1     Introduction
     There is a large literature on the causes of the cross-country differences in economic growth rates, emphasizing
the roles of institutions (North, 2005), human capital and capital market imperfection (Lucas, 1990), culture
(Barro, 1991; Barro and Lee 1994), among others. A recent and influential literature investigates the long-run
impact of history on a nation’s economic performance through its effect on the institutional development (La
Porta et a.l 1998a, 1998b; Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, 2002). La Porta et al. (1998a, 1998b)
argue that history might impact current economic performance via the legal system. They show that, generally,
legal protection of investors is strongest in common-law countries, weakest in French civil-law countries, and
in a middle range in German and Scandinavian countries. For many developing countries, their colonial past
influenced the legal system they adopted, and this history continues to cast a long shadow on current economic
performance. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002) show that mortality rates among early European
settlers in a colony strongly predict whether the colony ends up with “inclusive” institutions that protect property
rights and share prosperity, both of which, in turn, affect whether the country prospers today.1, 2
     Most of the existing literature, however, does not explain the vast differences in economic performance across
smaller geographical units within the same country or within the same region.3 Banerjee and Iyer (2005) focus
on the effect of a specific historical institution in India: the system for collecting land revenue. They show that
the present-day economic performance of different districts of India is very much related to the land revenue
systems imposed by the British colonial rulers. They find that districts where the collection of land revenues
from the cultivators was assigned to the landlords have significantly worse economic performance, as measured
by agricultural investments, yields, and various measures of public investments and outcomes, than districts
where this type of intermediation was avoided. Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson (2014) examine the long-term
consequences of political competition at the level of chiefdoms in Sierra Leone. The chiefs must come from
an exogenously given number of ruling families designated by the original British colonial authority. A large
number of designated ruling families thus results in stronger political competition at the chiefdom level. The
authors find that such competition leads to better indicators of development, but worse social capital. In addition,
Dell et al. (2018) examine the long-run impact of the historical state conditions in Vietnam. The authors
compare Northern Vietnam (Dai Viet), where, historically, the village was the fundamental administrative unit,
to Southern Vietnam, where the historical statecraft relied on more informal, personalized power relations rather
than village intermediation. Using a regression discontinuity design, they show that areas exposed to Dai Viet
administrative institutions for a longer period prior to French colonization have experienced better economic
outcomes over the past 150 years. They argue that the mechanism that underpins better performance in Dai Viet

    1Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2000) argue that the fact that Europeans considered Brazil, but not the colonies of North America, to
be suitable for growing sugar contributed to the much larger slave population in Brazil, and led to a much more hierarchical society in
Brazil than in the United States. This caused a divergence in the types of institutions that evolved in the two countries, and, in turn, led to
a divergence in the growth rates.
   2“Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty” (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012) further develops this important
thesis.
    3A limited literature has examined these issues. Gennaioli et al. (2013) consider the determinants of regional development using a
large dataset of sub-national regions from 110 countries, and focus on geographic, natural resources, institutional, cultural, and human
capital determinants of regional development. They find that human capital measured by education is the most consistently important
determinant of regional income.



                                                                      1
is the institutionalized village governance, which led to more local cooperation.
     Our paper focuses on sub-national growth differences by examining long-term outcomes and potential un-
derlying mechanisms within one country: China. We consider the within-provincial differences in a rich array
of development outcomes in Fujian Province after the communists took power in 1949. Fujian is a mostly
mountainous province on the southeast coast of China, separated from Taiwan by the 180 kilometers-wide Taiwan
Strait. It has an area of 120 thousand square kilometers; today it is home to a population of nearly 40 million.
When the reform started in 1978, Fujian ranked in the bottom 7 out of the 30 provinces then; in 2017, it ranks
in top 6 among all provinces.4 In 2016, its GDP per capita is 11,247 USD (and 21,339 in PPP). Thus, within
the Chinese economic growth miracle, Fujian is a superstar performer, having experienced the most complete
reversal of fortunes.
     We investigate, both theoretically and empirically, the role of political factions and local accountability in
explaining the huge variations in the development performance across counties in Fujian Province. The set of
county-level development outcomes we examine in this paper includes: the economic growth rates between 1952
and 1998, and in the post-reform period (i.e., 1978 to 1998); the improvement in educational attainment between
1952 and 1990; the level of private-sector development; and net birth rates and death rates during the Great
Chinese Famine between 1959-1961. We also empirically examine whether political survival is part of our story.
     We provide a model that sheds light on the underlying mechanisms that link the political faction, local
accountability, and the development outcomes at the county level. The intuition can be explained as follows: When
the Communist armies took over Fujian province from the Nationalist control circa 1949, the designated county
leaders consisted of cadres mainly from two army factions - namely, the Third Field Army (FA3, henceforth), and
the Yangtze-River Detachment (YRD). These cadres were commonly known as “southbound cadres” because
they came from northern provinces. The Fujian Provincial Standing Committee of the Communist Party, however,
was always dominated by members from FA3, which we refer to as the “strong faction.” We argue that county
leaders’ incentives regarding local development depended on whether they were from the strong faction (FA3)
that dominated the provincial government. If a county leader belonged to FA3, then he was less likely to pursue
policies that were friendly to local development because, as a political incumbent, his political survival depended
more on his connections to the provincial leaders. On the other hand, if a local leader belonged to the weaker
faction, his political survival depended more on local grassroots support, which could be best secured if he
focused on local economic development. In addition, the guerrilla presence in the county further improved
development performance either because it intensified local accountability of the county leader, or because it
better facilitated the provision of local public goods beneficial to development, or both. We argue that the above
mechanisms explain our finding that counties with leaders from the weaker political faction have significantly
better development outcomes in almost all the measures we examined, and that the difference is stronger in those
counties that also had a guerrilla presence.
     Fujian Province offers a particularly suitable place to examine how faction affiliation and local accountability
affect long-term development. Due to exogenous historical reasons, some counties were governed by cadres
affiliated with the strong faction, while others were governed by the weak faction. Moreover, a significant share of
counties had a Communist guerrilla presence before the 1949 takeover. As presumed by our model, local leaders
from the weak political faction and those in charge of counties in which guerrilla factions were present likely had

   4Source: https://triviumchina.com/data-viz/40-years-of-growth-ranking-chinas-provinces-by-gdp-per-capita-1978-2017/.



                                                                2
to depend more on grassroots support for political survival, and, thus, their development-related political choices
should have resulted in systematical differences in long-term development.
    A key challenge for identifying the effects of affiliation with a weak political faction (Weak Faction) and local
accountability (Guerrilla) is that they may not be exogenous to long-term development. We do our best to ensure
that the outcomes indeed reflect causal effects. First, we provide detailed institutional background information
that how different counties in Fujian Province ended up being in different factions is likely exogenous with respect
to our indicators of long-term development. Indeed, we find that weak faction affiliation and local accountability
are not systematically related to initial income levels or population levels; they do appear to be related to some
extent to geography, in terms of a county’s share of lands that are plains, a measure we control for in our empirical
specifications in this paper. Second, in assessing the impact of the local leader’s faction affiliation and the degree
of local accountability he faced, we control for initial income, population, and local geography (i.e., distance to
the coast, and the fraction of mountainous areas in the county). The differences that we find are, thus, not a
result of geography. Clearly, these counties shared the same legal system, religion, and culture. Because we also
control for the initial level of economic development in the county, the results cannot be attributed to conditional
convergence. Third, we find that the estimates of the two key variables tend to be quite stable regardless of
the amount of control. For example, during the 1952-1998 period, our comparison of weak- and strong-faction
countries shows that weak-faction counties experienced higher growth rates - 0.99 percentage points higher per
year when no controls are added, and 0.91 percentage points higher when full controls are imposed. This is
quite remarkable given the small sample (a total of 59 counties) we have. This robustness with respect to various
control of correlates is consistent with exogenous assignment (Angrist and Pischke, 2009). Fourth, the key results
remain robust quantitatively and qualitatively when we only use the geographically neighboring-county pairs with
different factional assignments. This drastically reduces the sample but does not change our key conclusions,
either qualitatively or quantitatively. We also rely on the model to derive the full implications of our causal story
and to test the channels. For instance, our model asserts that political survival would be higher with affiliation
with the strong faction or with grassroots support; in turn, we find support by using evidence of political survival
during the Cultural Revolution. We also find counties with weak faction-affiliated leaders and a local guerrilla
presence tend to adopt stronger pro-local policies, as demonstrated by lower death rates during the Great Famine
around 1960, greater private-sector development, and higher increases in schooling attainment before and after the
power change in 1949. We also observe that such differences between counties do not emerge in policy areas that
are highly visible to upper governments. For example, the pro-local tendency associated with weak faction-linked
leadership or the presence of guerrillas disappears in regard to the implementation of the One-Child Policy or the
Household Responsibility System, which were both easily monitored by upper governments.
    Our empirical results yield coherent findings consistent with the implications of our model. First, based on
our specification with full controls, we find that counties with weak-faction-affiliated leadership have an annual
growth premium (in gross value of output) of 0.9 percentage points in the 1952-1998 period, and this premium
increases to 1.9 percentage points in the 1978-1998, post-reform period. Similarly, we find that counties with a
guerrilla presence have an annual growth premium of 0.5 (1.5) percentage points in the 1952-1998 period (the
1978-1998 period). Robust evidence shows that the effects are especially pronounced when a county had both
weak-faction-affiliated leadership and a guerrilla presence; counties with this combination experienced a growth
premium (relative to strong-faction-led counties) that was often double that of counties that had weak-faction-
linked leadership but no guerrilla presence. Second, consistent evidence shows that weak-faction-led counties had

                                                          3
significantly lower death rates and smaller reduction in birth rates, during the Great Chinese Famine around 1960.
Third, we offer evidence that the change in average schooling levels for affected cohorts after the power change
was positive and significantly larger – by around 37.5 percentage points – in counties with weak-faction-affiliated
leaders and a guerrilla presence (relative to the strong-faction-led counties). Fourth, we find that weak-faction-
led counties tend to be more conducive to private-sector development. State-owned enterprise (SOE) shares
as measured by sales revenue and by the number of firms in a county were about 22 percentage points and 15
percentage points lower, respectively, in weak-faction-led counties than in strong-faction-led counties. In addition,
counties with a local guerrilla presence also had lower SOE shares, though the effect is not statistically significant.
Fifth, we provide evidence to directly support the political survival mechanism of our model. In particular, in
counties affiliated with the strong faction or in counties with lower death rates during the Great Chinese Famine,
leaders who were purged during the initial years of the Cultural Revolution tended to be reinstalled earlier or,
were more likely to be reinstalled. This provides evidence that supports the building blocks of the model. That
is, both affiliation with a strong political faction and grassroots support are central for political survival in the
autocratic regime. Finally, we offer further checks – such as whether fiscal transfers explain the differences in
development outcomes – which allow us to exclude this alternative interpretation. In general, our results tend to be
quite robust to specifications with different controls, to outlier concerns, and to using only the neighboring-county
treatment-control pairs.

1.1    Related Literature
    Our paper is related to several strands of literature in political economy. First, it is related to a recent literature
on the effect of local accountability on development. Besley and Burgess (2002) develop a theoretical model to
show that having a more informed and politically active electorate strengthens the incentives for governments
to be responsive to citizens’ preferences. In their empirical setting of India, media presence plays the role
of increasing local accountability. They show that state governments are more responsive – as evidenced by
public food distribution and calamity relief expenditure in the wake of falls in food production and crop flood
damage – in areas where newspaper circulation is higher (and thus electoral accountability is greater). Björkman
and Svensson (2009) present a randomized field experiment on community-based monitoring of public primary
health care providers in Uganda. They randomly choose communities in which residents are encouraged to be
more involved in the state of the health service provision so as to strengthen their capacity to hold local health
providers accountable for performance. The findings document large increases in utilization and improved health
outcomes – reduced child mortality and increased child weight – in the treatment communities than in the control
communities.5 In our paper, local guerrilla presence prior to the Communist takeover serves as a proxy for local
accountability. It is well known that guerrillas must rely on the support of local residents for their survival; as such,
guerrillas must foster a close and synergistic relationship with the local population. Therefore, leaders in counties
with a local guerrilla presence were likely to be more accountable to local residents, and more adept at mobilizing
local support. The results in our paper suggest that local accountability plays an important role in regulating the
behavior of local politicians to be more favorable to local economic development in a non-democratic setting,
such as China under communism. Our findings show that local accountability is positively associated with many

   5Mansuri and Rao (2013) provide a comprehensive overview of the theory and evidence for development strategies that are based on
local community empowerment.


                                                                4
different aspects of development (i.e., growth, education, private-sector development, and the extent of famine)
and at different stages of half a century of political transformation in China; these results suggest that local
accountability is a powerful, robust, and balanced mechanism for ensuring long-term development. To the best
of our knowledge, this paper is the first to consider the presence of guerrillas as the historical origins of local
accountability, and to study its comprehensive impact on local economic growth and other pro-local policies.6
    Second, our paper is related to the literature on the role of accountability for political survival in autocracies.
The main idea is that in autocracies, concerns about political survival drive the political leader to satisfy the
demands of the people in order to avoid large-scale revolutions. For example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2001,
2006) argue that in nondemocratic societies, the elite will try to prevent revolution by making concessions (e.g.,
by redistributing income) to poor people because they pose a revolutionary threat even though they are excluded
from political power. Smith (2008) and Bueno de Mesquita and Smith (2008, 2010) suggest that a leader can
reduce the revolutionary threat by expanding the supply of public goods to potential revolutionaries.7 Our paper
focuses on the survival incentives of local leaders rather than those of national leaders. In our setup, local leaders
can increase their chances of political survival either by strengthening their ties to higher-level officials, or by
mobilizing grassroots support from within their jurisdiction. Moreover, we emphasize the interactions between
the factional politics and local accountability in shaping local leaders’ policy-making incentives. We are able to
provide direct evidence from the power purge and recovery during the Cultural Revolution to offer support to our
model.
    Third, our paper is related to the literature on the role of political competition for development. As summarized
in Acemoglu, Reed, and Robinson (2014), existing studies on political competitions are few and largely focused
on the context of developed democratic countries such as the United States (e.g., Ansolabehere and Snyder, 2006;
Besley, Persson, and Sturn, 2010). Very few papers exploit exogenous variations in political competition, with
notable exceptions: Besley and Preston (2007), who use redistricting as the source of variations, and Acemoglu,
Reed and Robinson (2014), who use the number of designated ruling families eligible to serve as chiefs of
chiefdoms in Sierra Leone. We differ in capturing political competition via local leaders’ factional affiliation,
which was caused by the liberation pattern circa 1949. We show that stronger political competition faced by
weak-faction-affiliated leaders led to better long-term growth, social development (i.e., better education, lower
famine death rates), and stronger private-sector development. Our results are thus consistent with Becker (1958),
Stigler (1972), Wittman (1989), and Acemoglu, Reed and Robinson (2014) – all of which find that political
competition contributes to efficiency by reducing distortions.
    Finally, our paper is related to the literature on factions and political incentives in communist China. Most of
the studies on factions in China focus on the post-reform period. Shih (2008) provides a systematic analysis of
factions based on networks of leaders, and studies the impact of elite politics on monetary and banking policies.
Shih, Adolph and Liu (2012) examine the role of factional ties with top leaders in the promotion to the Central

    6The literature on local accountability in nondemocratic countries is relatively small, and the focus is generally on upward accountability
(i.e., accountability to the superiors) for the purpose of promotions. Few exceptions exist in the literature. Among these exceptions is Li
(2014), who shows that provincial leaders in China tend to implement policies more in favor of the citizens in response to intensified labor
disputes, thus suggesting evidence for downward accountability. Another example stems from Distelhorst and Hou (2017), whose study of
the responsiveness of Chinese city government officials to appeals from putative citizens finds that average responsiveness is comparable
to that in democracies.
   7See Bueno de Mesquita et al. (2003) for a book-length treatment of the logic of political survival.



                                                                      5
Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. Few papers study the impact of factional ties based on military
affiliations among the southbound cadres. One exception is Zhang and Liu (2019), who examine a possible causal
relationship between a region’s communist revolutionary legacy before 1949 and the variation in private-sector
development after 1949 in Zhejiang province. Our paper offers a theoretical framework, and it delves more
deeply and more systematically into the broad impact on a variety of development performance measures of the
counties led by southbound cadres from different military factions. On political incentives in China, most existing
work focuses on the promotion incentives of top-level government officials (Maskin, Qian and Xu, 2000; Li and
Zhou, 2005; Shih, Adolph and Liu, 2012). Our paper offers the complementary perspective of the importance of
incentives for political survival for local government officials.

    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows:. In Section 2 we present a simple model to highlight
effect on development performance played by leaders’ links to a given political faction, and local accountability
as evidenced by the presence of guerrillas. In Section 3 we provide institutional background on political factions
and local guerrilla movements in the post-civil-war county and provincial governments of Fujian Province. In
Section 4 we describe our data sources, and present summary statistics for some of the key variables of interest.
In Section 5 we present our empirical results, as well as robustness checks and alternative explanations. Section
6 offers conclusions.


2     Political Survival, Local Accountability, and Local Economic Performance:
      A Model
2.1   An Illustrative Example
    We first present a simple example to illustrate the main forces that local (i.e., county) leaders face in their
decision making to ensure political survival. Consider two factions, w and s, representing the weak and the strong
factions, respectively. The provincial government is controlled by the strong faction; indeed, the control of the
provincial government is what makes the so-called “strong faction” strong. We focus on the incentives of the
county-level leaders.
    A leader from faction f ∈ {w, s} faces an exogenous baseline probability ρ f ∈ (0, 1) of being stripped of
power. It is reasonable to assume that ρs < ρw . However, whether the county leader will actually be stripped of
power depends both on his faction and the policy actions he chooses. A leader’s faction is exogenously given and
cannot be changed. He can choose from two possible policy actions: the first is pro-local economic development,
which we denote by L; and the second is anti-local (or, pro-upper) policy, which we denote by U. We can interpret
L as extracting fewer local resources to send to the provincial government, and instead focusing on providing more
local public goods; or L could represent following economic policies that are more suitable to the local conditions
instead of following the policies preferred by the central leaders. Taking action L will endear the county leader
to the local citizens, which helps protect him from being purged of power. Taking action U will curry favor
from the provincial leaders, but whether it translates into protection against being purged depends on whether the
local leader belongs to the strong or the weak faction. Suppose that the actual probability that a county leader
will lose power, and face potential dismissal is represented by the following matrix, where ρw > ρwU > ρwL,
and ρs > ρsL > ρsU . In this simplest example, these assumptions say that for the local leaders belonging to the


                                                        6
weak faction, adopting policy L, which is more likely to gain local support, is a better power-protection strategy
than currying favor with the local provincial leaders. By contrast, for local leaders in the strong faction, currying
favors from the provincial leader offers a more effective strategy for political survival.
    It is clear that the optimal action choice of a local leader whose goal is to maximize his probability of political
survival will then depend on his faction: if he belongs to the weak faction, he will choose pro-local action L; and
if he belongs to the strong faction, he will choose the anti-local policy U.

                                           FactionAction      L      U
                                                  w            ρwL     ρwU
                                                   s           ρsL     ρsU

      Table 1: Probabilities of a Political Purge of Local Leaders, as Functions of Their Factions and Actions


2.2    A Model
     The above example highlights the key trade-offs that local leaders of different factions may face in their
choices of whether to adopt pro- or anti-local economic policies. In this sub-section, we enrich the model to show
that the key forces identified in the illustrative example are robust under the assumption that local leaders from
the strong faction have a comparative advantage over local leaders from the weak faction in gaining the political
support from the provincial leaders; we also incorporate the effect of local accountability into our model.
     As in the illustrative example, consider two factions: w, standing for the weak YRD faction; s, standing for
the strong FA3 faction. We distinguish officials at two levels of the government, those at the provincial level and
those at the county level. At the provincial level, as we will document empirically below (see Figure 3 in Section
3), the dominant faction, or the faction in power, has been those from FA3, s. We analyze the incentives of the
officials at the county level.
     A county is led by cadres affiliated with faction f ∈ {w, s} ; and the county may or may not have had a
guerrilla presence, which we denote by g ∈ {0, 1} where g = 1 indicates that the county had a guerrilla presence.
We hypothesize that any county official faces possible shocks that may lead to his dismissal. The probability that
a faction- f , f ∈ {w, s} , official in a county with a guerrilla presence g ∈ {0, 1} will be dismissed is given by
                                                                                
                                 ρ f ,g (Z, T) = ρ0f exp −α f × κ g × Z − β f × T ∈ (0, 1) ,                        (1)

where ρ0f ∈ (0, 1) denotes the baseline probability of a local official from faction f being dismissed from a
position of power; Z denotes the grassroots support that a faction- f county official enjoys from the citizens in the
county, and its determinant will be specified below; T is either the amount of “tax revenue” he collects from the
citizens and sends to the higher-ups in the provincial government, or, alternatively, the amount of local resources
the county leader collects and spends on the projects dictated by the higher-ups in the provincial government that
does not benefit the local citizens. We assume that α f and β f are both positive, in order to capture that a local
official’s chance of political survival can improve by either building strong local support or currying favors from
the provincial leaders. Parameter κ g measures the effect of local accountability on the importance of grassroots
support in political survival; without loss of generality, we normalize κ 0 = 1 and let κ 1 = κ > 1 to capture that
grassroots support is more important in counties with strong local accountability, as proxied by guerrilla presence.
We make the following assumptions regarding the functions ρ f ,g (·, ·) :

                                                          7
Assumption 1 α f > 0, β f > 0 for both f ∈ {w, s} .

    The difference between the weak faction and the strong faction stems from the fact that the strong faction
has its allies controlling the provincial government. To capture this difference, we assume that the transfers to
the higher-ups are more effective in reducing the chances of being dismissed for county officials from the strong
faction than for those from the weak faction:

Assumption 2 (Comparative Advantages of Strong vs. Weak Factions) α s /β s < α w /βw .

    Assumption 2 formalizes the idea that local leaders from the strong factions have a comparative advantage
relative to those from the weak faction to use upward transfers to reduce the probability of purges; likewise, local
leaders in the weak factions have a relative advantage to those from the strong faction to use local citizen support
in reducing the probability of purges.
    Both Z and T are affected by the policy choices of the local leader. We proxy Z by the local economic
outcomes. We hypothesize that the local citizens have an endowment (which could be interpreted either as
income or labor) equal to E. Local citizens can choose to allocate their endowment E in two ways. They can
spend it as investment (or labor supply for the market) I which produces f (I) > I . Or they can keep it under
a mattress, which represents a storage technology (or working in their own backyard). We assume that f 0 > 0
and f 00 < 0, and satisfies Inada conditions. The output produced from investment I, however, can be taxed by the
local government, while the storage technology is secret and not subject to taxation.
    Local citizens’ well-being is measured by their after-tax income, which is given by:

                                            Z = (1 − τ) f (I) + (E − I) .                                        (2)

where τ is the tax rate chosen by the county official. The “tax revenue” that the local leader can either send to the
provincial leader or spend on projects dictated by the higher ups, T, is given by

                                                  T = (1 − τ) f (I) .                                            (3)

In a county where its local leader chooses tax rate τ, the citizens will choose I to maximize (2). The first-order
condition for citizens’ optimal investment I ∗ is given by

                                                 (1 − τ) f 0 (I ∗ ) = 1.                                         (4)

(4) is also sufficient for optimality given our assumptions on f (·) . Since f 0 > 0, we have
                                                                   
                                                                 1
                                                I (τ) = f
                                                 ∗        0−1
                                                                       .                                         (5)
                                                                1−τ

Moreover, f 00 < 0 implies that
                                                            1           1
                                         I ∗0 (τ) =                           < 0.                               (6)
                                                      f 00 (I ∗ (τ)) (1 − τ)2
The local citizens’ after-tax income evaluated at the optimal investment choice I ∗ (τ) is given by

                                     Z ∗ (τ) = (1 − τ) f (I ∗ (τ)) + [E − I ∗ (τ)]                               (7)


                                                             8
It follows from the Envelope Theorem that

                                                       Z ∗0 (τ) = − f (I ∗ (τ)) < 0.                                      (8)

Together with (6), we have
                                                Z ∗00 (τ) = − f 0 (I ∗ (τ)) I ∗0 (τ) > 0.                                 (9)

    For a given level of tax rate τ chosen by the local leader, the available tax revenue that the local leader can
collect and transfer to the provincial level officials is then given by

                                                           T ∗ (τ) = τ f (I ∗ (τ))                                       (10)

(10) is the “Laffer Curve” that depicts the relationship between the total tax revenue and the tax rate. It is clear
that T ∗ (0) = 0, and limτ→1 T ∗ (τ) = 0. Thus T ∗ (τ) is non-monotonic. Indeed simple algebra shows that

                                           T ∗0 (τ) = f (I ∗ (τ)) + τ f 0 (I ∗ (τ)) I ∗0 (τ) ,

which does not have a definite sign. The sign of the second derivative of T ∗ (·) with respect to τ is more involved:

                     T ∗00 (τ) = 2 f 0 (I ∗ (τ)) I ∗0 (τ) + τ f 00 (I ∗ (τ)) [I ∗0 (τ)]2 + τ f 0 (I ∗ (τ)) I ∗00 (τ) .

The first two terms are unambiguously negative, but the third term depends on the sign of I ∗00 (τ) . If I ∗00 (τ) < 0,
then T ∗00 (τ) < 0. From (6), we have

                                              f 000 (I ∗ (τ)) I ∗0 (τ) (1 − τ)2 − 2 f 00 (I ∗ (τ)) (1 − τ)
                              I ∗00 (τ) = −                                               2               .             (11)
                                                                  f 00 (I ∗ (τ)) (1 − τ)2
                                                                

To convey our intuition as cleanly as possible, we make the following assumption:

Assumption 3 The production function f (·) is such that T ∗ (·) is a globally concave function.

Remark 1 A sufficient (but not necessary) condition for T ∗ (·) to be globally concave is f 000 ≤ 0. This follows
from the fact that f 000 ≤ 0 is a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for I ∗00 (τ) < 0, which is, in turn, a sufficient
condition for T ∗00 (τ) < 0.

    Now we can describe the choice problem of the county officials affiliated with faction f where the guerrilla
presence is g. He/she will choose τ f ,g to solve

                                                                ρ f ,g Z ∗ τ f ,g , T ∗ τ f ,g
                                                                                              
                                                  min                                                                    (12)
                                               τ f , g ∈[0,1]

where Z ∗ (·) and T ∗ (·) are respectively given by (7) and (10). The first-order condition with respect to τ for county
officials who belong to faction f with guerrilla presence g is
                                                                               
                                           α f κ g Z ∗0 τ ∗f ,g + β f T ∗0 τ ∗f ,g = 0                              (13)

Here τ ∗f ,g denotes the optimal solution for officials from faction- f county, f ∈ {s, w} , where the guerrilla presence
is g ∈ {0, 1}.

                                                                          9
Proposition 1 Under Assumptions 1 and 2, we have the following predictions:

   1. For a given g ∈ {0, 1} ,

        (a) Local leaders from the strong faction will choose higher tax rates: τ ∗s,g > τ ∗w,g ;
        (b) Citizens
                     in counties
                                  whose
                                        leader belongs to the strong faction will have lower after-tax income:
            Z τ s,g < Z τ w,g ;
              ∗    ∗        ∗   ∗

                                                                                                           
        (c) More taxes are collected from counties whose leaders belong to the strong faction: T ∗ τ ∗s,g >
                      
            T ∗ τ ∗w,g .

   2. Similarly, for a given f ∈ {w, s} ,

        (a) Local leaders in counties with a guerrilla presence will choose lower tax rates: τ ∗f ,1 < τ ∗f ,0 ;
                                                                                                                 
        (b) Citizens in counties with a guerrilla presence will have higher after- tax income: Z ∗ τ ∗f ,1 >
                      
            Z ∗ τ ∗f ,0 ;
                                                                                                     
        (c) Fewer taxes are collected from counties with a guerrilla presence: T ∗ τ ∗f ,1 < T ∗ τ ∗f ,0 .

   3. Local economic development as proxied by Z ∗ will be highest in those counties that are led by cadres
      affiliated with the weak faction, and also have a guerrilla presence; economic development will be worst in
      those counties that are led by cadres affiliated with the strong faction, and also lack a guerrilla presence:
                                              n                                      o
                            Z ∗ τ ∗s,0 = min Z ∗ τ ∗s,0 , Z ∗ τ ∗s,1 , Z ∗ τ ∗w,0 , Z ∗ τ ∗w,1 ,                (14)
                                               n                                     o
                            Z ∗ τ ∗w,1 = max Z ∗ τ ∗s,0 , Z ∗ τ ∗s,1 , Z ∗ τ ∗w,0 , Z ∗ τ ∗w,1 .                (15)

Proof. To prove Part (1), consider g ∈ {0, 1} . The first order conditions for local leaders of strong and weak
factions are respectively
                                                                        
                                      α s κ g Z ∗0 τ ∗s,g + β s T ∗0 τ ∗s,g = 0                             (16)
                                                                        
                                   α w κ g Z ∗0 τ ∗w,g + βw T ∗0 τ ∗w,g = 0.                                (17)

Taking the ratios, we have                                                   
                                            α s Z ∗0 τ ∗s,g     α w T ∗0 τ ∗s,g
                                                             =                 .                                 (18)
                                            β s Z ∗0 τ ∗w,g     βw T ∗0 τ ∗w,g
Suppose τ ∗s,g ≤ τ ∗w,g . As we showed in (9), Z ∗00 (τ) > 0. Together with Assumption 3, τ ∗s,g ≤ τ ∗w,g implies that
                                                                        
                                         Z ∗0 τ ∗s,g           T ∗0 τ ∗s,g
                                                      ≤ 1 and ∗0 ∗  ≥ 1.                                          (19)
                                         Z ∗0 τ ∗w,g           T τ w,g
The two inequalities in (19) and Assumption 2 then imply that
                                                                         
                                        α s Z ∗0 τ ∗s,g     α w T ∗0 τ ∗s,g
                                                         <                 ,
                                        β s Z ∗0 τ ∗w,g     βw T ∗0 τ ∗w,g

                                                             10
contradicting (18). Hence, τ ∗s,g > τ ∗w,g as claimed in (a). Claim (b) follows from (8). For Claim (c), note that the
                                                                                      
first order conditions (16) and (17) can be satisfied only if T ∗0 τ ∗s,g and T ∗0 τ ∗w,g are both in the positive region
                                                                                                                
because Z ∗0 τ ∗s,g and Z ∗0 τ ∗w,g are both negative from (8). Hence τ ∗s,g > τ ∗w,g implies T ∗ τ ∗s,g > T ∗ τ ∗w,g .
     The proof of Part (2) is completely analogous to the proof of Part (1). To prove Part (3), simply note that
Claim (b) in Part (1) yields:
                                                                       
                                               Z ∗ τ ∗s,0 < Z ∗ τ ∗w,0 ,                                             (20)
                                                                       
                                               Z ∗ τ ∗s,1 < Z ∗ τ ∗w,1 ;                                             (21)

and Claim (b) in Part (2) yields:
                                                                       
                                              Z ∗ τ ∗w,0     < Z ∗ τ ∗w,1 ,                                         (22)
                                                                      
                                              Z ∗ τ ∗s,0     < Z ∗ τ ∗s,1 .                                         (23)

Claims (14) and (15) follows from combining (20)-(23).


3    Institutional Background
    In this section, we present the historical and institutional background of Fujian Province for the period under
our consideration. Fujian Province is a particularly suitable province to study how local accountability and
factional politics may shape local development performances. First, during the early periods of the Chinese Civil
War (July 1946 - October 1949) between the Nationalist (Kuomintang, henceforth, KMT) and the Communist
(People’s Liberation Army, henceforth, PLA) armies, local Communist guerrillas had a presence in the region,
which was under the formal rule of the Nationalist government. Importantly, the presence of the guerilla forces
varied significantly across the counties within Fujian Province. This provides the cross-county variations in local
accountability, which we proxy with local guerrilla presence. Second, after the Communist takeover, well-defined
army-based factions existed among the county-level leaders in Fujian Province. These army-based factions grew
out of two different forces within the PLA. These PLA factions jointly took over the administration of the province
after the defeat of the KMT.
    The liberation of Fujian Province from the KMT control experienced two phases. From May to July 1949,
the PLA’s Second Field Army (FA2) led by Liu Bocheng and Deng Xiaoping entered Fujian Province from the
Southwest of neighboring Zhejiang Province and the Northeast of neighboring Jiangxi Province. This campaign
played an important role in liberating the 10 counties in northern Fujian Province. However, FA2 was immediately
mobilized to fight in Southwestern China. From June to October 1949, the PLA’s Third Field Army (FA3) led
by Marshall Chen Yi, replaced FA2 as the major military force in Fujian Province to attack the KMT forces that
were then still controlling part of the Fujian Province. The 10th Battalion of FA3, led by Ye Fei, entered from the
eastern part of Fujian Province, eliminated the main KMT forces defending the province, and took control of the
major cities of Fuzhou, Zhangzhou, and Xiamen. At the same time, the guerilla forces that were active along the
borders of Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, and Guangdong provinces actively participated in the liberation of counties
in central Fujian (including Pu Tian, Xian You) and western Fujian (including Shang Hang, Ming Nan and Ping
He, among others). By May 1950, the Communists had taken control of Fujian Province, except for the outpost

                                                             11
islands of Jing Men and Ma Zhu, which were (and are still today) under the control of the military force associated
with Taiwan. The two different army forces that played a role in the liberation of Fujian Province became the
basis of the army factions that we study in this paper. Figure 1 depicts the movement of the PLA armies from
April to October of 1949.




           Figure 1: Map of the Chinese Civil War: April - October 1949. Source: US Military Academy.



County-level Government. As in any power transition, the new Communist government needed to quickly
install cadres at all levels of the governing bureaucracy. The Chinese bureaucracy under communism (then and
today) consists of two parallel but inter-related apparatus: the Communist Party organization (“the party”), and
the People’s Government (“the state”). Below the central government are two hierarchical ladders at the local
level: the provincial and the county leadership. At both levels, the party is headed by a party secretary; and the
People’s Government is headed by a chief (governor at the provincial level and county chief at the county level).
Of course, there were hundreds of other positions at lower levels to fill. Building a bureaucracy completely from
scratch was a huge task because the Communist Party government could not use any of the officials of the previous
regime to staff these positions due to ideological differences and concerns about potential sabotage.
    The central government thus staffed these leadership positions by drawing from the military men and women
from the armies that liberated Fujian Province. These newly installed cadres, commonly known as “southbound
cadres” (because they were mostly from the Chinese Communist Party’s power base in northern China), played
an important role in the governance of mainland China after the Civil War. Both FA2 and FA3 played important
roles in liberating Fujian Province. However, FA2 had been deployed to fight elsewhere before the PLA assumed


                                                        12
                             Figure XX. Geographical Distribution of County Types




                  Figure 2: Geographic Distribution of County Types in Fujian Province in 1950.


full control of Fujian Province. In early 1949, members mainly drawn from FA2’s bases in Hebei and Shanxi
provinces (particularly, the Tai Hang and Tai Yue revolutionary bases) were assembled into a unit, known as
Yangtze-River Detachment (YRD hereafter). YRD members were sent to southern provinces, including Fujian
                                                       1 / 31
Province, to take up these leadership positions.
     As a result, the two major army factions from which the cadres in Fujian Province were drawn were FA3 and
YRD. Specifically, FA3-affiliated cadres took over the top positions in the two major cities in Fujian Province –
Fuzhou and Xiamen – as well as a total of 11 of the 59 counties in Fujian Province, including Long Yan, and Yong
An counties. YRD-affiliated cadres, organized into six units, were called to take over the remaining 48 counties
in Fujian Province, including Jing Jiang, Jian Yang, Nan Ping, and counties surrounding the provincial capital of
Fuzhou such as Fu Qing, Ping Tan and Pu Tian, Zhang Zhou, and Fu An counties.8
     As mentioned previously, another important variation for the liberation experience of counties was whether a
local guerrilla force was present and participated in the liberation. When a local guerrilla force participated, the
local government tended to include some members from that guerrilla force. The presence of guerrilla cadres in
a county government would make the county government’s policies more transparent to local citizens due to the
pre-existing links between guerrilla cadres and local citizens, and facilitates accountability of local government
to citizens. We thus hypothesize that the local guerilla presence led to greater local accountability.
     Figure 2 summarizes the geographic distribution of county types in cadre composition. Counties led by
FA3-affiliated cadres were concentrated at the southwest of Fujian Province, while those led by YRD-affiliated
cadres were in the northern and eastern regions. Moreover, the presence of local guerrilla forces was concentrated

   8Source: Jing De, Tie Min and Zhi Wan (2010).


                                                                     13
in the Eastern coastal regions.

Provincial Level Government. At the provincial level, the Fujian Chinese Communist Party (CCP) Committee
was the highest-level decision-making body. Within that CCP Committee, the key members who played pivotal
roles were members of the CCP Standing Committee, which controlled the rights to make decisions on political,
personnel and economic matters. Historically, the Standing Committee consisted of 13 members. As expected,
the Standing Committee members were mostly either from FA3 or YRD. The cadres from these two factions were
the major political forces in the post-liberation CCP Standing Committee in Fujian Province for decades. Figure
3 depicts the fraction of members from FA3 and YRD in the Fujian Province CCP Standing Committee from
1950 to 1993. The FA3 faction was clearly the more dominant force in the Standing Committee than the YRD
faction. FA3 members accounted for about 40-50% of Standing Committee members until the mid-1980s, and, in
the early 1950s, their representation had been as high as over 60%. The share by YRD members hovered around
20%. Other dynamics of the power structure present in Fujian Province are pertinent. Ye Fei, the aforementioned
commander of the 10th Battalion of FA3 that fought the KMT forces in Fujian Province, was appointed as the
CCP Party Secretary of Fujian Province from October 1954 until May 1967. Also, the Fujian Province Standing
Committee marginalized cadres from local guerrilla forces. Before the Cultural Revolution (1967-1976), only
two Standing Committee members had come from the local guerrilla forces, and one of the two was removed in
1955. After the 1978 economic reform, only two people with experience in the local guerrillas during the Civil
War were on the Standing Committee. Thus, cadres from the local guerrilla forces were not a powerful element in
the Standing Committee. While there were also Standing Committee members who did not belong to either the
FA3 or YRD factions, these members tended to have much shorter tenures, and their influence on the political,
personnel and economic decisions in Fujian Province was limited.

Factional Conflicts. The CCP has undergone numerous movements since it took power in 1949. At the national
level, the best-known example to illustrate these political movements is the experience of Deng Xiaoping, who
later became the architect of Chinese economic reforms and the paramount leader of China after the death of Mao
Zedong. Deng’s political career after the founding of the People’s Republic of China had several ups and downs.
In July 1952, Deng assumed the posts of Vice Premier and Deputy Chair of the Committee on Finance, and
shortly afterwards, he took the posts of Minister of Finance and Director of the Office of Communications. Yet in
1954, he was removed from all of these positions, holding only the post of Deputy Premier. In 1956, he became
the Head of the Communist Party’s Organization Department and a member of the powerful Central Military
Commission. In Mao’s Anti-Rightist Movement of 1957, Deng acted as Secretary General of the Secretariat and
ran the country’s daily affairs with President Liu Shaoqi and Premier Zhou Enlai during the Great Leap Forward
of 1957-1960. Yet, during the Cultural Revolution, Deng was twice purged from the central power apparatus.
The first purge occurred in October 1969 when Deng was sent to Jiangxi Province to work as a regular worker in
a tractor factory. Only in 1974 when Premier Zhou Enlai fell ill with cancer was Deng brought back to politics
as the First Vice-Premier. He was purged yet again in 1976 after the death of Premier Zhou Enlai when he was
removed from all positions following the Tiananmen Incident of April 5, 1976. He re-emerged as the de facto
leader of China following the death of Chairman Mao on September 9, 1976, and the purge of the Gang of Four




                                                       14
                                         Figure 1 Share of FA3 and YRD in Provincial Party Standing Committee in Fujian
                                                                   Province during 1950-1993


                                                                                     1978




                                            80
                                            60
                           Percent (%)

                                            40
                                            20
                                            0

                                                 1950       1960          1970          1980          1990
                                                                            Year

                                                                        FA3             YRD



                             Note: We implemented a two-step approach to calculate the shares of Share of FA3
Figure 3: Share of FA3and
                       andYRD
                           YRDin Provincial Party Party
                                 in Provincial    Standing Committee.
                                                        Standing      In the first in
                                                                  Committee         step, we read
                                                                                       Fujian     resumes During 1950-1993.
                                                                                               Province
                          of every Standing Committee member and identify if they have working experience in
Notes: We calculate the shares of FA3 and YRD in the Provincial Party Standing Committee as follows: First, we read resumes of all
                          the Third Field Army or they were members of YRD. In the second step, we divided
Standing Committee membersthe and
                              number  of provincial
                                  identify          Standing
                                           whether they      Committee
                                                        had working    members
                                                                    experience in from  FA3or
                                                                                   the FA3, and
                                                                                              if YRD  by the
                                                                                                 they were members of the YRD. We
                          total number of provincial Standing Committee members year by year, respectively.
then divide the number of Provincial Standing Committee members from the FA3 and the YRD, respectively, by the total number of
provincial Standing Committee members year by year.


in October 1976.9
    Deng’s experience was mirrored in the political battles at local levels of the governments. Within Fujian
Province, serious power struggles took place between cadres from FA3 and local guerilla forces. As mentioned
previously, one of the only two provincial CCP Standing Committee members with a local guerrilla background
was removed in 1955. In 1957, during the Anti-Rightist Movement, many of the local leaders with a guerrilla
background were purged and stripped of power. In the 1959 Anti-Localism Movement, the Acting CCP Party
Secretary of Fujian Province, Jiang Yizhen, was stripped of power and sent to work in a steel factory; Wei
Jinshui, then Vice Governor of Fujian Province, was also reprimanded. Both Jiang and Wei had local guerrilla
connections.10 The political struggles among the provincial leadership had serious implications on the fortunes
of many local leaders at the county level.                 2 / 31
    In the presence of constant power struggles, local leaders faced serious risks of being purged. As shown
below, local leaders from the relatively weak YRD tended to adopt economic policies that were more protective
of local economic development in their areas of jurisdiction. Many of these decisions were driven to mobilize
grassroots support to increase their chances of political survival.

Examples of Local Leaders’ Discretion in Economic Policies. Before presenting systematic results, we first
provide examples from three counties in Fujian Province, Shang Hang, Dong Shan, and Jing Jiang, that differed
in the county leaders’ factional affiliations and in whether there was a guerrilla presence, to illustrate how local

   9See Vogel (2011) for a detailed account of Deng’s life and his influence on China.
  10In 1962, Jiang Yizhen’s career was rehabilitated, and in 1964, he became China’s Acting Minister of Agriculture.


                                                                           15
leaders chose economic policies that were more or less friendly to local economic development.
    The leaders of Shang Hang county belonged to the FA3 faction. In the majority of the post-liberalization
period up to the dawn of the reform (i.e., 1978), FA3 cadres held the top leadership position in the county. During
the multitude of political movements in the communist era, the local cadres from FA3 in general adopted leftist,
collectivist economic policies. For example, during the Great Leap Forward Movement (1958-1962), the local
cadres strictly adhered to the quotas imposed on grain procurement. This led to severe famine in the county (see
empirical evidence below). In addition, the local leaders also adopted more strictly the centralized economic
policies, with the share of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the local economy rising steadily to 88% in 1978.
In 1985, SOEs still accounted for 56% of the total local industrial output. It was not until 1991 that individual
and private ownership surpassed 30% for the first time.
    By contrast, Dong Shan County was governed largely by cadres from the YRD and local cadres that they
tutelaged. These leaders overall were more reserved in the implementation of the leftist policies imposed from
the central- and provincial-level governments. During the Great Leap Forward Movement, the local cadres did
not succumb to the calls for farmers to “go all in” to produce steel in the “backyard furnace,” as did in many leftist
regions. Instead, they encouraged local residents to plant trees, and to finish several large-scale civil engineering
projects, e.g., constructing dikes, implementing the drinking water program, and claiming land from sea. These
projects greatly facilitated local development, and won local support. Moreover, through self-financing and
financing from overseas, the county established a series of small collective- and state-owned firms. In 1988, the
share of industrial output attributed to SOEs in Dong Shan was only 24.3%, compared to 36.3% for collective
firms, and 36.6% for privately owned firms.
    A third county is Jing Jiang County which was led by cadres from the YRD faction, and had a strong local
guerrilla presence before 1948. In fact, within the county administrative structure, local guerrilla leaders tended
to hold important positions, such as County Chief (1949-1958), and party secretary (1972-1976). Before the
Cultural Revolution, the YRD cadres and local guerrilla forces allowed non-state economic activities to continue.
Even in 1974, statistical reports show that village-level firms (most of which were privately owned) accounted for
41.1% of the county-level industrial output; by 1987, the figure had grown to 80%.


4      Data Sources and Descriptive Statistics
4.1     Data Sources
      We now describe our data sources.

County/Provincial Leaders’ Factional Affiliations and County’s Guerrilla Presence. We rely on informa-
tion from two primary sources: (1). “History of the Communist Party in Fujian Province, 1926-1987”; (2).
“Recollections on Yangtze-River Detachment”. We use these two primary sources to determine whether a county
was assigned cadres affiliated with the FA3 or with the YRD around 1949 and 1950. A county’s factional affilia-
tion is treated as stable because the initial cadre base during the liberation period remained intact for subsequent
decades.
    In addition, we hand-collected the resume of every member of the Fujian Provincial Communist Party Standing
Committee from 1950-1993. We identified whether a member belonged to the FA3 or YRD faction based on


                                                         16
working experiences listed on their resumes.
    To determine whether a local guerrilla force had strong presence in the counties during the pre-communist
liberation period, we hand checked various county gazettes (as of May 1948).

County-Level Development Performance from 1952 to 1998. We examine various measures of development
performance at the county level from 1952 to 1998. First, measures related to economic growth and other
economic outcomes are gathered from “Statistical Information on 50 Years of Fujian Province” and “Regional
Economies in Fujian,” which covers the period from 1952 to 1998 for all 59 counties in Fujian Province. We use
this data set to construct the average annual real growth rate of gross value of output for agriculture and industries,
separately for 1952 to 1998 (the whole sample period) and for 1978 to 1998 (the post-reform period).
     For outcome measures related to the Great China Famine (1959-1961), we construct two measures. The first
measure, which we refer to as famine control, following Meng, Qian and Yared (2015), is defined as the ratio of
the number of surviving births (per year) in the county during the period 1959-1961 relative to the number of
surviving births (per year) in the same county during the 1954-1957 period, as observed in the 1% sample of the
1990 China Population Census [see formula (24)]. The higher this ratio, the more successful the county was at
controlling the famine.
     The second measure is the county-level death rates (deaths per thousand) during the Great China Famine. The
number of deaths at the county level number is mainly collected from the population statistical books published
by the provincial Statistics Bureaus in the 1980s.11

Scope of Study. Our analysis is restricted to the 59 counties or county-level cities in Fujian Province. In the
administrative system in China, there are also prefecture-level cities (such as Fuzhou, Xiamen, and Zhang Zhou).
Prefecture-level cities are often treated differently in the statistical yearbooks, with many of the key economic
indicators only collected at the prefecture level (instead of at the district level within the prefecture-level city,
which would be more comparable to counties or county-level cities).
    We also restrict our analysis up to 1998 for two reasons: first, the Chinese government initiated extensive
redrawing of the county boundaries in 1998; second, Chinese government initiated its housing reform from
1998, which also drastically blurred the rural-urban boundaries.12 The changes in county boundaries will lead to
inconsistencies in the growth rate comparisons.

4.2    Descriptive Statistics
    Among the 59 counties (by which we mean the counties and county-level cities) in our study, 11 counties
were led by cadres affiliated with the FA3, among which 3 had a local guerrilla presence; 48 counties were led by
cadres affiliated with YRD, among which 22 had local guerrilla presence. In this subsection, we provide some
descriptive statistics.
    To control for the differences in the initial conditions across counties, we construct the following variables:
(1) The log of the average agricultural and industrial output per capita in 1952 (respectively, in 1978), denoted

   11The data are compiled by Kasahara and Li (2018), who provide details about the data construction and cross-validation with the other
provincial-level death statistics. We are grateful to Bingjing Li for generously sharing the data with us.
  12See Fang et. al. (2015) for a detailed discussion about the institutional details of China’s housing reform.



                                                                    17
by Ln_GVOPC52 (respectively, Ln_GVOPC78); and (2) The log of the total population in 1952 (respectively, in
1978), denoted by Ln_Pop52 (respectively, Ln_Pop78).
    We construct two variables to measure aspects of the county’s geography that may be relevant to economic
performance.13 The first variable is the share of plains (%) in the county’s total land areas where flat land
is defined as land with less than 15 degrees of incline. This captures the amount of land that can be used as
science/industrial parks or for agriculture production; it also captures the amount of land that is suitable for
development. The second variable is the distance to Taiwan, which is a key potential source of foreign direct
investment (FDI). We proxy this by using the distance to Xiamen, the city directly across the Taiwan Strait from
Taiwan. The distance is calculated based on the location, as determined by the Global Positioning System (GPS)
designation, of the centroid of each county to the centroid of Xiamen City. This variable may also capture access
to the commercial hubs of Fujian province, investment from Taiwan, and other potential benefits, such as better
access to business personnel and technology.


                            Variable                                 Obs.    Mean        SD       Min       Max
                            Annual Growth Rate 52-98 (%)              57      2.91      1.47      -0.03     7.94
                            Annual Growth Rate 78-98 (%)              57      7.11      3.89      1.47     22.49
                            Famine Control                            58      0.78      0.14      0.46      1.11
                            Death Rate (Death Per 1000)               58      13.4       5.8       5.8      33.8
                            FA3                                       59      0.19      0.39        0         1
                            YRD                                       59      0.81      0.39        0         1
                            Guerrilla                                 59      0.42       0.5        0         1
                            YRD×GuerrillaNo                           59      0.44       0.5        0         1
                            YRD×GuerrillaYes                          59      0.37      0.49        0         1
                            Ln_GVOPC_52                               58      7.95      0.45      5.99      8.66
                            Ln_GVOPC_78                               58       7.9      0.48      5.99      9.23
                            Ln_Pop_52                                 59      2.67      0.69      1.34      4.33
                            Ln_Pop_78                                 58      3.36      0.66      1.99      4.96
                            Share of Plains (%)                       59     10.96       9.7      1.53       41
                            Distance to Xiamen (Km)                   59     184.2      90.01      21       342

                                         Table 2: Summary Statistics of Main Variables



    Table 2 provides summary statistics of the variables used in our analysis. It shows huge variations in the
annual growth rates across counties. During the whole study period from 1952 to 1998, the annual real growth rate
ranged from -0.03% to 7.94%, with a mean of 2.91% and a standard deviation of 1.47%. During the post-reform
period from 1978 to 1998, the annual growth rate ranged from 1.47% to 22.49%, with a mean of 7.11% and a

   13We have also tried to use as one measure the distance to Fuzhou, the provincial capital; however, because the coefficient estimate of
this measure is never statistically significant, we thus opt not to include it to avoid multicollinearity in light of the few observations that
we have. Because Fujian Province is a coastal province, we have also tried controlling for the length of the seashore within the county;
again, it is never significant, and thus we exclude it too.


                                                                     18
standard deviation of 3.89%. Similarly, the Famine Control variable also shows large variations across counties,
with a mean of 0.78 and a standard deviation of 0.14. That is, during the 1959-1961 famine period, the drop in
          Figure
live births       2 Kernel
            averaged        Density Estimation
                     to an astounding             of Annual
                                      22%. Similarly,       Growth
                                                       the death ratesRate of the
                                                                       during Agriculture  and Famine ranged
                                                                                  Great Chinese
from 5.8‰ Industrial
             to 33.8‰Real
                       withOutput
                            a meanper Capita
                                   death       by13.4‰
                                         rate of   Powerand a standard deviation of 5.8‰.




                                                                                                    .25
                    .5

                                                                            YRD                                                                                 YRD
                                                                            FA3                                                                                 FA3
                    .4




                                                                                                    .2
                                                                                                    .15
                    .3
          Density




                                                                                          Density
                    .2




                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                    .05
                    .1
                    0




                                                                                                    0
                         0             2            4            6            8                           0          5           10           15          20        25
                          growth rate of ag and ind real output PC, 1952-1998                                 growth rate of ag and ind real output PC, 1978-1998




                                                                                                    .15
                                                                     guerrillaYes                                                                        guerrillaYes
                    .3




                                                                     guerrillaNo                                                                         guerrillaNo




                                                                                                    .1
                    .2
          Density




                                                                                          Density
                                                                                                    .05
                    .1
                    0




                                                                                                    0




                         0            2            4            6           8                             0          5           10           15          20        25
                         growth rate of ag and ind real output PC, 1952-1998                                  growth rate of ag and ind real output PC, 1978-1998




Figure 4:Note:
          KernelPanel topofleft
                 Density        is theGrowth
                             Annual    annualRate
                                              growth   rateAgricultural
                                                  of Real   of agriculture   and industrial
                                                                        and Industrial Outputreal
                                                                                              per output
                                                                                                  Capita: YRD vs.
FA3 (Top)per capita,
           and       1952-1998
               Guerrilla           (YRD vs.
                         vs. No Guerrilla    FA3); Panel
                                          (Bottom),  and fortop
                                                             theright
                                                                 periodis1952-1998
                                                                          the annual(Left)
                                                                                       growth
                                                                                           andrate of
                                                                                               1978-1998  (Right).
        agriculture and industrial real output per capita, 1978-1998 (YRD vs. FA3); Panel
        bottom left is the annual growth rate of agriculture and industrial real output per
        capita, 1952-1998 (GuerrillaYes vs. GuerrillaNo); Panel bottom right is the annual
4.3 Factions,
        growth Local
                rate ofAccountability,   and Annual
                        agriculture and industrial   realGrowth
                                                          output per capita, 1978-1998
        (GuerrillaYes
   We first compare the vs. GuerrillaNo)
                        annual growth rates of real agricultural and industrial output per capita (also referred to
as gross value of output per capita, or GVO per capita, henceforth) in counties led by YRD- and FA3-affiliated
cadres. We also compare the annual growth rates in counties with and without a local guerrilla presence prior to
1948. We use the GDP deflator to compute the real growth rates. We have comprehensive data from 1952 to 1998
for all counties covered by our study. To take into account important structural changes after the reforms started
in 1978, we present the above comparisons both for the entire study period (1952-1998) and for the post-reform
period (1978-1998) only.
    Figure 4 plots the estimated kernel density distributions of the annual growth rates of real agricultural and
industrial output per capita by factions (FA3 vs. YRD, the top panel) or by local accountability as proxied by


                                                                                     19

                                                                                    3 / 31
guerrilla presence (GuerrillaYes vs. GuerrillaNo, the bottom panel). The growth rates for the whole period
(1952-1998) were plotted in the left panel, and those for the post-reform period (1978-1998) were plotted in the
right panel. The two graphs in the top panel show that the distribution of the growth rates among counties led by
YRD-affiliated cadres is more heavily weighted on higher values than those in the counties led by FA3-affiliated
cadres - particularly so in the post-reform period. The two graphs in the bottom panel show that the growth rates
are higher, probabilistically, in counties that had a local guerrilla presence than those that did not have a guerrilla
presence; the difference is also much more striking during the 1978-1998 period.
     In Table 3, we summarize the differences in the average annual real GVO growth rates between the counties
led by cadres affiliated with FA3 and YRD, and between counties with and without guerrilla presence for the two
periods (1952-1998 and 1978-1998). In the left side of Panel A, we show that, from 1952 to 1998, the average real
GVO growth rate was 2.10 percent for FA3 counties, and 3.08 percent for YRD counties; the difference between
YRD and FA3 counties was 0.99 percentage points, which is 0.67 standard deviations (SDs) of the mean growth
rate of 2.91 percent. The difference in the growth rates between YRD and FA3 counties is statistically significant
at the 10 percent level. However, if we focus on 1978-1998, the difference is much more striking: the average
annual real GVO growth rate for FA3 counties was 4.37 percent, and that for YRD counties was 7.72 percent. The
3.17 percentage points per year YRD advantage in growth rate (about 0.82 SDs), is statistically significant at 1.4
percent level. The difference in economic growth rates between these two types of counties was huge, especially
in light of the fact that they are from the same province.
     In the right side of Panel A in Table 3, we examine the differences in growth rates among counties with and
without a guerrilla presence as of May 1948. These differences are also striking. The guerrilla-present counties
had an advantage in growth of 0.89 percentage points (or 0.6 standard deviations) during the 1952-1998 period,
and 3.72 percentage points (or 0.95 standard deviations) in the 1978-1998 period. Both differences are statistically
significant at the 5 percent level.
     In Panel B, we examine the differences in average annual real GVO growth in guerrilla and non-guerrilla
counties within the groups of counties led by FA3- or YRD-affiliated cadres. During the 1952-1998 period and
within the group of FA3 counties, there is no difference in growth rates with respect to the local guerrilla presence.
In contrast, within the group of YRD-affiliated counties, those with guerrilla presence outgrew those without
one by 0.98 percentage points (or 0.7 standard deviations). Similarly, during the 1978-1998 period and within
the group of FA3 counties, no statistically significant differences in annual GVO growth rates emerge between
those with and without a guerrilla presence – though the grow rates remain higher in counties that had a guerrilla
presence. In contrast, within the group of YRD counties, those with a guerrilla presence outgrew those without
one by 3.74 percentage points (or 0.95 SDs). It should be noted that, as shown in the last two columns in Panel
B, the numbers of counties in the FA3 group with and without a guerrilla presence are small, three and eight,
respectively.

4.4   Factions, Local Accountability and Famine Severity During 1959-1961
    Our second piece of descriptive evidence on the impact of factions and local accountability on development
performance is how counties fared during the Chinese Great Famine (1959-1961). An estimated total of 16.5
million (Coale, 1981) to 45 million (Dikotter, 2010) individuals, mostly rural residents, died or failed to be born
in the three-year period.


                                                          20
                                                                Panel A: FA3 vs. YRD, and Guerrilla vs. No Guerrilla
                      County by                     Growth Rate (%)              Sample             County by                  Growth Rate (%)     Sample
                      Faction                   1952-1998 1978-1998                              Guerrilla Presence        1952-1998 1978-1998
                      FA3                          2.10         4.37                11                   No                   2.51         5.52      25
                                                  (0.86)        (1.6)                                                        (1.16)       (2.44)
                      YRD                          3.08         7.72                48                    Yes                 3.43         9.26      34
                                                  (1.54)       (4.03)                                                        (1.72)       (4.52)
                      YRD-FA3                     0.99*       3.17**                                    Yes-No               0.89**      3.72**
                                                   (0.5)       (1.25)                                                        (0.38)       (0.93)




21
                                                             Panel B: Interactions of FA3, YRD with Guerrilla Presence
                      County by                     Growth Rate 1952-1998 (%)                              Growth Rate 1978-1998 (%)                 Sample
                      Faction\Guerrilla             Yes          No      Yes-No                           Yes             No       Yes-No           Yes    No
                      FA3                           2.05        2.11       -0.06                          5.82           4.08          1.7           3      8
                                                   (0.69)      (0.97)     (0.63)                        (0.125)         (1.69)       (1.01)
                      YRD                           3.63        2.65     0.98**                           9.75           6.01       3.74**           22     26
                                                   (1.74)      (1.18)     (0.43)                         (4.63)         (2.44)       (1.07)

     Table 3: Comparisons of Growth Rates across Counties in Fujian Province, by Faction and Guerrilla Presence (1952-1998 and 1978-1998)
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. *, ** and *** denote significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent, respectively.
     We examine two measures of famine severity at the county level. The first measure is based on Meng, Qian
and Yared (2015) and proxies the famine severity by the birth cohort size of survivors observed in 1990 census.
The logic for this measure, as Meng, Qian and Yared (2015) argued, is that “famine increases infant and early
childhood mortality rates, and lowers fertility rates such that a more severe famine results in smaller cohort sizes
for those born shortly before or during the famine.” Specifically, we seek to measure “famine control,” by which
we mean the degree to which a region was able to limit or offset the severity of the famine’s effects. We thus
calculate county-level famine severity as the ratio of the number of surviving births (per year) in the county
during the 1959-1961 period relative to the number of surviving births (per year) in the same county during the
1954-1957 period, as observed in the one percent sample of the 1990 China Population Census:
                                                           Surviving Births per Year from 1959-1961 in County C
                             Famine ControlC =                                                                  .                                              (24)
                                                           Surviving Births per Year from 1954-1957 in County C
The higher the measure, the less severe the famine was in county C. Meng, Qian and Yared (2015) point out that
a birth-cohort-size measure of famine severity is not vulnerable to misreporting because it is less influenced by
the government’s desire to understate famine severity.
            Figure
    The second      3 Kernel
                measure       Density
                         is the newly Estimation of Famine Control
                                      compiled county-level         during
                                                            death rates,   1959-1960
                                                                         number      by Power
                                                                                of deaths per thousand.
                       3




                                                                                                4
                                                                         YRD                                                                  guerrillaYes
                                                                         FA3                                                                  guerrillaNo
                                                                                                3
                       2
             Density




                                                                                     Density
                                                                                                2
                       1




                                                                                                1
                       0




                                                                                                0




                             .4            .6         .8          1         1.2                      .4            .6         .8          1              1.2
                                                 Famine Control                                                          Famine Control
                                                                                               .15




                                                                         YRD                                                                  guerrillaYes
                                                                         FA3                                                                  guerrillaNo
                       .1




                                                                                               .1
                                                                                   Density
             Density
                       .05




                                                                                               .05
                       0




                                                                                               0




                             4    6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34                       4    6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34
                                                  Death Rate                                                               Death Rate




             Note: Panel left is the famine control during 1959-1960 by Power(YRD vs. FA3);
Figure 5: Kernel Density of the Famine Control as Proxied by Birth Cohorts (Top Panel) and Death Rates (Bottom
             Panel right is the famine control during 1959-1960 (GuerrillaYes vs. GuerrillaNo)
Panel) at the County Level During the Great Chinese Famine of 1959-1961: YRD vs. FA3 (Left) and Guerrilla
vs. No Guerrilla (Right)

    Figure 5 plots the kernel density estimation of the distribution of the famine control proxied by birth cohorts
(top panel) and death rates (bottom panel) among counties with FA3- and YRD-affiliated cadres (left), and

                                                                                  22
counties with or without a guerrilla presence (right). The top panel of Figure 5 demonstrates that, as measured
by birth cohort size, the severity of the famine was greater in counties with FA3-affiliated cadres than in those
with YRD-affiliated cadres; counties with a guerrilla presence also had lower famine severity. The bottom panel
of Figure 5 shows that death rates during the Great Chinese Famine are lower in counties led by YRD-affiliated
cadres than in counties led by FA3-affiliated cadres; and similarly, the rates are also lower in counties with a
guerrilla presence than in those without such a presence.
    In Table 4, we compare the two famine-severity measures, famine control and death rates in the 1959-1961
period, between the counties led by FA3- and YRD-affiliated counties, and between the counties with and without
a guerrilla presence (Panel A), as well as the interaction effects between faction affiliation and guerrilla presence
on famine severity (Panel B). In the left side of Panel A, we find that YRD counties had significantly higher levels
of famine control by 11 percentage points (or 0.8 standard deviations), a large effect. We also find that counties
led by YRD-affiliated cadres had a significantly lower death rate, with 7.6 fewer deaths per thousand people, or
a rate that is 1.3 standard deviations lower than those counties led by FA3-affiliated cadres. In the right side of
Panel A, we find that the counties with a guerrilla presence as of May 1948 also had a higher levels of famine
control than counties without a guerrilla presence, though the difference is not statistically significant. The death
rates in counties with a guerrilla presence is significantly lower, 2.65 fewer per thousand people, or 0.46 standard
deviations lower, than the death rates in those counties without a guerrilla presence.
    In Panel B of Table 4, we show the interaction effects of faction and local accountability. The left side of
Panel B shows that, within FA3-affiliated counties, there is no statistically significant difference in either famine
control or death rates between counties with and without a guerrilla presence; however, within the group of
YRD-affiliated counties, those with a guerrilla presence had statistically significant higher famine control levels,
and statistically significant lower death rates, than those without a guerrilla presence.
    We interpret the better famine control and lower death rates in counties led by a YRD-affiliated leader and in
counties with a local guerrilla presence as evidence that the leaders in these counties undertook more pro-local
policies during the Great Famine period. As has been pointed out in the literature (Meng, Qian and Yared, 2015;
and Fan, Xiong and Zhou, 2016), local officials’ incentives to exaggerate their actual grain production in their
attempt to meet the procurement quota from the central government played an important role in the magnitude of
famine. The argument in our paper is that the local officials are driven by their incentives for political survival.
These incentives are, in turn, intimately related to their factional affiliations with the provincial-level governments
and their local accountability. County leaders whose political survival depends on grassroots support would tend
to adopt policies that are more likely to blunt the devastating impact of the famine.


5    Empirical Results
     The descriptive evidence in Section 4 is suggestive that the drastic differences in economic growth and famine
severity are related to the differences in the policy choices made by local leaders, either because of their political
affiliation or because of the presence or absence of guerrillas. In this section, we present more systematic empirical
evidence of this connection in order to account for the possible differences in other factors, including geographical
factors and the pre-l952 differences in economic conditions, that may have played a role in accounting for the
results.



                                                          23
                                      Panel A: FA3 vs. YRD, and Guerrilla vs. No Guerrilla
          County       Famine Control       Death Rate                       County         Famine Control      Death Rate
            FA3              0.688             19.7                       No Guerrilla           0.754             14.57
                            (0.158)            (2.6)                                            (0.153)            (5.36)
            Obs.               11               10                                                 25                25
            YRD              0.798             12.1                       Yes Guerrilla          0.807             11.92
                            (0.132)            (0.6)                                            (0.125)            (6.08)
            Obs.               48               48                                                 34                33
         YRD-FA3            0.11**            -7.6***                        Yes-No              0.054             -2.65*
                            [0.046]           [1.75]                                            [0.038]            [1.51]
                                    Panel B: Interactions of FA3, YRD with Guerrilla Presence
                             Famine Control                                                 Death Rates
          County             Guerrilla Presence                                  Guerrilla Presence
                              Yes               No         Yes-No              Yes                 No             Yes-No
            FA3              0.56              0.73         -0.17              24.3               17.8              6.5
                             (0.09)           (0.16)       [0.097]             (9.5)              (7.5)            [5.55]
            Obs.               3                 8                              3                   7
            YRD              0.84              0.76        0.08**              10.2               13.7           -3.47***
                             (0.09)           (0.15)       [0.037]            (2.99)              (4.4)            [1.11]
            Obs.               22               26                              22                 26

Table 4: Comparisons of Famine Control and Death Rates (per 1,000) Across Counties in Fujian Province, by
Faction and Guerrilla Presence, 1959-1961.
Notes: The numbers in parentheses are standard deviations, and the number in square brackets are standard errors. *, ** and *** denote
significance at 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent, respectively.




                                                                 24
5.1    Initial Assignment: Testing for Randomness
     Before we move on to examine the effect of faction affiliation and local accountability , we examine how YRD-
led counties and counties with a guerrilla presence differ from other counties in terms of basic characteristics.
This sheds light on what variables we should control for, and whether selection issues are serious.
     In Table 5, we present a simple linear probability model of the YRD and guerrilla dummy to basic county
characteristics such as initial income and population, and geography. Our income and population variables are
dated in 1952, the earliest number we can find. (Ideally we would have preferred values that preceded 1949.) The
OLS regression results, reported in the first two columns in Table 5, suggest that YRD-led counties had similar
initial income levels and population, but there were some differences in geography. YRD-led counties tended to
have a somewhat higher share of plains. On average, the distance to Xiamen (and Taiwan) does not differ much
between YRD- and FA3-led counties. Counties with a guerrilla presence tended to be more populous, but there is
no systematic difference between counties with and without a guerrilla presence in terms of initial income levels
and geography in general.
     In the last two columns in Table 5, we report the multinomial Logit results with the three states of FA3-
affiliated leadership, YRD-affiliated leadership without a guerrilla presence, and YRD-affiliated leadership with a
guerrilla presence (with the default being FA3-affiliated leadership).14 It again suggests that neither initial income
nor geography matters for which of the three groups would be assigned to a county in 1950. The only variable
that is significant at the 10 percent level is initial county population. To summarize the results in Table 5, we
think it is credible, at least as a first pass, to treat the county’s assignment to YRD- or FA3-affiliated cadres, or
the assignment to having a guerrilla presence or not, as close to random, especially after we control for the initial
conditions and geography variables. In Section 5.4, we further address this issue by focusing only on bordering
counties.

5.2    Factions, Local Accountability and Economic Growth
    We now report our regression results on the effect of factions (as captured by YRD and FA3 affiliations),
local accountability (as captured by having or lacking a guerrilla presence) and their interactions on local annual
economic growth rates.
    In Table 6, we estimate the effect of YRD and FA3 factions on county level annual growth rates, for the
whole period (1952-1998) and for the post-reform period (1978-1998) separately. We present the results for the
full sample, as well as the results when we trim the 5% of the tail observations. In Columns (1) and (4), we
do not control for any variables, and the estimates of YRD coefficients simply replicate the raw differences in
annual growth rates between the YRD- and FA3-led counties we reported in the left side of Panel A in Table 3:
YRD-affiliated counties on average grew by 0.99 percentage points faster than FA3-affiliated counties during the
whole sample period (1952-1998), and by 3.17 percentage points faster in the post-reform period (1978-1998). In
Columns (2) [respectively, Column (5)], we also add controls for the log of the initial GVO per capita, and initial
population size, in 1952 [respectively, in 1978]. In Columns (3) and (6) we further control for some measures
of the county geography and the distance to Xiamen. Finally, in Columns (7) and (8), we trim the tail 5% of the

  14 We do not distinguish an FA3-led county with and without a guerrilla presence because we have few observations (i.e., 11) for
FA3-led counties.



                                                               25
                                                         OLS                           Multinomial Logit
                                                YRD       Guerrilla        YRD_GuerrillaNo         YRD_GuerrillaYes
               Initial Conditions
               Ln_GVOPC_52                      0.052       -0.048                0.586                    0.317
                                               (0.565)     (0.651)               (0.579)                  (0.776)
               Ln_Pop_52                        0.053     0.303***                -0.122                  1.374*
                                               (0.472)     (0.000)               (0.870)                  (0.100)
               Geography
               Share of Plains (%)             0.009*       0.001                 0.062                    0.084
                                               (0.076)     (0.891)               (0.331)                  (0.183)
               Distance to Xiamen (Km)         0.001*       -0.001                0.008                    0.005
                                               (0.067)     (0.353)               (0.123)                  (0.353)
               Constant                        -0.012       0.126                 -5.534                  -7.334
                                               (0.987)     (0.897)               (0.558)                  (0.468)
               Obs.                              58            58                               58
               R2   (Pseudo- R2 )               0.07        0.253                              0.159

Table 5: Correlations of the Factions of Local Leaders in 1949 and Guerrilla Presence with County Characteristics
in 1952
Notes: FA3 is the reference group in multinomial logit regression. White Standard Errors are in parenthesis. *, **, and *** respectively
indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance.


dependent variable to ensure that our results are not driven by outliers.
     The results are remarkably robust. Let us discuss Columns (3) and (6) where we include all the controls of
initial economic condition, population and geography. Focusing on the annual growth rate from 1952 to 1998,
we find that, relative to FA3 counties, YRD counties exhibited an advantage of 0.91 percentage points per annum.
In Column (7), we find that the YRD advantage stays at 0.77 percentage points per annum even after we trim
5 percent of the tails. Focusing on the post-reform period from 1978 to 1998, the advantage of the YRD-led
counties is estimated to be more than 2.1 percentage points per annum, and this advantage does not shrink much
as we trim 5 percent of the outliers. Table 6 also shows that initial income is associated with a lower growth rate,
which is consistent with a conditional convergence hypothesis; that having a higher share of plains is associated
with higher growth, and that a closer proximity to Xiamen (and Taiwan) is associated with a higher growth rate.15
     We now turn to the effect of local accountability. Counties with a strong guerrilla presence had a more
organized grassroots political constituency that was better able to act as a force to be reckoned with for local
political leaders to survive. As a result, and as modeled previously, the local leaders in counties with guerrilla
presence were likely to adopt more pro-local economic policies.
     In Table 7 we add the dummy of local guerrilla presence, and study the separate effects of YRD leadership
and guerrilla presence on local growth rates. We find that both YRD and guerrilla dummies have statistically
significant and positive effects on annual growth rates. Focusing on the results in Columns (3) and (6), where

  15Reducing the distance to Xiamen by one standard deviation (90KM) is associated with an increase in growth rate by 0.9 percentage
point.



                                                                    26
                                                                                        Full Sample                                                 Trimming Tail 5%
                                                               1952-1998                                      1978-1998                        1952-1998          1978-1998
                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)                 (4)         (5)            (6)                (7)                (8)
                       Power Structure
                       YRD                       0.987***      0.925***       0.907***          3.166***      2.103***       2.102***           0.767***           2.007***
                                                  (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.003)           (0.000)       (0.003)        (0.002)            (0.008)            (0.000)
                       Initial Conditions
                       Ln_GVOPC_52                             -1.876***     -2.127***                                                         -1.985***
                                                                (0.000)        (0.000)                                                           (0.000)
                       Ln_GVOPC_78                                                                            -4.634***      -4.506***                             -3.358***
                                                                                                               (0.000)        (0.000)                               (0.000)
                       Ln_Pop_52                                 0.217          -0.417                                                            -0.193




27
                                                                (0.464)        (0.136)                                                           (0.349)
                       Ln_Pop_78                                                                                0.839          -0.842                                -0.864
                                                                                                               (0.299)        (0.282)                               (0.208)
                       Geography
                       Share of Plains (%)                                     0.055**                                       0.143***            0.046*             0.081*
                                                                               (0.015)                                        (0.007)            (0.064)             (0.06)
                       Distance to Xiamen                                    -0.004***                                       -0.010***          -0.004**           -0.012***
                       (Km)                                                     -0.008                                        (0.005)            (0.012)            (0.001)
                       Obs.                         57             57             57                  57          57             57                 53                 52
                       R2                          0.049         0.403           0.58             0.089          0.49          0.645              0.432              0.528

     Table 6: The Effect of YRD vs. FA3 Factions on Annual Growth Rates
     Notes: White Standard Errors are in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance.
                                                                                       Full Sample                                                 Trimming Tail 5%
                                                               1952-1998                                     1978-1998                         1952-1998     1978-1998
                                                    (1)          (2)             (3)               (4)          (5)             (6)               (7)             (8)
                       Power Structure
                       YRD                       0.867**      0.879***       0.857***          2.537***       1.981***       1.929***           0.741**            1.890***
                                                 (0.015)       (0.007)        (0.004)           (0.000)        (0.004)        (0.002)           (0.012)             (0.000)
                       Guerrilla                 0.818**      0.642**         0.524**          3.420***        1.652**        1.517**           0.472*             1.488**
                                                 (0.036)       (0.035)        (0.048)           (0.000)        (0.026)        (0.018)           (0.074)             (0.010)
                       Initial Conditions
                       Ln_GVOPC_52                            -1.860***      -2.096***                                                         -1.975***
                                                                (0.000)        (0.000)                                                           (0.000)
                       Ln_GVOPC_78                                                                           -4.278***      -4.150***                             -2.973***
                                                                                                               (0.000)        (0.000)                               (0.000)




28
                       Ln_pop_52                                -0.001        -0.576**                                                           -0.337
                                                                (0.997)        (0.045)                                                           (0.116)
                       Ln_pop_78                                                                                0.358         -1.248                                -1.247*
                                                                                                               (0.671)        (0.112)                               (0.077)
                       Geography
                       Share of Plains (%)                                     0.055**                                       0.149***            0.047**           0.091**
                                                                               (0.010)                                        (0.003)            (0.049)            (0.016)
                       Distance to Xiamen                                     -0.004**                                      -0.009***           -0.003**          -0.010***
                       (Km)                                                    (0.014)                                        (0.009)            (0.019)            (0.001)
                       Obs.                         57             57             57              57             57              57                 53                52
                       R2                          0.110         0.430          0.598            0.266          0.515          0.668              0.459              0.571

     Table 7: The Separate Effects of YRD and Guerrilla on Annual Growth Rates
     Notes: White Standard Errors are in parenthesis. Intercepts are not reported. *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance.
we include the richest set of controls with the full sample, we find that, compared to FA3-led counties, YRD-led
counties had a 0.86 percentage point higher average annual growth rate (or 0.6 standard deviations higher) in
the 1952-1998 period, and 1.93 percentage points (or 0.5 standard deviations higher) in the 1978-1998 period;
and the effect of a guerrilla presence is also strong though slightly less pronounced: the average annual growth
rate is 0.52 percentage point (or 0.35 standard deviations) higher in the 1952-1998 period, and 1.52 percentage
points (or 0.4 standard deviations) higher in the 1978-1998 period. The results remain statistically significant and
quantitatively similar when we trim 5 percent of tail counties.
     In Table 8, we examine the interaction effects of factions and local accountability. We include YRD×GuerrillaYes
and YRD×GuerrillaNo.16 If there is an additional boost from being led by cadres from the weak YRD faction in
counties with strong local accountability as proxied by local guerrilla presence, the effect of YRD×GuerrillaYes
should be significantly larger than YRD×GuerrillaNo. We find this to be true, and the results are robust. Focusing
on Columns (3) and (7), counties in which the local leaders were affiliated with YRD faction but without guerrilla
participation had a growth rate that was 0.67 percentage points (or 0.45 of a standard deviation) higher from 1952
to 1998, and 1.46 percentage points (or roughly 0.4 of standard deviation) higher from 1978 to 1998, than FA3
counties. In contrast, counties with a YRD faction leader and guerrilla presence had growth rates that were 1.29
percentage points (or 0.9 of a standard deviation) higher from 1952 to 1998, and 3.18 percentage points (or 0.8 of
a standard deviation) higher from 1978 to 1998, than FA3 counties with no guerrilla presence. The Wald tests for
the hypothesis that the coefficients for YRD×GuerrillaYes and YRD×GuerrillaNo terms are equal is rejected at
5.1 and 2.4 percent significance levels, respectively, in Columns (3) and (7). Thus, being led by cadres who lack
political support in upper-level government could imply faster local economic growth, but when coupled with
local accountability, its effects more than double.

5.3    Factions, Local Accountability and Famine Severity from 1959 to 1961
     So far we have found a strong and robust association between the faction of local leaders and local account-
ability and local economic growth; and we have offered evidence that counties with stronger local accountability
and with leaders from weaker factions tended to have significantly higher growth rates in the post-reform period
and in the five decades after the founding of the People’s Republic of China. However, the very nature of the
empirical exercise suggests that it is almost impossible to establish impeccable causality. In Tables 6-8 above, we
have controlled for geography and initial conditions; and in Tables 5, we have shown that there does not seem to
be significant correlations of the YRD or guerrilla status of a county with the county’s observables in terms of
initial economic conditions and geography. But the concern is that there may still be other omitted factors that
drive our findings.




   16In principle, we may also include FA3×GuerrillaYes. However, only three counties fit this category. Indeed, we have tried to include
this term in the regression [see Columns (4) and (8) in Table 8], and found the estimate to be, not surprisingly, statistically insignificant.


                                                                     29
                                                                                             Full Sample                                                                Trimming Tail 5%
                                                             1952-1998                                                      1978-1998                               1952-1998     1978-1998
                                          (1)            (2)         (3)               (4)                 (5)          (6)         (7)               (8)              (9)            (10)
        Power Structure
        FA3×GuerrillaYes                                                             0.058                                                          0.376
                                                                                    (0.453)                                                        (0.852)
        YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]            0.551        0.620*        0.674**         0.690*           1.458**         1.352*        1.455**         1.547*             0.535*            1.372***
                                        (0.118)       (0.055)        (0.029)        (0.410)           (0.034)        (0.054)        (0.032)        (0.818)            (0.062)            (0.002)
        YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]         1.528***      1.424***       1.288***       1.306***          5.198***       3.422***       3.180***       3.289***           1.160***           3.086***
                                        (0.001)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.455)           (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.959)            (0.001)            (0.000)
        Initial Conditions
        Ln_GVOPC_52                                  -1.855***      -2.098***      -2.097***                                                                        -1.968***
                                                       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.240)                                                                          (0.000)
        Ln_GVOPC_78                                                                 -0.576**                       -4.325***      -4.243***                                            -3.089***
                                                                                     (0.294)                         (0.000)        (0.000)                                              (0.000)




30
        Ln_pop_52                                     -0.028        -0.572**                                                                     -4.210***            -0.345*
                                                      (0.929)        (0.042)                                                                       (0.980)            (0.096)
        Ln_pop_78                                                                                                     0.272          -1.245         -1.261                               -1.252*
                                                                                                                     (0.745)        (0.108)        (0.795)                               (0.075)
        Geography:
        Share of Plains (%)                                          0.052**         0.053**                                       0.140***       0.142***            0.044*            0.084**
                                                                     (0.016)         (0.023)                                        (0.005)        (0.051)            (0.063)            (0.027)
        Distance to Xiamen                                          -0.004**        -0.004**                                      -0.009***      -0.009***           -0.003**          -0.010***
        (Km)                                                         (0.010)         (0.002)                                        (0.007)        (0.003)            (0.016)            (0.001)
        Obs.                              57            57              57              57              57             57              57             57                53                 52
        R2                               0.127         0.444          0.603           0.595            0.267          0.528          0.672          0.666              0.479              0.580
        H0 : b0 = b1                     0.033         0.024          0.049           0.051            0.002          0.018          0.023          0.024              0.042              0.015

     Table 8: The Interaction Effects of Factions and Guerrilla Presence on Annual Growth Rates
     Notes: (1). White Standard Errors are in parenthesis. (2). Intercepts are not reported. (3).*, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance. (4)
     The last row reports the p-values of the hypothesis that b0 = b1 .
                                                 Full Sample                   Trimming Tail 5%           Bottom 25%∗
                                          (1)         (2)         (3)                (4)                       (5)
              Power Structure
              YRD                      0.109**     0.116**     0.119**                0.087                  -0.419**
                                       (0.050)     (0.054)     (0.056)               (0.053)                  (0.182)
              Initial Conditions
              Ln_GVOPC_52                           0.033        0.028                0.031                    -0.081
                                                   (0.036)      (0.039)              (0.038)                  (0.101)
              Ln_pop_52                            0.048**       0.041                0.032                   -0.152*
                                                   (0.022)      (0.026)              (0.024)                  (0.076)
              Geography
              Share of Plains                                    0.000                 0.001                   0.002
              (%)                                               (0.002)              (0.002)                  (0.007)
              Distance to Xiamen                                 -0.000               -0.000                   0.001
              (Km)                                              (0.000)              (0.000)                  (0.001)
              Obs.                        58           57          57                    53                      58
              R2                        0.075        0.125       0.095                 0.089                   0.172

Table 9: The Effect of Factions on Famine Control during the Great Chinese Famine (1959-1961) in Fujian
Province
Notes: White standard errors are in parentheses. Intercept not reported. In Column (5), the dependent variable is a dummy variable,
which take the value of one, if the county was in the bottom 25 percent of counties in terms of famine control (i.e., they are among top
25 percent of counties with the most severe famine effects from 1959 to 1961), and take the value of zero, otherwise. *, **, and ***
respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance.


    In this subsection, we attempt to provide additional evidence to buttress the case for the causal impact of
factions and local accountability on economic performance. In particular, we examine whether counties led
by leaders affiliated with weak factions and with stronger local accountability led to better protection of local
residents in the Great Chinese Famine (1959-1961).
    The Great Chinese Famine was an important event in modern Chinese history in which roughly 30 million
people died due to a combination of natural disaster and radical policies implemented by the central government
(Coale, 1981; Dikotter, 2010). While one of the causes for the Great Chinese Famine was, no doubt, natural
disaster, the literature suggests that the key determinant was likely the implementation of radical policies to
procure grains for the rapid industrialization that was favored by Mao Zedong, the top leader of China at the
time. For instance, the incidence of famine was higher in grain-rich areas (Meng, Qian and Yared, 2015), which
implies that it was grain procurement rather than the inadequacy of grain production that caused famine. Indeed,
Li and Yang (2005), Meng, Qian and Yared (2015) argue that the key factors behind the famine were the inelastic
and regressive procurement policies. Yang (1996) and Kung and Lin (2003) offer evidence that radical policies
were a key reason behind the widespread famine in China even though the average grain output was sufficient to
support the whole population.17 Kung and Chen (2011) provide evidence that provincial leaders with stronger
career incentives (i.e., alternative members of the central committee versus full central committee members) were
more radical in implementing the grain procurement policy despite the large scale of the natural disaster. Those

  17Fan and Shi (2013) offer evidence that the Great Leap Forward industrialization movement and the details of the procurement policies
contributed to the famine.


                                                                  31
alternative members had an incentive to work harder to try to please Mao by, for example, procuring grains
aggressively, because their political positions were more precarious, and their career trajectories depended on
pleasing superiors. Fan, Xiong and Zhou (2016) argued that inflation of the grain production by local officials
was partly responsible for the severity of the famine.
    This literature thus far has focused on either the role of provincial leaders (such as how career incentives
influenced their decisions), or the policies at the central level (such as the grain procurement policies). We
complement this literature by zeroing in on the incentives of the county-level cadres, the role of local accountability,
and the connection between the provincial and the county-level cadres.

Famine Control (Birth Rates). In Table 9 we relate famine control at the county level to whether a county’s
leader was affiliated with the weaker faction YRD, with the same sequences of controls as in the case of annual
growth rates reported in Table 5. The results on the effect of YRD leadership are very robust, with the coefficient
estimates ranging from 0.11 to 0.12 when outliers are not trimmed. When outliers (i.e., tail 5% ) are trimmed,
however, the YRD coefficient becomes statistically insignificant, though the magnitude is similar. These results
thus suggest the mechanism that led to better famine control among counties with YRD-affiliated leaders was
likely an ability to reduce extreme famine.
     To check this, we create an indicator variable which takes the value of one if a county’s famine control measure
as constructed by formula (24) is in the bottom quartile among all counties. This indicator captures the possibility
of extreme local famine. The results in Column (6) of Table 9 show that YRD-led counties had a 42 percent lower
likelihood of extreme local famine, suggesting that being led by cadres from the weaker YRD faction was very
effective in containing the famine disaster.
     In Table 10 we further allow the guerrilla presence in the county to play a role. In the left panel, we let YRD
affiliation and a guerrilla presence have separate effects; and in the right panel, we let YRD affiliation interact
with a guerrilla presence. When YRD affiliation and a guerrilla presence are included separately, YRD matters
much more than the guerrilla presence, with the former being largely statistically significant, while the latter
is never statistically significant. Because the procurement policy was a top-down mandate, it is not surprising
that YRD affiliation would be more important in reducing famine since its cadres served as the link between the
provincial government and the county governments, and thus could have a stronger say on how much grain was
to be procured. Local guerrilla cadres did not have direct link to the provincial government, thus they could
not directly push back the central mandate. Similar to Table 9, Columns (4) and (5) of Table 10 suggest that
YRD-affiliated counties were able to substantially reduce extreme famine.




                                                          32
                                                                     Separate Effects                                                                    Interaction Effects
                                                  Full Sample              Trimming Tail 5%         Bottom 25%∗                        Full Sample                 Trimming Tail 5%          Bottom 25%∗
                                          (1)         (2)          (3)               (4)                   (5)                (6)           (7)           (8)                (9)                  (10)
         Power Structure
         YRD                            0.101*     0.114**      0.117**             0.077              -0.422**
                                        (0.055)    (0.056)      (0.058)            (0.055)              (0.182)
         Guerrilla                       0.041      0.021        0.018              0.052                0.023
                                        (0.036)    (0.040)      (0.042)            (0.037)              (0.111)
         YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                                                                               0.072         0.091         0.094             0.055                -0.369*
                                                                                                                            (0.056)       (0.057)       (0.060)           (0.055)               (0.189)
         YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                                                                                            0.152***      0.154***      0.157***           0.134**              -0.499**
                                                                                                                            (0.050)       (0.056)       (0.058)           (0.056)               (0.189)
         Initial Conditions
         Ln_GVOPC_52                                 0.033       0.029              0.032               -0.079                             0.034         0.031              0.034               -0.086
                                                    (0.037)     (0.039)            (0.038)              (0.102)                           (0.038)       (0.039)            (0.038)              (0.102)




33
         Ln_pop_52                                   0.041       0.036              0.017              -0.159**                            0.029         0.027              0.012               -0.120
                                                    (0.025)     (0.029)            (0.024)              (0.076)                           (0.024)       (0.028)            (0.023)              (0.078)
         Geography
         Share of Plains (%)                                     0.000               0.001               0.002                                          -0.000              0.001                0.003
                                                                (0.002)            (0.002)              (0.007)                                         (0.002)            (0.002)              (0.007)
         Distance to Xiamen                                      -0.000             -0.000               0.001                                          -0.000              -0.000               0.001
         (Km)                                                   (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.001)                                         (0.000)            (0.000)              (0.001)
         Obs.                             58           57          57                 53                   58                  58            57            57                 53                  58
         Adjusted-R2                    0.079        0.113       0.080               0.104               0.156               0.126         0.143         0.110               0.144               0.172
         H0 : b0 = b1                                                                                                        0.031         0.136         0.142               0.035               0.238

     Table 10: The Separate and Interaction Effects of Factions and Guerrilla Presence on Famine Control during the Great Chinese Famine (1959-1961)
     Notes: (1). White Standard Errors are in parentheses. (2). Intercepts are not reported. (3). *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance. (4) The last
     row reports the p-values of the hypothesis that b0 = b1 . (5) In Columns (5) and (10), the dependent variable is a dummy variable, which take the value of one, if the county was in the bottom 25 percent
     of famine control (i.e., they are among top 25 percent of counties with the most severe famine effects from 1959 to 1961), and take the value of zero, otherwise.
    In Columns (6)-(10), we allow YRD’s effect to hinge on whether the county had a guerrilla presence. Columns
(6)-(8) show that counties with a guerrilla presence and were also led by cadres affiliated with the weak faction
achieved much better famine control with the coefficient around 0.15 to 0.17. In contrast, YRD-led counties
without a guerrilla presence did not have significantly better famine control, though the magnitude remain
consistently positive.
    In Column (10) we focus on whether a county had a disastrous famine control (i.e., was in bottom quartile).
We find that it is 36.9 percentage (49.9 percent, respectively) less likely for YRD-led counties without guerrilla
presence (with a guerrilla presence, respectively) than for FA3 counties to be in this extreme famine severity
scenario.

Death Rates. The second measure of famine severity we examine is the county-level average death rates (per
thousand) during the 1959-1961 period. In Table 11, we present the estimates of the impact of faction on death
rates. In the specification reported in Column (4) , which controls for the county’s initial conditions and geography
variables, we find that counties led by YRD-affiliated cadres have death rates that are 7.81‰ (about 1.4 standard
deviations) lower; the finding is statistically significant at 1 percent In Columns (5) and (6), we find that YRD-
leadership affiliation is associated with lower local death rates, both at the extreme end of the distribution and in the
middle part of distribution: trimming the 5 percent of the tail observations, we find that having a YRD-affiliated
cadre is still associated with death rates that are 4.2 ‰ lower; and that YRD affiliation reduces the likelihood of
being among the most impacted counties (i.e., in the top quartile in terms of death rates) by 39 percent.In Table
12, our analysis of death rates incorporates the effects of a guerrilla presence in the county. Similar to Table 10,
Table 12 includes the guerrilla presence both separately from YRD affiliation [Columns (4)-(5)] and interacted
with YRD affiliation [Columns (6)-(10)]. When guerrilla presence is included in the regression separately, we
find that its coefficients are not statistically significant, while the coefficient estimates on YRD affiliation remain
negative and significant at around -7.8‰˙When we interact guerrilla presence with YRD affiliation, we find that
both YRD-led counties with and without a guerrilla presence have statistically significant lower death rates than
FA3-affiliated counties. There is also strong evidence that YRD affiliation joint with guerrilla presence reduces
the probability of the county experiencing extreme famine severity (in terms of the county’s death rates being
among the highest quartile among all counties) by about 40 percent.




                                                           34
                                                 Full Sample                      Trimming Tail 5%          Top 25%*
                                        (1)           (3)            (4)                (5)                    (6)
            Power Structure
            YRD                     -7.611***     -7.925***      -7.807***             -4.228**              -0.391**
                                      (2.576)       (2.853)        (2.883)              (1.860)               (0.195)
            Initial Conditions
            Ln_GVOPC_52                            -2.095*         -1.488               -0.366                -0.042
                                                    (1.199)       (1.036)               (0.736)               (0.101)
            Ln_pop_52                             -3.077***       -1.711*               -1.423                -0.131
                                                    (0.765)       (0.873)               (0.887)               (0.085)
            Geography
            Share of Plains (%)                                  -0.105**              -0.089**               0.002
                                                                  (0.045)               (0.038)              (0.004)
            Distance to Xiamen                                    0.009*               0.010**               0.002**
            (Km)                                                  (0.005)               (0.005)              (0.001)
            Obs.                         58            57            57                    52                   57
            Adjusted R2                0.238         0.376         0.408                 0.394                0.202

Table 11: The Effect of Factions on the Death Rates During the 1959-1961 Chinese Famine
Notes: (1). White Standard Errors are in parentheses. (2). Intercepts are not reported. (3). *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10
percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance.




                                                                35
                                                                     Separate Effects                                                                     Interaction Effects
                                                    Full Sample                Trimming Tail 5%           Top 25%*                        Full Sample                  Trimming Tail 5%          Top 25%*
                                           (1)           (2)           (3)                (4)                 (5)               (6)            (7)            (8)                (9)                (10)
         Power Structure
         YRD                           -7.298**      -7.886***      -7.798**           -4.214**           -0.395**
                                        (2.769)        (2.916)       (2.936)            (1.915)            (0.196)
         Guerrilla                      -1.982         -0.433        -0.077             -0.108              0.032
                                        (1.350)        (1.330)       (1.310)            (0.985)            (0.117)
         YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                                                                               -6.021**       -7.093**       -7.173**           -3.896**            -0.380*
                                                                                                                              (2.673)        (2.861)        (2.903)            (1.881)            (0.203)
         YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                                                                                             -9.491***      -9.045***      -8.672***           -4.729**            -0.407*
                                                                                                                              (2.606)        (2.888)        (2.937)            (1.946)            (0.206)
         Initial Conditions
         Ln_GVOPC_52                                  -2.101*         -1.492            -0.372             -0.040                           -2.131*        -1.559              -0.417             -0.043
                                                       (1.204)       (1.038)            (0.754)            (0.102)                           (1.191)       (1.063)             (0.753)            (0.103)




36
         Ln_pop_52                                   -2.925***       -1.688*            -1.393             -0.141                          -2.435***       -1.311              -1.218             -0.124
                                                       (0.830)       (0.914)            (0.920)            (0.092)                           (0.851)       (0.935)             (0.930)            (0.094)
         Geography
         Share of Plains (%)                                        -0.105**           -0.089**             0.002                                         -0.098**            -0.085**             0.002
                                                                     (0.046)            (0.038)            (0.004)                                         (0.046)             (0.039)            (0.005)
         Distance to Xiamen                                          0.009*             0.010**            0.002**                                          0.009              0.010*             0.002**
         (Km)                                                        (0.005)            (0.005)            (0.001)                                         (0.005)             (0.005)            (0.001)
         Obs.                              58             57            57                 52                 57                58             57             57                  52                 57
         R2                              0.254          0.365         0.396              0.381              0.187             0.302          0.384          0.408               0.389              0.186
         H0 : b0 = b1                                                                                                         0.002          0.077          0.145               0.359              0.819

     Table 12: The Separate and Interaction Effects of Factions and Guerrilla Presence on Death Rates during the Great Chinese Famine (1959-1961)
     Notes: (1). White Standard Errors are in parentheses. (2). Intercepts are not reported. (3). *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance. (4) The last
     row reports the p-values of the hypothesis that b0 = b1 . (5) In Columns (5) and (10), the dependent variable is a dummy variable, which takes the value of one, if the county was in the bottom 25 percent
     of famine control (i.e., they are among top 25 percent of counties with the most severe famine effects from 1959 to 1961), and take the value of zero, otherwise.
                                                     1952-1998                                  1978-1998
                                               (1)       (2)               (3)             (4)      (5)              (6)
              YRD                           0.972*** 0.684**                            1.961** 1.545**
                                             (0.351)  (0.309)                           (0.782)  (0.635)
              Guerrilla                                0.468*                                    1.374**
                                                      (0.277)                                    (0.670)
              YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                        0.465                                   0.980
                                                                          (0.309)                                 (0.657)
              YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                                     1.058***                                2.645***
                                                                          (0.364)                                 (0.820)
              Other Control Variables          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes
              Obs.                              15            51             51            15           51           51
              Adjusted-R2                     0.233         0.589          0.598         0.424        0.662        0.669
              H0 : b0 = b1                                                 0.071                                   0.037

Table 13: The Effect of Power Structure on Growth Rates in Fujian, Border-Sharing Counties Only
Notes: White standard errors are in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. Columns (1) and (4) use a subsample of FA3-led counties and
their border-sharing counties. Columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) use a subsample of counties with a guerrilla presence, and their border-sharing
counties. Other control variables include Ln_GVOPC_52 (Ln_GVOPC_78), Ln_pop_52 (Ln_pop_78), Share of Plains (%) and Distance
to Xiamen. *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance.


5.4    Robustness Checks: Border Counties
    Some may argue that, given the uneven distribution of YRD- and FA3-led counties over the province (see
Figure 2), the difference in development outcomes we have so far documented may reflect difference in other
unobserved differences in geography or aspects not captured by our limited controls, such as the share of plains
in the county and the distance to Xiamen (and therefore Taiwan).
    A useful robustness check would thus be to hold these unobserved geographic elements or other aspects
as constant as possible. To this end, when we estimate the effect of YRD leadership, we only keep FA3- and
YRD-led counties that are neighbors. Since counties are geographically small - there are almost 3,000 counties
in China now – neighboring counties tend to be similar in geography (and culture). This stringent control results
in a much smaller sample of 15 counties (versus 57 counties in the full sample). When we estimate the effect of a
guerrilla presence (and its interactive effect with YRD), we keep only counties with a guerrilla presence and their
neighboring counties. The restricted sample has 51 counties.
    Since our results are quite robust across various sets of controls, we present the specification with the
comprehensive controls. The results on annual growth rates when restricted to the border counties are presented
in Table 13, and those on famine control and death rates are in Table 14.
    In Columns (1) and (4) in Table 13, we examine the effect of factions (measured by the YRD dummy) on
border-sharing counties with observations from only 15 border-sharing counties. We find that the results, both
qualitatively and quantitatively, are very similar to our results from the full sample. For instance, the YRD-
leadership effect on annual growth rates in the 1978-1998 period is now 1.96 percentage points (compared to
2.10 percentage points in Column 6 of Table 6); the YRD-leadership effect on the growth rates in the whole
1952-1998 period 0.97 of a percentage point (vs. 0.91 of a percentage point in Column 3 of Table 6). This is
quite remarkable, since the estimation sample is now only a quarter of the previous, already quite small, sample.


                                                                    37
                                                  Famine Control                                   Death Rates
                                             (1)       (2)         (3)                  (4)           (5)             (6)
           YRD                            0.176** 0.171***                            -3.549     -10.545***
                                          (0.062)    (0.060)                         (4.362)       (3.201)
           Guerrilla                                  0.018                                         -0.335
                                                     (0.040)                                       (1.273)
           YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                0.151**                                          -10.050***
                                                                 (0.063)                                           (3.221)
           YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                              0.200***                                          -11.154***
                                                                 (0.060)                                           (3.173)
           Other Control Variable           Yes        Yes         Yes                 Yes           Yes             Yes
           Obs.                              15         51          51                  14            51              51
           Adjusted-R2                     0.485      0.171       0.191               0.501         0.566           0.571
           H0 : b0 = b1                                           0.244                                             0.283

Table 14: The Effect of Power Structure on Famine Control and Death Rates during the 1959-1961 Chinese
Famine in Fujian, Border-Sharing Counties Only
Notes: White standard errors are in parentheses. Intercepts are not reported. Columns (1) and (4) use a subsample of FA3 counties and
their border-sharing counties. Columns (2)-(3) and (5)-(6) use a subsample of counties with a guerrilla presence, and their border-sharing
counties. Other control variables include Ln_GVOPC_52 (Ln_GVOPC_78), Ln_pop_52 (Ln_pop_78), Share of Plains (%) and Distance
to Xiamen.


     In Columns (2) and (5), the estimation uses the 51 neighboring counties with and without a guerrilla presence.
When we examine the effect of both YRD affiliation and a guerrilla presence, again, we find the results qualitatively
and quantitatively similar for the growth rates in both periods. For instance, the effect of YRD leadership on the
growth rate in the 1978-1998 period is 1.55 percentage points (vs. 1.93 percentage points in Column 6 of Table
7); the effect of a guerrilla presence is 1.37 percentage points (vs. 1.52 percentage points in Column 3 of Table
7).
     In Columns (3) and (6) where we allow for the interactive effect of YRD and a guerrilla presence, some
differences in results emerge. Relative to FA3-led counties, YRD counties without a guerrilla presence no longer
have a statistically significant advantage in growth rates – though the advantage remains, and the magnitude
remains sizable: 0.98 (vs. 1.46 in Column 7 of Table 8) for the 1978-98 period. However, relative to FA3-led
counties, YRD-led counties with a guerrilla presence still exhibit sizable and significant advantages in growth,
1.06 (vs. 1.29 in Column 3 of Table 8) for the 1952-98 period, and 2.65 (vs. 3.18 in Column 7 of Table 8) for the
1978-1998 period.
     Table 14 shows similar results for both famine control and death rates over the 1959-1961 period using
border-sharing counties only. Column (1) shows that, when using only border-sharing counties, the effect of
YRD affiliation on famine control becomes even more pronounced. The estimated coefficient of YRD affiliation
is 0.17 (vs. 0.12 in Column 3 of Table 9). When we include both YRD-affiliation and guerrilla-presence effects,
the estimated YRD effect becomes 0.17 (vs. 0.12 in Column 3 of Table 10). The effect of guerrilla presence
remains statistically insignificant. Column (3) examines the interaction effect of YRD affiliation and guerrilla
presence, the coefficient estimate of YRD×GuerrillaYes is now 0.20 (vs. 0.16 in Column 8 of Table 10); that of
YRD×GuerrillaNo is now 0.15 and statistically significant (vs. 0.09 and statistically insignificant in Column 8 of
Table 10).

                                                                   38
     In Columns (4)-(6), we report the results for death rates when only border-sharing counties are included in
the analysis. In Column (4), we find that the estimated coefficient of YRD affiliation on death rates during the
Great Chinese Famine is still negative at -3.55‰ , but it is no longer statistically significant. When we include
both YRD affiliation and guerrilla presence in Column (5), however, the YRD-affiliation effect is -10.5‰ and
statistically significant at the 1 percent level, and the effect of guerrilla presence is negative but statistically
insignificant. In Column (6), the interaction effects of YRD×GuerrillaYes and YRD×GuerrillaNo are both
negative and statistically significant; the magnitude of these estimates is larger than the corresponding numbers
in Table 11.
     The qualitatively and quantitatively robust results in Tables 13 and 14, using a smaller set of neighboring
counties, render strong support to the positive role of weak factions and local accountability in facilitating local
development.

5.5   Were the Local Leaders from the Stronger Faction Starved of Resources from the Higher-
      level Government?
    Why do counties led by cadres affiliated with the stronger FA3 faction perform worse than the counties led
by cadres affiliated with the weaker YRD faction? Is it possible that counties led by FA3 factions did not receive
as many resource as the counties led by YRD factions? To assess this hypothesis, we plot in Figure 6 the kernel
density distribution of the average fiscal expenditure/fiscal revenue ratio for 1950 and 1957, the only two years for
which these statistics are available at the county level. A ratio larger than one indicates that the county received
net transfers from the higher-level government (as local government debt was prohibited then), and a ratio lower
than one indicates that the county transferred net resources to higher-level governments. Figure 6 shows that the
density plot for YRD-led counties is to the left of the density plot for the FA3-led counties, indicating relatively
lower transfers to the YRD-led      counties.
                          Figure 6. Kernel Density Estimation of Average Expenditure-Revenue Ratio, 1950 and 1957
                                                                      YRD vs. FA3
                                             1




                                                                                                            YRD
                                                                                                            FA3
                                             .8
                                             .6
                                   Density
                                             .4
                                             .2
                                             0




                                                  0          .5                1           1.5                  2
                                                                   Expenditure-Revenue Ratio

                     Note: We construct the variable of Average Expenditure-Revenue Ratio to proxy fiscal favoritism by the
                   provincial authority.
         Figure 6: Kernel    Density Estimation of Average
                   Expenditure-Revenue Ratio=(Exp +Exp *Def
                                                                  Expenditure-Revenue
                                                            )/ (Rev +Rev *Def )
                                                                                      Ratio, 1950 and 1957.
                                                       50     57      50-57        50   57    50-57
                     Where Exp50 is the county's fiscal budgetary expenditure in 1950, Inc50 is the county's fiscal budgetary
                     revenue. Def50-57 is the GDP deflator to convert 1957 Renminbi (RMB) into 1950 RMB.
    The pattern in Figure 6 is confirmed in Table 15 where we regress the average expenditure-revenue ratio for
1950 and 1957 on the YRD dummy. We find that the ratio is about 26.8 percentage points lower (Column 3)
for YRD-led counties than for FA3 counties when we include all the controls. However, trimming the 5 percent


                                                                              39
                                                             Full Sample                     Trimming Tail 5%
                                                     (1)          (2)           (3)                (4)
                        Power Structure
                        YRD                      -0.357**       -0.266*      -0.268*                 -0.186
                                                  (0.151)       (0.140)      (0.156)                (0.149)
                        Initial Conditions
                        Ln_GVOPC_52                             -0.317*       -0.319*               -0.254
                                                                (0.160)       (0.175)               (0.168)
                        Ln_pop_52                              -0.206**      -0.212**               -0.147
                                                                (0.083)       (0.101)               (0.090)
                        Geography
                        Share of Plains (%)                                    0.001                 -0.001
                                                                             (0.008)                (0.008)
                        Distance to Xiamen                                    -0.000                  0.000
                        (Km)                                                 (0.001)                (0.001)
                        Obs.                         53            52            52                     48
                        Adjusted-R2                0.062         0.147        0.110                  0.037

        Table 15: The Effect of Factions on Average Expenditure-Revenue Ratios Between 1950 and 1957


tail of outliers renders the YRD dummy statistically insignificant even though the point estimate is still negative,
suggesting that YRD-led counties are more prone to extreme resource extraction by the higher-level governments.
Even though YRD-led counties were prone to experience resource extraction by the higher-level governments,
the counties led by YRD-affiliated cadres were still able to achieve a better development performance for their
counties. This suggests that the underlying mechanisms must be more efficient resource allocations in the
YRD-affiliated counties.18



5.6    Faction, Local Accountability, or Something Else?
    Another concern is that the main results may be driven by the differences in skills in managing economic affairs
among cadres affiliated with FA3 and YRD factions. After all, FA3 cadres specialized in fighting wars because
they spent most of their careers in the formal troops led by the Chinese Communist Party. In contrast, YRD
cadres may have been more experienced in working with locals because they originated from the revolutionary
bases in Hebei and Shanxi provinces. If this were the case, the difference in the growth rates for these two groups
of counties can be driven by skill differences of the local leaders, not by political survival incentives.

   18Interestingly, our findings here coupled with earlier findings are similar in spirit to the experience of the emergence of inclusive
institutions in England documented in Angelucci, Meraglia, and Voigtlander (2017). These authors present historical evidence that,
staring with relatively homogeneous institutions in England after the Norman Conquest of 1066, the rulers of England granted some
trading towns self governance for exchange of higher taxes to increase total tax revenues, and those self-governance arrangements
facilitated the emergence of "inclusive institutions" such as by these trading towns sending troops to back the parliament against the king
during the Civil War in 1642 and supporting the Great Reform Act of 1832 that resulted in the franchise. Here, those weak-faction counties
likely employed more local initiatives, sent higher net transfers to the upper government, had more pro-local policies (that is, more self
governance), and as shown later, had more prosperous private sector, all similar in spirit to what happened to those trading towns in
England between 1066 and 1832.


                                                                   40
                                                             Full Sample                      Trimming Tail 5%
                                                   (1)           (2)            (3)                 (4)
                      Power Structure
                      YRD                      4.297***       2.864***       3.072***               2.844***
                                                (1.027)        (1.024)        (0.932)                (0.723)
                      Initial Conditions
                      Ln_GVOPC_78                            -5.515***      -5.425***              -3.474***
                                                               (1.752)        (1.478)                (0.900)
                      Ln_pop_78                                 1.466         -1.138                 -0.001
                                                               (1.238)        (1.297)                (0.907)
                      Geography
                      Share of Plains (%)                                    0.193***               0.150***
                                                                              (0.066)                (0.056)
                      Distance to Xiamen                                    -0.018***              -0.019***
                      (Km)                                                    (0.005)                (0.005)
                      Obs.                          58            57             57                     53
                      Adjusted-R2                 0.083         0.405          0.597                  0.623

                 Table 16: The Effect of Factions on Growth Rates in Counties in Fujian, 1984-1998


     To address this concern, we argue that, if either skills and/or knowledge in economic development are
important driving forces behind the differences in the development performances of FA3- and YRD-affiliated
counties, then we would expect the growth gaps between these two groups of counties to decrease (and eventually
disappear) over time: as FA3-affiliated cadres obtained more experience on their positions, the skills of initial
local cadres should matter less.
     Table 16 presents the regression results, where we replicate the regressions in Tables 6-7, but replace the
dependent variable with the annual real growth rate between 1984 and 1998. Comparing the results in Table 16
with those in Tables 6-7, we find that for every specification, the coefficient estimate for YRD affiliation is larger
in the 1984-1998 period than that in the overall 1978-1998 period. Thus, the main factors explaining growth gaps
between FA3- and YRD-led counties do not seem to be skills and/or knowledge on the job; if anything, the gap
increases rather than decreases over time.19

5.7     Evidence of Pro-Local Policies
5.7.1    Improvement in Local Educational Achievement

    We now present evidence that the counties led by YRD-affiliated cadres indeed adopted pro-local policies
that facilitated local development. Education, a key component of human capital, can be an important source of
local growth. Table 17 regresses the log changes in the average years of schooling for individuals born between

    19If FA3-affiliated cadres preferred to promote their former colleagues rather than to choose the most talented candidates for career
advancement, this kind of official selection practice would have prolonged their disadvantage in managing economic affairs, and might
have caused persistent gaps in growth rate between these two kinds of counties. As we do not observe cadres’ skills or knowledge directly,
it is impossible to confirm or reject the mechanism of social heritage. This within-faction promotion pattern, indeed, could be another
mechanism for persistent faction effects even though initial faction leaders likely had left their local leadership jobs.



                                                                   41
1950 and 1972 from those born prior to 1930, as observed in the 1990 Census, on the county’s YRD affiliation,
guerrilla presence, and their interactions. As before, we control for the initial conditions and geography. Note
that those born prior to 1930 would have been 22 years old in 1952, and would mostly have finished their formal
schooling by then. Similarly, cohorts born between 1950 and 1972 would be at least 18 by 1990, and would have
completed their formal schooling by then. We use the log differences in the average schooling of the 1950-1972
cohorts and the cohorts prior to 1930 as the proxy for the improvement in local education.
     Columns (1) and (2) of Table 17, which includes all the counties (with non-missing variables) in the analysis,
show that counties with YRD affiliations and with a guerrilla presence are associated with larger percentage
increases in educational achievement, though the differences are not statistically significant. When we interact
the YRD and guerrilla dummies, as shown in Column (3), we find that counties with both YRD affiliation and a
guerrilla presence are associated with an average education level that is 37.5 percentage points higher; the effect
is statistically significant at the 10 percent level.
     In the right panel of Table 17, we trim the tail 5 percent of the counties from the analysis. Column (4) shows
that, relative to counties led by FD3 cadres, those led by YRD cadres had a greater increase - 30.1 percentage points
higher - in average schooling levels; Column (5) includes both YRD and guerrilla dummies in the regression, and
the results indicate that the YRD premium in education increase is 28.7 percentage points, statistically significant
at the 10 percent level. Guerrilla presence is also associated with an education increase of 13 percentage points,
though the figure is not statistically significant. Column (6) includes the interactions of YRD leadership and a
guerrilla presence. We find that most of the YRD effect on educational improvement results from the counties led
by YRD-affiliated cadres that also had guerrilla presence; the premium is 38 percentage points (relative to FA3
counties). In counties led by YRD-affiliated cadres without a guerrilla presence, the educational achievement
growth is also faster than that of FA3 counties (by 22 percentage points), but the coefficient estimate is not
statistically significant.
     The results in Table 17 confirm that counties led by cadres from weaker factions that also had stronger local
accountability did pursue policies that led to faster improvements in local educational achievement. We believe
that these are likely levers through which faction and local accountability impact the local development.

5.7.2   State-Owned Enterprise (SOE) Shares in the Local Economy in 1998

    Another pro-local policy that county leaders might have undertaken was to encourage the development of the
private sector. In this subsection, we examine whether counties led by YRD-affiliated cadres and counties with
guerrilla presence are more conducive to private-sector development. China started its large-scale SOE reform
in 1998 (see Hsieh and Song, 2015), and the top-down nature of that SOE reform likely would hide the footprint
of the locally initiated private-sector development after 1998 (Huang et al., 2017); thus, we focus on the share of
the SOE in the county economy as of 1998. We use two measures of SOE share in the economy: the SOE share
of the county’s total sales revenues, and the SOE share in terms of the number of firms.
    In Panel A of Table 18, we regress the SOE sales-revenue share in 1998 on the county’s YRD affiliation,
guerrilla presence, and their interactions, after controlling for the initial conditions and geography. Columns
(1)-(3) include the full sample; Columns (4)-(6) trim the tail 5% of the counties. In Column (1), we find that,
relative to counties with FA3 affiliations, counties with YRD affiliations are associated with a 22 percentage point
lower SOE sales-revenue share in the county’s economy in 1998. Column (2), which includes both YRD and


                                                         42
                                                         Full Sample                         Trimming Tail 5%
                                                 (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)
                 Power Structure
                 YRD                            0.273       0.262                   0.301**      0.287**
                                               (0.216)     (0.218)                  (0.135)      (0.137)
                 Guerrilla                                  0.162                                 0.130
                                                           (0.128)                               (0.113)
                 YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                  0.209                                0.220
                                                                       (0.248)                              (0.142)
                 YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                                0.375*                               0.380**
                                                                       (0.201)                              (0.152)
                 Initial Conditions
                 Ln_GVOPC_52                    -0.025      -0.014      -0.014       -0.055        -0.045     -0.041
                                               (0.128)     (0.125)     (0.124)      (0.116)       (0.113)    (0.111)
                 Ln_pop_52                      -0.254      -0.301      -0.293       -0.073        -0.113     -0.119
                                               (0.201)     (0.203)     (0.200)      (0.118)       (0.123)    (0.122)
                 Geography
                 Share of Plains (%)            0.011       0.011       0.011        -0.000        0.000      -0.001
                                               (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.008)       (0.008)    (0.008)
                 Distance to Xiamen             0.001       0.001       0.001        -0.000        -0.000     -0.000
                                               (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)
                 Obs.                             55          55          55           51            51         51
                 R2                             0.087       0.095       0.095        0.084         0.105      0.110
                 H0 : b0 = b1                                           0.309                                 0.221

Table 17: The Effect of Factions and Guerrilla Presence on the Changes in the Average Years of Schooling for
Individuals Born in 1952-1972 Relative to Those Born Prior to 1930, as Observed in the 1990 Census
Notes: The dependent variable is the difference in log of the average education level of the cohort born between 1952 and 1970 and the
log of the average education of the cohort born before 1930, as observed in the 1990 Census. Intercepts are not reported. In the right
panel, the 5% tail observations are trimmed from the analysis. The last row reports the p-values of the hypothesis that b0 = b1 . White
standard errors are in parenthesis. *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent statistical significance.




                                                                 43
guerrilla dummies, demonstrates that the YRD coefficient barely changed, while the guerrilla presence is not
significantly associated with the SOE share. In Column (3), where we interact YRD and Guerrilla dummies,
we find that counties with both a YRD affiliation and a guerrilla presence are associated with 25.3 percentage
point lower SOE sales-revenue share, and counties with a YRD affiliation but without a guerrilla presence are
associated with 21.3 percentage point lower SOE sales-revenue share; both effects are statistically significant at
1 percent level. These effects are qualitatively and quantitatively similar when we trim the tail 5 percent of the
counties.
    Panel B of Table 18 replicates the results using the share of SOEs in terms of the total number of firms in
1998. Overall, the qualitative results are similar to those in Panel A. An exception is that the guerrilla presence
is more strongly related to the reduction of SOE importance. For instance, counties led by the weak faction that
also have a guerrilla presence show drop in the SOE number share by 22.8 percentage points (and statistically
significant), but the counties that are led by a weak faction but do not have a guerrilla presence show a drop that
is half that size, around 11.7 percentage points (and not statistically significant).
    The results in Table 18 confirm that counties led by cadres from the weak faction and with stronger local
accountability pursued policies that were more conducive to private-sector development. Because the private
sector tends to be more productive than the SOEs (Shleifer 1998; Megginson and Netter, 2001), a lower SOE
share in the local economy tends to be associated with faster local economic growth. We believe that this is likely
another lever through which factional competition and local accountability impact the local development.

5.8     Limits to Pro-Local Policies
    One interesting question is how much discretion would county-level cadres have in choosing pro-local policies
in an authoritarian regime? It is reasonable to hypothesize that there are limits to what local leaders can do to
promote local interest, and that the pro-local policies that local leaders may implement are limited to those not
easily observed by upper-level leaders, especially if ties between lower- and upper-level leaders are loose at best.
As in our theory, the local leaders’ behavior relies on two factors: connection with upper-level authority (the
factional connection) and connections with the grassroots community (local accountability). Because the higher-
level government holds the power of promotion, demotion and even political purge, the local leaders dare not
overtly disobey the center. Therefore, we implicitly assume that YRD cadres are likely to enact policies favorable
to local residents only when doing so does not openly defy their superiors. In other words, two types of cadres
will perform in the same way when they implement tasks that are easily monitored by the upper-level authority.

5.8.1    One-child Policy

    We use the population growth after the one-child policy to test the above hypothesis. The one-child policy
was launched as a national policy by the central government in 1979; it was a highly visible policy. Following
the launch of the policy, all levels of the government hierarchy established population and family planning
commissions, which made enforcement of the policy easily observable. Due to these reasons, even though taking
a “loose” birth policy would increase the local cadres’ popularity among the local population, the YRD-affiliated
cadres would not be expected to openly defy the central government’s national policy.
    Figure 7 shows that the kernel density plot of the population growth rates among counties with YRD-affiliated
leaders and those with FA3-affiliated leaders between 1984 and 1998. The two density plots do not exhibit

                                                        44
                                                   Full Sample                              Trimming Tail 5%
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)               (4)        (5)                               (6)
                                     Panel A: SOE Sales Revenue Share in the County in 1998
 Power Structure
 YRD                                    -22.866***      -22.610***                           -20.370***       -20.353***
                                          (6.494)         (6.585)                              (6.304)          (6.407)
 Guerrilla                                                 -2.547                                                -0.282
                                                          (6.196)                                               (6.322)
 YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                            -21.343***                                                   -19.706***
                                                                     (7.418)                                                     (7.271)
 YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                                           -25.320***                                                   -21.454***
                                                                     (7.441)                                                     (7.404)
 H0 : b0 = b1                                                         0.597                                                       0.818
                                          Panel B: SOE Count Share in the County in 1998
 Power Structure
 YRD                                    -15.965**        -15.157**                            -13.466**        -13.020*
                                         (6.697)          (6.784)                              (6.608)          (6.806)
 Guerrilla                                                 -8.046                                                -6.805
                                                          (5.295)                                               (5.427)
 YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                                      -11.735                                               -9.559
                                                                            (7.214)                                              (7.180)
 YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                                                   -22.782***                                           -19.747***
                                                                            (6.947)                                              (6.844)
 H0 : b0 = b1                                                                0.071                                                0.131
 Obs.                                       56               56                56                 52               52               52
 Controls for Initial Conditions            Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes
 Controls for Geography                     Yes              Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes             Yes

Table 18: The Effect of Factions and Guerrilla Presence on the Share of SOE in the County Economy in 1998
Notes: The dependent variable in Panel A is the SOE share of sales revenue in the county in 1998; the dependent variable in Panel B is
the SOE share in terms of the number of firms (count share) in 1998. In the right panel, the 5% tail observations are trimmed from the
analysis. All regressions control for the initial conditions and geography variables as in Table 17. White standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                                     45
                           Figure 7. Kernel Density Estimation of Population Growth Rate during 1984-1998, YRD vs. FA3




                                              1.5
                                                                                                    YRD
                                                                                                    FA3




                                              1
                                    Density
                                              .5
                                              0
                                                    0     .5            1           1.5            2
                                                                Population Growth Rate




Figure 7: Kernel Densities of Population Growth Rates Among Counties Led by YRD- and FA3-affiliated Cadres,
1984-1998.




                                                                  Full Sample                            Trimming Tail 5%
                                                          (1)          (2)          (3)                (4)     (5)       (6)
           Power Structure
           YRD                                          -0.053      -0.052                        -0.094        -0.089
                                                        (0.109)     (0.113)                       (0.109)      (0.115)
           Guerrilla                                                -0.008                                      -0.042
                                                                    (0.116)                                    (0.096)
           YRD×GuerrillaNo [b0 ]                                                 -0.033                                  -0.056
                                                                                 (0.126)                                 (0.120)
           YRD×GuerrillaYes [b1 ]                                                -0.087                                  -0.158
                                                                                 (0.128)                                 (0.118)
           Obs.                                           56          56            56              51            51       51
           R2                                           0.054       0.054         0.057            0.144        0.148    0.161
           Controls for Initial Conditions               Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes      Yes
           Controls for Geography                        Yes         Yes           Yes              Yes          Yes      Yes
           H0 : b0 = b1                                                           0.40                                   0.312

Table 19: The Effect of Factions on the Population Growth Rates in the Counties in Fujian, 1984-1998
Notes: The dependent variable is the county’s population growth rates between 1984 and 1998. In the right panel, the 5% tail observations
are trimmed from the analysis. All regressions control for the initial conditions and geography variables similar to those in Table 17,
with the exception that Ln_GVOPC_78 and Ln_POP_78 (instead of the levels in 1952) are used. The last row reports the p-values of the
hypothesis that b0 = b1 . White standard errors are in parenthesis. *, **, and *** respectively indicate 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent
statistical significance.




                                                                      46
                                                Number of Months between the Start of HRS in
                                                      the County from December 1978
                                                  (1)                    (2)
                     Power Structure
                     YRD                         -1.647
                                                (3.074)
                     YRD×GuerrillaNo                                     1.375
                                                                        (3.615)
                     YRD×GuerrillaYes                                    -5.389
                                                                        (3.428)
                     Initial Conditions
                     Ln_GVOPC_52                -6.783**              -7.467***
                                                 (2.561)               (2.291)
                     Geography
                     Share of Plains (%)          0.354                  0.517
                                                 (0.340)                (0.358)
                     Ln (Distance to Xiamen )    0.030*                  0.025
                                                 (0.017)                (0.016)
                     Ln(Elevation)               17.834                 23.913
                                                (19.374)               (21.418)
                     Constant                    22.934                 16.822
                                                (49.828)               (50.463)
                     Obs.                           59                     59
                     Adjusted-R2                  0.169                  0.238

Table 20: Effect of Power Structure on the Initiation of the Household Responsibility System (HRS) in Counties
in Fujian Province


obvious differences in mean population rates, though there is more dispersion among YRD-affiliated counties.
This pattern is confirmed in the regression analysis in Table 19: the coefficients for power structure are never
statistically significant in explaining population growth rates in all specifications.

5.8.2   Household Responsibility System (HRS)

    At the beginning of the rural reform in early 1980s, the Chinese central government launched the household
responsibility system (HRS), which allowed households to contract land from collective organizations. Households
could make operating decisions independently within the limits set by the contract agreement, and they could
freely dispose of surplus production over and above national and collective quotas. HRS represents one of the
most significant institutional reforms in the Chinese agricultural sector. It gave the farmers the residual claim
rights for production from the land after meeting the procurement quota. When it was initiated in secret in
Xiaogang Village of Fengyang County in Anhui Province in December 1978, such a system was prohibited by
the central government. The program was clearly a pro-local policy. By 1982, the HRS was recognized by the
central government as a form of beneficial institutional innovation. In 1983 the HRS spread throughout China,
and most village collectives adopted it.


                                                          47
    Table 20 shows the results of the tests for whether factions and local accountability measures might have
affected the timing of the initiation of the HRS in the county. From the county gazettes, we collect the time
(year and month) that a county government unofficially or officially allowed for the implementation of the HRS.
We use the number of months between the county’s initiation of the HRS and December 1978 as the dependent
variable, a larger value of which indicates a later adoption of the HRS . We find that YRD-affiliated counties
allowed or adopted the HRS about 1.6 months earlier than FA3-affiliated counties, but the difference is statistically
insignificant. In Column (2) we show that the difference is mainly coming from YRD-affiliated counties with a
guerrilla presence, where the HRS was permitted or adopted about 5.4 months earlier than FA3 counties. But the
difference is again not statistically significant.
    The two case studies reported in this subsection on the One-Child Policy and the HRS adoption suggest that
there was a limit on how much local leaders were willing to go against the central government in their desire
to adopt pro-local polices. In counties with weaker factions, or those that feature local accountability pressures,
leaders would choose more pro-local policies; at the same time, their political instincts would also limit the degree
to which they would defy the central government, particularly if the policy in question were clearly observable to
the higher level governments. Doing so would have implied higher probability of being politically purged.

5.9   Factions, Grassroots Support, and Political Survival: Some Direct Evidence
     We have advanced the idea that local politicians’ decisions about what types of local development policies to
pursue are shaped by their incentives for political survival, and that their chances of political survival depend on
the factional support from higher-level government as well as the grassroots support from local citizens. As we
illustrate in our model, local cadres from the strong faction may find it advantageous in terms of political survival
to cater to the policies desired by higher-level officials instead of pro-local policies; by contrast, local cadres from
the weak faction may find pro-local development policies to enhance their political survival. Providing direct
evidence for this mechanism is not easy, as the career paths of the county-level cadres were impossible to track.
In this section, we exploit a unique historical event, the Cultural Revolution of 1966 to 1976, to provide direct
evidence about and a rare glimpse into the mechanisms that relate faction affiliation, grassroots support, and
political survival.
     After the initiation of the Cultural Revolution in 1966, county-level Communist Party committees gradually
lost power amid the chaos. To sustain political order, the central authority launched the so-called “Three Support,
Two Military” (shorthand for “Support the Left, Support the Peasants, Support the Workers; Military Training,
Military Control”) Movement in 1967, which facilitated military cadres to organize the Core Leading Group of the
County Revolutionary Committee to be in charge of local administrations. In essence, the military purged local
cadres from power in the process. The county Core Leading Group stayed in power until late in 1970, when the
county party committees were reestablished and military cadres gradually retreated from the county leadership.
That is, the county party committees attempted to regain their leadership around the end of 1970. Consistent with
our model, we expect that those counties that either kept a close connection with the provincial leaders, or had
strong grassroots support were likely to regain their power from the military-led Core Leading Group faster after
1971.
     Table 21 shows the results of our direct examination of the association between the two potential sources of
a local leader’s support - the connection to higher-level government and to grassroots backing - with the ability


                                                          48
                                                              (1)         (2)
                                 FA3                      -3.238**      -6.042
                                                           (1.254)      (6.308)
                                 Famine Control           -6.224**     -7.078**
                                                           (3.070)      (3.337)
                                 FA3×Famine Control                      4.019
                                                                        (8.863)
                                 Constant                 9.609***    10.292***
                                                           (2.553)      (2.782)
                                 Obs.                          53          53
                                 R2                          0.116       0.103

    Table 21: The Effect of FA3 and Famile Control (1959-1961) on Retaking the Power During 1971 and 1979


of a faction to regain power from the military Core Leading Group. The dependent variable in Table 21 is the
speed of regaining power by the original faction in the county between 1971 and 1979, as captured by “years to
regain power during the period.” We use FA3 and Famine Control during the Great Chinese Famine (1959-1961)
to proxy the connection to the provincial leaders and grassroots support, respectively. In Column (1), the negative
OLS coefficient estimates of FA3 and Famine Control mean that FA3-affiliated counties and counties with strong
grassroots support regain power faster. Interestingly, in Column (2) we find that the interaction term FA3×Famine
Control is positive, suggesting that counties that already had strong connections to the higher-level government
benefit less from pro-local policies in terms of their speed in regaining power; however, the coefficient estimate
is not statistically significant.
    The results from Table 21 provide direct evidence that connections to strong factions and grassroots support
both helped the local cadres to regain power from the military Core Leading Group more quickly; in addition,
grassroots support is not as effective in speeding this process for the strong FA3 faction as for the weak YRD
faction. Both are consistent with the mechanisms of political survival described in our model presented in Section
2.


6     Conclusion
    What explains persistent regional differences in development performance? Do local leaders make decisions
with their own political survival in mind, taking into account the political connections they have – or lack – and
the degree of local accountability they face? Moreover, do the policy decision made by leaders in response to
these incentives have long-lasting implications? In this paper, we investigate, both theoretically and empirically,
the role of factional political competition and local accountability in explaining the enormous local variations in
development performance. Our evidence comes from the county-level variations within Fujian Province in China.
When the communist armies took over Fujian Province from Nationalist control circa 1949, cadres from two
different army factions – the Third Field Army (FA3) and the Yangtze-River Detachment (YRD) – were assigned
as county leaders. Counties also differed in another key respect: whether a local guerrilla presence existed prior
to the communist takeover. Members of FA3 (the “strong faction”) dominated the Fujian Provincial Standing


                                                        49
Committee of the Communist Party. We argue that local leaders’ incentives regarding development policies
depended on whether they were from the strong faction in the provincial government. County leaders from the
strong faction were less likely to pursue policies friendly to local development because their political survival
depended more on their loyalty to the provincial leader above than on the grassroots support from local residents
below. By contrast, in a situation similar to that encountered by politicians facing stronger electoral competition
in democratic countries, the political survival of county leaders from the weak faction was based to a greater
extent on local grassroots support, which could be best secured if these leaders focused on local development.
In addition, the presence of guerrillas in a county further improved development performance either because it
intensified local accountability of the county leader, or because it better facilitated the provision of local public
goods beneficial to development, or both.
    We offer evidence that the historical assignment of local cadres’ factions and the presence of local guerrillas
had little to do with the initial economic conditions – though these features were somewhat related to geography,
as proxied by the share of plains in the county and the distance of the county from Xiamen, the provincial
commercial hub near the Taiwan Strait. We provide robust evidence that counties led by cadres affiliated with
the weak political faction (YRD) and counties with a local guerrilla presence tended to experience a less severe
degree of famine – as measured both by the degree of birth cohort losses and by the rate of deaths during the
Great Chinese Famine (1959-1961). These counties had significantly faster real annual economic growth rates
in the whole period (1952-1998), and, especially, in the post-reform period (1978-1998). We also find positive
interaction effects between weak factions and local accountability: counties that had both a guerrilla presence
and a leadership from cadres affiliated with the weak factions tended to grow the fastest and suffered the least
severe levels of famine. The magnitudes of these effects also imply first-order importance. For instance, counties
that were led by weak factions and that also had a guerrilla presence had annual growth rates from 1978 to 1998
that were 3.3 percentage points higher (or 0.85 standard deviations higher). We further provide evidence that two
potential mechanisms for such long-term effects could be improvement in local education, and the development
of the private sector. Our findings underscore the important roles played by factional political competition and
local accountability in shaping local leaders’ policy choices. Such choices may in turn have drastic implications
for economic growth, education, private-sector development, and citizens’ lives and deaths (both literally and
figuratively).
    We believe that the insights we uncovered in this paper from Fujian Province, the superstar performer even in
the miracle-growth environment in China, are robust and general in settings of one-party-ruled countries, where
political purges and turnovers are important concerns for politicians. De facto one-party rule has been quite
common in the world. Indeed, at the country level over the past four decades, about 45 percent of country-
years (among a sample of 179 countries) can be characterized as having de facto one-party rule (Cruz, Keefer,
and Scartascini, 2016). Our insights regarding the importance of political competition and local accountability
for local development may also be relevant for democracies. In future work, we will continue to examine the
connections between factional competition, local accountability, political survival, and local development in other
provinces in China, and around other parts of the world.




                                                         50
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001). “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
     Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91 (5), 1369-1401.

 [2] Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001). “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and
     Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117
     (4), 1231-1294.

 [3] Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson, James (2001). “A Theory of Political Transitions.” The American
     Economic Review, 91, 938–963.

 [4] Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson (2006). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Cam-
     bridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

 [5] Acemoglu, Daron and James R. Robinson (2012). Why Nations Fail: the Origins of Power, Prosperity and
     Poverty. New York: Crown Publishing.

 [6] Acemoglu, Daron, Tristan Reed, and James A. Robinson (2014). “Chiefs: Economic Development and Elite
     Control of Civil Society in Sierra Leone.” Journal of Political Economy, 122 (2), 319-368.

 [7] Angelucci, Charles, Simone Meraglia, Nico Voigtlander (2017). “How Merchant Towns Shaped Parliaments:
     From the Norman Conquest of England to the Great Reform Act.” NBER Working Paper 23606.

 [8] Angrist, Joshua D. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist’s
     Companion. Princeton: Princeton Press.

 [9] Altonji, Joseph, Todd Elder and Christopher R. Taber (2005). “Selection on Observed and Unobserved
     Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal of Political Economy, 113 (1), 151-
     184.

[10] Ansolabehere, Steven and James M. Snyder. (2006). “Party Control of State Government and the Distribution
     of Public Expenditure.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 108 (4), 547-69.

[11] Banerjee, Abhijit and Lakshmi Iyer (2005). “History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The Legacy
     of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India.” American Economic Review, 95(4): 1190-1213.

[12] Barro, Robert J. (1991). “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics, Vol. 106, No. 2, 407-443.

[13] Barro, Robert J. and J.W. Lee (1994). “Sources of Economic Growth.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
     Series on Public Policy, Volume 40, 1-46.

[14] Becker, Gary S. (1958). “Compeition and Democracy.” Journal of Law and Econ., Vol. 1, 105-109.

[15] Belton F. and Jian C. (1997). “The Coast-Noncoast Income Gap, Productivity and Regional Economic Policy
     in China.” Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol. 25, No. 2, 220-236.


                                                     51
[16] Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess (2002). “The Political Economy of Government Responsiveness:
     Theory and Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 177, 1415–1451.

[17] Besley, Timothy, and Ian Preston (2007). “Elecoral Bias and Policy Choice: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1474–1510.

[18] Besley, Timothy, Thorsten Persson, and Daniel Sturm (2010). “Political Competition and Economic Perfor-
     mance: Evidenced from the United States,” Rev. of Econ. Studies, 77(3), 1329-52.

[19] Björkman, Martina and Jakob Svensson (2009). “Power to the People: Evidence from a Randomized
     Field Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (2):
     735-769.

[20] Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce and Alastair Smith (2008). “Political Survival and Endogenous Institutional
     Change.” Comparative Political Studies, 42, 167–197.

[21] Bueno de Mesquita, B. and Smith, A. (2010). “Leader Survival, Revolutions, and the Nature of Government
     Finance.” American Journal of Political Science, 54(4), 936–950.

[22] Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow (2003). The Logic
     of Political Survival. Cambridge: The MIT Press.

[23] Coale, A. J. (1981). “Population Trends, Population Policy and Population Studies in China.” Population
     and Development Review, 7, 85-97.

[24] Cruz, Cesi, Philip Keefer, Carlos Scartascini (2016). “Database of Political Institutions, 2015 Update
     (DPI2015).” Updated version of Thorsten Beck, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrich
     Walsh, 2001. "New Tools in Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions." World
     Bank Economic Review, 15, 165-176.

[25] Dell, Melissa, Nathan Lane, and Pablo Querubin. “The Historical State, Local Collective Action, and
     Economic Development in Vietnam.” Econometrica (Forthcoming).

[26] Dikotter, F. (2010). Mao’s Great Famine: The History of China’s Most Devastating Catastrophe, 1958-1962.
     Bloomsbury Publishing USA, Walker.

[27] Distelhorst, Gregory and Yue Hou (2017). “Constituency Service Under Nondemocratic Rule: Evidence
     from China.” Journal of Politics, 79(3): 1024–1040.

[28] Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (1997). “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential
     Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of the United States.”
     in “How Latin America Fell Behind: Essays on the Economic Histories of Brazil and Mexico 1800-1914.”
     Stanford University press, 260-304.

[29] Fan, Ziying, Wei Xiong, and Li-An Zhou (2016). “Information Distortion in Hierarchical Organizations: A
     Study of China’s Great Famine.” Working Paper, Princeton University.



                                                      52
[30] Fang, Hanming, Quanlin Gu, Wei Xiong, and Li-An Zhou (2015). “Demystifying the Chinese Housing
     Boom.” NBER Macro Annual, Volume 30, 105-166, edited by Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker.

[31] Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer (2013). “Human Capital
     and Regional Development.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1), 105-164.

[32] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Michael Zheng Song (2015). “Grasp the Large, Let Go of the Small: The Transfor-
     mation of the State Sector in China.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 295-346.

[33] Huang, Zhangkai, Lixing Li, Guangrong Ma, and Lixin Colin Xu (2017). “Hayek, Local Information,
     and Commanding Heights: Decentralizing State-Owned Enterprises.” American Economic Review, 107(8),
     2455-2478.

[34] Jia, Ruixue, Masa Kudamatsu and David Seim (2015). “Political Selection in China: Complementary Roles
     of Connections and Performance.” Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 13, No. 4, 631-668.

[35] Kasahara, Hiroyuki and Bingjing Li (2018). “Grain Exports and China’s Great Famine, 1959-1961: County-
     Level Evidence.” Working Paper, National University of Singapore.

[36] Kung, James and Justin Y. Lin (2003). “The Causes of China’s Great Leap Famine, 1959–1961.” Economic
     Development and Cultural Change, 52, 51–73.

[37] Kung, James and Chen Shuo (2011). “The Tragedy of the Nomenklatura: Career Incentives and Political
     Radicalism during China’s Great Leap Famine.” American Political Science Review, 105(1), 27-45.

[38] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998a). “Law and
     Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (6), 1113-1155.

[39] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998b). “The Quality of
     Government.” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization , 15 (1), 222-279.

[40] Li, Wei and Dannis Tao Yang (2005). “The Great Leap Forward: Anatomy of a Central Planning Disaster.”
     Journal of Political Economy, 113(4), 840-877.

[41] Li, Hongbin and Li-An Zhou (2005). “Political Turnover and Economic Performance: The Incentive Role
     of Personnel Control in China.” Journal of Public economics, 89(9), 1743-1762.

[42] Li, Yuan (2014). “Downward Accountability in Response to Collective Actions: The Political Economy of
     Public Goods Provision in China.” The Economics of Transition, 22(1), 69-103.

[43] Lucas, Robert E. (1990). “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American Economic
     Review Papers and Proceedings, 80(2), 92-96.

[44] North, Douglas (2005). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. Cambridge: Cam-
     bridge University Press.

[45] Mansuri, Ghazala and Vijayendra Rao (2013). Localizing Development: Does Participation Work? Inter-
     national Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank.

                                                     53
[46] Maskin, Eric, Yingyi Qian, Chenggang Xu (2000). “Incentives, Information, and Organizational Form.”
     Review of Economic Studies, 67(2), 359-378.

[47] Megginson, William, Jefferey Netter (2000). “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Studies on
     Privatization.” Journal of Economic Literature, 39, 321-389.

[48] Meng, Xin, Nancy Qian and Pierre Yared (2015). “The Institutional Causes of China’s Great Famine,
     1959–1961.” Review of Economic Studies, 82 (4): 1568-1611.

[49] Miquel, Gerard Padró I. (2007). “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics of Fear.”
     Review of Economic Studies, 74(4), 1259-1274.

[50] Olsen, Mancur (1993). “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development.” American Political Science Review,
     87(3), 567-576.

[51] Persson, Petra and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2016). “The Limits of Career Concerns in Federalism: Evidence
     from China.” Journal of the European Economics Association, 14(2), 338-374.

[52] Shih, Victor (2008). Factions and Finance in China: Elite Conflict and Inflation. Cambridge University
     Press.

[53] Shih, Victor, Christoper Adolph and Mingxing Liu (2012). “Getting Ahead in the Communist Party:
     Explaining the Advancement of Central Committee Members in China”, American Political Science Review,
     106, 166-187.

[54] Shleifer, Andrei (1998). “State versus Private Ownership.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(4),
     133-150.

[55] Smith, Alastair (2008). “The Perils of Unearned Income.” The Journal of Politics, 70(3), 780-793.

[56] Stigler, George J. (1972). “Economic Competition and Political Competition.” Public Choice, 13, 91-106.

[57] Vogel, Ezra F. (2011). Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation of China. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press
     of Harvard University Press.

[58] Wittman, Donald. (1989). “Why Democracies Produce Efficient Results.” J. Political Economy, 97 (6),
     1395-1424.

[59] Xi, Tianyang, Yang Yao and Muyang Zhang (2018). “Competence versus Incentive: Evidence from City
     Officials in China.” Journal of Comparative Economics, DOI: 10.1016/j.jce.2018.04.001.

[60] Zhang, Qi and Mingxing Liu. 2019. Revolutionary Legacy, Power Structure, and Grassroots Capitalism
     under the Red Flag in China. Cambridge: Cambridge Press.




                                                      54
