NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SPATIAL MISMATCH BETWEEN INNOVATION AND JOBLESSNESS
Edward L. Glaeser
Naomi Hausman
Working Paper 25913
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25913

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019

We thank Michael Andrews, Benjamin Austin, Joshua Lerner and Scott Stern for helpful comments.
Claire Shi provided excellent research assistance. We thank the Smith Richardson Foundation and
the Israel Science Foundation (grant no. 2118/17) for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w25913.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2019 by Edward L. Glaeser and Naomi Hausman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Spatial Mismatch Between Innovation and Joblessness
Edward L. Glaeser and Naomi Hausman
NBER Working Paper No. 25913
May 2019
JEL No. O31,R11
ABSTRACT
American technological creativity is geographically concentrated in areas that are generally distant
from the country’s most persistent pockets of joblessness. Could a more even spatial distribution of
innovation reduce American joblessness? Could Federal policies disperse innovation without significant
costs? If research funding is already maximizing knowledge production, then spatial reallocation of
that funding will reduce America’s overall innovation unless that reallocation comes with greater spending.
Without any spatial reallocation, the primarily inventive parts of innovation policy, such as N.I.H.
grants, can potentially aid underperforming areas by targeting the problems of those areas, like widespread
disability. The educational aspects of innovation policy, such as Pell Grants, work-study, vocational
training, and Federal overhead reimbursement on grants, currently have multiple objective and could
focus more on employability in distressed areas. Lifting the cap on H1B visas in poorer places could
attract outside human capital to those places. Geographically targeted entrepreneurship policies, such
as eliminating the barriers to new business formation near universities and in distressed places, could
potentially enhance employment growth in those regions. Spatially targeted employment subsidies
will increase the returns to labor-intensive innovation in depressed areas, but we know little about
how much innovation will respond to such subsidies.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
Naomi Hausman
Naomi Hausman
70 Neshobe Rd
Waban, MA 02468
naomi.hausman@mail.huji.ac.il

I.

Introduction

Between 2000 and 2015, more than 140,000 patents were granted to residents of Santa Clara
County, more than triple the number granted to any other U.S. county. Over forty percent of
the families in Santa Clara County earn more than 150,000 dollars annually, and about eightypercent of 25 to 54 year-olds are employed. Over the same fifteen-year period, exactly two
patents were granted to residents of Clay County, Kentucky, where only two-percent of families
earn more than $150,000 and only 45 percent of 25 to 54 year-olds are employed. Santa Clara
County, which includes much of Silicon Valley, seems decades and continents away from the
Appalachian isolation of Clay County.
Section II of this paper reviews the enormous spatial disparities in innovation, and the spatial
mismatch between the locations of joblessness and technological dynamism. Section III
discusses the key economic changes that have led to the spatial separation of innovators and
ordinary workers. Innovation now builds on an increasingly large body of existing knowledge,
which raises the benefit for innovators from being enmeshed in a research-intensive region,
filled with people who have that knowledge. Innovation also leads to far less employment of
less-skilled workers, except in the publicly supported healthcare sector. Less-skilled Americans
work overwhelmingly in services, and demand for services is both local and relatively limited in
poorer places with few viable exports.
Can spatially targeted policies reduce joblessness or increase innovation in depressed areas?
Appalachia has been the target of place-based Federal support through the Appalachian
Regional Commission for over 50 years, and the results are modest at best.1 Sections IV, V, and
VI discuss place-based innovation policy, and we split the innovation process into education,
invention and entrepreneurship.

1

The modest results quite possibly reflect the relatively modest spending over a region that was defined to be vast
for largely political purposes.
2

Education helps scientists to become skilled, enables entrepreneurs to understand the science
of new technologies, and produces workers who can implement entrepreneurs’ visions.
Invention is the actual process of generating new technologies, and it occurs both in private
sector firms and in universities. Entrepreneurship transforms new inventions into products
and employment. In this paper, we explore the case for geographic targeting of innovationrelated policies -- from N.I.H. research funding to local land use controls.
Traditionally, place-based policies emphasized infrastructure, such as the mountain-crossing
highways that were built to end Appalachia’s isolation, and tax subsidies, like those offered by
today’s Opportunity Zones. But the extreme success of innovative regions, like Silicon Valley,
has led some to support place-based innovation policies, such as special economic zones,
spatially-targeted Federal research funding, and state-specific Research and Development Tax
Credits, as in Gruber and Johnson (2019). Such place-based innovation policies could be
justified either as aid for less innovative places or as enhancing long-run innovation nationwide, potentially by boosting successful clusters.
A central theme of this paper is that innovation can impact distressed regions even if the
innovation itself is not located in distressed regions. Medical research in Bethesda can make it
easier for disabled workers in Appalachia to comfortably return to employment. A ride-sharing
company in San Francisco can increase earnings for people in central city Detroit.

Federally

funded research in poorer places may be a way to aid those areas, but it seems equally
plausible to us that these areas would benefit more from funding targeted towards their
problems that flowed to the best research proposals regardless of location.
In Section IV, we discuss the economics of place-based policies and the difficulties facing placebased invention policy. The three core arguments for place-based policies are (1) locationrelated externalities mean that relocating activity can improve social welfare, (2) place is
correlated with poverty so targeting place can enhance equity, and (3) heterogeneous local
conditions imply that uniform national policies are suboptimal. Even when urban economists
accept the existence of location-related externalities, including agglomeration effects and
human capital externalities, uncertainty about the exact nature of those externalities weakens
3

the first argument for place-based policies. More human capital is good for both California and
Appalachia. Would the relocation of skilled workers from California to Appalachia be a good or
bad thing for the country as a whole? Our limited knowledge about the shape of the placespecific production function for invention means that we do not know whether any spatial
reallocation of either human capital or innovation funding will increase the total flow of
invention.
The second case for spatial intervention is inequality. Helping Appalachia may help some poor
Appalachians, but economists have long argued that helping poor people directly is more
effective than aiding poorer places.

A place-based policy is more likely to reduce inequality if

its direct benefits are enjoyed disproportionately to the poor.

Federal support for water

infrastructure in Flint, Michigan, is more egalitarian than similar spending in Bloomfield Hills.
Innovation is typically done by the most well-educated and well-compensated members of
society.
The strongest case for place-based policies occurs when heterogeneous local conditions make
one-size-fits-all national policies seem nonsensical. In places with high prices and limited
supply, like San Francisco and Seattle, Federal policies that subsidize new housing construction
seem likely to increase the stock of housing and to generate a home with a market value that
exceeds the production costs. In places with abundant and elastic supply, like Atlanta or
Houston, subsidized public construction is more likely to crowd out private construction and
leave the total stock of homes unfixed. In places with low prices, like St. Louis or Detroit,
subsidized new homes are likely to be valued by the market at less than construction.2
Similarly, policies that penalize employment, such as Disability Insurance, may discourage
employment more in eastern Tennessee than in eastern Massachusetts. Austin, Glaeser and
Summers (2018) argue that heterogeneous labor supply elasticities suggest targeting wage
subsidies towards distressed areas and reforming social insurance so that they penalize work
less in distressed areas.

2

We neither argue against the Low Income Housing Tax Credit in St. Louis nor for the credit in San Francisco, but
rather that economics predicts that a supply subsidy is more likely to generate extra units that are valued more
than construction costs in places with limited supply.
4

Economists’ traditional skepticism towards place-based policies reflects both optimism about
market forces, like the natural migration of people from poor to rich areas, and pessimism
about the public ability to manage economic geography. Today, optimism about the status
quo seems less tenable as migration rates across the U.S. have decreased by a third and
regional convergence has stalled. Widespread joblessness is endemic in much of America, and
for men, not working is associated with individual misery and larger social costs. Given current
technological trends, widespread economic dislocation seems likely to spread and cause further
rifts in American society and government.
Section IV also makes three points about invention policy, which includes both research and
development tax credits and research subsidies administered by the National Institutes of
Health (N.I.H.) and the National Science Foundation (N.S.F.). First, when subsidies are targeted
by peer review and corporate incentives, there is little reason to think that redirecting research
dollars based on coarse locational boundaries will improve national output of new ideas.
Second, there is no established link between the current place-based policies within the N.I.H.
and local employment or earnings. Third, there are ways to ensure that N.I.H.-funded
research will do more to help depressed regions without moving that research to those regions.
For example, the N.I.H. could focus more on medical technologies that move people off of
disability insurance.
In Section V, we turn to Federal education support which can be spatially targeted in many
ways. Federal overhead payments can provide more incentives for better local technology
transfer in distressed areas. Work-study grants for students in distressed areas can be oriented
more towards the research process to promote marketable skills. Vocational training in
distressed areas can be provided nimbly and competitively after school, on weekends, and
during the summer by non-traditional providers who are evaluated based on the skills their
students learn. Human capital can also be increased in distressed areas by raising the cap on
H1B visas for local firms and by reducing state court enforcement of non-compete clauses.
The level of human capital in distressed areas can by increased both by training and by
attracting talent. Zolas et al. (2015) find that eighty-percent of recent research-oriented Ph.D.s
5

leave the state of their training. Quality of life and economic dynamism help to retain Ph.D.s
and attract talent from elsewhere.
Section VI turns to entrepreneurship policies that aim to promote employment particularly in
distressed regions. We discuss eliminating the barriers to entrepreneurship near research
hubs, both in distressed areas and elsewhere. More educated areas seem particularly prone to
produce regulations that make it difficult to build housing or even start businesses. Reducing
regulatory barriers to entrepreneurs could be done by establishing “entrepreneurship zones”
that offer one-stop permitting and eliminate occupational licensing.
We also discuss targeted employment subsidies that promote job creation in distressed areas,
and social insurance reform for these areas to make work more attractive.

If these policies

reduce the effective cost of labor in places with high levels of joblessness, they will also
increase the incentive for entrepreneurs to innovate to create productive tasks for the less
skilled who live away from successful cities. By contrast, Universal Basic Income (U.B.I.) is an
income shock that seems likely to reduce the willingness of low income people to work, and
that should lead to even less innovation that employs the less skilled. Section VII concludes.

II.

The Spatial Mismatch between Innovation and Joblessness

In this section, we compare the geography of innovation with the geography of joblessness.
The central point is that innovation occurs in places that are far from America’s most troubled
local economies.
The Geography of Education, Invention, and Entrepreneurship
To illustrate the landscape of innovation, we focus on multiple aspects of the innovation
process. Upstream invention reflects technical discoveries that often lead to a patent.
Downstream entrepreneurship typically involves either the implementation of a technical
discovery or a non-technical idea that can potentially generate profits, such as reapplying the
burger restaurant franchise model to sell fried chicken. Both types of creativity depend on

6

human capital, and both are a function of other local influences. Human capital is formed both
in-school and on-the-job, but we focus primarily on formal schooling.
We first measure inventive activity using patents. This measure has the advantage of relative
consistency over a long horizon and is applicable to many fields of knowledge, such that it can
provide an overview of inventiveness in the U.S. Of course, patents miss some important
inventions, like those in finance, which aren't patentable. And they don't, on their own,
capture the importance of an invention: most patented inventions are never used. Where
possible, we thus incorporate importance by using citation-weighted patents (Trajtenberg
(1990); Hall et al. (2001)).
Figure 1 shows the geography of citation-weighted patents in the United States in 2000. We
use an earlier date so that the patents are old enough to have a plausible period for being cited.
The map shows that patenting is extremely highly concentrated within the U.S.

There is one

massive cluster running along the eastern seaboard from Washington, D.C. up to Boston and a
second massive cluster along the Western seaboard.
In 2015, eight counties together produced 41,499 patents, which is nearly one-third of
America’s entire patenting activity. Six out of those eight counties are in coastal California, and
the other two contain Seattle, WA, and Cambridge, MA. Between 2000 and 2015, only one
county entered and left that top eight list (Seattle entered, Boise, Idaho left). The top eight
counties in 2000 produced only 17,137 patents, which was 20.1 percent of U.S. patenting
activity. Patenting activity is wildly concentrated within the U.S. and the level of concentration
appears to be increasing rather than decreasing.
Figure 2 shows the growth rate in the number of patents granted per capita between 1980 and
2015. In this case, we use the number of patents rather than citation-weighted patents to
permit a longer time frame. There are non-coastal metropolitan areas, like Atlanta, that have
experienced significant increases the total level of patenting activity. Yet many of the faster
growing places are the coastal areas that begin with the most innovation in 1980. There is little
evidence to suggest that patenting activity is smoothing itself out over space.

7

A second important component of innovation comes from the entrepreneurs who bring new
ideas to life. High growth entrepreneurship is likely reflected in venture capital investments,
which are concentrated in similar parts of the country. Figure 3 indicates that while most
counties in the country in the three-year period around 2015 received no VC investment at all,
areas in California and the east coast chain of clusters received up to $6,535 per capita per year
in VC dollars. It makes sense, given the wealth of evidence on local knowledge flows, that this
type of business activity would be co-located with invention, as measured by patents. New
ideas from universities and from larger firms – which generate the majority of patents – are
frequently spun out and developed in start-ups (Shane, 2004; Agrawal et al., 2014). More
generally, one can consider patents and startups as two expressions of the wealth of new ideas
in these knowledge-intensive places.
Innovation is also correlated with density, which we think facilitates local knowledge flows and
spurs idea production. Figure 5 shows the strong positive correlation between patents granted
and population density across counties in 2000.
Figure 4, like Figure 2, suggests that knowledge is only becoming more concentrated. Growth
in VC investments per capita between 1995 and 2015 has been most pronounced in initially
strong clusters, such as those in California and Massachusetts. A closer look at the map reveals,
in addition, relatively high VC investment growth in Seattle, Portland, Provo, Albaquerque,
Austin, Little Rock, Atlanta, Raleigh, Pittsburgh, Ann Arbor, Chicago, and Madison – all of which
are urban, and many of which house top research universities.
Overall new business activity follows a different pattern than patents and venture capital
funding. Figure 6 uses data from the Business Dynamics Statistics of the Census Bureau to show
2015 establishment birth rates, which accounts for the fact that some states have higher overall
levels of economic activity than others. Unfortunately, we must make do with coarser state
level data for overall business activity. With a few exceptions, such as Florida and Missouri, the
western U.S. has higher birth rates. This outcome reflects to some extent state and local
regulatory environments. For example, states that more stringently enforce non-compete

8

agreements (NCAs) in employment contracts have lower establishment entry (Figure 7a).3
Changes in enforcement of these NCAs within a state over time also seems to affect entry.
States that reduce enforcement of non-competes begin to experience more establishment
entry from new firms (Figure 7b).
General education, as measured by the share of population with a college degree and shown in
Figure 8, is far more widespread than patenting and high-growth entrepreneurship.
Nonetheless, education is closely connected to both invention and entrepreneurship. Figure 9
shows the positive correlation between share of adults with college degrees and the logged
number of citation weighted patents in 2000 (correlation 0.65). A wealth of literature
documents that entrepreneurs are disproportionately educated, are more likely to start firms in
more educated places, and are more successful the more educated they and their local areas
are (Acs and Armington 2004; Doms, Lewis, and Robb 2010).
But while patents and venture capital spending are concentrated in a small number of coastal
areas, commercial technology adoption seems to be more widespread geographically. Figure
10 shows the Forman, Goldfarb, and Greenstein (2012) data on the fraction of firms in each
county that had adopted advanced internet applications by 2000, the end of a five-year period
of massive commercial technology investment. While there is some geographic heterogeneity
in adoption, high adoption rates are not found only on the coasts. The new technology seems
to be prevalent in many central parts of America – not just urban – presumably because it
handles complex logistics challenges for geographically dispersed firms.
The consumption benefits of technology improvements are even more widespread. Broadband
internet is highly diffused across the country according to five-year-average data from the
American Community Survey (ACS), 2013-2017 (Figure 11). Only modest parts of the south-east
and south-central regions have distinctly lower rates of broadband penetration. Similarly,
patients nationwide benefit from pacemakers originally developed in Minneapolis and teenage
boys everywhere play Fortnite, developed in North Carolina's Research Triangle (72.4%
penetration among U.S. boys in 2018). The combination of the maps in Figures 1-4 with those
3

Four outlier states are excluded from this graph: Florida, Missouri, Utah, and Nevada.
9

in Figures 10 and 11 suggests that innovations are highly localized, while the benefits of
innovations are far more dispersed.
But these consumption benefits need to be set against the employment-related returns to
innovation, which exhibit geographic heterogeneity similar to that of innovation itself. Figure
12a shows that per capita income grew most in the most innovative places through 2000. The
northern part of the eastern heartland performed poorly while the southern part seems to have
fared decently well. Figure 12b shows that the western heartland did well between 2000 and
2010. Although southern Appalachia seems to do alright between 1980 and 2000 as far as per
capita growth, this measure masks important changes in employment. These changes – a large
increase in the chronically non-employed in certain parts of the country – are the topic of the
next subsection.
The Geography of Joblessness
America has experienced enormous economic disruption over the past 30 years, and it has not
been evenly distributed across space. We focus on joblessness (one minus the ratio of
employment to population) rather than unemployment, because the primary secular shift is
due to men leaving the labor force entirely. The available evidence (Austin, Glaeser, and
Summers, 2018) suggests that these men are not happily fulfilling home production, but rather
that they are unhappy and disconnected from larger society.
We focus on male joblessness, rather than female employment, because female labor force
participation is a far more complex topic. Women who do not have formal employment are far
less likely to say that the unsatisfied with their lives than equivalent men.

Moreover, for

much of the past 50 years, the female employment rate has been rising, unlike the male
employment rate.
The map in Figure 13 shows the distribution of joblessness in the United States in the years
around 2015. Some parts of America regularly experience joblessness rates over 25 percent,
while others have joblessness rates that are under five percent. The most notable feature of
this map is the swath that runs from Louisiana and Mississippi through Appalachia up to the
cities of the rust belt. We refer to this area as the Eastern Heartland and note that it is also
10

the area of the U.S. where employment and income growth is lowest, and where male life
expectancy has declined.
The eastern heartland has three features that help explain its particularly poor employment
performance. The northern part of the heartland was disproportionately industrial fifty years
ago, and it has since suffered from declining manufacturing jobs for men. In the past, high
wages from industrial jobs reduced the demand for formal schooling (Goldin and Katz, 2009)
and this region was far less educated historically than the western heartland. Low levels of
schooling were also a feature of the southern heartland states during their Jim Crow past.
Finally, this region appears to have weaker political institutions, at least as measured by the
levels of corruption (Glaeser and Saks, 2006, Liu and Mikesell, 2014).
Of course, manufacturing jobs are not the only ones to have become obsolete. More generally,
“routine jobs” that involve a variety of rote tasks have been replaced by computers and
offshored to cheaper sources of labor. Figure 14 maps the Autor and Dorn (2013) data on the
share of routine employment by commuting zone in 1980, before the period of widespread
computer adoption and open trade with China. In 1980, the eastern heartland had particularly
high shares of employment in soon-to-be obsolete routine jobs.
Note that the innovation-intense places featured in Figures 1-4 also tended to have high
routine shares in 1980, but these places were highly skilled due to top universities and
generations of educational investments. They went in a different direction when routine jobs
were mechanized and offshored, using workers with technical skills in a more innovative
capacity. The data indeed support a bifurcated response to advances in technology among the
places with a high routine employment share in 1980. To illustrate this phenomenon, we start
by taking the component of the 1980 routine employment share that isn’t correlated with the
subsequent share of IT worker hours in 2015. In Figure 15a, we graph 2015 jobless rates
against this residualized routine employment measure and find a strong positive correlation.
Large non-employed populations have grown in places that were initially dense with routine
employment that didn’t subsequently specialize in innovative industries.

11

Autor and Dorn (2013) argue that places with lots of routine employment had disproportionate
incentives to adopt worker-replacing computer technologies. Indeed, the 1980 routine
employment share explains 33 percent of the variation in the 2015 information technology
worker hours share across commuting zones. The remaining 67 percent of the variation
presumably reflects the presence of innovative, highly skilled, technology-intensive industries.
That residual share is strongly negatively correlated with local joblessness, as shown in Figure
15b. Figure 16 shows a similar negative relationship between patenting and non-employment.
The joblessness in Figure 13 is not simply a mirror image of the innovation depicted in Figures 1
and 3. High joblessness areas do tend to have less innovation, but there are many areas,
especially those in the western heartland, where low innovation is not associated with higher
levels of joblessness. Joblessness heterogeneity provides a new twist to old regional disparities
that strengthens the case for policy intervention. Employment generates sizable positive fiscal
externalities because employed workers pay taxes and non-employed workers receive benefits.
Pigou (1912) argued that this fiscal gap creates a case for subsidizing work. Similarly, this fiscal
externality strengthens the case for revisiting spatial policies – potentially including innovation
policies – that might reduce joblessness.
A further reason for revisiting spatial policies is that market forces do not seem to be
eliminating these joblessness gaps on their own. Blanchard and Katz (1992) famously reported
that unemployment rates at the state level in 1975 were uncorrelated with unemployment
rates in 1985, suggesting that economic dislocations were temporary. Figure 17 shows the
correlation between the non-employment rate in 1980 and the non-employment rate in 2015
across Census Public Use Microsample Areas (PUMAs). The r-squared of this regression is over
sixty percent and the coefficient is more than one, meaning that joblessness has become a
permanent part of many areas.
America has long had spatial heterogeneity in economic outcomes and by many measures that
heterogeneity has fallen. In 1950, Mississippi was the poorest state and there were eighteen
states with incomes that were twice as high. Today, Mississippi is still the poorest state, but
there are no states with incomes that double those in Mississippi. Mississippi has caught up
12

with many states, which reflects the long-standing pattern of economic convergence of regions
within the United States (Barro and Sala-I-Martin, 1992).
Yet while income convergence was the norm until 1980, it seems to have largely disappeared
since that time. Berry and Glaeser (2005) document a substantial decline or even
disappearance of regional convergence at the sub-state level. Ganong and Shoag (2018) show
a similar end of convergence at the state level.

State income gaps, like joblessness, have

become far more permanent. In the next section, we discuss possible reasons for declining
regional convergence, which can help in considering place-making policy.

III.

Why is there a spatial mismatch between innovation and joblessness?

We now turn to the causes of this persistent mismatch. First, we note the decline in the
geographic mobility of capital and labor. Historically, factor flows across space would
ameliorate spatial gaps in productivity and income. Second, we discuss changes in the nature
of innovation, technology, and work that interact with the location of firms and the geographic
sorting of more and less skilled workers. Finally, we suggest what we call the O’Neill Corollary,
that in the long run “All Jobs are Local,” by which we mean that global markets for traded goods
generate strong incentives to reduce variable labor costs with fixed capital costs, and so the
remaining demand for unskilled labor will come from the service sector.4
We highlight several historical facts. Innovation has always depended on geography because
local knowledge helps forge new ideas, because local markets demand or inspire certain
products, and because local labor determines production possibilities. As ideas have become
more complex, the type of knowledge required may have become more advanced, more
connected to universities, and more connected to technologically advanced industry and skilled
workers. If these demands concentrate skill in innovative areas, then innovators responding to

4

The O’Neill Corollary honors former House Speaker Thomas “Tip” P. O’Neill who famously declared that all
politics is local.
13

local market forces and local production possibilities will increasingly be geared towards skilled
workers’ consumption preferences and labor availability.
In addition, changes in information and communication technology (ICT), in trade, and in
transportation costs have fundamentally changed the geography of production possibilities. As
a result of these innovations, both the type of labor and the location of labor used in
production has changed. The global market for ideas has increased returns to geographic
concentrations of skill, where local knowledge flows create cascades of ingenuity. Meanwhile,
any low skilled labor input that doesn’t have to be both human and physically co-located with
the consumer (as in some service sector jobs) can be sourced more cheaply by employing either
a machine or a developing country worker. Communication, transportation, and institutional
(trade) barriers no longer protect less-skilled American workers from the competition of their
foreign counterparts. Any remaining difficulties in mechanizing and offshoring work are only
going to be eliminated by the future innovation of skilled workers.
Declining Mobility of Labor and Capital
From 1880 to 1980, per capita income differences across space converged steadily (Barro and
Sala-I-Martin, 1992), partially because of the movement of both labor and capital. After World
War II, manufacturing firms relocated to states with cheaper labor, especially when they also
embraced right-to-work laws (Holmes, 1998). While there is some migration of technology
companies to the most well-educated parts of the sunbelt, such as Austin, Texas, there is little
movement to less educated places where labor is even cheaper. Low cost, unskilled labor has
far less appeal to technology firms than it did for industrial firms.
Labor and capital now seem much less likely to move in response to geographic differences in
wages. The inter-country migration rate never fell below six percent during the forty years
before 1992. That rate has never risen above four percent during the past decade. Ganong
and Shoag (2018) show that while poor people often moved from poor places to rich places
before 1980, that process has ended. The migration of the poor no longer helps to iron out
differences in income or employment across space.

14

Why has migration slowed, especially from poor places to rich places? One explanation
emphasizes the changing nature of housing supply (Ganong and Shoag, 2018). In previous
epochs, Americans could easily move to places with economic opportunity with few barriers to
building. Balloon-frame homes were easy to build on the frontier. There were few barriers to
tenement construction in the cities of 1900. Today, new construction is enormously difficult in
the country’s most productive areas, from Silicon Valley to New York City, primarily because of
land-use restrictions. While we believe that this phenomenon cannot on its own explain the
decline in regional convergence, the high cost of housing surely helps to explain why more
poorer people don’t move to the centers of American innovation.
Eliminating these barriers to building would enable more people to receive some of the
employment benefits coming from the innovation economy, but encouraging out-migration
from distressed areas also carries costs. Austin, Glaeser and Summers (2018) report that a
large skill gap exists between people who stay in less advantaged areas and the people who
leave. More emigration would mean an even larger “brain drain” which could make conditions
even worse for those left behind. Land use regulations in high innovation areas may be
seriously reducing American productivity, as suggested by Hsieh and Klenow (2018), but
reforming those regulations will not be easy and will not solve the underemployment problems
of the eastern heartland.
Yet barriers to building cannot on their own explain the end of regional convergence.
America’s growing geographic sclerosis is surely also related to fundamental changes in the
nature of innovation, technology, and work. We turn to those next.
The Changing Nature of Innovation
For at least 250 years, the innovation economy has destroyed old jobs and created new jobs.
The machines of the early industrial revolution, such as Arkwright’s water frame and
Cartwright’s power loom, were meant to eliminate the labor needed to spin and weave.
Luddites destroyed those machines precisely because they feared a reduction in demand for
their skilled labor.

15

But the industrial revolution eventually led to a massive increase in the number of factory
workers, at least in Europe and the U.S.5 As mechanization proceeded, prices fell, and the
total quantity of industrial goods increased. While Jevons (1866) focused on how
improvements in the efficiency of coal-burning engines increased total usage of coal, his point
also applies to labor-saving industrial technology during his own era.

As 19th century watch

factories replaced traditional watchmakers, more people ended up making watches, because
lower prices induced a much larger share of the world carried a watch. As long as the
percentage decline in the amount of labor per unit output is less than the percentage growth in
total output, then labor-saving technology lead to an increase in labor demand.
The industrial revolution also created new products which generated more demand for less
skilled labor. Gas lighting, steam locomotives, and Portland cement are just three of the many
new products invented during the early industrial revolution. Mass produced automobiles may
have been the ultimate, employment-creating innovation of the late 19th century. Ford’s
automated assembly-line factories were massively more efficient than the technology they
replaced, but low car prices still ultimately relied on a massive supply of relatively low cost
labor.6
Geography mattered to these early breakthroughs. Innovations drew heavily from local
influences, including fortuitous knowledge transfers over an ale or ancient traditions of
production in related crafts. The lawsuit over Arkwright’s patent claimed that he had learned
about roller spinning through a conversation with John Kay, who had been working for another
inventor: Thomas Highs. James Watt’s early steam engines needed the metal-making
expertise of Birmingham that had been developed over centuries. Detroit’s automobile
production seems almost pre-ordained given the area’s earlier focus in wagon-building, which
employed General Motors’ Billy Durant, and in manufacturing boat engines, which employed
Henry Ford.

5

It is harder to account for the reduction in cotton work in India, much of which was in the home, because it was
displaced by England’s industrial cotton exports.
6
Ford’s enormous productivity edge also enabled him to pay for five dollar days.
16

Moreover, the location of the innovator had long-lasting employment impacts. One of
Arkwright’s largest mills was built at Shudehill Hill in central Manchester, and that city would
subsequently explode in size as the world’s Cottonopolis. Detroit would be synonymous with
automobile production for decades after Ford’s first Model T was produced in the city in 1908.
In both cases, thousands of less skilled workers came to these industrial meccas to operate the
machines that were designed to use their labor.
Long-term joblessness was rare in the pre-modern era, and innovators would often live near
less skilled workers. Most 19th century entrepreneurs didn’t need help from a university (Watt
was an exception), but they did need low cost labor. Innovators came from both urban and
rural areas. Many, like Edison, McCormick and Rockefeller, moved to large cities, but that was
where the low wage workers were moving as well.
Through the early 1920s, labor in the U.S. remained relatively inexpensive because labor unions
were weak, immigration to the U.S. was unfettered and there was little social safety net, so
working at any wage was better than starving.7 In the decades after the great recession, the
incomes of poorer Americans experienced a “great convergence” (Goldin and Margo, 1992).
Immigration was restricted. Labor unions were empowered. A modest safety net meant that
workers could be a bit choosier about their jobs. Higher labor costs may have motivated
innovators towards skill-biased technological change (Acemoglu, 1996).
As capital deepening replaced more expensive labor, the geography of production also
changed. Henry Ford’s early plants had about 200 square feet of space per worker, which is
comparable with many typical urban occupations, including office space and retail trade. More
modern factories can have two or three thousand square feet per worker, largely because
machines are doing the work. Since cities offer proximity at the cost of expensive land,
factories naturally relocated outside of urban centers (Glaeser and Kahn, 2004). Improvements
in transportation technology and infrastructure also encouraged this transition (Glaeser and
Ponzetto 2010).

7

We mean that labor was inexpensive relative to the returns to capital, not that labor was cheaper in the U.S. than
in other countries.
17

Innovators became less interested in employing less skilled workers, and innovations became
vastly more complicated as knowledge became deeper. Computers and medicine relied on
large research and development labs, such as those at I.B.M., Bell Labs and Pfizer. University
scholars, like those at Stanford and M.I.T., became natural partners for entrepreneurs.
In the age of Henry Ford, massive economies of scale were reaped by combining highly skilled
inventors with masses of less skilled laborers. In the era of Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg,
skilled inventors hire highly skilled computer programmers. Large scale manual work is
handled by machines or off-shore labor. These changes help explain why innovative activity no
longer locates near less skilled workers, but they do not explain, on their own, why joblessness
has risen so dramatically within the United States.
The Changing Nature of Work, and the Rise in Joblessness since 1969
Between 1940 and 1960, the total number of non-agricultural workers in the U.S. rose from 32
million to 54 million. Non-agricultural employment rose to 90 million in 1980 and 132 million
in 2000. From 1940 to 1980, jobs grew by an astounding 2.6 percent annually. Between 1980
and 2000, employment was still increasing at 1.9 percent per year, which is still quite healthy.
But since 2000, the number of jobs has been growing by only .7 percent per year, which at least
suggests that America’s economy has stopped innovating in ways that generate mass
employment – at least on American soil.
Throughout most of the 1960s, the male jobless rate hovered around five percent. For much of
the past decade, the jobless rate has been over fifteen percent. Abraham and Kearney (2018)
“conclude that labor demand factors, in particular trade and the penetration of robots into the
labor market, are the most important drivers.” Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2015) illustrate the
substantial impacts of both trade and technology on areas that are exposed to Chinese import
competition and computerization, respectively. Male employment, especially the
employment of the less educated, has disproportionately dropped in those areas that were
once heavily oriented towards manufacturing, as shown in Figures 12 and 13. This fact
supports that view the trade and technological change have reduced the role of men in making
goods.
18

Between 1969 and 1993, the share of non-farm employees who worked in manufacturing
industries dropped from 26.3 percent to 15.1 percent. From 1979 to 1993, the absolute
number of manufacturing workers fell from its high point of 19.5 million to 16.7 million. But
while manufacturing was switching from labor to capital and retrenching, service sector
employment was expanding enormously, from 64.9 million in 1979 to 88.6 million in 1993. This
shift was bemoaned by many who argued that “good,” unionized factory jobs were being
replaced by lower wage, non-unionized service sector jobs, but it is hard not to be impressed by
the share scale of service sector growth from 1970 to 2000.
From 1980 to 2000, service sector employment rose by 2.4 percent annually, from 66 to 107
million. This growth employed millions of women entering labor force, and muted the adverse
effects of declining industrial employment. Autor and Dorn (2013) show that local labor
markets with high initial shares of employment in routine tasks computerized at higher rates
and reallocated low-skill labor into service occupations, which saw greater wage growth than
middle-skill occupations in these years. Since 2000, service employment has growth only by
about one percent per year.
Before 1980, employment growth was pushed along by shifts in labor supply, most notably the
entry of women into the formal labor market. Yet wage growth was far healthier during those
decades than it has been since 2000, which suggests that much of the change has come from a
slower growth in the demand for new forms of work. One fundamental policy question is
whether changes to innovation policy could increase growth in labor demand, especially for less
skilled Americans.
Increases in labor supply mean that limited labor demand leads to joblessness, not merely low
wage labor. Long-term joblessness for men was rare prior to the New Deal, because any wage
was better than starvation.

Even in the 1960s, the bottom of the male wage distribution was

lower than today, and yet men still worked. Men seem less willing to work at extremely low
wages today because a more generous private and public safety net – especially disability
insurance – makes it easier to survive without working.

19

The private safety net also enables prime aged men to survive without working. Austin,
Glaeser and Summers (2018) report that one-third of prime-aged men who have been jobless
for over a year live with their parents. In the 1960s, homes were far smaller and parents were
far poorer. When the non-employed rely on in-kind transfers from friends and relatives, then
they are less able to move to places with greater job opportunities, which is one explanation for
why joblessness has become so geographically persistent.
Joblessness is particularly acute in former manufacturing hubs where industry has left.
Joblessness is less problematic in large cities, where there is more service sector employment.
Indeed, if service sector jobs are to provide work for less skilled Americans, then it is even more
valuable for more and less skilled people to live close to one another even if the result is wage
polarization, as shown in Autor and Dorn (2013). Wage polarization is likely to be less
destructive than joblessness because of the large negative externalities of the latter.
Yet the changing nature of innovation and work has led to more rather than less segregation by
skill across the U.S. (Berry and Glaeser, 2005).

Many of the greatest innovators since the

1970s have relied on highly skilled workers and been extremely segregated in the clusters of
Silicon Valley and Seattle and other highly educated cities. Some of the innovations have
affected productivity in other industries (Microsoft Office, Apple and creative fields like
architecture), and in some cases, these innovations may make both unskilled and skilled
workers redundant. Of course, in many cases, these advances vastly increase the productivity
of skilled workers and feed clusters like those in which they were developed. Other
innovations, like Google and Facebook, provide services directly to consumers and sell
consumer attention to other firms in the form of advertising. These internet giants are notable
because they impact the lives of billions, but they employ only a modest number of generally
highly skilled workers who benefit from proximity to each other. They have little need for lessskilled workers.
This fact provides another explanation for the decline in regional convergence. Technology
hubs, which are among America’s highest-wage areas, don’t need large numbers of skilled
workers to produce, so they don’t need to relocate to areas with lower wages. Their skilled
20

employees would like to hire more service workers, but limitations on housing supply ensure
that housing prices are extremely high and make migration to high wage areas less attractive.
There is an open question about whether the geographic isolation of the technology innovators
actually influences the nature of their innovations. We have ample evidence that new idea
production in the modern era requires local depth of knowledge. Local consumers may also
influence new product ideas, and local labor availability may affect an innovator’s perception of
production possibilities. If these innovators lived near more low-skill workers, would they
produce more inventions that would employ those workers? Certainly, there is some track
record of innovators creatively responding to the needs they see around them. But today’s
innovators know that almost any low-skilled labor they’ll need in production will be sourced
cheaply abroad. Innovating to increase demand for local low skill workers thus requires
creating tasks that must be performed locally.
For example, Uber is a technology company that provides work for the less skilled. Uber was
born – in part – because Travis Kalanick was in San Francisco and saw the need for a service
that could connect car service providers with car service users. The car-sharing service, Zipcar,
has a similar founding story. If innovation requires some direct knowledge, then it may be a
problem that the technology sector is geographically isolated from the places which contain
America’s larger economic problems. If rich people aren’t going to move to poorer areas, like
the eastern heartland, and the poorer residents of these places find San Francisco too
expensive, then is it possible to imagine service sector innovation that reduces American
joblessness?
The O’Neill Hypothesis: Will All Jobs be Local?
Not every American innovator works primarily with computers and skilled computer
programmers. The American job market, especially the job market for the less skilled, is
dominated by services. Much of the shape of this service economy was formed in the 1970s
and 1980s, when service-sector innovators massively increased employment.
Glaeser and Ponzetto (2019) argue that the rise in service sector employment is the natural
side-effect of vast global markets for traded goods. If firms can reduce variable labor costs by
21

paying fixed capital costs, then firms with larger markets will pay those fixed costs. As the size
of the global market expands, then fewer and fewer unskilled workers will produce traded
goods. Consequently, the remaining demand for unskilled labor will be in non-traded, local,
service-sector jobs.
This hypothesis is compatible with events of the past 50 years, where first manufacturing firms
mechanized, and then innovation switched to products which enjoyed a global reach because
they only existed in hyperspace, like Facebook. These hyperspace products require almost no
labor per user. Skilled labor is still needed to pay the fixed costs of managing machines and
coding software, but it is possible that machines will eventually replace even those human
inputs. Yet it seems likely that people will continue to enjoy buying coffee from a barista with a
pleasant smile, and the service sector will continue to employ less skilled Americans.
America’s service sector is dominated by four large industrial groups: education and health
services (23 million workers), wholesale and retail trade (22 million workers), professional and
business services (22 million workers), and leisure and hospitality (17 million workers).8 Over
the past twenty years, education and health service employment has been growing steadily and
independently of the business cycle. Both leisure and hospitality and professional and
business services are growing robustly, but with substantial setbacks during the great recession.
Wholesale and retail trade experienced serious declines during the recession and little overall
growth during the past twenty years.
This stagnation is in sharp contrast to the 1980 to 2000 period when retail and wholesale trade
grew dramatically, along with the other service sectors. Healthcare’s expansion was a natural
response to the public funding that flowed from Medicare and Medicaid.

Professional and

business services provided external technical expertise in an increasingly complex world.
These services were disproportionately urban and skilled, and their links with other businesses
mirror the increasing links between businesses and universities.

8

https://www.bls.gov/emp/tables/employment-by-major-industry-sector.htm
22

America’s vast fast food industry begins in Kansas with White Castle in 1921. White Castle
offered burgers with buns, and fast service, but the restaurants were not franchises. They
were and are owned directly by the company. Starting in California in the 1950s, McDonald’s
achieved much greater scale with a similar production model and a franchise system, which
borrowed from earlier franchise operations, like Coca-Cola and Rexall. Kentucky Fried Chicken
borrowed the McDonald’s model but applied it to a regional cooking style. American food
entrepreneurs have shown a steady ability to generate employment in different regions by
borrowing and adapting ideas from elsewhere.
Moreover, fast food entrepreneurs have managed to generate local employment in corporate
headquarters that is sustained by sales elsewhere. Nine of America’s twelve largest fast food
chains (by number of stores) are headquartered close to their original founding locations.
McDonalds, Pizza Hut and Baskin Robbins are three prominent exceptions. In most cases,
these companies have changed hands, sometimes repeatedly, but new owners have
maintained a regional affiliation, or in the case of Kentucky Fried Chicken, returned to the
region.
Even retail and wholesale trade expanded dramatically during the 1980s and 1990s, as malls
expanded and America bought more. Today, a combination of e-commerce and improvements
in the logistics of selling raises the possibility that employment will now stagnate or decline.
There will surely continue to be demand for skilled human salespeople pushing the sales of high
margin products, such as luxury goods and real estate, but the number of salespeople who just
move products and man the register in shops seems sure to continue to fall.
Healthcare and much of education primarily serve the local market and thus have limited scope
for expansion. The country’s top hospitals and universities are exporters, but this group is a
small sliver at the top end of the market that is highly concentrated in the country’s most
educated regions. While the healthcare and education sector employ a vast number of
Americans and often expands with innovation, this sector is largely public in nature and seems
unlikely to provide a dynamic basis for future regional export-based growth in less educated
parts of the U.S.
23

By contrast, professional and business services, which include lawyers, advertising agencies,
accountants and management consultants, are a dominant sector in many high human capital
cities and many of these are export-oriented. While Madison Avenue emerged first because of
demand from New York-based businesses, New York advertising agencies soon supplied a
global roster of firms. While education and healthcare is protected from technological
disruption partially because of public funding, professional and business services generally
involve both creative thinking and face-to-face contact, which are harder to reproduce in a
robot.
Business and professional services are far less likely to generate future employment gains in
depressed areas because these services require the high levels of education that are generally
lacking in those areas. The Big Four accounting firms that dominate corporate business in the
U.S. aren’t even headquartered in the U.S. The management consulting industry is dominated
by New York and Boston. Architectural firms are more dispersed geographically, with large
and successful companies in St. Louis (HOK), Omaha, and especially fast-building states, like
Texas. Ultimately, the business service model involves selling highly skilled labor to global
companies, which can only be a viable model for places that have an abundant supply of highly
skilled labor.
Leisure and hospitality is more plausibly a dynamic source of employment growth, even in areas
with lower human capital. Wealthier Americans will spend on leisure in places that they don’t
live, and they are also willing to pay for a more luxurious labor-intensive leisure experience.
The question is how many residents of depressed areas can really work in leisure and
hospitality and how many of these areas can be turned into leisure destinations, or into
exporters of local cuisine.
The changing nature of work means that less-skilled Americans have been working
disproportionately in service jobs, not in manufacturing or other routine jobs, for decades. This
shift into service sector jobs in response to improvements in trade and technology helps explain
the spatial mismatch between joblessness and innovation, and it makes that mismatch harder

24

to address. Manufacturing workers didn’t need to live near their eventual customers. More
service sector workers do.
The need for low wage workers drew manufacturing firms into low wage areas. There are very
few technology firms that would benefit from hiring large numbers of high school dropouts.
Their workers might benefit from cheaper service workers, but that gain is unlikely to be
enough to offset the productivity losses from moving to a less educated locale.

IV.

Spatial Innovation Policy: Invention

The spatial mismatch between joblessness and innovation suggests that innovators believe the
returns to creativity are lower in regions with abundant underemployed labor. That belief
suggests the geographic dilemma facing innovation policy. Should we target resources
towards the most innovative places, or to the places that have the greatest need for jobgenerating innovation? If America is split between a creative zone and a jobless zone, then
can improving the creative zone help the jobless zone? The disparate geographies of
invention, technology and employment motivate our discussion of spatial innovation policy.
This tradeoff is particularly acute because America appears to have both an innovation problem
and an employment problem. The share of prime aged (25 to 54 year old) men who are not
employed rose from five percent in the 1960s to over fifteen percent during much of the past
decade. Gordon (2016) finds that American economic growth declined over the same time
period, and reduced business dynamism may explain the rise in male joblessness. Okun’s Law
(1962) noted the link between low growth rates and unemployment over fifty years ago.
We take as given that innovation policy is aimed both at expanding the stock of knowledge and
addressing other social problems, like America’s growing joblessness problem, especially in the
eastern heartland. If joblessness causes a reduction in tax revenues and an increase in social
expenditure, then there is a fiscal externality from non-employment. Consequently, the
equilibrium level of joblessness will be too high, and reducing joblessness can raise social
welfare.
25

Continuing with our division of innovation into education, invention and entrepreneurship, we
now turn to spatial dimensions of policies that affect invention, like Federal research funding.
The previous section’s discussion suggests that geography matters for innovation policy
because space helps shape the production function for new ideas, by determining the overall
level of creativity, the problems that innovators address, and the means of producing the final
good (input mix). The separation of joblessness and innovation may lead innovators to ignore
the opportunities that exist among the jobless population. Geography may also determine the
impact of creativity on outcomes, like unemployment and inequality.
In this section, we start by reviewing the three main arguments for place-based policies:
heterogeneous agglomeration effects, redistribution (geography as “tagging”) and differential
impacts on social problems. We then compare the case for spreading education and
entrepreneurship across America with the case for spreading invention.
The Logic of Place-Based Policies
Place-based policies can be justified in three different ways (Austin, Glaeser and Summers,
2018): spatial externalities, redistribution, and spatially heterogeneous impacts on social
problems. Spatial externalities include agglomeration economies and local human capital
externalities, and they typically imply that the relocation of activity from one place to another
can increase aggregate outcome. In the case of innovation policy, these spatial externalities
might include local increasing returns to scale from a massive research hub like Silicon Valley, or
the spillovers from inducing a modest number of scientists to relocate from California to
Kentucky.
In the case of overall economic activity, the literature accepts that while it may be likely that
the exact population sizes of New York City and West Virginia are not optimum, it is not clear if
we should be moving people from New York to West Virginia or vice versa. Perhaps cases exist
where a modest “big push” would propel a region into perpetual growth, but we do not know
how to identify these cases in the U.S. today.
Similarly, a large body of work suggests that spatial spillovers are important in innovation (e.g.
Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson, 1993; Belenzon and Schankerman 2013), but it is hard to
26

know the optimal location for additional innovative activity or whether the U.S. as a whole be
more creative if invention were more concentrated or more dispersed.
The redistributive case for spatial targeting is that place may be a convenient tag for “poverty,”
so that by redistributing across place we can help poor people without destroying incentives to
work. We can also think of insuring people against the adverse economic shocks experienced
by their location. But place-based redistribution (unless it is based on place of birth) will
distort location choice, and may increase housing costs in areas that receive transfers.
Moreover, lower incomes may already be offset by lower prices. Perhaps the strongest
argument against place-based redistribution is that the overwhelming share of income variation
lies within states and counties rather than across states and counties (Austin, Glaeser and
Summers, 2018).
The most equity-enhancing forms of local investment provide benefits or employment for
lower income people within a locality, but the best labs rarely employ high school dropouts.
Attracting top scientists will only raise the costs of local housing. Technological breakthroughs,
such as cancer-fighting therapies, may well benefit the poorest members of society, but they
will not disproportionately benefit the poor who are living where the breakthrough occurs.
The government has many other, more direct tools for redistributing wealth, other than
redirecting research to poorer areas.
The third case for spatial policy is that social problems, like joblessness, may be more
responsive to policy interventions in some places than in others. For example, we may want to
reduce crime everywhere, but by targeting resources towards “hot spots”, the effectiveness of
spending can increase. While fiscal externalities from being non-employed may be the same in
Seattle and Appalachia, there may be far more people on the margin of employment in
Appalachia. Consequently, an employment subsidy that targets Appalachia may induce more
people to move from being jobless to being employed per dollar spent than would a spatially
uniform employment subsidy.
We will treat joblessness as our primary social problem, but we recognize that there are many
other market failures which vary across space. Treating joblessness as a market failure means
27

that we reject the view that not working is merely a benign decision to consume more leisure.
Austin, Glaeser and Summers (2018) also quantify the sizable fiscal externality that is associated
with working because of paying taxes and not receiving benefits.
Austin, Glaeser and Summers (2018) discuss large happiness gap between jobless and
employed men, and the connections between joblessness, suicide and marital disruption. The
life satisfaction gaps between the employed and the non-employed, at least among men, are
much larger than the gaps between the working rich and the working poor. If the goal of
redistribution is to reduce happiness gaps across individuals, then reducing joblessness would
be far more equity enhancing than redistributing income.
The case for spatially targeted action against joblessness emphasizes the vast differences across
American labor markets. The right policies for Seattle are unlikely to be right for West Virginia.
This point is obvious in housing markets, where subsidizing new construction through the Low
Income Housing Tax Credit makes far more sense in Boston than it does in Houston or Detroit.
Austin, Glaeser and Summers (2018) argue that local heterogeneity means that social insurance
policy should penalize working less in West Virginia than in low joblessness areas, and that if we
were to subsidize employment more aggressively, those subsidies should target areas with
higher levels of joblessness.
The differential elasticity argument is generally less relevant in the case of targeted
interventions, like N.S.F. grants, than with broader economic policies, such as employment
subsidies. As long as the peer review processes of the N.S.F. and the N.I.H. are targeting
efficiently on a project-by-project basis, then additional spatial targeting will not improve
efficacy.9
Still, to consider spatial targeting of invention more fully it is helpful to discuss between four
classes of American locales: (1) highly successful research clusters in highly skilled regions (e.g.
San Francisco, Boston), (2) successful, smaller research cluster in skilled mid-sized areas (e.g.

The case for some spatial targeting is stronger if the peer review process is weaker, but we still
would not know if better targeting means spending more in successful areas or in distresses
areas.
9

28

Rochester, Minnesota, Austin, Texas), (3) successful research clusters in more troubled areas
(Lexington, Kentucky, Morgantown, West Virginia), and (4) less successful places with little
existing research infrastructure.
Most of distressed America falls into the fourth category and research funding in those areas
would face many hurdles. Gruber and Johnson (2019), for example, favor dispersing research
funding, but only towards places with sufficient clusters of skills. If human capital is necessary
for successful invention, then Federal research funding will not succeed in the most desperate
parts of the U.S. Distorting innovation policy by targeting it towards poorer states will bring
the largest benefits towards the richest residents in those states, who already benefit from low
housing costs, and this targeting will-- if anything-- exacerbate local inequality. There is an
equity-related case for focusing on education and reducing the barriers to entrepreneurship in
poorer communities, but invention policy seems poorly targeted for the needs of these areas.
The case for redistributing resources from places in category (1) to places in category (2) must
rely on the nature of the research production function. If an extra dollar in a mid-sized area
would be more productive than an extra dollar in San Francisco, then redistributing funding
across space would increase the total flow of new research. The case for redistributing
research resources from places in category (1) to places in category (3) is somewhat stronger,
because even if the research is the same quality, more funding in category (3) places may
actually reduce joblessness.

In this case, we would need to know the tradeoff between the

number of jobs created and the value of research that is lost.
Geography and the Invention Production Function
Gruber and Johnson (2019) argue that research and development should be subsidized in
America’s most distressed areas, primarily through the tax code. This policy can be justified
either because research and development produce more valuable inventions in distressed
areas, or because any given level of invention produces more employment in these areas.
similar logic can be used to justify added invention spending, through the National Science
Foundation or the National Institutes of Health, in distressed areas.

29

A

To clarify the tradeoffs involved in spatially targeting invention subsidy and spending, we now
turn to a highly stylized model of national innovation policy.

We define innovation in locality j

as 𝐼𝑗 (𝑆𝑗 ), where 𝑆𝑗 is the spending by the Federal government in locality j, which could
represent either direct grant spending or tax credit support. National knowledge is
. Output in each locality is a function of both local innovation and national
knowledge 𝐹𝑗 (𝐼𝑗 , 𝐼𝑈𝑆 ), which is meant to represent a broadly defined measure of overall
welfare. We assume that the national objective function is
If the government allocates a fixed bucket of spending to maximize total national output, which
equals the sum of local outputs, then the first order condition will set
equal over space. This expression contains three elements. The term, 𝐼 ′𝑗 (𝑆𝑗 ), represents the
impact that spending will have on the total stock of knowledge and that might differ across
space. The term

𝑑𝐹𝑗
𝑑𝐼𝑗

reflects the impact of local knowledge on the local objective function, and

that might be higher in distressed areas because there are more people on the margin of
employment. The term

is common across areas and reflects the national benefit from

expanding the stock of knowledge. Spending might be particularly targeted towards an area
either because the marginal returns of spending on research, 𝐼′𝑗 (𝑆𝑗 ), are particularly high in
𝑑𝐹

that area or because the impact of innovation on local output, 𝑑𝐼 𝑗, is higher in that area.
𝑗

If the review panels of the NSF and NIH are ideally allocating funds to the projects that generate
the highest level of knowledge, then 𝐼′𝑗 (𝑆𝑗 ) is constant across space without any explicit spatial
policy. It is conceivable that there are dynamic impacts of spending that are not captured by
either N.I.H. panels or the model, and in that case, it may make sense to spend more in
underdeveloped areas to improve long-term innovation.
But given the detailed knowledge of the N.I.H. and N.S.F. review panels, the presumption must
be that they optimize research output without spatial targeting and that any spatial program
will reduce the quantity of knowledge produced. In the case of private sector research,
companies presumably locate research in places that will maximize their stock of private usable
30

knowledge. Yet the existence of research and development tax credits suggests that there are
also externalities from private research and development, presumably reflecting the fact that
some knowledge spills over to others. To justify spatial targeting on knowledge-creation
grounds, we would need to know that knowledge spillovers are larger for inventions made in
more distressed areas.
𝑑𝐹

Heterogeneity in 𝑑𝐼 𝑗 reflects different spillovers from local research and development activity
𝑗

(Jaffe et al., 1993, Hausman, 2018). If current programs equalize 𝐼′𝑗 (𝑆𝑗 ) over space, then spatial
targeting towards places with a higher value of

𝑑𝐹𝑗
𝑑𝐼𝑗

will trade local economic benefits against

global knowledge creation. If the impact of local innovation on local activity,
the impact of the stock of knowledge on overall American welfare,
research for local employment purposes will reduce welfare. If

𝑑𝐹𝑗
𝑑𝐼𝑗

𝑑𝐹𝑗
𝑑𝐼𝑗

, is dwarfed by

, then skewing
is large and heterogeneous,

then spatial targeting of research funding becomes more attractive.
Spatial invention policy therefore depends on empirical evaluation of
𝐼′𝑗 (𝑆𝑗 ). The evaluation of

𝑑𝐹𝑗
𝑑𝐼𝑗

𝑑𝐹𝑗
𝑑𝐼𝑗

and the shape of

is complicated by the fact that the government is not simply a

pure G.D.P. maximizer. Welfare is not equivalent to wealth, and public policy may have added
objectives such as decreasing joblessness or inequality. These added objectives would push
towards more research spending in areas where the impact of innovation on joblessness was
higher, or where innovation would do more to reduce income inequality.
If invention expenditure is more likely to reduce joblessness in eastern Kentucky than in Silicon
Valley, and if joblessness produces externalities, then Pigouvian public economics suggests a
difference in tax subsidy across space which is equal to the difference in the joblessness that is
eliminated times the benefit per person moved from non-employment to employment.10 The
case for skewing research and development tax credits needs more empirical work, but it

10

If employment generates different externalities in the two places, then that too needs to be incorporated nto
the formula.
31

seems stronger than the case for skewing the process of awarding research grants because it
can be done in a small way that doesn’t endanger an existing process for targeting spending,
and because these tax credits are not already awarded on a case-by-case basis by a panel that
can already consider the wider impacts of the research
Spatial targeting of research funding is risky because we have existing funding models that are
remarkably non-political by the standards of Washington. Skewing grant funding to privileged
geographies opens the flood-gates for political maneuvering, as we will see in the next
subsection. Without estimates of the spatial effects of innovation spending, it would be hard to
have confidence in any new spatially oriented policy, and abandoning the scientific approach to
grant-making might lead to considerable politicization of Federal research funding.
The Empirical Track Record of Spatially Targeting Invention Subsidies
Geography naturally matters for Federal entities aimed at engendering innovation and better
economic performance. The Small Business Administration “provides free counseling and lowcost training to new entrepreneurs and established small businesses in over 1,800 locations,” and
maintains district offices in every state. This wide geographic spread does not reflect a
conscious attempt to relocate small businesses or even to right geographic inequities, but
rather just to ensure that their services are available to every American entrepreneur.
The geographic element of the National Science Foundation is somewhat more surprising, since
knowledge can benefit all Americans even if it is produced in a small range of locations. Yet the
1950 Act founding the N.S.F. proclaimed “it shall be an objective of the Foundation to
strengthen research and education in the sciences and engineering, including independent
research by individuals, throughout the United States, and to avoid undue concentration of
such research and education.” No justification is provided for this goal, and no definition is
given of “undue concentration,” but this clause is the primary justification for the NSF’s
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program.11

11

Formerly the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research.
32

The EPSCoR program was founded in 1979 and it originally provided targeted funding for six
states: Arkansas, Maine, Montana, South Carolina and West Virginia. Since 2016, there are 25
states that are eligible for EPSCoR funding, and a number of other Federal agencies, including
the Department of Energy and NASA, have embraced the EPSCoR model. The National
Institutes of Health has had its own “Institutional Development Awards” (IDEA) program for
supporting research and education in 23 states.
The initial objective of this program was “enabling universities in every state to be able to
compete for federal research funding,” according to a 2013 National Academy of Sciences
review.12 This outreach spending could be justified even without the N.S.F.’s mandate “to
avoid undue concentration,” if the returns to education investment are sufficiently concave in
the research production function, so that hidden talent emerges with a small amount of
funding in Montana or Maine. The alternative interpretation is that the geographic spread is
largely political, ensuring wider support for the National Science Foundation from a larger set of
Senators.
The National Academy of Sciences report notes that over the years EPSCoR programs have
been subject to mission creep with “other goals, such as enhancing innovation to stimulate
economic development and entrepreneurship and expanding the diversity of the science and
engineering workforce.” While the National Academy of Sciences was charged by Congress
with evaluating EPSCoR, their report notes that “the breadth and increasing complexity of the
EPSCoR objectives have made it difficult to develop a rigorous assessment system with
quantitative metrics.” Consequently “the committee could not assess the effectiveness of
ESPCoR with the necessary rigor needed to fully address Congress’s charge.”
Nonetheless, the “committee” came to the view that “several million dollars of funding and 5
years of effort were clearly not going to transform a state’s research capacity,” which is
essentially rebutting the extra concaving case for targeted spending. The committee
concludes that “EPSCoR has been in operation for more than 30 years and, over this period, the
program has invested several billion dollars in capacity-building activities, yet the same 10
12

https://www.nap.edu/read/18384/chapter/2
33

states that received the highest level of research funding in 1977 still top the list,” and
“EPSCoR-eligible states received roughly the same percentage of total federal research funding
in 2012 that they had received in 1979.”
EPSCoR, and the many related programs, have not redrawn the map of American innovation.
This could mean that they were simply too small to have a visible impact or that this process
was doomed from the start. Yet, we take this empirical track record as pushing against spatial
targeting of invention policy. The EPSCoR problem doesn’t appear to have generated strong
results and we have abundant evidence for changing the geographic scope of its activity for
presumably political purposes. Targeting innovation policies relating to education and
entrepreneurship may be more effective tools for reducing local joblessness than relocating
inventive activity.
Targeting Research for Distressed Regions
But research can aid distressed regions even if it isn’t located in distressed regions. One
plausible response to the joblessness in the American heartland is to subsidize innovations that
will promote employment in that region, even if the innovators themselves remains in Boston
or San Francisco. This view would be untenable if innovations had little impact outside of their
region of origin, but most major innovations have nation and global reach, and some even drive
employment in distressed areas.
Most obviously, American medical research is an innovation machine that generates
procedures and prescription medicines that improve both longevity and quality of life. This
innovation machine is funded directly by the National Institutes of Health. The public sector
also funds research indirectly because Medicare and Medicaid will both pay for new procedures
that confer some medical benefit. Unlike many European single payer systems, the American
healthcare system provides something of an open-ended commitment to pay to use new
innovation, which is an enormous spur towards corporate creativity.
That public research bonanza has helped healthcare to become the largest employment cluster
in many poorer parts of America. The expansion in the number of medical techniques has
saved many lives, but it has also increased the size of the sector. Nationwide, the Census
34

reports that 14 percent of employed persons in the U.S. work in the healthcare and social
assistance.
In depressed areas, this share can be much higher, because there is fewer forms of other
economic activity. Eighteen percent of employment in the state of West Virginia is in
healthcare. In the city of Cleveland, that share rises to almost one-in five. The share of
employment in healthcare and social assistance is only likely to increase with the number of
innovative health-generate procedures created by the country’s top medical research centers.
Since Medicare and Medicaid are both entitlements, these procedures lead to employment and
spending in regions that have few other sources of earnings. Consequently, healthcare has
become a dominant industry in many declining places. Future changes either in Federal
healthcare policy or the labor intensity of medical provision have the capacity to deeply shape
economic conditions in poorer parts of America.
Health care innovation has certainly generated vast numbers of jobs in less advantage parts of
the country. Healthcare employees are employed themselves and provide demand for other
local services. It is possible that the vast size of the medical sector has crowded out other
activities that might lead to more export-related entrepreneurship in the long run, but we have
little evidence to support such a claim. A more plausible view is that healthcare spending on
new medical innovations seems like a short-term boon for disadvantaged economies, but not a
basis for long run economic resurgence. Ultimately, a structure where Federal largesse pays for
a clearly delineated set of procedures that are invented elsewhere seems likely to lead to
employment but not entrepreneurship in distressed communities.
Is it possible to incentivize a broader set of innovations that might encourage entrepreneurship
in distressed parts of America? In healthcare innovation, there is an obvious tool. If N.I.H.
funding were dedicated to research that moved people from disability to being employable,
that could have a major impact on the economy of these regions. Disability is the larger
Federal program providing aid for non-employed prime-aged males (Autor and Duggan, 2007).
If health innovations could specifically work at moving adults from disability to employability,

35

this might particularly benefit distressed parts of America by reducing the level of permanent
joblessness.
A second possibility is that N.I.H. could spend more on researching remote delivery of medical
services, which could be particularly valuable in lower density areas of America with fewer
doctors. Delivering medical services over distances is already becoming a reality, and long
distance health care could potentially improve the quality of care in distressed communities.
The benefits could be even higher if the research targeted long distance delivery of healthcare
for conditions that particularly afflict isolated communities.
The N.S.F. also has programs that could encourage innovation in distressed areas. Most
obviously, this could be done through the Engineering Directorate as part of the Division of
Industrial Innovation and Partnerships.

We suspect that trying to forecast which innovations

will employ less skilled people in distressed areas is almost impossible. Consequently, ex post
rewards may be the only option.

V. Human Capital for Distressed Regions
In Sections II and III, we documented the positive links between education and invention and
the negative correlation between education and joblessness. These correlations suggest that
distressed regions must improve their human capital levels in order either to become more
inventive or to capitalize on new inventions through entrepreneurship. In this section, we first
discuss the literature linking universities and local economic success and how universities might
be strengthened in distressed parts of the U.S. Second, we suggest the possibility of bringing
entrepreneurship into the education sector via competitive sourcing of vocational training for
high school and community college students.
We then turn to two strategies for attracting human capital. One approach is to tilt
immigration policy to favor distressed areas, such as issuing more H1B visas to companies that
locate in distressed areas. A second approach is for localities to deliver local amenities that
36

particularly appeal to inventors and entrepreneurs, such as freedom from non-compete
clauses. Naturally, more general amenities, such as safer streets and better schools, can also
play a role in attracting talent, but such policies are beyond the scope of this paper.
Universities and Local Economic Success
Palo Alto was a near wilderness in 1894, when Leland Stanford founded his university there.
Today, Palo Alto and Stanford are the epicenter of perhaps the most productive region in the
world. Over the past forty years, Cambridge, Massachusetts has evolved from a decaying
industrial town into a thriving innovation hub largely through the influence of its universities.
In the often distressed eastern heartland, university cities, like Lexington, Kentucky, Columbus,
Ohio, and Bloomington, Indiana, stand out as regional success stories.
The economic literature provides compelling evidence of the link between the presence of
universities and local success. Universities are both educators and producers of new
ideas (Henderson, Jaffe, Trajtenberg 1998), which are disproportionately transmitted locally
(Jaffe, Trajtenberg and Henderson, 1993; Belenzon and Schankerman, 2013). StephensDavidowitz (2018) finds that people who are innovative not just in science, but also in art,
entertainment, business, and politics come disproportionately from either big cities or
university towns.
Hausman (2018) documents that when universities are given stronger commercialization
incentives, employment grows disproportionately in industries most closely related to the
nearby university’s ex-ante innovative strengths. Corporate innovation also increases in these
local university connected industries, suggesting the importance of universities not only in
producing ideas but also in stimulating local corporate production and implementation of new
ideas.
Indeed, early investments in higher education seem to produce benefits decades or centuries
later. Moretti (2004) shows the sizable wage benefits of having a land grant college in a city

37

prior to 1940.13

Cantoni and Yuchtman (2014) show that the founding of medieval

universities in Germany after 1386 had important long-term effects on nearby economic
activity, possibly because their law students developed the legal and administrative institutions
to facilitate markets.
One interpretation of the economic impact of universities is that they attract and retain smart
workers, who then generate human capital externalities. Rauch (1993) and Moretti (2004)
document the strong link between local human capital levels and wages. Local human capital
also predicts subsequent growth in employment, population and earnings (Glaeser, Scheinkman
and Shleifer, 1995, Glaeser and Saiz, 2004, Shapiro, 2006).
Over the past 60 years, human capital levels, as measured by the share of the population with a
college degree, have been geographically diverging (Moretti, 2004, Berry and Glaeser, 2005)
such that the initial skills advantage conferred by a university has only become more important
over time. This divergence may reflect the tendency of skilled people to invest in amenities
that the skilled like (Diamond, 2016),14 or increasing restrictions on the supply of affordable
housing (Ganong and Shoag, 2017). This divergence could also reflect the tendency of skilled
workers to innovate in ways that demand the labor of other skilled workers (Berry and Glaeser
2005; Acemoglu 2002).
Human capital externalities appear tangibly in research parks that enable entrepreneurs to
learn from nearby academic innovators. The success of the North Carolina Research Triangle or
Stanford Industrial Park seems to suggest the existence of such spillovers. Partnerships of
physically proximate scientists, like M.I.T.’s Robert Langer and Steven Zeitels of Massachusetts
Eye and Ear Infirmary, to solve problems that appear locally, like Julie Andrews’ botched throat
surgery, further support the innovative impact of universities.

13

Kantor and Whalley (2014) show a rise in local wages in response to university endowment
shocks. The increase is greater for research-intensive universities and in industries that,
nationally, hire more college graduates and cite more university patents.
14

Ganong and Shoag (2017) suggest that skills divergence may also reflect restrictions on building in more skilled
places.
38

If the goal is to reduce joblessness in distressed parts of America, then universities can be
nudged towards more local economic engagement. If universities were standard profitmaking firms, then incentives would already be in place, but universities, especially public
universities, may have different objectives. Stronger incentives for commercialization may also
induce universities to allow their faculty members to benefit more from their innovations.
Lach and Schankerman (2008) show that royalty incentives increase faculty effort and the
subsequent quality of inventions.
Fehder, Hausman, and Hochberg (2019) find that commercialization of university innovation is
more common in large cities. This fact suggests that the presence of nearby human talent is an
important ingredient in the technology transfer process. Consequently, cities and universities
may end up being more complementary in the future, which may make it more difficult for
rural universities to compete. This trend may also make it harder for universities to bring jobs
to lower density areas. In principle, any system that rewards universities for generating jobs
from their research can reward them more for jobs in places that are harder to reach.
For example, to encourage implementation of innovations in distressed communities, a portion
of research overhead might be designated for funding the technology transfer office that works
to commercialize local innovation. Subsequent receipt of an expanded overhead rate could
then be made contingent upon past performance in the commercialization of Federally funded
research. If future overhead rates depend on the level of commercialization, then universities
may increase royalty incentives to faculty members to increase the level of commercial
innovation.
Another stronger tool would be to offer priority to N.I.H. funding for scholars or labs that have a
track record of producing innovations that lead to large scale employment of less skilled
Americans. The scholar or lab would have to document such a track record. An N.S.F. panel
would have to evaluate this claim. If the scholar had indeed generated jobs in the past, then
she or he would probably be more likely to generate jobs in the future. Granting that scholar a
modest amount of extra priority or extra funding could thus support job creation.

39

If the university’s scholars generate a funding benefit for the university from a track record of
successful commercialization, then the University has an incentive to be more proactive in
seeking out potentially commercializable discoveries from within the university. University
overhead rights from Federal grants could also be tied to past generation of employment,
which would also create stronger incentives to commercialize technology. These
commercialization-geared policies seem more likely to generate growth than piling R&D dollars
on sub-par research projects in these distressed places.
Partially linking student funding to their outcomes could enhance the usefulness of the training
they get. Federal funding through Pell Grants and other programs for students going to schools
in distressed areas could be increased and tied to performance. School aid could increase or
decrease based on the students’ subsequent fate in the labor market. For example, Pell Grant
funding could be increased by one-third in distressed areas, but that extra funding might be
made available only ten years after graduation in proportion to the share of that postgraduation decade in which the student had paid income taxes.
Work-study programs are a third area for reform in distressed areas. The Federal caps on
work-study could be increased for students in these areas. Work-study aid could be targeted
more closely towards working in fields that are likely to yield higher paying work after
graduation. For example, being a research assistant in a science lab could be supported more
aggressively than working in an administrative dean’s office.
For many, learning-by-working is easier than learning-by-studying. Working with faculty
members on research-related projects may be a particularly natural way for students from
distressed areas to come to understand the innovation economy. Naturally, these programs
should be subject to experimentation and evaluation, but there is surely room for
experimentation with policies towards colleges and universities in distressed areas, in order to
promote both the employment and future entrepreneurship of students and faculty.
Entrepreneurs for Education: Vocational Training outside of School
Many students in distressed areas do not attend college. They are the ones that are at greatest
risk of long-term joblessness. Education policy could also do more to spur the development of
40

usable skills before college. One vision incorporates entrepreneurial skills delivery with
traditional high schools.
In some cases, vocational schools operate well in the U.S., but often they do not. Boston’s
Madison Park High School has had a troubled history since its creation as Boston’s magnet
vocational school. One reason for its troubles is that students and their parents don’t want to
accept that, at age 14, the students are already tracked into a vocational path. Older, tenured
teachers may also lack the skills needed to educate students for the 21st century economy.
When teaching and family buy-in are not the obstructions to successful vocational training,
learning time can be. More can be done to teach vocational students after school, on
weekends and over the summer. Currently, high school students who are children of less
educated parents report doing less than 4.5 hours per week of homework and more than 20
hours per week of screen time, along with another 12 hours per week “hanging out.”15 Adding
eight hours to the school week for vocational training does not seem like an impossibility, and
more time could be spent over the summer.
Vocational training need not be provided by school faculty, although it would in most cases be
provided in schools during off hours. Skills like plumbing and computer coding can be provided
by specialized teachers. Ideally, these skills will be competitively provided by different wouldbe educators, which might include for-profit firms, labor unions, non-profit organizations and
even existing vocational schools. An entrepreneurial model makes sense for vocational training
because it is possible to evaluate whether the student has learned the skill and to make
payment to the provider contingent upon skill acquisition. The economy’s quickly changing
demand for specific skills is another reason to involve entrepreneurs who keep their fingers on
the pulse of American markets.
Entrepreneurially supplied vocational training could be Federally funded for all children who are
deemed to be at risk, which can be defined based on a combination of parental and community
attributes. Once again, the programs can be experimental, and even if they do become
permanent, evaluation would be built into the process because of the pay-for-performance
15

https://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2007/05/art4full.pdf
41

aspect of the training. Ultimately, the goal would be to encourage entrepreneurial educators
to provide skills with market value.
Perhaps the hardest task is to determine the vocations that will be taught. While it may be
straightforward to judge whether a carpenter is trained, it is not so easy to tell whether the
economy has enough carpenters. One approach would be to begin with a small number of
large occupations, which enjoy low levels of unemployment and reasonable wages, and then
add new skills gradually over time, based on demand and performance. For this larger
question, it would also be useful to have longer term data on the earnings and employment of
children who go through these programs.
Another approach would be to encourage apprenticeship programs within existing firms.
Presumably, firms which will employ the workers they train will be sure to provide these
workers with useful skills. Of course, there is the potential that these skills will be overly firmspecific and not transferable to other jobs, leaving workers vulnerable if they’re fired or laid off.
Countries with well-functioning apprenticeship programs, like Germany, implement
employment protections that make firing workers difficult and generate long job tenures, but
of course these protections may have farther-reaching consequences for labor market
dynamism. At their best, apprenticeship programs could simultaneously create both jobs and
training for what may otherwise be low skilled and marginally employed individuals. But they
likely come with the risk of complex regulation.

Importing Human Capital through Place-Based Immigration Policy
In 2013, Michigan’s Governor Rick Snyder urged immigration reform “to welcome innovators,
entrepreneurs and skilled workers from around the world” because “they can help our core
industries - automotive, agriculture and tourism - continue to drive Michigan's comeback.”16
Governor Snyder’s ideas “included an ambitious proposal to ask the federal government to use
existing visas to bring 50,000 skilled immigrants to Detroit over the next five years; support for

16

https://www.michigan.gov/formergovernors/0,4584,7-212-90815_57657-293976--,00.html
42

a state-sponsored EB-5 investor visa regional center; creation of a Michigan Office for New
Americans within state government; and allocation of state resources for the national nonprofit
Upwardly Global to open a Detroit office to help skilled immigrants and refugees connect with
meaningful careers in their fields of expertise” (Tobocman, 2014). Snyder echoed earlier
proposals during the Great Recession to admit immigrants who would buy housing and boost
prices in depressed regions.17
If human capital is a central ingredient in regional success, then the global supply of talent that
wants to come to America appears to be an almost miraculous solution for low human capital
regions. Kerr (2018) documents the outsized role that skilled immigrants play in America’s
innovation economy. In recent years, numerous policy analysts have followed Snyder’s lead
and called for some form of increased legal immigration targeted towards distressed regions.
This enthusiasm is somewhat at odds with the national mood. In November 2018, more than
one in five Americans told Gallup pollsters that immigration was America’s largest problem.18
Yet even if immigration may depress national wages for workers who are comparable to the
immigrants (Borjas, 2003), there is little evidence immigration hurts wages locally (Card, 1990).
Immigration flows do seem to boost local housing markets, which would certainly be seen as a
plus by the homeowners of Detroit (Saiz, 2007).
The idea that spatially targeted immigration could increase entrepreneurship and innovation in
distressed areas seems distinctly plausible, but what policy tools does the U.S. government
have to determine where immigrants choose to locate once they come to the United States?
Two possible avenues are the H1B Visa and EB-5 investor programs, which could be expanded
to target distressed areas.
The H1B Visa program is a reasonably easy program to expand for these places. There is a
nationwide limit on the number of H1B visas that are available. These are typically rationed
through a lottery system. A natural reform is to lift the cap for employers that locate in

17
18

https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB123725421857750565
https://news.gallup.com/poll/244925/immigration-sharply-important-problem.aspx
43

distressed areas. This easing may allow these employers to expand their skilled workforces and
potentially generate spillovers for other workers in the area.
The natural worry is that an increase in H1B Visas will crowd out existing workers. This
concern seems unlikely in distressed areas, since H1B Visa recipients are typically quite well
educated, while the average worker in the area is far less skilled. In many cases, the less skilled
among the residents may benefit by the demand for services that will be generated by the
more well educated H1B visa holders. Those downsides may also be limited by the
requirement that the area has to select to enter the program. Areas in which firms are
especially eager to bring more H1B Visa recipients may well be convinced, however, that
welcoming these immigrants and keeping these firms local is a good deal.
One difficult part of the H1B Visa program is the moderate monopsony power the employer
gains over the employee because the visa is tied to the firm. Employee mobility and labor
market fluidity are thus reduced, which potentially reduces the scope for knowledge spillovers.
One way to make the H1B Visa program more fluid in distressed areas is to allow the Visa to be
transferable to other employers in the same area or in other similarly distressed areas. The
program would then be relatively more appealing to immigrants and to local, growth-oriented
politicians but perhaps less appealing to employers.
The EB-5 investor program grants visas and green cards to immigrants who invest in distressed
areas.19 This program has been in operation since the mid-1990s, and it seems less likely to
lead to widespread migration, both because it requires sizable capital and because it is prone to
manipulation. Many immigrants would prefer to invest in wealthier parts of America, and the
target areas have been redefined over time to increase investor flexibility.
The investment requirement could be beneficial if the primary weakness of distressed areas
were in physical capital, but in many of these areas, human capital is the greater need.
Moreover, the supply of global immigrants with a million dollars to invest in America’s eastern
heartland does not seem to be large enough to plausibly change the region’s skill composition.

19

http://icic.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/ICIC_EB5Impact_Report.pdf
44

A final idea that has been proposed is to allow places to apply for immigrant visas, just like
companies can. This idea is appealing in some ways and could in principle lead to more skilled
immigration going to depressed areas. Yet there are reasons why this program is less likely to
succeed than an expanded H1-B visa program. Many of the workers who come to depressed
areas as part of this program will prefer living elsewhere. Consequently, it will be hard to
ensure the connection between person and place. Even if the immigrant were to stay in place
until she received her green card, the chance of subsequent mobility would then jump.
If there were a national mood to increase immigration, then it would be possible to increase
the flow of visas to people who at least showed some willingness to move to depressed areas.
It is harder to imagine political support for a large scale expansion of any standard program. A
spatially targeted H1B program seems like it has the most likelihood of actually ensuring that
skilled workers will end up in unskilled communities.
Attracting Talent and Non-Compete Clauses
The overall welfare consequences of the migration of skilled workers and potential
entrepreneurs into distressed areas are unclear. That type of migration may reduce the
joblessness problem in those areas, but it may also reduce current creativity in more successful
areas. The competition for migrants and job-creators can be beneficial when local
governments focus on quality of life investments and good local management. If local
governments spend too much time on targeted tax deals for large firms, the impact of
competition may be less benign.
One way that distressed areas may attract talented workers is by refusing to enforce noncomplete clauses in employment contracts even when those contracts are signed in other
states. Non-complete clauses in contracts make it easier for firms to trust employees with
specialized knowledge, but they also limit the flow of that knowledge across the innovation
sector by reducing employee mobility. They also can reduce the realization of new ideas in
entrepreneurial firm, as is suggested by Figures 7a and 7b, which show the negative
relationship between stringency of enforcement and entry. The enforcement of non-compete
clauses is already place-based within the United States.
45

In some states, such as California, state courts refuse to enforce contractual clauses which bar
future employment in competing firms. In other states, such as Massachusetts, these laws are
enforced. Fallick, Fleishman, and Rebitzer (2006) find that stricter enforcement of noncompete agreements is associated with reduced mobility in computer manufacturing
industries.
In 1985, Michigan started to enforce non-compete agreements in a switch that seems almost
accidental. Marx et al. (2009) examine the impact of that change and find that stricter
enforcement of non-compete agreements reduces inventor mobility, especially for those
inventors with highly specific skills. Hausman (2019) looks across all states over nearly 20 years
and similarly finds that inventors are less likely to leave firms in states whose enforcement of
non-compete agreements becomes stricter due to judicial decisions. Non-compete agreements
particularly deter inventors from leaving larger firms.
Enforcement of non-compete agreements does have the potential benefit of protecting
employers against the loss of firm-specific knowledge, which may in turn lead them to hire
more workers and organize work more productively. Of course, sharing trade secrets can be
and often is illegal in cases where non-compete agreements are not enforced. Nonetheless,
non-compete agreements grant the employer some added protection. Conversely, they
reduce the flow of knowledge between firms and make the labor market generally less fluid.20
If non-compete clauses were enforced nationally, then it would be hard to know whether these
clauses were benign or not. But local enforcement does not protect firms against losing their
firm specific knowledge, since the worker can always relocate to California. That right was
affirmed by the California Supreme Court in 1998 in the case Application Group, Inc. vs. Hunter
Group, Inc. Local enforcement only ensures that any positive benefits from the weaker leaving
will happen somewhere else.
If distressed states were to make non-compete agreements non-enforceable, perhaps
especially for innovative sectors, then they might become attractive locales for inventors whose
20

Typically, eliminating the ability to write contracts can rarely represent a Pareto improvement for all actors. It is
at least possible that eliminating the ability to enforce non-compete clauses could be Pareto improving if the
movement of workers across firms generates new ideas where generate external benefits.
46

contracts force them to leave other areas. Perhaps, the non-enforcement could create a local
eco-system of mobile inventors. Such a change might symbolically indicate an eagerness to
attract outside talent, but there are also costs associated with not enforcing contracts.
Another even more complex legal institution that impacts innovation is patenting, which
rewards innovation with a time-limited monopoly. The natural alternative to patenting is a
fixed reward, as in Kremer (1998), or the type of rewards offered for solving the longitude
puzzle (Sobel, 2005).

When Oklahoma’s Medicaid system agrees for a fixed price for access to

a medication, regardless of quantity consumed, then the manufacturer is in a sense being
rewarded with a fix fee rather than with monopoly pricing.
There may be cases where innovations can contribute to local productivity, such as with
prescription drugs that make it easier for disabled people to get back to work. In such cases,
distressed states may consider buying out the patent locally or paying a fixed fee for low unit
costs to reduce the underutilization that comes with high prices. This policy seems easiest to
envision in the medical sector, but the same logic may hold with other innovations as well.
Another option to encourage job-generating innovation might be for patent protection to
depend on employment levels. If a patent is associated with employment of significant
numbers of less-skilled employees, then it could be extended by a year. If a patent leads to
little employment, then it could be shortened. We are not recommending such a change but
rather suggesting a rethinking of the connection between patent policy and employment.

VI. Spatially Targeted Entrepreneurship Policies
The spatial mismatch between the places in America that patent highly and the places in
America where joblessness is high means that joblessness will decline only if some of the new
ideas get implemented in places with higher levels of joblessness.
In this section, we discuss strategies for improving entrepreneurship in distressed areas.

We

start by discussing the many cases in which imported ideas have led to local employment. The
47

case of Uber suggests that work-creation in distressed areas is easier when the work is flexible
and when the jobs avoid the mandated benefits that come with a formal employment
relationship.
We then turn to reducing the barriers that stop inventions from being turned into employment,
both by reducing land use controls and overregulation of entrepreneurs near universities. We
discuss entrepreneurship zones in more distressed areas. We also consider policies to
encourage both inventors and entrepreneurs to focus on less skilled workers, such as
employment subsidies and entitlement reform. We end by discussing a reconfiguration of
national entrepreneurship policy.
Can imported innovations engender local entrepreneurship?
Much of the entrepreneurship in the developing world was initially imported, but usually the
entrepreneurs have been manufacturers and often they had a captive local market.

The

Argentine industrial giant founded by Torcuato DiTella began when he started making gasoline
pumps under license to the American Wayne Pump Company in 1923. DiTella perturbed the
product for local conditions and then expanded into a large range of industrial products. The
East Asian car companies similarly borrowed technologies that were initially developed in the
west.
One primary difference between the East Asian model (exemplified by Toyota or Hyundai) and
the Latin American model (exemplified by DiTella) is that the East Asian entrepreneurs adapted
the technology to local labor supply while the Latin Americans were more likely to focus on
local demand. Korean and Japanese producers, at least after World War II, attempted to sell
globally, relying on their low cost but high skill labor as a comparative advantage. The Latin
American entrepreneurs were less likely to sell globally and more likely to rely on local markets.
Such imitation and improvement also occurred in the U.S. Francis Cabot Lowell famously
began the American industrial revolution with an act of industrial espionage, importing English
technologies into the U.S.

Cyrus McCormick regularly sent agents throughout the U.S. to

learn the ideas of competing producers of mechanical reapers. After World War II in the U.S.

48

context, low transportation costs and low tariffs prevented entrepreneurs from just copying
goods or even production techniques for the local market.
In the U.S. after World War II, there have been service-industry entrepreneurs who borrowed
ideas invented elsewhere and then combined them with local knowledge or used them to
supply services.

For example, Clarence Saunders seems to have invented the self-service

grocery with his Piggly-Wiggly chain in Memphis, Tennessee, in 1916.

Despite his attempt to

patent the idea, it spread widely and was improved. Fourteen years later in New York City,
Michael Cullen then combined self-service with distinct food departments and discounted
prices and founded perhaps the first true supermarket chain. The success of Whole Foods
shows that there is still room for innovation in grocery stores, and grocery store employment
has increased substantially in some states, including California, Massachusetts, and Texas, over
the past 20 years.
The KFC model is one plausible model of service sector entrepreneurship in distressed areas.
The entrepreneur borrows and adapts technology from elsewhere, and first sells entirely to
locals. The product develops and evolves and eventually is appealing enough to open branches
elsewhere. Local entrepreneurs that adapt external ideas for local conditions and then export
their services provide one model for non-local ideas to generate employment in more
depressed regions.
The second model involves external entrepreneurs bringing new firms of employment into
depressed regions. Historically, this model was implemented as factories moved from high
wage rust-belt regions into lower cost right-to-work states. Manufacturing relocation within
the U.S. has become less common because labor is a far lower share of manufacturing costs,
because low wage areas often lack the high levels of human capital that are needed for
complex production processes, and because low skill jobs are often more cheaply sourced from
abroad.
Moving service sector jobs to lower wage areas is far less common since service providers need
to be near customers, and there are fewer service customers in poor places. The obvious
exception is providers who can build large employment centers anywhere with an attractive
49

climate, such as Orlando, Florida or Aspen, Colorado. Las Vegas, Nevada, is the most obvious
example of a metropolitan area – located in the middle of the desert – that expanded
enormously based on employment in leisure and hospitality. The initial growth of that city, like
Orlando’s Disney World, was driven almost entirely by non-local entrepreneurs.
Uber is another example of imported innovation providing employment and services in
distressed communities. We have already noted the many thousands of drivers who live in
distressed areas and make money through Uber. In some cases, those drivers make a
harrowing two hour commute to wealthier cities. In other cases, they find work closer to
home. Uber provides a valued service for users in wealthy and depressed places alike.
The Uber model is somewhat remarkable because unlike almost most major San Francisco
technology start-ups, the App provides jobs for less skilled Americans rather than reducing the
need for less skilled labor. This car-sharing service provides a model for labor-creating
innovation that generates jobs far from the place of creation, even when the taxpayers aren’t
picking up the bill. Zappos also makes heavy use of non-technology workers in the customer
service phone banks that are a major part of its business model. Call center customer care is at
least one type of service that can be provided at a distance.
Uber has provided a different model of local service sector job growth based on non-local ideas
and entrepreneurship. Uber requires a minimal local presence to make its platform available
for use, even in highly depressed areas. By avoiding formal employment status for Uber
drivers, the company reduces fixed costs of operation and allows workers to sell their labor
even in areas that are quite far from both the company’s San Francisco headquarters and any
physical Uber presence.
It seems quite plausible that Uber, and other companies, may be able to provide service sector
opportunities in poor places. Yet long-run economic success for a locality requires some form
of an export industry, and local service provision does not generate export revenues. Is it
possible for technological innovation, imported from somewhere else, to generate some way
for residents of poorer places to sell their labor to the residents of richer places?

50

Plausibly, the online-matching model at the heart of Uber can generate a large number of jobs
in a wide range of service tasks, from babysitting to gardening. Reducing the frictions that bar
service sector employment in depressed areas may generate sizable employment gains, but it
will not turn these sectors around until these applications can lead to exports to other regions.
Uber has already provided a conceivable model for service exports in that it does allow drivers
who live as far away as Sacramento to earn a living driving in the San Francisco region. This is an
extraordinarily long commute, but it does seem possible that more services can be provided for
the residents of successful east and west coast metropolitan areas by workers who live two to
three hours away. For example, one could imagine painters coming into Washignton, D.C.,
from West Virginia, or gardeners traveling into Los Angeles from much further away. In some
cases, the service could be virtual, but in that case Americans will need to compete with virtual
service providers in far lower wage places, like India.
Uber proves that entrepreneurs based in San Francisco can provide work for the residents of
West Virginia, but we don’t know how far that model can expand. It may well develop into a
wider range of services targeted at the local population. It seems harder, but not impossible,
to expand the model so that the residents of poor areas provide services for people living in
richer areas.
The largest industrial sector in many depressed parts of America—healthcare-- uses technology
developed in America’s most innovative places. Healthcare spending is often higher on a per
capita basis in depressed areas, and since other industries are minimal, healthcare stands out as
a dominant employer. This pattern helps explain why the share of employment in healthcare
has had a strong negative correlation with population growth across cities (Glaeser and Shapiro,
2003). Imported innovations can certainly shape depressed local economies, but it is less clear
whether these technological imports in healthcare can become a self-sustaining engine of
growth.
One possible public policy that would support service sector entrepreneurship in distressed
areas is to reduce the costs of hiring workers, as discussed above. If healthcare costs are
covered by the state, or the payroll tax is eliminated for younger workers, then it is easier to
51

start a new fast-food restaurant in a distressed part of the U.S. Lower labor costs make service
sector innovation distinctly easier given that service sector employees are typically quite low
wage.
It is also possible to encourage the education of potential entrepreneurs in these areas. Local
universities and colleges could have targeted programs that train would-be entrepreneurs to
learn from external innovators but provide local employment. The Federal government could
subsidize such programs as long as they were subject to rigorous evaluation, ideally with
randomized controlled trials.
Eliminate local barriers to the commercialization of research
If research funding generates spillovers that depreciate with distance (Hausman, 2018), then
barriers to economic activity and to building near research universities will reduce the external
benefits of Federal research funding. Relocating research funding towards distressed areas is
one tool for potentially increasing the social benefits of innovation, but that benefit must be
offset against the costs of not supporting the most productive researchers. An alternative is to
make it easier for economic activity to emerge near research universities.
Universities, like Stanford and M.I.T., have incentives to partner with firms that would directly
commercialize their research. The incentive to enable services that might sell to the workers in
those firms are weaker. Moreover, even if an urban university is perfectly happy to see new
service sector firms nearby that employ the less skilled, local regulations may prevent that from
happening.
For example, Boston’s Longwood Medical Area and Cambridge’s Kendall Square are both places
with abundant research. Kendall Square has particularly seen the emergence of a start-up
ecosystem that surrounds M.I.T.

But in both of these areas, the emergence of other

businesses has been far more limited.

Robust demand and limited supply mean that Kendall

Square Commercial real estate often costs more than 40 dollars per square foot per month.
An extremely restrictive permitting environment limits the ability to start restaurants and
grocery stores.

52

For businesses that could benefit from proximity to a research center, the relevant restrictions
are local permitting rules and rules that make it difficult to construct more commercial space.
For the larger population, restrictions on housing supply are the more important limit. Housing
supply is limited by a web of rules including minimum lot sizes, growth control, historic
preservation rules and wetlands protection. These rules are particularly stringent in researchintensive metropolitan areas, including San Francisco, San Jose, Boston, and Seattle. They limit
the ability of less-skilled people to take advantage of proximity to often Federally-funded
innovative activity.
These issues do not appear just in the most successful cities. Educated people are more
engaged politically, and education is correlated with enacting more stringent land use controls
(Glaeser and Ward, 2009). Consequently, funding an educational institution almost
guarantees a rise in local barriers to building which will limit the ability of others to take
advantage of that building. Austin, Texas, for example, has become a more difficult building
environment than the rest of Texas.
But while the case for enabling new business formation and population growth near research
hubs seems strong, the appropriate Federal policy is not clear.

Federal research funding could

be directed more to areas that make growth and new business formation easier, but that would
come at the cost of less efficient research targeting.

Another option would be to tie research

funding to improvements in the permitting environment, but neither researchers nor their
schools have control over the permitting process.
One possible path might be for the Small Business Administration to work with the N.I.H. and
the N.S.F. to develop policies that would enable businesses to grow near centers of innovation.
A simple policy might be for the S.B.A. to fund one-stop permitting centers for new businesses
near research centers if communities are willing to accept such a structure. This could be
done, as discussed above, without legal reforms and could still smooth the process of
permitting for small businesses.
A stronger and more fraught approach is to tie overhead rates on research grants to the
construction of new housing or dormitory space. If universities are nudged to deliver more
53

residential space, this might reduce the demand of students for housing in the outside
community and that should reduce housing costs. Naturally, such requirements are difficult to
impose when the permitting environment makes new construction extremely difficult, but a
building requirement for universities that do research over some significant threshold could still
send a message about the importance of delivering livable space near places that receive
Federal funds for research.
Entrepreneurship Zones for Distressed Areas
Enterprise zones and innovation hubs, which are typically designed by state or local
governments, are meant to attract and encourage innovation and business success.
Universities and companies usually consider geographic proximity when designing their
buildings and locating their researchers. Almost always, these clusters are devoted more to
entrepreneurship than to invention.
When Peter Hall envisioned enterprise zones in the 1970s, he imagined rust belt England reindustrializing by imitating lightly regulated East Asia. But manufacturing seems less relevant
in America today, and the large manufacturing plants are almost sure to receive a generous tax
deal in distressed America already. The more relevant small service sector entrepreneurs
cannot negotiate their own deals and are more likely to need proximity to other successful
firms. They are the natural target for entrepreneurship zones.
Such zones are most plausible near existing research institutions and within poorer
neighborhoods of cities that are not close to research clusters. It is harder to imagine the
success of these zones in lower density areas that are far from centers of innovation, because it
is hard to imagine that either technology or service sector startups can succeed in isolation.
The two most famous examples of university-oriented entrepreneurship zones are the Stanford
Industrial Park, initially envisioned by Frederick Terman of Stanford, and North Carolina’s
Research Triangle Park. In both cases, the clusters were pushed by universities to encourage
businesses who would benefit from proximity to academic researchers.

Even though

“Research” is in the name of “Research Triangle Park,” the Park is more aptly seen as a place

54

where research is embedded into entrepreneurship than as a place where basic research itself
is done.
These parks are designed to enable the flow of ideas between academic and companies and to
generate a long-term eco-system that will generate larger economic growth for the region.
Much like successful development of shopping malls and commercial skyscrapers, they
represent a form of local real estate related entrepreneurship. One plausible interpretation is
that some of these clusters will succeed. Others will fail, and the process of competition across
places for talent is both fundamentally benign and not really an appropriate area for national
policy intervention.
By contrast, enterprise zones were originally envisioned by Peter Hall as a national economic
policy meant to bring economic vitality to underperforming regions. In the 1970s, Hall
observed the economic vitality of the lightly regulated East Asian Tigers, including Taiwan and
Hong Kong, and thought that perhaps a similar approach might work for England’s declining
industrial towns. Hall’s vision was the Nucleus for Margaret Thatcher’s Enterprise Zones, which
become Empowerment Zones in the U.S. These zones were meant to combine tax and
regulatory relief, but in practice, enterprise zones have more typically specialized in tax
support. Over the past 18 months, Opportunity Zones represent the latest iteration of
providing tax breaks for investing in underperforming regions.
Busso, Gregory, and Kline (2013) document the positive employment and wage impacts of
empowerment zones within the U.S., implying that subsidies can create localized jobs. It is less
clear if this effect represents net job creation or simply relocation of employment. Still, the
relocation of an employer from a low unemployment region to a high unemployment region
may reduce joblessness overall, even if the firm hires the same number of workers in each
location.
If zones are places of policy experimentation, then the knowledge they generate can generate
better future policy-making nationwide. For example, Peter Hall’s original vision of a low
regulation zone within a high regulation area is one perfectly plausible model for an
experiment.

If the zone appears to spur entrepreneurship, especially among lower income
55

residents, then it may be sensible to expand the zone to encompass a larger share of the urban
area.
The success of technology hubs, like Silicon Valley, has led many local policy makers towards
policies aimed at creating innovation corridors in their districts. But for many areas and many
workers, Peter Hall’s vision may be more relevant. Can policy-makers generate zones where
entrepreneurs will find it attractive to employ less skilled workers, especially in the service
industries? Hall’s vision was to reduce tax and regulatory liabilities. The Busso et al. (2013)
evidence suggest that targeted tax subsidies can generate jobs in empowerment zones, but the
high cost per job challenges the sustainability of such a generous subsidy-based employment
model.
A light regulation zone designed to encourage service sector entrepreneurship is one possible
model for transforming new ideas into jobs for less skilled individuals. There are many areas in
which U.S. regulates low skill innovation more heavily than high skill innovation. Internetoriented start-ups begin at least in an almost regulation free zone, where there is little
oversight preventing the sale of a creative app that generates revenues through advertising
dollars. By contrast, the number of regulations needed to start a small local grocery store can
easily exceed ten.
One approach is to experiment more with low-regulation zones that don’t give financial breaks,
since such financial benefits are harder to replicate more widely. Economists have long
argued that many regulations do more to protect incumbents than to safeguard consumers,
and that excess regulation retards entrepreneurship and job creation. One plausible model,
adopted by the Devens Economic Commission in Massachusetts, is to have a single permitting
entity that handles all of the aspects of business regulation within a jurisdiction.

It is easier to

hold a single permitting entity accountable for delays than it is to blame one of a dozen
different agencies each of which can hold up a new business.
Entrepreneurship zones that reduce regulation may also spur innovations that use nearby
laborers. Dealing with regulations is typically a fixed cost that must be paid whether or not any
innovation is successful. Consequently, those fixed costs deter implementation of marginal
56

ideas. A light-regulation zone would potentially allow ideas to be tested with fewer barriers on
implementation. That zone would also attract innovators to the area because light regulations
might enable something of a local laboratory of innovation.
These zones might hold for all industries, or they might permit entrepreneurship in particularly
appropriate clusters. For example, Pittsburgh might want encourage the development of firms
that combine robot and human delivery in the neighborhoods near to Carnegie-Mellon and the
University of Pittsburgh. Most regulations, apart from those that protect worker and
customer safety, could be reduced within this area to encourage firms that use both humans
and robots.
This model of low-regulation entrepreneurship zones is particularly plausible within large,
dense urban areas. A food service entrepreneur might be happy to launch first in a more
disadvantaged area than San Francisco or Boston because customers could come from
elsewhere. Local entrepreneurs in the area will also be tempted to start businesses when local
regulations are lighter since they have always enjoyed a plausible customer base.
It is less clear whether a light regulation zone will actually induce service sector entrepreneurs
to relocate to lower density parts of America, where demand is sparser.

Unfortunately, in a

world dominated by service sector employment, it is difficult to determine what people will do
in places where demand is limited by lack of density and lack and income. In such places, the
only plausible path may be to encourage job creation and hope for the best, even without any
clear vision about what future jobs will do.
Place-Based Employment Subsidies and Social Policy Reform
Austin, Glaeser and Summers (2018) argue that joblessness generates negative externalities
because of foregone taxes and possibly larger social losses. These externalities occur
everywhere, but the elasticity of joblessness with respect to wages seems to be higher in some
areas than in others. In particular, places with high levels of historic joblessness see their
number of jobless wax and wane more dramatically with the level of labor demand. This fact
suggests that the elasticity of joblessness with respect to either wage subsidies or implicit taxes
may be higher in those regions.
57

One implication of that logic is that if the U.S. has a fixed amount of resources to spend on
employment subsidies, then these subsidies may be more effective if spent in West Virginia
than in Seattle. The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) is America’s long-standing employment
subsidy program, but its incentives are primarily oriented towards single mothers.

One

plausible policy option is to expand the EITC so that it becomes relevant for jobless men, but to
focus its benefits on regions with high levels of joblessness.
A similar argument suggests that social insurance programs might do more to encourage work
in places where joblessness is more endemic. Policies like disability insurance, Medicaid and
even SNAP assistance (Food Stamps) provide benefits to the jobless, and they consequently
generate incentives not to earn more money. The Bailey-Chetty optimal unemployment
insurance formula weighs the benefits of ameliorating adversity with the costs of deterring job
search. If the elasticity of employment with respect to benefits is higher, then the program
suggests that benefits should be made less generous.
This logic suggests that benefits programs might promote employment by spatial reforms which
discourage work less in areas where joblessness is more responsive to incentives. Disability
insurance, for example, might reduce the base payment but allow disability recipients to earn
more without losing their benefits. Similarly, SNAP Assistance and Housing Vouchers might
offer a lower base payment but a slower phase-out with earnings in distressed areas. This
social assistance reform can make payment in highly distressed areas more or less generous on
average, or it could keep the average benefit level the same while tilting those benefits towards
promoting work.
This tilt highlights that while traditional place-based policy has aimed at redistributing income
towards poorer places, the policies we discuss here are meant instead simply to recognize
spatial heterogeneity. America has many labor and housing markets and one-size-fits-all
policies are unlikely to be optimal. Housing policies that work for Boston are unlikely to be
right for Houston. Similarly, generous social policies are more likely to generate long-term
joblessness in less skilled places than in more skilled areas.

58

While these policies are aimed at reducing joblessness at the outset, we expect that they also
will have dynamic effects, at least if the government is able to commit to maintaining them.
Both targeted employment subsidies and social insurance reforms should lower the wages that
firms will have to pay for workers in distressed areas. In the short run, these lower wages
seem likely to encourage firms to hire. In the longer run, lower wages should induce firms to
innovate.
As we discussed above, much 19th century innovation was targeted towards employing lesss
killed workers. In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, innovation seems targeted at reducing
labor requirements or providing services directly to consumers. While it is impossible to fully
quantify the role that high mid-twentieth century wages played in that switch, lower wages
would make innovations that use low skill labor more remunerative.
The spread of technology to low wage areas should be easy if those areas can produce goods
that have a market. Unfortunately, the switch from a manufacturing economy to a service
economy makes it hard to find that market. We turn to that challenge next.
Universal Basic Income
A large variety of technology entrepreneurs have embraced Universal Basic Income, or UBI, as a
solution for a world in which technology has made low skill labor largely obsolete. The basic
perspective of UBI’s supporters is that robots will make mass joblessness inevitable. UBI would
make this joblessness less terrible, because people will still have access to material resources.
As we have discussed throughout this paper, massive joblessness seems more like a national
policy choice than an inevitability.

Service sector entrepreneurs have produced millions of

new jobs in a short period of time. They may well be able to do that again. Consequently, any
analysis of UBI needs to consider not only its effect for a given level of joblessness but also its
effect on the level of joblessness.
Universal Basic Income makes jobless people richer and that reduces the incentives to work.
Moreover, UBI would have to be paid for by taxes on the working, and those higher taxes are
also likely to reduce the supply of labor. The Negative Income Tax experiments of the 1970s
provided poorer people with unconditional cash transfers, and subsequent evaluations found
59

quite significant hours reductions of “between 5 and 25 percent” and “employment rate
reductions from about 1 to 10 percentage points” (Robins, 1985). The negative effects on
working of such transfers seem likely to be larger today because there appear to be far more
men on the margin of working or not working.
The downsides of UBI and the upside of employment subsidies become exacerbated once
innovation is incorporated into the analysis. If UBI leads workers to expect higher wages, then
innovation will tend to reduce the role of less skilled labor. If employment subsidies induce
workers to accept lower wages, the innovators will see more upside in technologies that lead to
hiring workers. The short run impacts of the policies, whether an increase or decrease in
employment, will be exacerbated in the long run because of innovation.
A New National Entrepreneurship Policy
National innovation policy has a well-developed justification stemming from the public-good
nature of knowledge. The theoretical case for national entrepreneurship strategy is far
murkier, but we also spend far less on entrepreneurship. The Small Business Administration’s
budget request for 2017 was $834 million. The N.S.F.’s budget is almost ten times larger at
seven billion dollars. The National Institutes of Health’s budget is five times larger still.
The Small Business Administration’s budget goes towards a loan guarantee program,
entrepreneurship training and salaries for administrators. The loan guarantee program, which
is split between disaster-related loans and standard loans, is justified partially by alleged credit
market imperfections, and perhaps partly by externalities related to new business creation,
such as future tax payments or reduced the fiscal costs of the unemployed.

The

“Entrepreneurial Development Programs” can also be justified by pointing to the externalities
of entrepreneurship or by externalities from the development of entrepreneurial human
capital.
If America has an entrepreneurship policy is to exist, then it could be geographically targeted.
The impacts of entrepreneurs will always be mediated by the condition of local markets, and so
local economic conditions may be quite relevant when either the public sector of venture

60

capitalists consider supporting entrepreneurship. The fundamental contributions of a biomedical research team are far less entwined with local labor market conditions.
One plausible explanation for spatial heterogeneity in entrepreneurship policies is that credit
market imperfections may differ across regions. Historically, small businesses were physically
proximate to their lenders, and there was a much greater abundance of lenders in large
financial centers. Yet over the past 30 years the average distance between borrower and
lender has been growing (Peterson and Rajan, 2002), apparently because of improvements in
information technology (DeYoung et al. 2011).

As credit markets become nationalized, it

becomes less plausible that lending support should be targeted towards areas with fewer
lenders.

The nationalization of lending relationships also suggests that credit market

imperfections are becoming less important more generally.
But while the credit market case for spatial targeting of entrepreneurship support is getting
weaker, other arguments for such targeting are getting stronger. In a world of full
employment, new enterprise formation may not generate any positive externalities.

The

customers receive benefits but pay for them. The new jobs just displace old jobs. There is little
case for subsidy.
The situation looks quite different when joblessness is quite high.

The fiscal externality

associated with not working means that every person moved from joblessness into
employment generates a benefit for all other taxpayers.

People who are not working receive

government benefits, including unemployment and disability insurance and SNAP assistance,
while people who are working pay taxes. This fiscal benefit of employment may be over
$10,000 per worker, which is not internalized by entrepreneurs or other employers who make
hiring decisions. If an entrepreneur is more likely to move people from joblessness to
employment in West Virginia than in Seattle, then there is a case for stronger support of
entrepreneurship in West Virginia.
The optimal size of the entrepreneurship subsidy depends on reliable estimates of both the
impact of the subsidy on joblessness and the fiscal externality associated with reducing nonemployment.

Subsidies might be targeted towards firms that will employ more previously
61

jobless workers or be made contingent upon the level of such employment. We do not have
these estimates yet, but possibility that employment effects differ across space makes a
spatially targeted entrepreneurship policy plausible.
Imagine a new idea that requires 20 brilliant scientists to create and 2,000 ordinary workers to
produce at scale. Changing the geographic location of the idea creation phase will have little
impact on overall U.S. employment, since those scientists will be employed no matter where
they live. But those 2,000 extra ordinary jobs may reduce the numbers of jobless workers by
1,000 in West Virginia and only 100 in Seattle. Geographically nudging the production phase
seems more likely to reduce joblessness than nudging the innovation phase.

VII. Conclusion
Over the past 20 years, innovation has done a much better job at producing new technology
pleasures – like sharing pictures or short messages online – than at generating new sources of
employment. Future innovations are most likely to produce new jobs if they are oriented
towards the service sectors. Health care innovation, which is already strongly supported by
Federal policies, is likely to generate many jobs in depressed areas, but these jobs seem unlikely
to spur longer-term dynamic benefits. Professional and business service innovations that
generate more employment seem most likely to benefit already successful areas. In some
places, leisure and hospitality innovations could provide more employment, and that could be
dynamic, but we suspect that the number of places that could benefit from these innovations is
small.
The geographic heterogeneity of America’s economy is problematic because there are some
regions that appear to be trapped in perpetual joblessness. Innovation is also low in those
regions. But it does not follow that the path towards less joblessness is to induce innovators to
relocate to high joblessness regions. One alternative is to focus on ensuring that the ideas that
are produced in innovative areas create opportunity in non-innovative places.
Policies that subsidize invention, including funding for the N.S.F. and the N.I.H. could target
research that does more to benefit distressed areas, such as reducing the number of workers
62

receiving disability insurance. Educational reform could focus on promoting employment in
distressed regions, with more commercially oriented Federal aid to colleges and
entrepreneurially provided vocational skills. Barriers to entrepreneurship can also be
eliminated, especially in distressed areas.

Policy tools are available to reduce joblessness in

the distressed regions of the country, but there is a great need for further research to
understand better the full implications of these policies.

63

References
Abraham, Katharine G., and Melissa S. Kearney. 2018. Explaining the decline in the US employment-topopulation ratio: A review of the evidence. No. w24333. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Acemoglu, Daron. 1996. "A microfoundation for social increasing returns in human capital
accumulation." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111, no. 3: 779-804.
Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. “Directed Technical Change.” Review of Economic Studies, 69:781-810.
Acs, Zoltan J., and Catherine Armington. 2004. “The impact of geographic differences in human capital
on service firm formation rates.” Journal of Urban Economics, 56:244-278.
Agrawal, Ajay, Christian Catalini, and Avi Goldfarb. 2014. "Some simple economics of
crowdfunding." Innovation Policy and the Economy 14, no. 1: 63-97.
Austin, Benjamin A., Edward L. Glaeser, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2018. Jobs for the Heartland: Placebased policies in 21st century America. No. w24548. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Autor, David, H., and David Dorn. 2013. "The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the
US labor market." American Economic Review 103, no. 5: 1553-97.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2015. "Untangling trade and technology: Evidence
from local labour markets." The Economic Journal 125, no. 584: 621-646.
Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2007. "Distinguishing income from substitution effects in disability
insurance." American Economic Review 97, no. 2: 119-124.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1992. "Convergence." Journal of political Economy 100, no. 2:
223-251.
Belenzon, Sharon, and Mark Schankerman. 2013. "Spreading the word: Geography, policy, and
knowledge spillovers." Review of Economics and Statistics 95, no. 3: 884-903.
Berry, Christopher R., and Edward L. Glaeser. 2005. "The divergence of human capital levels across
cities." Papers in regional science 84, no. 3: 407-444.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, no. 1: 1–75.

64

Borjas, George J. 2003. "The labor demand curve is downward sloping: Reexamining the impact of
immigration on the labor market." The quarterly journal of economics 118, no. 4: 1335-1374.
Busso, Matias, Jesse Gregory, and Patrick Kline. 2013. "Assessing the incidence and efficiency of a
prominent place based policy." American Economic Review 103, no. 2: 897-947.
Cantoni, Davide, and Noam Yuchtman. 2014. "Medieval universities, legal institutions, and the
commercial revolution." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 2: 823-887.
Card, David. 1990. "The impact of the Mariel boatlift on the Miami labor market." ILR Review 43, no. 2:
245-257.
Diamond, Rebecca. 2016. "The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers' Diverging
Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000," American Economic Review 106 (3): 479-524.
DeYoung, Robert, W. Scott Frame, Dennis Glennon, and Peter Nigro. 2011. "The information revolution
and small business lending: The missing evidence." Journal of Financial Services Research 39, no.
1-2: 19-33.
Doms, Mark, Ethan Lewis, and Alicia Robb. 2010. "Local labor force education, new business
characteristics, and firm performance." Journal of Urban Economics 67, no. 1: 61-77.
Fallick, Bruce, Charles A. Fleischman, and James B. Rebitzer. 2006. "Job-hopping in Silicon Valley: some
evidence concerning the microfoundations of a high-technology cluster." The review of
economics and statistics 88, no. 3: 472-481.
Fehder, Daniel, Naomi Hausman, and Yael Hochberg. 2019. “Cities and University Commercialization.”
Rice University Working Paper.
Forman, Chris, Avi Goldfarb, and Shane Greenstein. 2012. "The Internet and local wages: A
puzzle." American Economic Review 102, no. 1: 556-75.
Ganong, Peter, and Daniel Shoag. 2017. "Why has regional income convergence in the US
declined?" Journal of Urban Economics 102: 76-90.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Albert Saiz. 2004. “The rise of the skilled city.” Brookings-Wharton Papers on
Urban Affairs, No. 5: 47-94.

65

Glaeser, Edward L., and Bryce A. Ward. 2009. "The causes and consequences of land use regulation:
Evidence from Greater Boston." Journal of Urban Economics 65, no. 3: 265-278.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Giacomo AM Ponzetto. 2010. “Did the death of Distance Hurt Detroit and Help
New York?” In National Bureau of Economic Research Volume: Agglomeration Economics, pp.
303-337. The University of Chicago Press.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Giacomo AM Ponzetto. 2019. “All jobs are local in the long run.” Work in
progress.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. "Sprawl and urban growth." In Handbook of regional
and urban economics, vol. 4, pp. 2481-2527. Elsevier.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Raven E. Saks. 2006. "Corruption in America." Journal of Public Economics 90,
no. 6-7: 1053-1072.
Glaeser, Edward L., JoséA Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer. 1995. "Economic growth in a cross-section of
cities." Journal of monetary economics 36, no. 1: 117-143.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Jesse M. Shapiro. "Urban growth in the 1990s: Is city living back?." Journal of
regional science 43, no. 1 (2003): 139-165
Goldin, Claudia, and Robert Margo. 1992. “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in the United
States at Mid-Century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (1): 1–34.
Goldin, Claudia D., and Lawrence F. Katz. The race between education and technology. Harvard
University Press, 2009.
Gordon, Robert J. The rise and fall of American growth: The US standard of living since the civil war. Vol.
70. Princeton University Press, 2017.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Simon Johnson. Jump-starting America: How breakthrough science can revive
economic growth and the American dream. 2019.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. The NBER patent citation data file:
Lessons, insights and methodological tools. No. w8498. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hausman, Naomi. 2018. "University innovation and local economic growth." Hebrew University Working
Paper: 0_1-63.

66

Hausman, Naomi. 2019. “Non-compete Law, Labor Mobility, and Entrepreneurship.” Hebrew
University Working Paper.
Henderson, Rebecca, Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 1998. "Universities as a source of
commercial technology: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965–1988." Review of
Economics and statistics 80, no. 1: 119-127.
Holmes, Thomas J. 1998. “The Effect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence from
State Borders.” Journal of Political Economy 106, no. 4: 667–705.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Enrico Moretti. 2019. "Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation," American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol 11(2), pages 1-39.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. "Geographic localization of
knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations." the Quarterly journal of Economics 108,
no. 3: 577-598.
Jevons, William Stanley. 1866. The coal question: an inquiry concerning the progress of the nation, and
the probable exhaustion of our coal-mines. London: Macmillan.
Kantor, Shawn, and Alexander Whalley. 2014. "Knowledge spillovers from research universities:
evidence from endowment value shocks." Review of Economics and Statistics 96, no. 1: 171-188.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William R. Kerr. 2018. Immigrant entrepreneurship in America: Evidence from the
survey of business owners 2007 & 2012. No. w24494. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kremer, Michael. 1998. "Patent buyouts: A mechanism for encouraging innovation." The Quarterly
Journal of Economics113, no. 4: 1137-1167.
Lach, Saul, and Mark Schankerman. 2008. "Incentives and invention in universities." The RAND Journal of
Economics 39, no. 2: 403-433.
Liu, Cheol, and John L. Mikesell. 2014. "The impact of public officials’ corruption on the size and
allocation of US state spending." Public Administration Review 74, no. 3: 346-359.
Marx, Matt, Deborah Strumsky, and Lee Fleming. 2009. "Mobility, skills, and the Michigan non-compete
experiment." Management Science 55, no. 6: 875-889.

67

Moretti, Enrico. 2004. "Estimating the social return to higher education: evidence from longitudinal and
repeated cross-sectional data." Journal of econometrics 121, no. 1-2: 175-212.
Okun, Arthur M. "Potential GNP: it’s measurement and signifiicance." Cowles Foundation (1962)
Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan. 2002. "The information revolution and small business
lending: Does distance still matter?." Journal of Finance 57, no. 6: 2533-2570.
Pigou, Arthur C. Wealth and Welfare. London: MacMillan. 1912.
Rauch, James E. 1993. "Productivity gains from geographic concentration of human capital: evidence
from the cities." Journal of urban economics 34, no. 3: 380-400.
Robins, Philip K. 1985. "A comparison of the labor supply findings from the four negative income tax
experiments." Journal of human Resources: 567-582.
Saiz, Albert. "Immigration and housing rents in American cities." Journal of Urban Economics 61, no. 2
(2007): 345-371.
Shane, Scott Andrew. 2004. Academic entrepreneurship: University spinoffs and wealth creation. Edward
Elgar Publishing.
Shapiro, Jesse M. 2006. "Smart cities: quality of life, productivity, and the growth effects of human
capital." The review of economics and statistics 88, no. 2: 324-335.
Sobel, Dava. Longitude: The true story of a lone genius who solved the greatest scientific problem of his
time. Macmillan, 2005.
Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth. 2018. Everybody Lies : Big Data, New Data, and What the Internet Can Tell
Us About Who We Really Are. New York City: William Morrow & Co.
Tobocman, Steve. 2014. “Revitalizing Detroit: Is There a Role for Immigration?” Migration Policy
Institute.
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. "A penny for your quotes: patent citations and the value of
Innovations." The Rand Journal of Economics: 172-187.

68

Figures
Figure 1

Figure 2

69

Figure 3

Source: VentureXpert

Figure 4

Source: VentureXpert

70

Figure 5

Figure 6

71

Figure 7a

Figure 7b

72

Figure 8

Figure 9

73

Figure 10

Figure 11: Home broadband subscriptions, any type (excluding cell only) 2013-2017 averages

Source: 2013-2017 ACS averages

74

Figure 12a

Figure 12b

75

Figure 13

Figure 14

76

Figure 15a

Figure 15b

77

Figure 16: Prime Male Long-term (>12 months) Jobless Rate and Innovation
Coeff = -0.03, Rsq = 0.025

Figure 17

78

