NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FUTURE OF U.S. CARBON-PRICING POLICY
Robert Stavins
Working Paper 25912
http://www.nber.org/papers/w25912

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2019

The author acknowledges valuable comments on a previous version of the manuscript by
Lawrence Goulder, Larry Karp, Gilbert Metcalf, William Pizer, Richard Schmalensee, and the
organizers of the National Bureau of Economic Research conference on Environmental and
Energy Policy and the Economy, as well as comments on my presentation at the conference. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Robert Stavins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Future of U.S. Carbon-Pricing Policy
Robert Stavins
NBER Working Paper No. 25912
May 2019
JEL No. Q40,Q48,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
There is widespread agreement among economists – and a diverse set of other policy analysts –
that at least in the long run, an economy-wide carbon pricing system will be an essential element
of any national policy that can achieve meaningful reductions of CO2 emissions cost-effectively
in the United States. There is less agreement, however, among economists and others in the
policy community regarding the choice of specific carbon-pricing policy instrument, with some
supporting carbon taxes and others favoring cap and trade mechanisms. This prompts two
important questions. How do the two major approaches to carbon pricing compare on relevant
dimensions, including but not limited to efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and distributional equity?
And which of the two approaches is more likely to be adopted in the future in the United States?
This paper addresses these questions by drawing on both normative and positive theories of
policy instrument choice as they apply to U.S. climate change policy, and draws extensively on
relevant empirical evidence. The paper concludes with a look at the path ahead, including an
assessment of how the two carbon-pricing instruments can be made more politically acceptable.

Robert Stavins
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
robert_stavins@hks.harvard.edu

The Future of U.S. Carbon-Pricing Policy
Robert N. Stavins1
John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
In this paper, I seek to compare the two major approaches to carbon-pricing – carbon
taxes and cap-and-trade – in the context of a possible future U.S. climate policy, and to do so by
treating both instruments in a balanced manner, examining their merits and challenges, without
necessarily favoring one or the other.2 I try to follow the principle that when making normative
comparisons3 of policy instruments, it is most valuable to compare either idealized versions of
two instruments or realistic (likely to be implemented) versions of both, thereby avoiding a
comparison of an idealized version of one instrument with a less-than-ideal, but realistic version
of another (Hahn and Stavins 1992).
In the next section, Part I, I describe the key premises I adopt, including the importance
of global climate change, the current reality of U.S. inaction at the Federal level, and my view
that in the long term a truly meaningful, economy-wide U.S. climate policy will likely need to
have carbon-pricing at its core, either in the form of a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system.
Then, in Part II, I examine the normative theory of policy instrument choice as it applies to U.S.
climate change policy, with brief reviews of the major options, and particular attention to what
normative theory suggests about the choice between price and quantity instruments for abating
CO2 emissions. In Part III, I turn to the positive theory of instrument choice as it applies to U.S.
climate policy, and assess what positive theory can tell us about this choice of climate policy
instruments.

1

Stavins is the A. J. Meyer Professor of Energy and Economic Development at the Harvard Kennedy School, a
University Fellow of Resources for the Future, and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. He acknowledges valuable comments on a previous version of the manuscript by Lawrence Goulder,
Larry Karp, Gilbert Metcalf, William Pizer, Richard Schmalensee, and the organizers of the National Bureau of
Economic Research conference on Environmental and Energy Policy and the Economy, as well as comments on my
presentation at the conference. The author, who is responsible for all remaining errors, can be reached at
robert_stavins@harvard.edu.

2

In 2007, I was asked to write a paper for the Brookings Institution’s Hamilton Project proposing a national
emissions trading system to reduce U.S. carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. I said I would prefer to write about what I
considered to be the two symmetric carbon-pricing instruments – a carbon tax and a carbon trading program. But
the Hamilton Project leaders said they would find someone else to write about carbon taxes (Metcalf 2007), and I
should make the strongest case possible for what is today called cap-and-trade. I did my best, and in the process I
came to be identified – and to some degree may have become – an advocate for CO2 cap-and-trade. During the
Obama administration transition, the design recommendations in my Hamilton Project paper (Stavins 2007) became
the starting point in efforts to structure the administration’s proposed CO2 cap-and-trade system that became part of
the failed Waxman-Markey legislation, H.R. 2454, the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009.
3

Normative assessment refers to the merits of the instruments, such as in terms of: quantitative emissions
reductions, aggregate abatement costs, and distributional impacts. Positive (political economy) prognosis refers to
identifying which instrument is more likely to be enacted and implemented.

1

In Part IV, I examine empirical evidence, that is, what experience can tell us, first with
regard to empirical evidence bearing on normative instrument choice, including lessons learned
from experience with taxes and cap-and-trade, and then with regard to empirical evidence about
positive instrument choices. In Part V, I offer some conclusions from the normative and positive
analyses – both theoretical and empirical – and comment on the path ahead.
1. Setting the Stage: Major Premises
Gradually, over the twenty-five years since the U.S. Senate ratified the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, scientific assessments of the risk of global climate
change have become increasingly compelling (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
2013, 2018), and economic analyses supporting the wisdom of policy action have gained
considerable prominence, if not influence (Nordhaus 2015).4 While China’s annual emissions
have surpassed those of the United States since 2006, the U.S. remains the largest contributor to
the accumulated atmospheric stock of anthropogenic greenhouse gases (GHGs) (Boden,
Marland, and Andres 2017).
Countries around the world – including nearly all of the industrialized countries and large
emerging economies – have launched or are in the process of launching national policies aimed
at reducing their emissions of GHGs. Of the 169 Parties to the Paris climate agreement that have
submitted specific pledges (known as Nationally Determined Contributions or NDCs), more than
half (88 to be exact) refer to the use of carbon pricing in their NDCs. To date, some 51 carbonpricing policies have been implemented or are scheduled for implementation worldwide,
including 26 carbon taxes and 25 emissions trading systems (Table 1).5 Together, these carbonpricing initiatives will cover about 20% of global GHG emissions (World Bank Group 2018),
and many of these systems may eventually be linked with one another under the auspices of
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement (United Nations 2015; Bodansky, Hoedl, Metcalf, and Stavins
2015; Mehling, Metcalf, and Stavins 2018).
In the midst of these global and national developments, the current U.S. administration
stands out for its rejection of the science of climate change, its decision to withdraw from the
Paris Agreement, and its comprehensive moves to reverse climate policy initiatives of the
previous administration. In this context, it is of value to assess the long-term future of U.S.
climate policy – both normatively and positively.
There is widespread agreement among economists – and a diverse set of other policy
analysts – that at least in the long term, economy-wide carbon pricing will be an essential

4

The phrase, “wisdom of policy action,” refers to the global dynamic efficiency of cost-effective actions taken to
reduce global emissions, without suggesting that the direct climate change benefits to a single country – in
particular, the United States – would exceed the costs it incurs through unilateral actions (that is, without being part
of effective international cooperation). However, if domestic co-benefits of U.S. climate policies are taken into
account, such as the health impacts of reductions in fine particulates due to decreased coal combustion, then a
unilateral U.S. climate policy can be welfare improving for the United States (Stavins 2014).
5

Most of the emissions trading systems are cap-and-trade, but one very important one is a tradable performance
standard, namely China’s system, officially launched in December 2017 and likely to be implemented in 2020.

2

element6 of any policy that can achieve meaningful reductions of CO2 emissions cost-effectively
in the United States, as well as in many other industrialized countries (Metcalf 2009; Kaplow
2010; Borenstein et al. 2018).7 The ubiquitous nature of energy generation and use and the
diversity of CO2 sources in a modern economy mean that conventional technology and
performance standards would be infeasible, and C in any event C excessively costly (Newell and
Stavins 2003). The cost advantage of carbon pricing exists because of the flexibility it provides
and the incentive it fosters for all sources to control at the same marginal abatement cost, thereby
achieving cost-effectiveness in aggregate. In addition, in the long term, pricing approaches can
reduce abatement costs further by inducing carbon-friendly technological change (Newell, Jaffe,
and Stavins 1999).8
There is less agreement among economists regarding the choice of specific carbonpricing policy instruments, with some supporting carbon taxes (Mankiw 2006; Nordhaus 2007)
and others cap-and-trade mechanisms (Ellerman, Joskow, and Harrison 2003; Keohane 2009).
That prompts two questions. How do the two major approaches to carbon pricing compare on
relevant dimensions, including but not limited to efficiency, cost-effectiveness, and distributional
equity? And which of the two approaches is more likely to be adopted in the future in the United
States? Much has been written by academic economists about the first question; and the second
question has been addressed from a number of disciplinary perspectives by social scientists, as
well as by commentators in the broader policy community.
Among many findings from this survey and synthesis, two major conclusions stand out.
One is that the specific designs of carbon taxes and cap-and-trade systems may be more
consequential than the choice between the two instruments. The two approaches to carbon
pricing are perfectly or nearly equivalent in regard to some issues and attributes, while
significantly different in regard to some others. But many of these differences fade with specific
implementations, as elements of design foster greater symmetry. Indeed, what appears at first to
be the dichotomous choice between two distinct policy instruments often turns out to be a choice
of design elements along a policy continuum. A second major conclusion is that issues of
positive political economy – such as the probability that a particular instrument will actually be
6

Carbon pricing may be necessary but it would not be sufficient, because other market failures limit the impacts of
price signals (Jaffe, Newell, and Stavins 2005). One example is the well-known principal-agent problem that
constrains incentives for energy-efficiency investments by either landlords or tenants in renter-occupied properties.
Another is the public-good nature of research and development, whereby firms capture only a share of the benefits
of the information their research produces. Both argue for specific policies that would complement a carbon-pricing
regime (Stavins 2010).

7

There is a prominent minority view that carbon pricing is little more than a sideshow, due to the fact that
sufficiently high carbon prices are politically unattainable, and that the only politically feasible path is making
carbon-free energy cheaper (not making carbon-intensive energy more costly). The thinking from private industry
representatives in the renewables sector tends to be that government subsidies are the answer, while the response
from some policy analysts is that government-funded research initiatives should be the prime focus (Stepp and
Trembath 2013; Sachs 2018). Others recognize that carbon-pricing may be the first-best policy for the long term,
but argue that the best set of approaches for the short term may be those that are politically achievable (Gillis 2018;
Goulder 2019b). For a comparison of U.S. carbon-pricing (carbon taxes and cap-and-trade) with use of a national
clean energy standard and a gasoline tax increase, see Goulder and Hafstead 2018.

8

Two additional advantages of carbon-pricing instruments are that they encourage demand-side conservation, and
can raise revenues for governments, which through judicious use of those revenues, can lower social costs of the
policies (Goulder and Hafstead 2018; Metcalf 2019).

3

adopted and implemented – frequently have normative dimensions, as well. Likewise, normative
attributes – ranging from cost-effectiveness to distributional equity – have important implications
for any political prognosis.
2. Normative Theory of Policy Instrument Choice
For much of the past 100 years, economists have considered environmental pollution to
be a classic C indeed, textbook C example of a negative externality, an unintentional
consequence of production or consumption that reduces another agent=s profits or utility (Pigou
1920). A separate but related strand of literature C stemming from Ronald Coase=s work (1960)
C has identified environmental pollution essentially as a public-good problem, that is, a problem
of incomplete property rights. These two perspectives can lead to different policy prescriptions
for climate change: carbon taxes versus tradable carbon rights.9
For some 40 years prior to Coase (1960), the literature focused on a single economic
response to the problem of externalities – taxing the externality in question. In principle, a
regulator could ensure that emitters would internalize the damages they caused by charging a tax
on each unit of pollution equal to the marginal social damages at the efficient level of pollution
control (Pigou 1920). Such a system makes it worthwhile for firms to reduce emissions to the
point where their marginal abatement costs are equal to the common tax rate. Hence, marginal
abatement costs will be equated across sources, satisfying the necessary condition for costeffectiveness. In theory, this will hold both in the short term, and in the long term by providing
incentives for diffusion (Jaffe and Stavins 1995) and innovation (Newell, Jaffe, and Stavins
1999) of low-cost abatement technologies.
Following Coase (1960), it became possible to think about solving the problem of
pollution as one of clarifying poorly defined property rights. If resources such as clean air and
water could be recognized as a form of property, whose corresponding rights could be traded in a
market, private actors could allocate the use of this property in a cost-effective way. Some fifty
years ago, Thomas D. Crocker (1966) and J. H. Dales (1968) each proposed a system of
transferable discharge permits that could provide such a market solution: the regulator need only
designate the total quantity of emissions allowed (the cap), distribute rights corresponding to this
total, and allow individual sources of emissions to trade the permits until an optimal allocation
had been reached. This was the fundamental thinking behind what was has come to be known as
Acap and trade.@10
Under this approach, an allowable overall level of pollution is established by the
government (not necessarily at the efficient level), and allocated among firms in the form of
tradable allowances. Firms that keep their emissions below their allotted level may sell their
surplus allowances to other firms or use them to offset excess emissions in other parts of their
operations. Under these conditions, it is in the interest of each source to carry out abatement up
9

Both the Pigouvian (externality) and Coasian (property rights) approaches are examples of missing markets (Arrow
1969).

10

Cap-and-trade systems should not be confused with Aemission-reduction-credit@ or Aoffset@ systems, whereby
permits are assigned when a source reduces emissions below some baseline, which may or may not be readily
observable (Stavins 2003).

4

to the point where its marginal control costs are equal to the market-determined price of tradable
allowances. Hence, the environmental constraint is satisfied, and marginal abatement costs are
equated across sources, satisfying the condition for cost-effectiveness.11
Although the two instruments C carbon taxes and carbon cap-and-trade C may be said to
derive respectively from the externality (Pigou 1920) and property-rights (Coase 1920)
perspectives, the two approaches are more similar than different. A carbon tax would directly
place a price on carbon (most likely upstream, where fossil fuels C coal, petroleum, and natural
gas C enter the economy), with quantities of carbon use and CO2 emissions adjusting in
response. An upstream carbon cap-and-trade system would constrain the quantity of carbon
entering the economy through allowances on the carbon content of the three fossil fuels, with
prices emerging indirectly from the market for allowances.
In some cases, what may at first appear to be key differences between the two
instruments fade on closer inspection, while other apparent differences survive such inspection.
I first explore symmetries between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade, and then I turn to significant
differences.
2.1 Equivalence, Similarities, and Symmetries
To a significant degree, a carbon tax and a commensurate cap-and-trade system are
functionally similar, with differences in specific design elements dominating fundamental
differences between the instruments themselves (Stavins 1997; Goulder and Schein 2013). I
examine six areas of symmetry: (1) emissions reductions; (2) abatement costs; (3) possibilities
for raising revenue; (4) costs to regulated firms (with respective revenue-raising instruments); (5)
distributional impacts; and (6) competitiveness effects. The findings which emerge in regards to
these six areas are summarized in Table 2, where I characterize the symmetries between carbon
taxes and cap-and-trade as being perfectly equivalent, nearly equivalent, or similar.
2.1.1 Emission Reductions
In the absence of uncertainty, by setting the respective time-paths of the tax rate or the
emissions cap, commensurate tax and trading instruments can achieve the same emissions
reductions. Both instruments can employ an upstream, midstream, or downstream point of
regulation (distinct from the point of allocation of allowances). This does not affect aggregate
cost in either case, but it can affect decisions about the scope of coverage, and therefore can
affect environmental effectiveness, as well as cost-effectiveness. With either carbon tax or capand-trade, focusing on the carbon content of fossil fuels upstream could enable a policy to
capture up to 98% of U.S. CO2 emissions with a relatively small number of compliance entities –
on the order of a few thousand – as opposed to the hundreds of millions of smokestacks,
tailpipes, and other sources that emit CO2 after fossil fuel combustion (Metcalf 2007; Stavins
2007).
11

In theory, as I discuss later, a number of factors can adversely affect the performance of a cap-and-trade system,
including: concentration in the permit market (Hahn 1984); concentration in the related product market (Malueg
1990); transaction costs (Stavins 1995); non-profit maximizing behavior, such as sales or staff maximization
(Tschirhart 1984); the preexisting regulatory environment (Bohi and Burtraw 1992); and the degree of monitoring
and enforcement (Montero 2007). Some of these also affect the performance of pollution taxes.

5

2.1.2 Abatement Costs
If firms subject to a policy are operating in a competitive market, they have strong
incentives with either instrument to minimize their total costs, which include the sum of
abatement costs and tax liability, or the sum of abatement costs and cost of allowance purchases
(or net of allowance sales revenue).12 In both cases, there is an incentive to abate emissions up to
the point where each source’s marginal abatement cost is equal to the tax rate or the marketdetermined allowance price. Hence, all firms control at the same marginal cost, and so the same
(minimized) aggregate cost is experienced across the scope of the policy.
Considering the temporal dimension of the respective policies, an important question is
the relative effect of the two approaches on technological innovation. Here, a series of
theoretical explorations have found that a tax and a cap-and-trade system (with auctioned
allowances13) are equivalent in their incentives for carbon-saving innovation (Milliman and
Prince1989; Jung, Krutilla, and Boyd 1996), or at least that neither system dominates (Fischer,
Parry, and Pizer 2003).14
Finally, in principle, offsets for emissions reductions outside of the respective programs
can be used with either tax or trading regimes, bringing about additional abatement cost savings
(Goulder and Schein 2013).
2.1.3. Possibilities for Raising Revenue
An important attribute of a carbon tax is that it raises revenue for the government, which
can be used for a variety of beneficial public purposes, including but not limited to using the
revenue to enable cuts in the rates of distortionary taxes, thereby lowering the net social cost of
the overall policy (Bovenberg and Goulder 1996). More broadly, given the need for government
revenues for other purposes as well, this is indeed an important attribute of taxes.
Of course, an auction mechanism in a cap-and-trade system can, in principle, accomplish
the same outcome (Goulder and Schein 2013). In this regard, of various cap-and-trade designs, it
has been estimated that auctioning and recycling revenue via income tax cuts would be the least
costly, while the most costly would be recycling revenue through lump-sum dividends or freelyallocated allowances (Parry and Williams 2010). The results are similar for the use of revenue
from a tax.
12

Whether firms receive allowances for free (sometimes called grandfathering) in a cap-and-trade system or via
auction, they face the same marginal opportunity cost for emissions.

13

Throughout this paper, I frequently include the caveat of considering cap-and-trade systems that include
auctioning of allowances, because it is with this design that the symmetry of these price and quantity instruments is
greatest.
14

A related temporal issue is that carbon prices – and, for that matter, performance standards – that devalue existing
carbon-intensive capital can have the effect of fostering stranded assets (Rozenberg et al. 2019), which could create
political resistance to policies. This can be avoided with policies that target only new investments, as opposed to the
existing capital stock, but this would introduce the problems created by vintage-differentiated regulation (Stavins
2006).

6

Since the systems are theoretically equivalent in their abilities to raise revenue, any
differences in this regard would be in terms of implementation. One possible difference is that
given the committee jurisdictions in the U.S. Congress, it could be more difficult to link revenuerecycling with a cap-and-trade system than it would be to link revenue-recycling with a carbon
tax (Metcalf 2007). This is because in the cap-and-trade case, committees with environmental
jurisdiction and those with financial jurisdiction would need to be involved in the legislative
process, whereas for a revenue-neutral carbon tax only the financial committees would be
necessary. Whether or not this causal chain is the real explanation, there is empirical support for
the overall point from global experience, where about 70% of cap-and-trade auction revenue has
been earmarked for green spending, while 72% of carbon tax revenue has been recycled or
dedicated to general funds (Carl and Fedor 2016).
2.1.4 Costs to Regulated Firms (with Revenue-Raising Instruments)
The cost of a carbon tax or cap-and-trade system that includes auctioning greatly depends
on the use of the revenue. Compared with a lump-sum redistribution of revenue (rebates),
recycling through rate cuts in payroll taxes, individual income taxes, or corporate income taxes
may have net costs (after accounting for the benefits of eliminating the excess burden of
distortionary taxes) that are 15%, 26%, and 67% lower (Goulder and Hafstead 2018).15
The results with a cap-and-trade system with complete auctioning of allowances are
similar. With a lump-sum rebate, the cost is identical to the rebate paired with a carbon tax.
According to one set of estimates, if auction revenue is recycled via cuts in tax rates, then there
are “slight differences” in costs, compared with respective cuts in the same tax rates (above) with
a carbon tax (Goulder and Hafstead 2018). If allowances are not auctioned, but given out for
free, then the costs are considerably greater than with auctioning: at best, 8% higher than if
lump-sum rebates are employed, and 200% higher than if revenue was recycled through
corporate tax rate cuts (Goulder and Haftstead 2018).
If the comparison is between a cap-and-trade system with freely allocated allowances and
an ordinary carbon tax, then the cost differential is significant. In fact, free allocation could
increase regulatory costs of carbon cap-and-trade enough that the sign of the efficiency impact
could conceivably be reversed from positive to negative net benefits (Parry, Williams, and
Goulder 1999). On the other hand, as I discuss below, free allocation of allowances would meet
with much less political resistance.
It might appear that cap-and-trade systems offer greater opportunities to protect the
profits of regulated firms (through free allocation of allowances), but, as I discuss below, the
same can be accomplished under a tax regime through inframarginal tax exemptions for
emissions below a specified level.

15

All of the numerical estimates in this paper are from analyses carried out prior to implementation of the “Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act” of 2017. One effect of that set of tax reforms would be to lessen the magnitude of the efficiency gains
that could be achieved from further cuts in corporate tax rates (Metcalf 2019).

7

2.1.5 Distributional Impacts
In principle, either instrument can be designed to be roughly equivalent to the other in
distributional terms. If allowances are auctioned, a cap-and-trade system looks much like a
carbon tax from the perspective of regulated firms. Likewise, if a carbon tax system includes
tradable tax exemptions16 for a specified quantity of emissions (that is, the tax is levied only on
emissions above a specified amount), then a carbon tax can resemble a cap-and-trade system
with freely allocated allowances (Goulder and Schein 2013). This is because inframarginal tax
exemptions have the same effect as freely allocated allowances in a cap-and-trade system: they
allow a specified quantity of emissions for which a compliance entity need not pay.
Goulder and Haftstead (2018) and others have examined minimum free allocations that
could make firms whole in terms of fully compensating them for their compliance costs. In
general, these turn out to be a relatively small shares of allowances, yet produce significant
decreases in overall costs (with auctioning and recycling of the remainder of allowances). In
theory, a similar approach is conceivable with a carbon tax system, namely tradable exemptions
to the carbon tax for emissions up to some threshold where the tax begins (Goulder and Hafstead
2018).
Household distributional impacts also can be identical, depending upon two elements of
design – the extent of free emissions, and the use of revenue. This emerges from an assessment
of two components of household impacts of a carbon price. One of these has been termed “useside impacts,” reflecting how a policy affects relative prices of goods and services purchased by
households, in other words, impacts that take place through household expenditures. The other
has been termed “source-side impacts” reflecting how the policy affects nominal wages, capital,
and transfers, in other words, impacts that take place through household income (Goulder and
Hafstead 2018; Goulder, Hafstead, Kim, and Long 2018; Metcalf 2018, 2019). On the use side,
carbon pricing is generally regressive (ignoring the return of tax revenue), due to changes in the
prices of goods and services. Although the degree of regressivity can be altered by the use of the
revenue, this effects remains regressive (Goulder & Hafstead 2018).17
However, on the source side, changes in wage and capital income (as well as government
transfers) are generally progressive.18 Lump-sum recycling of the revenue makes this very
progressive. Using the revenue instead for cuts in corporate tax rates, the effect is still
progressive, although somewhat less so. Most importantly, in most cases (in the models
employed by Goulder and Hafstead 2018, and others), the overall (use-side plus source-side)
impact tends to be progressive. Because source-side impacts dominate use-side impacts for most
cases where there is revenue recycling (tax rate cuts in payroll or individual income taxes), the
16

A compliance entity which receives more exemptions than needed may sell the exemptions to other entities.

17

This discussion abstracts from the fact that there can be a mix of winners and losers in any group, which is missed
by focusing on averages.
18

This reflects the fact that carbon-intensive industries (which, of course, face the greatest burden from a carbon tax)
tend to be relatively capital-intensive. As a result, the burden of a carbon tax falls more on capital than on labor, and
hence tends to reduce returns to capital more than returns to labor. Since capital income represents a larger share of
total income for wealthier households than for poorer households, the impacts from reduced returns to capital is
progressive.

8

overall impact of carbon taxes – or cap-and-trade with 100% auctioning of allowances and the
same recycling through tax rate cuts – is progressive. Using the tax or auction revenue for lumpsum rebates is even more progressive. Hence, there is a tradeoff, namely that by using
approaches that are more cost-effective (tax rate cuts), the progressivity is less than it is with
lump-sum rebates (most progressive, but most costly because distortionary taxes are unaffected).
2.1.6 Competitiveness Effects
A frequently expressed concern about new proposals for carbon-pricing policies is their
impact on competitiveness. The concern is that by increasing the costs of producing carbonintensive goods and services within a jurisdiction, there will be a shift in comparative advantage
to the production of those same goods and services in other jurisdictions that do not face
commensurate climate policy compliance costs. In theory, this can produce “leakage” of
economic activity and of related emissions.
In reality, such leakage may be relatively modest, particularly if the emissions occur in
non-traded sectors, such as electricity generation, transportation, and residential buildings, but
energy-intensive manufacturing industries could face incentives to relocate (Aldy and Pizer
2011). Additional emissions leakage may occur through international energy markets, as
countries with climate policies reduce their consumption of fossil fuels and drive down fuel
prices, those countries without such policies may increase their fuel consumption in response to
the lower prices (Aldy and Stavins 2012).
These impacts on competitiveness would be anticipated equally with either type of
carbon-pricing policy instrument (and with virtually any meaningful CO2-limiting policy, for that
matter). The impacts on energy-intensive manufacturing can be mitigated – in theory – through
specific elements of policy design with either instrument. With a carbon tax, border adjustments
– a tax on imports of products from countries without commensurate climate policies – can be
employed. With a cap-and-trade system, an allowance requirement can be employed for those
same imports, together with an output-based updating allocation of allowances (Goulder and
Schein 2013), although leakage though international energy markets may remain.
2.2 Differences and Distinctions
In theory, there are also some significant differences and distinctions between the two
main approaches to carbon pricing. I examine eight such areas: (1) performance in the presence
of uncertainty about benefits and costs; (2) price volatility; (3) interactions with complementary
policies; (4) potential market manipulation; (5) transaction costs; (6) ease of linkage with
policies in other jurisdictions; (7) complexity and administration; and (8) political resistance to
simplest forms of both instruments.19 The findings that emerge in regards to these eight areas are
summarized in Table 2, where I characterize the comparison between carbon taxes and cap-andtrade as representing significant differences, differences, or some distinctions.
19

An additional difference, noted by Goulder and Schein (2013), is the potential for wealth transfers to oil exporting
nations (that have market power) if those countries choose to behave strategically in response to the imposition of a
cap-and-trade system in the United States, with the result that policy-generated rents can be transferred in part from
the domestic economy to the oil-exporting countries. In theory, the same phenomenon would not arise in response
to the imposition of a U.S. carbon tax.

9

2.2.1 Uncertainty about Benefits and Costs
Significant uncertainty characterizes the benefits and the costs of environmental
protection. For two decades following Weitzman's (1974) classic paper on “Prices vs.
Quantities,” it was generally acknowledged that benefit uncertainty on its own has no effect on
the identity of the efficient policy instrument, but that cost uncertainty could have significant
effects, depending upon the relative slopes of the marginal benefit (damage) and marginal cost
functions.20 In particular, in the presence of cost uncertainty when (the absolute value of) the
marginal cost function exceeds that of the marginal benefit function, then – in expected value
terms – a price instrument, such as a tax, is likely to be more efficient (smaller deadweight loss
due to mistaken predictions of future costs) than a quantity instrument, such as a cap-and-trade
system. When the opposite is the case – slope of the marginal benefit function exceeds slope of
the marginal cost function – then a cap-and-trade instrument would be more efficient.21
In the Weitzman (1974) analysis, benefit uncertainty has no effect on the relative
efficiency of the two instruments. However, twenty years after Weitzman’s work, it was noted
that when there is simultaneous and correlated uncertainty about marginal benefits and marginal
costs, and marginal benefits are positively correlated with marginal costs, then it is more likely
than it is solely on the basis of the usual relative slopes analysis to favor the relative efficiency of
the quantity instrument (Stavins 1996). The opposite result holds if there is negative correlation
between benefit and cost uncertainty.22
It was to be another two decades (Karp and Traeger 2018) before any use was made in
the climate policy context of the findings from Stavins (1996), which drew on an important
insight in Weitzman’s original analysis. Much sooner than that, however, Newell and Pizer
(2003) and others (Hoel and Karp 2002) applied the Weitzman analysis to the circumstances of
climate change. Newell and Pizer reasoned that because greenhouse gases accumulate in the
20

Weitzman’s (1974) model assumed uncertainty regarding the level (intercept), but not the slope of the marginal
abatement cost function, and assumed no correlation between benefit uncertainty and cost uncertainty. Also, the
original analysis considered a situation where the regulator makes a one-time choice of instrument. Subsequent
work (as discussed below), relaxed these assumptions.
21

Intuition for this result is that a steep marginal benefit function suggests large gains or losses in the benefits of
abatement with relatively small changes in abatement levels. A tax fixes the emissions price, but allows the quantity
of emissions to vary, whereas a quantity instrument fixes the emissions (abatement) level and allows the price to
vary. Hence, the quantity instrument is favored when the marginal benefit function is steeper than the marginal cost
function. On the other hand, a steep marginal cost function suggests that large increases in the costs of abatement
take place with relatively small changes in abatement levels. Hence, a price instrument is favored.
22

Intuition for this result is that if emission taxes are used to control pollutant emissions, firms will respond to
unexpectedly high marginal control costs by reducing their control efforts. But if there is a positive correlation
between uncertain benefits and uncertain costs, then at the same time that firms are reducing their control efforts, the
marginal benefits of those efforts will be unexpectedly great. Hence, the firms' natural response to the emission tax
will be less appropriate than indicated by the simple relative slopes rule. On the other hand, if there is a negative
correlation between the marginal benefits and marginal costs of control, then unexpectedly high marginal control
costs will be associated with unexpectedly low marginal benefits, meaning that a tax instrument will lead firms to
reduce their control efforts (because of high control costs) at times at which the marginal benefits of those efforts are
unusually low; hence, the tax instrument will lead to particularly appropriate actions.

10

atmosphere (with CO2 remaining in the atmosphere in excess of 100 years), changes in emissions
in a specific period of time do not significantly alter atmospheric concentrations. Furthermore,
climate change is itself a stock externality, that is, climate change is a function of the
atmospheric stock of greenhouse gases, not the emissions per se at any point in time.
Newell and Pizer (2003) and others found that this implies that the marginal damage
function (for any period) is relatively flat, which means that the marginal benefit function (of
emissions reductions for that period) is also relatively flat, whereas the costs of emissions
reductions are a function of contemporaneous policies. Hence, the current-period marginal
benefits would have a smaller slope (in absolute value) than current-period marginal costs.
Hence, the standard Weitzman analysis would suggest that the more efficient climate policy
instrument under conditions of uncertainty about abatement costs will be a price instrument, such
as a carbon tax, rather than a quantity instrument, such as cap-and-trade.23
The above comparison refers to the relative slopes of marginal benefits and marginal
costs in a given time period, but the marginal damages of a unit of emissions during some time
period (such as the current period) are equivalent to the present discounted value of the future
stream of marginal damages, otherwise known as the social cost of carbon (Interagency Working
Group on Social Cost of Carbon 2016; Weitzman 2014, 2017). In other words, with a stock
pollutant, the marginal benefit of reducing emissions in the current period equals the present
discounted value of the stream of reductions of current and future marginal damages. This is the
appropriate comparison in the climate change context (Pizer and Prest 2019).
In a recent analysis, Karp & Traeger (2018) utilize this comparison of the slopes of the
current marginal cost of CO2 emissions reduction and the marginal benefits (avoided social cost
of carbon) of a current unit of CO2 emissions reduction. They do this by applying to climate
change policy the earlier analysis of the relative efficiency of price and quantity instruments in
the presence simultaneous and correlated benefit and cost uncertainty (Stavins 1996). They note
that an important source of uncertainty is technological change, which brings about positive
correlation between uncertainty of abatement costs and uncertainty of (stock-related) damages,
because technological change lowers current abatement costs, as well as future abatement costs,
due to the persistence of the technology effect. Then, in their closed-loop (feedback) model,
future policy makers will take these lower costs into account, and reduce future targeted
emissions, and lower the expected future pollution stock in the atmosphere.
Hence, today’s marginal damage function shifts downward, because the damages of
emissions now are the discounted present value of the future stream of damages. On this basis,
they find a positive correlation between uncertain benefits and uncertain costs. And, as
23

At about the same time the paper by Newell and Pizer (2003) appeared, Hoel and Karp (2002) independently
came to the same conclusion regarding stock externalities, but with a different analytical model. In their framework,
the ranking of price versus quantity instruments also depends upon the discount rate and the rate of decay of the
stock, with higher discount and decay rates favoring price instruments. They examined both open-loop policy (as
did Newell and Pizer 2003), where price and quantity are set by the regulator and unchanged, and closed-loop
(feedback) policy, where the price and quantity can be adjusted over time by the regulatory authority in response to
new information. In the latter case, the relative efficiency of the two instruments also depends on the length of
intervals between adjustments of prices and quantities by the regulator. They parameterized their models to examine
the control of GHGs, and found – like Newell and Pizer (2003) – that prices (carbon taxes) are preferred to
quantities (cap-and-trade). Also see Hoel and Karp (2001).

11

previously demonstrated (Stavins 1996), such a positive correlation tends to favor a quantity
instrument, compared with the finding from the usual relative slopes comparison which only
considers cost uncertainty and ignores correlated benefit and cost uncertainty.
This analysis does not lead to an unambiguous finding favoring the quantity or the price
instrument. Rather, the implication of the analysis by Karp and Traeger (2018) is that what was
thought to be an unambiguous result from the stock externality application (Newell and Pizer
2003) of the Weitzman (1974) relative slopes rule becomes ambiguous, that is, it becomes an
empirical question of the magnitude of the effect from Stavins (1996), compared with the basic
effect of the relative slopes (Weitzman 1974; Hoel and Karp 2002; Newell and Pizer 2003),
where the slopes compare current marginal costs with current marginal damages measured as the
avoided social cost of carbon. The simple ranking of price over quantity instruments for the
stock externality of climate change no longer holds.24
Karp and Traeger (2018) calibrate their dynamic model, drawing largely on the DICE
model (Nordhaus 2013), and find that in many cases, the quantity instrument is superior to the
price instrument. At a minimum, their analysis suggests that quantities can be (but are not
necessarily) superior on efficiency grounds to price instruments for addressing climate change.
In other words, the case for carbon taxes compared with cap-and-trade in the presence of
uncertainty “is much weaker than commonly believed” (Karp and Traeger 2018).25
2.2.2 Carbon Price Volatility
Putting aside the issue of long-term benefit and cost uncertainty, another issue is shortterm price volatility. It is straightforward that the tax approach eliminates the potential for shortterm price volatility, which can surely exist under a cap-and-trade system. This is essentially an
issue of two different types of endogeneity. Whereas prices are endogenous (and hence subject
to fluctuation and volatility) under a cap-and-trade mechanism, emissions are endogenous under
a carbon tax (Goulder and Schein 2013). Greater certainty about mitigation cost via a carbon tax
(or a price collar in a cap-and-trade system – see below) reduces certainty about the quantity of
emissions allowed (Aldy and Stavins 2012).
Such cost uncertainty (price volatility) in a cap-and-trade system can be an impediment to
capital investment (Pindyck 2017; Metcalf 2019), and could undermine political support for
climate policy and discourage investment in new technologies, as well as research and
development (Aldy and Stavins 2012). From an economic perspective, it makes sense to allow
emissions (of a stock pollutant) to vary from year to year with economic conditions that affect
aggregate abatement costs. This happens automatically with a carbon tax, but with a cap and
trade system, such temporal flexibility needs to be built in through provisions for banking and
24

In a distinct, but related analysis, Pizer and Prest (2019) find that with policy updating (closed-loop model), if
firms have expectations regarding future policy updates and if the quantity instrument is tradable over time, then the
quantity instrument can be preferred on efficiency grounds to the price instrument, although their “main finding” is
that the comparative advantage of one instrument versus the other depends more on firms’ information and
expectations about policy updates than on the relative slopes of marginal benefits and marginal costs.
25

Given the very recent vintage of the analysis by Karp and Traeger (2018), I have placed the issue – performance
in the presence of benefit and cost uncertainty – within the section on differences rather than the previous section on
similarities.

12

borrowing of allowances, which redefines the cap as a limit on cumulative emissions over a
period of years, rather than a cap on annual emissions (Aldy & Stavins 2012). Conversely, a
carbon tax can employ measures to automatically adjust to meet some quantity target (Halfstead
et al. 2017; Metcalf 2019), as I consider below when examining hybrid policy instruments.
2.2.3 Interactions with Complementary Policies
It is rarely, if ever, the case that carbon pricing instruments are considered as the sole
policy to be used to address climate change. More often, carbon pricing – whether carbon tax or
cap-and-trade – is considered as one of a suite of policy measures. In fact, if there are other
market failures present, such as the principal-agent problem that affects decisions regarding
adoption of thermal insulation in renter-occupied buildings or the public-good nature of
information produced by carbon-friendly research and development activities, then there are
solid economic arguments in favor of complementing a carbon-pricing regime with other
regulatory policies (Schmalensee and Stavins 2017a). But if such additional market failures are
not present (and if the complementary policies are not targeting sources outside of the scope of
the carbon-pricing regime), then differences emerge between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade.
With a cap-and-trade regime, there are two possibilities of concern. One is that a
complementary regulatory policy targets sources under the cap of the cap-and-trade system. The
other is that a policy (of any type) is geographically nested within the area of a cap-and-trade
system. In either of these situations, the results are threefold (Schmalensee and Stavins 2017a):
(1) if the complementary policy is binding, there is no additional reduction in emissions due to
the complementary policy, but rather a relocation of emissions to other sectors under the overall
cap (100% leakage), unless the complementary policy renders the allowance price floor binding;
(2) with the binding complementary policy, marginal abatement costs are no longer equated
among all sources, and so aggregate abatement costs are greater than without the additional
policy; and (3) allowance prices are suppressed, raising concerns about the ability of the capand-trade system to encourage technological change (except in the sector directly regulated by
the complementary policy).
Hence, under these circumstances, the addition of a
“complementary” policy increases abatement costs and lowers allowance prices, but does not –
on net – reduce emissions (Goulder and Stavins 2011).
When a carbon tax is paired with complementary policies, the emissions-leakage effect
(and allowance price suppression) does not occur, and the complementary policy will serve to
reduce emissions below the level that the tax alone would achieve. However, the combination of
carbon tax and complementary policy is, like in the cap-and-trade case, not cost-effective, since
marginal abatement costs are no longer identical for all sources. It would cost less to abandon
the complementary policies, and rely instead on a boosted carbon tax rate to achieve the same
degree of aggregate emissions reduction.
2.2.4 Corruption and Market Manipulation
With any policy there is a possibility of corruption of various kinds, including attempts
by private firms to manipulate the market. For this reason, cap-and-trade systems require
regulatory oversight. In the large European Union Emissions Trading System for GHG control,
there was a single and quite significant case of theft of allowances in 2011 in the Czech

13

Republic, as well as hacking of allowance accounts in a number of other countries (Metcalf
2019).
The parallel concern with a carbon tax system would presumably be tax evasion of one
kind or another, a significant problem in many countries, but not of sufficient magnitude in the
United States to present a major concern for a carbon tax (Metcalf 2019). However, much the
same can be said of concerns for market manipulation in cap-and-trade systems within this
country, since there has been only a single case of fraudulent activity reported (in the RECLAIM
program), which was successfully prosecuted by the U.S. Department of Justice. In the large and
ambitious California cap-and-trade system and the electricity-sector system in the Northeast
(Schmalensee and Stavins 2017a), there have been no reported cases of attempted fraud. That
said, it is difficult to contest the judgment of one analyst that in the United States “the risk of
cybertheft from electronic registries in a cap and trade system is likely to present a greater
problem than the risk of tax evasion in a carbon tax” (Metcalf 2019, p. 82).
2.2.5 Transaction Costs
A cap-and-trade system is likely to involve the trading of allowances among firms (unless
the initial allocation matches the cost-effective-equilibrium allocation), and therefore there is the
possibility of transaction costs, which increase aggregate compliance costs. More important, if
transaction costs take the form of volume discounts, then with such decreasing marginal
transaction costs, the equilibrium allocation through market activity is no longer independent of
the initial allocation, removing a key political attraction of cap-and-trade (Stavins 1995). But
historically, transaction costs – of any form – have not been empirically significant in
implemented systems (Schmalensee and Stavins 2017a). The sulfur dioxide (SO2) allowance
trading system demonstrated that in properly designed systems, private markets can render
transaction costs minimal (Schmalensee and Stavins 2013).
2.2.6 Ease of Linkage with Policies in Other Jurisdictions26
Linkage of policies across jurisdictions – connections among policy systems that allow
emission reduction efforts to be redistributed across systems – is of great potential value because
it: (1) can facilitate cost savings by allowing firms to take advantage of lower-cost abatement
opportunities in other jurisdictions; (2) may improve the functioning of individual markets by
reducing market power by enlarging the trading market, and reduce total price volatility by
thickening markets; (3) can provide political benefits to linking parties by conveying a sign of
momentum as political jurisdictions band together; (4) provides administrative economies of
scale; and (5) allows for distributional equity among nations under existing international climate
agreements (United Nations 2015) without sacrificing cost-effectiveness (Bodansky, Hoedl,
Metcalf, and Stavins 2015; Mehling, Metcalf, and Stavins 2018).
Cap-and-trade systems generate a natural unit of exchange for linkage – allowances
denominated in units of carbon content of fossil fuels or CO2 emissions. Hence, it would appear
to be easier to link a domestic U.S. cap-and-trade system with other countries, particularly if they
26

Also in the international domain, Weitzman (2014, 2017) has argued that negotiating a specific, single carbon
price (if nations have already agreed to hold such a negotiation and abide by the negotiated price, where each
country has one vote and accepts majority rule) is easier than negotiating a set of quantity limits.

14

employ cap-and-trade approaches (Jaffe, Ranson, and Stavins 2010). Recent research has found,
however, that through appropriate mechanisms, it is possible that linkage could be carried out
between a domestic U.S. carbon tax systems and certain other policy instruments in other
jurisdictions, although linkage of such heterogeneous policy instruments is considerably more
challenging than the standard variety of linking two cap-and-trade regimes (Metcalf and
Weisbach 2012; Bodansky, Hoedl, Metcalf, and Stavins 2015; Mehling, Metcalf, and Stavins
2018).
2.2.7 Complexity and Administration
The simplest cap-and-trade system will involve greater complexity than the simplest
carbon tax. But more important than the relative complexity of the two approaches is the fact
that greater complexity in design elements frequently translates into greater administrative
burden for the system’s implementation.
A cap-and-trade system requires government to track allowances (at the end of
compliance periods), possibly hold auctions, and develop other necessary rules. These include
rules to prevent fraud and abuse, although as noted above, issues of fraud have been rare with
previous cap-and-trade applications. In contrast, a carbon tax is administratively simple and
relatively straightforward to implement, given that the tax could incorporate existing methods for
fuel-supply monitoring and reporting to the regulatory authority. It is reasonable to conclude
that textbook applications of carbon taxes and cap-and-trade would yield greater administrative
costs with the latter instrument (Goulder and Schein 2013).
Two possibly minor caveats are warranted. First, experience with cap-and-trade systems
has demonstrated that the actual (marginal) costs of trading institutions have not been significant
(Schmalensee and Stavins 2017a), although the fixed costs of setting up such institutions would
presumably be greater than the fixed costs of setting up a carbon tax, since the latter could build
on existing fossil fuel excise taxes. Second, experience also suggests that a simple tax proposal
might become considerably more complex as it passes through the legislature. Whether a policy
as important as a national carbon tax would turn out to be “simple” in its design and
implementation is at least open to question. That said, it is also true that the simplest cap-andtrade regimes become more complex as they work their way through legislative processes.
2.2.8 Political Resistance and Support for the Two Instruments
A common thread throughout this paper is endorsement of the principle that realistic
versions of alternative policies should be analyzed and compared (Hahn and Stavins 1992). In a
recent presentation, Goulder (2019a, 2019b) goes further by suggesting that when comparing
proposed climate policy instruments in an ex ante net present value analysis, it would be
appropriate and desirable to weight the net benefits of each alternative by the probability of it
being implemented within some period of time. These probabilities would presumably be
dependent upon current and future political factors.27 In any event, this suggestion recognizes
that issues of positive political economy may have normative dimensions, as well.
27

In simple terms, as David Leonhardt has written in The New York Times, policies “are not efficient if they never
pass” (Leonhardt 2019). However, making this analytical approach operational would require quantifying the
probability of a specific policy being implemented (or rather, implementable) over some period of time, which

15

In summary, Table 2 characterizes carbon taxes and cap-and-trade as being perfectly
equivalent in regard to three attributes – incentives for emission reductions, aggregate abatement
costs, and effects on competitiveness; nearly equivalent in regard to possibilities for raising
revenue; similar in regard to costs to regulated firms, and distributional impacts; exhibiting some
distinctions in regard to transaction costs; different in regard to performance in presence of
uncertainty; and significantly different in regard to effects on carbon price volatility, interactions
with complementary policies, potential for market manipulation, and complexity and
administrative requirements.
2.3 Hybrid Policy Instruments and a Policy Continuum
Some remaining differences between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade can diminish with
implementation, because hybrid policies that combine specific features of tax and cap-and-trade
instruments can blur distinctions between the two. As already noted, the government can auction
allowances in a cap-and-trade system, thereby reproducing many of the properties of a tax
approach. In addition, mechanisms that reduce short-term price volatility and/or long-term price
uncertainty in a cap-and-trade system bring it closer to a tax approach (Roberts and Spence
1976). These design elements include cost-containment mechanisms that place a cap or collar on
allowance prices, banking that creates a floor under prices, and borrowing that provides
flexibility similar to a tax. Hence, elements of design can foster symmetry of the two carbonpricing instruments.
The use of a safety-valve (hard price ceiling) or a price floor in a cap-and-trade system
would appear to eliminate the key attribute that is strongly favored by environmental advocates,
namely, lack of uncertainty regarding the quantity of emissions (Metcalf 2019), because a price
ceiling is achieved through the provision of additional allowances, while a binding price floor
results in fewer emissions than the stated cap level (Goulder and Schein 2013). However, in
principle, the additional allowances the government offers for sale at the safety-valve price can
come from an allowance reserve set aside for this purpose, or there can be borrowing from future
allocations, so that total allowed emissions over time are unchanged, which is appropriate for the
stock externality of climate change (Stavins 2008). Of course, the use of borrowing in a capand-trade regime raises a set of concerns that have prevented the adoption of this element in
previous applications.
Likewise in a carbon tax system, certain elements of design can bring it closer to the
properties of cap-and-trade. For example, emissions uncertainty with a tax can be reduced
through a variety of means (Aldy et al. 2017), including: a formula for adjusting the tax
(Hafstead, Metcalf, and Williams 2017); periodic government review (Aldy 2018); or dedicating
some tax revenue for emission mitigation activities (Goulder and Schein 2013; Murray, Pizer,
and Reichert 2017). Some of these approaches may be thought of as rendering a pure carbon tax
a hybrid instrument, just as a price collar may be said to render a pure cap-and-trade system a
hybrid instrument.

would be a function of current and future political factors. It is possible that quantifying those probabilities in a
regulatory impact analysis could render the overall analysis less useful, because of the degree of uncertainty that
would inevitably be associated with the respective politically-determined implementation probabilities.

16

Thus, the dichotomous choice between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade can be a choice of
design elements along a policy continuum (Weisbach 2010). Ultimately, the design of either
instrument is very consequential, possibly more important than the choice between the two
(Stavins 1997; Keohane, Revesz, and Stavins 1998; Goulder and Schein 2013; Goulder and
Hafstead 2018).
3. Positive Theory of Policy Instrument Choice
In order to examine the most likely future choice in the United States between the two
types of carbon-pricing instruments, this part of the paper applies the positive theory of policy
instrument choice in the environmental realm to the choice between carbon taxes and cap-andtrade. First, we review the major components of positive theory in this realm, and then turn to an
application of the model to the choice between taxes and trading.
3.1 Components of Positive Theory
Drawing on the metaphor of a political market, we can identify three components of a
positive theory of policy instrument choice: political demand for a particular policy instrument;
political supply of that policy instrument; and the equilibrium outcome in a legislature (Keohane,
Revesz, and Stavins 1998).
3.1.1 Political Demand for Policy Instruments
The effective demand for policy instruments comes largely from firms and interest
groups (Stigler 1971; Peltzman 1976, 1984; Becker 1983). Firms tend to demand those policy
instruments that promise the highest profits – or lowest losses – from regulation, and some
instruments augment profits through the generation of rents and the erection of entry barriers
(Buchanan and Tullock 1975; Maloney and McCormick 1982). In addition, individual firms
may support policy instruments that impose costs, as long as those costs are less than the
industry average, giving them some competitive advantage (Oster 1982).
Environmental interest groups tend to exercise demand for policy instruments which:
provide high confidence of low pollutant emissions levels; make benefits visible and may hide
costs; offer lower compliance costs, if those lower costs mean more aggressive emissions targets;
and keep Congressional authority in committees that are typically dominated by pro-environment
members (Kelman 1981).
3.1.2 Political Supply of Policy Instruments
The political supply of policy instruments emanates from legislators (Kalt and Zupan
1984; Shepsle and Weingast 1984). In theory, legislators may start from a strong position of
status quo bias (Kneese and Schulze 1975), but favor those policy instruments that provide
(visible) benefits but not (visible) costs to their constituents (McCubbins and Sullivan 1984).
Because politicians are risk averse, they prefer control over outcomes, particularly if their
constituents are affected (Shepsle and Weingast 1984). But because constituents typically have
very limited information, politicians may engage in symbolic politics, or exhibit demands that
are consistent with their ideology, rather than their constituents’ interests (Kalt and Zupan 1984).

17

3.1.3 Political Equilibrium
The equilibrium of these forces of political supply and demand play out in what may be
thought of as a political market. Policy instrument choice takes place in the legislature, where
the key commodity is effective support, and the political currency is the accumulation of
resources necessary for a legislator’s reelection (Keohane, Revesz, and Stavins 1998).
Exchanges occur among legislators, constituents, and interest groups, with the equilibrium
yielding the legislative outcome.
3.2 Positive Theory of the Choice Between Carbon Taxes and Cap-and-Trade
Consistent with the theory, we can separate out demand-side and supply-side implications
for the choice between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade.28
3.2.1 Political Demand
The historical opposition of private industry to pollution taxes results in part from the fact
that with the simplest form of taxes, firms pay not only their compliance costs, but also the costs
associated with tax payments for residual emissions (Buchanan and Tullock 1975), which will be
some amount less than the full amount of tax payments, since some share is passed on to
consumers. This also explains the historical and ongoing opposition of private industry to
auctioning of allowances in cap-and-trade systems.
Rent generation and the erection of entry barriers helps explain why for many years when
market-based instruments were used they most frequently took the form of cap-and-trade
systems with freely-allocated allowances, where scarcity rents are conveyed to firms, and also
provide entry barriers, since new entrants must purchase allowances from incumbent firms,
making the rents sustainable (Keohane, Revesz, and Stavins 1998). On a global basis, this may
help explain the ongoing preference from private industry for cap-and-trade mechanisms in the
climate context.
Turning to the demand from environmental interest groups, there continues to be a strong
preference for cap-and-trade over taxes, in part because these interest groups prefer policies that
help obscure the costs, but make benefits transparent and visible (Stavins 1998), although in the
United States this political difference has been significantly lessened, due to the successful
tarnishing of the Obama administration’s CO2 cap-and-trade proposal as “cap-and-tax” by
Republican conservatives and coal-state Democrats.29 In addition, environmental interest groups
may favor cap-and-trade over carbon taxes, because the former keeps the authority in
environmental Congressional committees, where the advocacy groups have considerable
influence, as opposed to the tax and finance committees, which are typically more conservative,
and where the environmental groups typically have less influence (Kelman 1981; Metcalf 2019).
28

For a very different approach to a theory of positive political economy of instrument choice in the context of
climate change (which can help explain the recent prominence of the “Green New Deal”), see Driesen 2019.
29

The “cap-and-tax” moniker may have derived from the fact that the Obama administration included in its first
budget proposal included revenue to be obtained from a CO2 cap-and-trade program with auctioning of 100% of
allowances.

18

3.2.2 Political Supply
For politicians in the legislature, freely allocated allowances in a cap-and-trade system
are typically favored over auctioned allowances or a tax, because no money is exchanged at the
time of the initial allocation. On the other hand, the revenue from a tax or from auctioned
allowances is attractive to the government (Stavins 1998), and may come to be a major political
force on behalf of a future U.S. carbon tax.
A cap-and-trade policy gives legislators considerable control over the outcome for their
constituents through the initial free allocation of allowances, because a cost-effective equilibrium
is likely to be achieved independently of the initial allocation of allowances (Montgomery 1972),
except under specific, limited circumstances.30 This independence property is of central political
importance, and is the primary reason why cap-and-trade systems have been employed in
representative democracies, where distributional issues are of paramount importance in
mustering support for a policy. In principle, the government can set the overall emissions cap C
whether on the basis of economic efficiency or, more likely, some other grounds C and then
leave it up to the legislature to allocate the available number of allowances among sources to
build a constituency of support for the initiative without reducing the system=s environmental
performance or driving up its cost (Joskow and Schmalensee 1998). This should be contrasted
with most public policy proposals B environmental or otherwise B for which the normal course of
events is that the political machinations that are necessary to develop sufficient legislative
support reduce the effectiveness of the policy and/or drive up its costs.
Thus, cap-and-trade leaves distributional issues up to politicians, and provides a
straightforward means to compensate burdened sectors and other constituencies. Of course, this
political advantage can be an economic disadvantage if it invites particularly harmful rentseeking behavior. In any event, the compensation associated with free distribution of allowances
based on historical emissions can be mimicked under a tax regime through the assignment of
specific tax exemptions (Goulder and Schein 2013), as noted previously.
Although there is a propensity of political processes under cap-and-trade to compensate
sectors through free allowance allocations, a carbon tax would be sensitive to the same political
pressures, and succumb in other ways, namely through sectoral or other tax exemptions that may
reduce environmental achievement or drive up costs. Instead, a cap-and-trade system may be
anticipated to lead to battles over the allowance allocation, but these do not raise the overall cost
of the program nor affect its climate impacts (Montgomery 1972).
In terms of symbolic politics, policy makers working in the environmental realm seem to
think in terms of pollution quantities, not prices. However, the political process may no longer
favor announcing quantity goals (with conventional standards, cap-and-trade, or some other
quantity-based approach), as it once did.

30

This property can be violated under specific, but relatively uncommon conditions (Hahn and Stavins 2012), as
well as in the presence of imperfect competition (Fowlie, Reguant, and Ryan 2016).

19

4. Empirical Evidence: What Experience Suggests About Future U.S. Climate Policy
In this section I turn to an exploration of empirical evidence regarding first the normative
aspects and then the positive aspects of the choice between carbon taxes and cap-and-trade. In
other words, I seek to identify lessons that can be learned from previous and current applications
of these two carbon-pricing instruments
4.1 Empirical Evidence for Normative Assessment of Carbon Taxes and Cap-and-Trade
Although more than 50 carbon-pricing policies have been implemented or are scheduled
for implementation worldwide, including 26 carbon taxes and 25 emissions trading systems
(Figure 1), I focus on a few of the more prominent examples of taxes and cap-and-trade that can
offer the most useful lessons.
4.1.1 Lessons from Experience with Cap-and-Trade Policies
Among the most important applications of cap-and-trade in the United States have been
the leaded gasoline phasedown (1982-1987),31 the sulfur dioxide (SO2) allowance trading system
(1994-2010), NOx trading (1998-2009), and the Regional Clean Air Incentives Market (1993present). In addition, two prominent U.S. cap-and-trade systems address CO2 emissions – the
Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (2009-present), and California’s system (2013-present); and
the world’s largest carbon-pricing initiative is the European Union Emissions Trading System
(EU ETS, 2008-present). Table 3 summarizes the geographic scope, sectoral coverage, time
duration, allowance allocation method, cost containment mechanisms, and environmental and
economic performance of these seven important emissions trading systems.
There has also been rights trading for ozone depleting substances (ODS) in several
countries during the ODS phasedown from 1991 to 2000 under the 1987 Montreal Protocol
(Klassen 1999; Stavins 2003; U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2014), as well as CO2 capand-trade systems in New Zealand, Japan, South Korea, Kazakhstan, Quebec, and other
jurisdictions. Also, an international CO2 cap-and-trade system has been in place since 2008
under Article 17 of the Kyoto Protocol, but because the trading agents are nations, rather than
firms, there has been little significant activity, an outcome that was anticipated (Hahn and
Stavins 1999). As I discuss later, cap-and-trade systems are under development, planned, or
proposed in many other jurisdictions (Schmalensee and Stavins 2017b).
Turning to lessons from these experiences,32 first, in terms of the basics, cap-and-trade
has long since proven to be environmentally effective and economically cost-effective (lead
phasedown, SO2 allowance trading33). For example, it has been estimated that SO2 trading
reduced aggregate abatement costs by more than half, compared with a commensurate, welldesigned command-and-control approach (Metcalf 2019). The world’s most important CO2 cap31

The program was a tradable performance standard rather than a textbook cap-and-trade system.

32

Lessons learned from experiences in industrialized countries are emphasized, both because these contexts are
more relevant to the United States and because of the greater availability of reliable evaluations.
33

The policy experiences listed in parentheticals in this part of the paper refer to the sources of evidence for
respective lessons.

20

and-trade system – the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) – had its share of
problems in its pilot phase (Metcalf 2019), but it has functioned essentially as anticipated since
then (Ellerman, Convery, and Perthuis 2010). Relatively low allowance prices were a function
of: (1) the degree of ambition of the cap; (2) the perverse effect of EU and member state
“complementary policies,” including those targeting renewable sources of energy and energy
efficiency; and the 2008-2009 recession, which reduced energy demand. Of course, the lower
allowance prices and fewer emissions reductions that occur with cap-and-trade during a
recession are an economic virtue, that is, they are counter-cyclical, and do not unduly burden
industry when it is fundamentally unnecessary and unwise to do so. As with the EU ETS and
RGGI, downstream, sectoral programs have been commonly employed, although economy-wide
systems have been shown to be feasible (AB-32).
Transaction costs have turned out to be low to trivial, particularly when compliance
entities have been homogeneous (lead phasedown, SO2 allowance trading). In particular, the
SO2 allowance trading system demonstrated that in properly designed systems, private markets
can render transaction costs minimal (Schmalensee and Stavins 2013). In the context of climate
policy, CO2 emissions trading programs have been limited in scope of coverage, in contrast with
textbook, upstream trading of rights associated with the carbon content of fossil fuels (World
Bank Group 2016).
It is clear from basic theory and validated by experience that a robust market requires a
cap that is significantly below BAU emissions (SO2 allowance trading,34 RECLAIM). Likewise,
high levels of compliance require monitoring, reporting, and verification combined with
significant penalties for non-compliance (SO2 allowance trading). Also, it has been shown to be
important for final rules to be established well before commencement of a system’s first
compliance period to avoid unnecessary price volatility (SO2 allowance trading, NOx Budget, EU
ETS).
Turning to specific elements of design, experience argues for systems that allow for a
broad set of compliance alternatives, in terms of both timing and technological options. One of
the most significant benefits of using carbon pricing – whether tax or cap-and-trade – is simply
that technology and uniform performance standards are thereby avoided. Less flexible systems
would not have led to the technological change that appears to have been induced by marketbased instruments (Ellerman and Montero 1998; Bohi and Burtraw 1992; Keohane 2003;
Schmalensee and Stavins 2013; Calel and Deschezlepretre 2016), or the induced process
innovations that have resulted (Doucet and Strauss 1994) in previous applications.
Provisions for banking of allowances have proven to be exceptionally important, as such
inter-temporal trading has represented a large share of the realized gains from trade (lead
phasedown, SO2 allowance trading). In contrast, the absence of banking provisions can lead to
price spikes (RECLAIM) and price collapses (EU ETS). More broadly, a changing economy can
render a cap non-binding (RGGI, EU ETS) or drive prices to excessive levels (RECLAIM).
Hence, there is a distinct role in cap-and-trade systems for price collars, which reduce the risk of
unanticipated allowance price changes and price volatility by combining an auction price floor
34

For an analysis of how other government regulations (and some related judicial decisions) essentially eliminated
the SO2 market beginning in 2006, see: Schmalensee and Stavins 2013.

21

with an allowance reserve (RGGI, AB-32), a topic to which I return below.35 On the other hand,
excessive constraints on offset use can lead to a thin market that fails to be effective for cost
containment purposes (RGGI, AB-32).
Simplicity is important, and transparent formulae C including for allowance allocations
C are difficult to contest or manipulate, particularly if rules are clearly defined up front, without
ambiguity. By avoiding any requirements for prior government approval of individual trades,
uncertainty and transaction costs are decreased (lead phasedown, SO2 allowance trading).
The allocation of allowances is inevitably a major political issue, because of the large
distributional impacts that can be involved. A striking and important experience has been that
free allowance allocation has proven to foster political support, although it means that the
opportunity is foregone to cut the program’s overall social cost by refunding revenues from
auctioning allowances through cuts of distortionary taxes (SO2 allowance trading, AB-32).
However, empirical experience has revealed that political pressures exist to use auction revenue
not for the economist’s favorite purpose of cutting distortionary taxes, but to fund new or
existing government programs or relieve deficits (AB-32, RGGI). Indeed, cap-and-trade
allowance auctions can and have generated very significant revenue for governments (RGGI,
AB-32).
Another prominent political concern with cap-and-trade systems has been the possibility
of emissions and economic leakage and related competitiveness impacts. In practice, leakage
from cap-and-trade systems can range from non-existent (lead phasedown) to potentially quite
serious (RGGI). It is most likely to be significant for programs of limited geographic scope,
particularly in the power sector because of interconnected electricity markets (RGGI, AB-32).
Attempts to reduce leakage and competitiveness threats through free allocation of allowances per
se does not address the problem (EU ETS), but an output-based updating allocation – in principle
– can do so (AB-32).
Carbon pricing (through cap-and-trade or taxes) may be said to be necessary to address
climate change, but it is surely not sufficient, due to the limited sectoral scope of some carbon
pricing regimes, and – more broadly – due to the presence of other market failures that inhibit the
perfect functioning of markets. Hence, there can be an appropriate role for complementary
policies. But actual suites of so-called “complementary policies” have frequently conflicted
rather than complemented by addressing emissions under the cap, thereby relocating rather than
reducing emissions, driving up abatement costs, and suppressing allowance prices (Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development 2011). This perverse situation has characterized
two of the most prominent applications of cap-and-trade in the climate policy context (AB-32,
EU ETS).
The degree of perverse interaction of a complementary policy with a cap-and-trade
system within which it is nested can be characterized by the difference in marginal abatement
costs between the cap-and-trade system and the complementary policy. In the case of California,
35

A laboratory experiment by Holt and Shobe (2016), which compared price collars, as used in RGGI and AB-32,
with quantity collars (modeled after the EU ETS Market Stability Reserve), found that the price collar was superior
to the quantity collar in terms of reducing allowance price volatility and increasing efficiency.

22

these marginal costs are known, because they are represented by the allowance price in the AB32 cap-and-trade system, and by a separate allowance price under a distinct trading system that
operates in the state’s refinery-based Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS). In February, 2019,
AB-32 allowances were trading at about $16/ton, while LCFS allowances were trading at
approximately $200/ton (Lithgow 2019f), representing a dramatic departure from an overall
system of cost-effective emissions reduction.
These perverse interactions, frequently characterized as the “waterbed effect” in the
European context (Fankhauser, Hepburn, and Park 2010; Perino 2018), may be partially
alleviated by planned reforms employing “market stability reserves” in the EU ETS, California,
and RGGI (Edenhofer, et al. 2017; Perino, Ritz, and van Benthem 2019).
4.1.2 Lessons from Experience with Carbon Taxes
In contrast with the history of cap-and-trade systems, the lion’s share of implemented
pollution taxes have been focused on CO2 (or related energy generation), including 26 carbon
taxes identified by the World Bank as of 2018. As with cap-and-trade, I focus on the most
prominent applications – carbon taxes that are set at particularly high levels in several northern
European countries, and the more recent carbon tax in British Columbia.
4.1.2.1 Northern European Carbon Taxes
European carbon taxes have frequently been elements of broader energy and excise tax
reform initiatives, as opposed to singular focus on reducing CO2 emissions (Murray and Rivers
2015). The systems have had different scopes of coverage, different tax rates, and many are
coincident with – if not linked with – the EU ETS, making it difficult to assess impacts (Murray
and Rivers 2015). In the 1990s, several northern European countries imposed carbon taxes to
limit their greenhouse gas emissions as part of broader tax policies.
Norway implemented a carbon tax in 1991 that varied in its level across sectors of the
economy, despite the fact that cost-effective abatement would call for a uniform tax. By 1999,
facilities using coal paid $24/ton of CO2 for coal for energy purposes and $19/ton for coal for
coking purposes (Bruvoll and Larsen 2004), but these activities were completely exempted from
the carbon tax beginning in 2003. In the transportation sector, by 2009, the Norwegian carbon
tax was $58/ton of CO2 on gasoline and $34/ton on diesel. In 2009, the carbon tax applied to
about 55% of Norwegian greenhouse gas emissions, while an emission trading scheme linked to
the EU ETS covered an additional 13% of emissions.36 In 2003, Norway also introduced a tax of
$33/ton of CO2-equivalent on HFCs and PFCs, to slow the growth rate of these potent
greenhouse gases.
Sweden implemented a carbon tax of $33/ton of CO2 in 1991 as a part of a fiscal reform
that cut high income tax rates (Speck 2008). The carbon tax has since increased to
approximately $120/ton of CO2 (based on the February, 2019 exchange rate). When the carbon
tax was implemented, Sweden – as a relatively small, open economy – reduced its general
energy tax on many of the sources bearing the carbon tax; and refineries, steel, and other primary
36

Greenhouse gas emissions in the offshore oil sector, representing 24% of Norway’s emissions, are covered by
both a (lower) carbon tax and the emission trading scheme.

23

metal industries received exemptions from the carbon tax (Daugjberg and Pedersen 2004). In
addition, those industries covered by the EU ETS were exempted from the carbon tax, but in
2018, these exemptions were relaxed.37 The tax has generated considerable revenue for the
general budget, as there is no earmarking of tax revenues in Sweden (Government Offices of
Sweden 2019). However, because of its (fully intended) impacts, revenues from the tax on
heating fuels, for example, have fallen due to decreased use and consequent erosion of the tax
base.
Denmark implemented a carbon tax of about $18/ton of CO2 in 1992, and reduced the tax
to $17/tCO2 in 2005, where it has remained (Speck 2008; World Bank Group 2018).
Manufacturing sectors face lower tax rates, up to 90% below the standard rate, depending on
their energy intensity.
Finland has imposed a general tax on energy coupled with a surtax based on the carbon
content of the energy since 1997. Like other northern European nations, Finland lowers its
carbon tax for industries covered by the EU ETS. Since 2008, the carbon surtax has been about
$28/ton of CO2, although natural gas faces half this rate (World Bank Group 2018).
Some of the carbon taxes in northern Europe are at the highest levels of any carbon prices
worldwide (Figure 1), although implementation has yielded significant variations in the effective
tax per unit of CO2 across fuels and industries within each country, contrary to the cost-effective
prescription of a common price on carbon. In addition, fiscal cushioning to the carbon taxes – by
adjustments to pre-existing energy taxes – and to the EU ETS – by adjustments to pre-existing
carbon taxes – is common, especially for those industries expressing concerns about their
international competitiveness (Aldy and Stavins 2012). Nevertheless, these countries were the
first to demonstrate that carbon taxes could be employed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
while raising revenue to finance government spending or lower other tax rates (Organization of
Economic Cooperation and Development 2001). Unfortunately, there is little empirical evidence
of the emissions impacts of these taxes.
4.1.2.2 British Columbia Carbon Tax
The Canadian province of British Columbia has had in place since 2008 a carbon tax that
comes closest to the version of an ideal carbon tax typically recommended by economists
(Metcalf 2019). As such, it has been characterized – like the U.S. SO2 allowance trading system
– as “a grand policy experiment” (Stavins 1998; Murray and Rivers 2015). The tax is one part of
British Columbia’s plan to reduce provincial GHG emissions by 33% by 2020 (British Columbia
2007). The carbon tax is intended to be economy-wide (covering approximately 70-75% of
emissions).

37

Since January 1, 2018, previously exempted emissions from combined heat and power plants that are also covered
by the EU ETS are being taxes at 11% of the full tax rate. The tax level for other heat production covered by the EU
ETS increased from 80% to 91% of the full rate, while industrial facilities covered by the EU ETS are still entirely
exempt from the carbon tax. In addition, since January 1, 2018, the carbon tax rate on industrial facilities not
covered by the EU ETS became aligned with the general tax rate. Prior to this date, a lower tax rate was applied to
these facilities (World Bank Group 2019).

24

It began at $7.50 per ton of CO2-equivalent emissions in 2008, increasing by $3.75 per
year, now amounts to $27/ton,38 and is scheduled to reach $38/ton in 2021. The tax is collected
upstream at the wholesale level (fuel distributors), based on the carbon content of fuels (Duff
2008), and, according to Metcalf (2019, p. 50), covers “carbon emissions of all hydrocarbon
fuels burned in the province.” Exemptions from the tax include: fuels exported from British
Columbia;39 fuels used by aviation and shipping into or out of the province; operations and fuels
used in agriculture (since 2012); all non-fossil-fuel GHG emissions, including from industrial
processes, landfills, forestry, and agriculture; and methane emissions from the production and
transmission of fossil fuels.
Originally, by law, 100% of the tax revenue was to be refunded through tax cuts to
businesses and individuals, with low-income individuals further protected through a targeted tax
credit. But, over time, the policy has evolved from using revenues to cut distortionary taxes to
more focused use of specific tax cuts for specific sectors and locations (Murray and Rivers
2015). That said, combining general tax cuts and those targeted to specific sectors, companies,
and locations, the current disposition of tax revenues is: 50% to business tax rate reductions and
corporate income tax credits; 23% to personal income tax cuts; and 25% to equal lump-sum
rebates to households (Goulder and Hafstead 2018). According to an analysis by Beck et al.
(2015), when taking into account both its use-side and source-side impacts (see above), the
British Columbia carbon tax turns out to be progressive in its distributional impacts, even before
considering the consequences of specific uses of revenue.
In terms of its performance, empirical evidence is unclear. One estimate is that the tax
policy has reduced the province’s CO2 emissions by 5-10%, with little negative impact on the
economy (Metcalf 2019), but unknown emissions leakage (Murray and Rivers 2015). But other
research has questioned whether emissions have been reduced (Pretis 2019). On the other hand,
the government has estimated that by 2020, the carbon tax will reduce British Columbia’s CO2
emissions by approximately 3 million tons annually.
4.1.3 Lessons from Experience with Hybrid Policy Instruments
As discussed above, hybrid policies that combine features of tax and cap-and-trade can
blur distinctions between the two. Empirical experiences with cap-and-trade systems suggests a
trend of greater use over time of auctioning of allowances, as in the California AB-32/398
system, the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI), and the European Union Emissions
Trading System (EU ETS).
The blurring of the two approaches can become even more pronounced with the use of
cost-containment elements in cap-and-trade systems, which reproduce many of the properties of
a tax approach, as do mechanisms that reduce short-term price volatility and/or long-term price
uncertainty in a cap-and-trade system. Banking provisions have been common in all CO2 capand-trade systems (and nearly all cap-and-trade systems for other pollutants), but borrowing
38

The April 2019 exchange rate has been used to convert Canadian dollars to U.S. dollars.

39

Note that virtually all of the coal mined in British Columbia is exported (Murray and Rivers 2015). About 90% of
the province's coal production is steel-producing coking coal. The province does not use coal for power generation.

25

provisions have only been present implicitly in the form of compliance periods that have ranged
from one to five years.
The California system as well as RGGI have employed safety-valve prices, $10 in the
case of RGGI, and greater than $50 in the California system. In fact, both systems now employ
price collars, combining an auction price floor with a price that triggers availability from an
allowance reserve. However, these approaches provide a “soft ceiling” on prices (or a soft price
collar), because there is a finite supply of allowances in the reserve. Going forward, California’s
post-2020 system will include a hard ceiling on prices, in which there will be no limit on the
supply of allowances available at a specified, escalating price level (Schatzki and Stavins
2018b).
4.2 Empirical Evidence for Positive Assessment of Carbon Taxes and Cap-and-Trade
Some analysts have contended that because the differences in outcomes with the two
approaches need not be very great, the key questions to address in deciding between these two
policy approaches are which is more politically feasible and which is more likely to be well
designed (Furman, Bordoff, Deshpande, and Noel 2007). To some degree, responses to the first
question could be provided by the political revealed preference of individual countries. The
number of CO2 cap-and-trade and carbon tax systems around the world is about the same (World
Bank Group 2018).
4.2.1 Cap-and-Trade Experience
Rather than counting the number of systems, the relative significance of the two
approaches can be assessed to some degree by observing the relative mass exhibited in Figure 1,
which provides a sense of scope of coverage multiplied by stringency (carbon price).40 The
world’s most significant carbon-pricing regime is surely the European Union Emission Trading
Scheme (EU ETS).
A major factor behind the choice of that instrument by the European Commission was the
perceived success of the U.S. SO2 allowance trading program. However, another factor said to
have influenced the choice of cap-and-trade over a tax approach was the fact that fiscal measures
– such as a carbon tax –require unanimity in the Council of the European Union, whereas most
other measures – including cap-and-trade – require only a majority (Metcalf 2019). It is for this
same reason that an upstream (and hence, economy-wide) system was not employed, because it
was thought that since it would appear downstream like a tax, it might require unanimity in the
EU Council.
Going forward, other evidence of political revealed preference for emissions trading
comes from China, where after much reflection on cap-and-trade and carbon tax theory, as well
40

In addition to these existing cap-and-trade systems, there are other systems in various stages of planning (or at
least proposing) in Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Japan, Mexico, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, and Viet
Nam (Schmalensee and Stavins 2017b), as well as at the sub-national level in the United States, including New
Mexico (Lithgow 2019c), New Jersey, Oregon (Lithgow 2019e), and Washington (Lithgow 2019a). There are
carbon tax proposals at various stages in Brazil, Ivory Coast, and the Netherlands (World Bank Group 2018), plus
sub-national proposals in Maine (Lithgow 2019b), Massachusetts, New Hampshire (Lithgow 2019d), and
Washington.

26

as the experience of its six pilot provincial and municipal emissions trading systems, the
government chose to proceed with a national emissions trading system, although it should be
noted that it is not cap-and-trade per se, but rather a national set of sectoral tradable performance
standards (Goulder and Morgenstern 2018; Pizer and Zhang 2018).41
In December, 2018, nine northeastern states plus the District of Columbia announced the
Transportation and Climate Initiative (TCI), intended to reduce GHG emissions from the
transportation sector, with the design of the mechanism to be completed by the end of 2019. The
announcement referred to the development of a “market-based policy,” with much of the original
thrust emphasizing the potential use of a tax mechanism for transportation fuels, to complement
the cap-and-trade instrument used by the RGGI states in the electricity sector. However, by
early February, 2019, indications were that “officials will gravitate towards a cap-and-trade
programme for the final design, as all jurisdictions except Pennsylvania and Washington, D.C.
have experience with that structure via RGGI” (McGraw 2019).
At the same time, Oregon is poised to enact in 2019 an economy-wide CO2 cap-and-trade
system, patterned after the California system, with which it would link via the Western Climate
Initiative (Schatzki and Stavins 2018a; Burtraw et al. 2019). The system lays out in a 98-page
“Clean Energy Jobs” bill how the system – beginning in 2021 – would achieve emission
reduction goals of 45% by 2035 and 80% by 2050, relative to 1990 levels (Climate Xchange
2019). Electricity generators and importers, natural gas utilities, petroleum-product distributors
(including gasoline and diesel fuel), and large point sources will be included under the declining
cap. Emissions from energy used out of state, aviation, watercraft, and rail transportation will be
exempted. An increasing share of allowances is to be auctioned over time, starting with 60% at
the program’s launch in 2021, with most funds directed to climate-related programs. Emissionsintensive trade-exposed (EITE) industries receive allowances through an output-based updating
allocation. In addition, New Jersey is preparing to join RGGI.
4.2.2 The Limits of Cap-and-Trade Experience and the Promise of a U.S. Carbon Tax
Past may not be prologue, at least not in the United States. What has been the dominant
political revealed-preference for emissions trading over pollution taxes may not hold for future
applications at the national level to GHG emission reductions.42 Since the successful
41

China’s new Ministry of Ecology and Environment circulated a work plan in April, 2019, for its emissions trading
system (ETS), originally “launched” in December, 2017. A trial ETS for the electricity-generation sector is
scheduled to commence in November, 2019, with the actual market – covering 80% of China’s generators, which
emit about 3 to 3.5 billion tons of CO2 annually – expected to start in 2020. Over the subsequent five years, the plan
is to bring petrochemicals, chemicals, building materials, steel, non-ferrous metals, paper production, and aviation
sectors under the system. Initially, allowances will be distributed freely, with auctioning commencing sometime
between 2020 and 2025. If China meets this plan, the ETS will cover about 7 billion tons of CO2 emissions
annually, making the system more than four times the size of the EU ETS, currently the world’s largest (Reklev
2019). In the longer term, it is anticipated that the TPS system will evolve into a mass-based cap-and-trade system
sometime after 2025.
42

However, at the sub-national level in the United States, the only two significant carbon-pricing systems are the
cap-and-trade policies in California and the northeast. In the state of Washington, the Senate blocked a cap-andtrade bill in 2015, then voters rejected carbon tax ballot initiatives – in 2016 with revenues directed to cutting other
tax rates, and in 2018 with revenues directed to environmental programs and projects. None of three climate bills
introduced early in 2019 in Washington involve carbon pricing of any kind (Kagubare 2019), although a cap-andtrade proposal is again circulating in the state Senate (Lithgow 2019a).

27

demonization in 2009 of cap-and-trade as “cap-and-tax” by opponents of the Waxman-Markey
legislation (H.R. 2454, the American Clean Energy and Security Act of 2009), the political
advantage held by this instrument (namely, doing a better job of obscuring cost than did a tax)
may have been lost, at least for the foreseeable future for national climate legislation
(Schmalensee and Stavins 2013, 2017).
Beyond that, as I discuss below, there is clearly increasing interest within the policy
community – and even within Congress – in the possibility of using a Federal carbon tax to
reduce CO2 emissions. This heightened activity includes: the Market Choice Act of July, 2018,
which would have imposed a $24/ton carbon tax, with 70% or the revenue going to infrastructure
projects; the Energy Innovation and Carbon Dividend Act of November, 2018, which provided a
$15/ton carbon “fee,” with the revenue rebated to households; and the even more prominent
bipartisan proposal from the Climate Leadership Council, endorsed by some leading Republican
economists and former senior government officials (Akerloff et al. 2019). On the other hand, the
most prominent climate proposal in the current Congress is surely the “Green New Deal,”43
which is noticeably silent about, if not hostile towards any kind of carbon-pricing initiative. In
the meantime, there may be positive political economy lessons to be learned from British
Columbia’s experience with its carbon tax system.44
4.2.3 Political Economy of the British Columbia Carbon Tax
The successful enactment in British Columbia of its carbon tax has been attributed to the
“confluence of political conditions ripe for carbon taxation” (Harrison 2013; Datla and Lee
2016), including: (1) availability of untapped hydroelectric potential as an important source of
electrical power; (2) a strongly environmentalist electorate combined with a surge in public
concern about climate change (as with California’s move to a CO2 cap-and-trade system); (3) a
right-center majority government that had the trust of the business community (as with the
George H. W. Bush administration’s push for the SO2 allowance trading program); and (4) a
committed leader with the institutional capacity to pursue his personal policy preferences – the
Premier made the decision about a carbon tax (Harrison 2013).45
The political economy of this carbon tax has changed over time. Public opinion was
opposed to the tax when it was introduced in 2008,with 60% somewhat or strongly opposed. But

43

The “Green New Deal” proposal includes a set of economic stimulus objectives and programs intended to address
climate change and economic inequality (U.S. House of Representatives 2019). A political advantage of noncarbon-pricing approaches is that – like cap-and-trade in the past – they can hide the economic costs of the policies
(Leonhardt 2019).
44

The unusually high carbon taxes that exist in Sweden – and to lesser degrees in the other Scandinavian countries –
may have less to offer for relevant political economy lessons for the United States, because in Sweden, high taxes
exist, in general, and are well accepted, with citizens enjoying state-funded access to services such as child care and
education. High taxes may work in the region because the notion of state welfare is so deeply rooted in the culture.
Therefore, I focus on potential positive political economy lessons for the United States from the British Columbia
experience.
45

To a degree not frequently recognized by academic studies, successful policy initiatives can at least partly be
attributed to healthy doses of chance that have placed specific persons at critical moments into key positions in
government and the broader policy community (Stavins 1998).

28

by 2015, only 45% of the surveyed population was somewhat or strongly opposed (Murray and
Rivers 2015). This increased public acceptance may partly have been due to the perception that
emissions had been reduced without severe economic impacts (Harrison 2013). In addition, the
British Columbia government had become reliant on the revenue.
Over time, political pressures have caused the system to evolve from one where revenues
were used broadly to cut distortionary taxes to a system that was considerably more focused on
the use of tax cuts to favor specific sectors (including the motion picture industry), and for
payments and tax cuts for northern rural households and low-income populations (Murray and
Rivers 2015). “What began as use of carbon tax revenues for general tax reform to reduce
distortions and promote economic growth (straight out of the economist’s playbook) appears to
have evolved into a system with some ‘industrial policy’ objectives for promoting certain
sectors” (Murray and Rivers 2015, p. 7).
Interestingly, the policy is no longer revenue-neutral. From 2008 through 2015, the
carbon tax generated $4.6 billion of revenue, with tax cuts exceeding $5.3 billion over the same
period (Plumer 2010; Murray and Rivers 2015). The tax reached $27 in April, 2018, and is
scheduled to increase annually by $3.75 until the rate reaches $38/ton of CO2-equivalent in 2021.
However, according to one analysis, there is likely to be continuing political pressure for
exemptions for trade-exposed industries (Harrison 2013). Experience with concessions that have
been granted to local governments, rural voters, and farmers may be cause for concern in this
regard (Harrison 2013).
It is probably fair to say that political pressures can drive up the social costs of both
carbon-pricing instruments, with incentives sometimes working against auctioning of allowances
in cap-and-trade systems, and a variety of pressures working against employing cost-effective
cuts of distortionary taxes in carbon tax systems.46
5. Conclusions: The Path Ahead
At the outset, I posed two questions. How do the two major approaches to carbon pricing
compare on relevant dimensions? And which of the two approaches is more likely to be adopted
in the future in the United States?
5.1 Does Either Carbon-Pricing Instrument Dominate in Normative or Positive Terms?
In principle, either carbon-pricing instrument could be used in a national system to
achieve meaningful reductions of CO2 emissions, such as the 2025 target of 26-28% below the
2005 level, expressed in the U.S. NDC under the Paris Agreement (Chen and Hafstead 2018).
When carbon taxes and carbon cap-and-trade systems are designed in ways that make them truly
comparable, their characteristics and outcomes are similar, and in some cases fully equivalent
(normatively), in terms of their: emission reductions; abatement costs; possibilities for raising

46

It is possible that additional carbon-pricing systems will be forthcoming at the provincial level in Canada. Four
provinces that had resisted the Federal government’s carbon-pricing mandate – Ontario, Saskatchewan, Manitoba,
and New Brunswick – became subject to the Federal government’s backstop carbon tax on April 1, 2019. The
mandate is now being subjected to legal challenge, but all of this may become moot, depending upon the outcome of
the national general election on October 21, 2019.

29

revenue; costs to regulated firms when revenue-raising instruments are employed; distributional
impacts; and effects on competitiveness.
On some other dimensions, there can be real differences between the performance of
these two approaches. Some of these dimensions favor carbon taxes and some cap-and-trade,
and most depend on respective design elements. In particular, the tax approach is clearly favored
by three elements:
complexity and administrative requirements; interactions with
complementary policies; and effects on carbon-price volatility. Cap-and-trade is favored by its
ease of linkage with policies in other jurisdictions; and possibly by its anticipated performance in
the presence of uncertainty. However, neither transaction costs nor the potential for market
manipulation with cap-and-trade appear to be particularly important in the U.S. context.
Thus, the available evidence supports the normative conclusion that neither approach
dominates the other, and any overall ranking would depend upon the weights given to the various
dimensions of difference (Goulder and Schein 2013; Goulder and Hamstead 2018), as well as the
relative probability of good design.
Much the same can be said in the positive political economy domain: there is decidedly
mixed evidence regarding which of the two carbon-pricing approaches (if either) is more likely
to be adopted at the national level in the United States in the future. Thus, there is not a strong
case for the superiority of taxes or trading, normatively or positively, and differences in
performance that are a function of specific design of the two instruments dominate differences in
the performance of the instruments themselves.
Two major conclusions therefore stand out. One is that the specific designs of carbon
taxes and cap-and-trade systems may be more consequential than the choice between the two
instruments. Many differences fade with specific implementations, and what appears to be the
dichotomous choice between two distinct policy instruments often turns out to be a choice of
design elements along a policy continuum. The other conclusion that stands out is that issues of
positive political economy frequently have normative dimensions, and normative attributes have
important implications for political prognosis.
All of this serves as a reminder of the importance of avoiding comparisons of two policy
instruments where one is idealized and the other realistic; rather, comparisons are best made
between idealized versions of two instruments, or – better yet – realistic versions of both (Hahn
and Stavins 1992). This is consistent with the notion of comparing proposed climate policy
instruments by weighting the net benefits of each by the probability of it being implemented
within some time period, an approach which would essentially merge the normative and positive
domains. National policy instruments that appear impeccable from the vantage point of
Berkeley, Cambridge, Madison, or New Haven, but consistently prove infeasible in Washington,
D.C., can hardly be considered “optimal” (Stavins 2012).
5.2 The Virtue of Simplicity and the Challenge of Politics
It may be reasonable to stipulate (as the lawyers say) that in regard to relative simplicity,
carbon taxes have the upper hand over cap-and-trade. But real carbon taxes “are among the least
used climate policy instruments” (Carattini et al. 2017), with only twenty countries and two
Canadian provinces having implemented carbon taxes as of 2018, with South Africa now having
delayed implementation. Also, carbon tax proposals have been undone, reversed, or simply
30

failed – sometimes at very advanced stages politically – such as in France and Switzerland in
2000, Australia in 2014, and the State of Washington in 2016 and 2018 (Carattini et al. 2017;
Anderson, Marinescu, and Shor 2018). Cap-and-trade has not fared much better (Figure 1),
having failed at the national level in the United States during the Obama administration
(although at the sub-national level, cap-and-trade systems are poised to be launched in 2019 in
three states).
This track record can be compared with the 176 countries that had renewable energy
policies and/or energy efficiency standards, and another 110 national and sub-national
jurisdictions with feed-in tariffs, as of 2016 (Carattini et al. 2017). So, thinking about how to
make carbon taxes or cap-and-trade more politically acceptable may be a critical step for more
effective climate policy action.
5.3 Can Carbon Pricing be Made More Politically Acceptable?
Can carbon taxes or cap-and-trade be made more acceptable by designing them in ways
that respond to voter concerns? This is a particularly important question, given the considerable
ambiguity regarding the normative superiority of either of these instruments, and the reality that
specific elements of design can minimize, if not eliminate, remaining differences.
Survey and other evidence indicate that a set of public perceptions – at least some of
which are inaccurate – are primary factors behind aversion to carbon taxes, including: the
personal costs are too great; the policy is regressive; it could damage the economy; it will not
discourage carbon-intensive behavior; and governments just want to increase their revenues
(Carattini et al. 2017).47 This suggests that one way to improve public acceptability could be
through better informing the public about the real nature and consequences of carbon-pricing
policies.
Another way to increase public acceptability could be through judicious policy design.
Several routes might be employed to make carbon taxes or cap-and-trade more politically
acceptable, while departing from what may be first-best design. One approach would be to
phase in taxes/caps over time, since a lower carbon price is presumably more politically
acceptable, and as aversion may abate over time, prices can be increased (Carattini 2017). This
is the route that California and British Columbia have taken with their respective carbon-pricing
policies. A gradual phase in also reduces the stranded asset problem (Rozenberg, et al. 2019),
even if the outcome is less effective in the short run and hence less efficient. There is a risk that
the carbon price would become stuck at too low a level, so a commitment device may be
appropriate, such as making the emissions cap or tax rate trajectory part of legislation, as was
done with the SO2 allowance trading program and the British Columbia and Swedish carbon
taxes.
A second, very important design modification that would frequently depart from the firstbest (most efficient) design would be to earmark carbon tax or auctioned allowance revenue to
finance additional climate mitigation (Amdur, Rabe, and Borick 2014; Carattini et al. 2017;
Kotchen, Turk, and Leiserowitz 2017). This is in contrast to economists’ first-best use of
treating carbon tax proceeds as part of general revenues, so that the tax system as a whole can be
47

This list of factors as well as the potential means of addressing these through modifications of carbon tax design I
subsequently describe are drawn from Carattini et al. 2017, and a large number of other studies cited therein.

31

optimized, such as through cutting distortionary taxes. There is, in fact, substantial evidence of
voter preference for such earmarked use of revenues, with particular attraction to using revenue
for low-carbon research and development, and subsidies to promote deployment. The former, at
least, can be part of an efficient portfolio of complementary climate policies, due to the separate
market failure of the public good nature of information. Of course, in principle, earmarking
could be phased down over time.
A third and final design modification that departs from a first-best approach is to use
revenues for fairness purposes, such as with a progressive revenue-neutral carbon tax or cap-andtrade system with lump-sum rebates of tax (or auction) revenue or rebates more targeted to
cushion impacts on low-income or other particularly burdened constituencies (Amdur, Rabe, and
Borick 2014; Carattini et al. 2017), rather than recycling carbon tax revenue through cuts in
distortionary taxes (Goulder and Hafstead 2018; Metcalf 2019). A diverse set of surveys
indicate voter support for using carbon-pricing revenue to ease impacts on low-income
households (Carattini et al. 2017). Proposals from very different political perspectives have
favored this approach, using so-called carbon dividends with carbon taxes or as part of a “capand-dividend” trading system (Boyce and Riddle 2007; Sedor 2015; U.S. House of
Representatives 2018; Akerlof et al. 2019; Harder 2019).
Survey evidence does not indicate support from the general public for using revenue to
cut distortionary taxes. In fact, surveys in Denmark, Germany, the United Kingdom, and other
countries have found cutting other taxes to be the least popular strategy for the use of revenues
(Carattini et al. 2019). Why might this be? It could be that voters do not understand the logic of
the “double dividend” (Goulder 1995), which can come from cutting these other taxes. Or it may
be a simple lack of trust of politicians and government; that is, doubt that governments will
actually cut the other taxes, or fear that the “wrong people” would benefit. In general, survey
evidence indicates that public support both for carbon taxes and for carbon cap-and-trade is
linked with proposed uses of revenue (Amdur, Rabe, and Borick 2014; Mills, Rabe, and Borick
2015; Kotchen, Turk, and Leiserowitz 2017).
5.4 Can the Rejection of National Carbon Cap-and-Trade Help Carbon Tax Proposals?
Political polarization in the United States – which began some five decades ago and
accelerated after 1990, has decimated what had long been the key source of political support in
the Congress for environmental and energy action, namely, the middle, including both moderate
Republicans and moderate Democrats (Stavins 2011; Schmalensee and Stavins 2013). Whereas
Congressional debates about environmental and energy policy had long featured regional
politics, they are now fully and simply partisan. In this political maelstrom, the failure of capand-trade climate policy in the U.S. Senate in 2010 was essentially collateral damage in a much
larger political war.
The successful political battle against the Obama administration’s CO2 cap-and-trade
legislation featured the demonization of that instrument as “cap-and-tax.” Does the consequent
reputational loss for cap-and-trade present an opening for serious consideration of the other
carbon-pricing instrument – a carbon tax? The ongoing challenge of large budgetary deficits
may increase the political feasibility of new sources of revenue. When and if that happens,
consumption taxes (as opposed to traditional taxes on income and investment) could receive
heightened attention, and primary among these might be energy or carbon taxes.
32

Surely this opening already exists in the broader policy community, with support not only
from the usual Democratic sources, but also from prominent Republican academic economists
and former high government officials. The January 16, 2019 economists’ statement on a carbon
dividend plan in the Wall Street Journal (Akerloff et al. 2019) and support from the Niskanen
Center provide evidence of the diversity of bipartisan support for a carbon tax (typically in the
form of a carbon dividend plan) in the broader policy community.
What about in the real political world of those currently holding elective office in the
Federal government? The good news is that a carbon tax is not “cap-and-trade.” That may help
with the political messaging. But if conservatives were able to tarnish cap-and-trade as “capand-tax,” it surely will not be very difficult to label a tax (or a “fee”) – as a tax. In addition to
opposition from the right, it is – as of now – questionable whether the new left of the Democratic
Party in the Congress will want a carbon tax to be part of its promoted “Green New Deal.” So,
for the short term, national carbon-pricing of either type may continue to face an uphill battle in
the United States.
Therefore, in addition to economic research on judicious design of second-best carbonpricing policies, economists can be effective by working to catch up with the political world by
examining better design of second-best non-pricing climate policy instruments, such as clean
energy standards.48 But at some point the politics will change, and it is important to be ready,
which is why – for the long term – ongoing research on carbon-pricing instruments is very much
warranted, particularly if it is carried out in the context of real-world politics and focuses on
policies that are likely at some point to prove feasible.

48

For example, the “Clean Energy Standard Act of 2019,” Senate Bill 1359, introduced on May 8, 2019, would
establish a standard for clean generation of electricity with a market-oriented credit trading program.

33

Table 1:
Implemented and Scheduled Carbon-Pricing Initiatives, 1990-2020

Initiative

GHG
Emissions
[MtCO2e]

Type

Status

Type of
Jurisdiction

Jurisdiction

Year

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Alberta

2007

120

Tax

Implemented

Sub-National

Alberta

2017

109

Argentina Carbon Tax
Australia Emissions Reduction
Fund Safeguard Mechanism
BC Greenhouse Gas Industrial
Reporting and Control Act

Tax

Scheduled

National

Argentina

2019

79

Trading

Implemented

National

2016

381

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

2016

0

BC Carbon Tax
Beijing
Emissions Trading System
California AB-32/AB-398
Cap-and-Trade System
Canada Federal
Output-Based Pricing System

Tax

Implemented

Sub-National

Australia
British
Columbia
British
Columbia

2008

42

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Beijing

2013

85

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

California

2012

378

Trading

Scheduled

National

Canada

2019

?

Canada Federal Carbon Tax

Tax

Scheduled

National

Canada

2019

?

Chile Carbon Tax
China National
Emissions Trading System
Chongqing
Emissions Trading System

Tax

Implemented

National

Chile

2017

47

Trading

Scheduled

National

China

2020

3,232

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Chongqing

2014

97

Colombia Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Colombia

2017

42

Denmark Carbon Tax
European Union
Emissions Trading System

Tax

Implemented

National

1992

22

Trading

Implemented

Regional

Denmark
EU plus Nor.,
Ice., & Lich.

2005

2,132

Estonia Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Estonia

2000

1

Finland Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Finland

1990

25

France Carbon Tax
Fujian
Emissions Trading System
Guangdong
Emissions Trading System
Hubei
Emissions Trading System

Tax

Implemented

National

France

2014

176

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Fujian

2016

200

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Guangdong

2013

366

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Hubei

2014

162

Alberta Carbon Competitiveness
Incentive Regulation
Alberta Carbon Tax (repealed,
May 2019)

34

Table 1 (continued)

Initiative

Type

GHG
Type of
Jurisdiction Year Emissions
Jurisdiction
[MtCO2e]

Status

Ireland Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Ireland

2010

31

Japan Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Japan

2012

999

Kazakhstan
Emissions Trading System
Korea
Emissions Trading System

Trading

Implemented

National

Kazakhstan

2013

183

Trading

Implemented

National

Korea

2015

453

Latvia Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Latvia

2004

2

Liechtenstein Carbon Tax
Massachusetts
Cap-and-Trade System

Tax

Implemented

National

Liechtenstein

2008

0

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

RGGI States

2018

10

Mexico Carbon Tax
New Zealand
Emissions Trading System

Tax

Implemented

National

Mexico

2014

307

Trading

Implemented

National

New Zealand

2008

40

Norway Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Norway

1991

40

Poland Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Poland

1990

16

Portugal Carbon Tax
Quebec
Cap-and-Trade System
Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative
Saitama
Emissions Trading System
Shanghai
Emissions Trading System
Shenzhen
Emissions Trading System

Tax

Implemented

National

Portugal

2015

21

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Quebec

2013

67

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

RGGI States

2009

94

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Saitama

2011

7

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Shanghai

2013

170

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Shenzhen

2013

61

Singapore Carbon Tax

Tax

Scheduled

National

Singapore

2019

42

Slovenia Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Slovenia

1996

5

South Africa Carbon Tax

Tax

Scheduled

National

South Africa

2019

360

Spain Carbon Tax

Tax

Implemented

National

Spain

2014

9

Sweden Carbon Tax
Switzerland
Emissions Trading System

Tax

Implemented

National

Sweden

1991

26

Trading

Implemented

National

Switzerland

2008

6

35

Table 1 (continued)

Switzerland Carbon Tax
Tianjin
Emissions Trading System

Tax

Implemented

National

Switzerland

2008

18

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Tianjin

2013

118

Tokyo
Cap-and-Trade System

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

2010

14

UK Carbon Price Floor

Tax

Implemented

National

Tokyo
United
Kingdom

2013

136

Ukraine Carbon Tax
Washington State
Clean Air Rule

Tax

Implemented

National

Ukraine

2011

287

Trading

Implemented

Sub-National

Washington

2017

58

SOURCE: World Bank Group. 2018. State and Trends of Carbon Pricing. Washington, D.C.

36

Table 2:
Similarities and Differences
Between Carbon Taxes and Carbon Cap-and-Trade

Perfectly
Equivalent

Nearly
Equivalent

Some
Distinctions

Similar

Differences

Significant
Differences

Incentives for
Emission
Reductions
Aggregate
Abatement Costs
Effects on
Competitiveness
Possibilities for
Raising Revenue
Costs to
Regulated Firms
Distributional
Impacts
Transaction
Costs
Performance in
Presence of
Uncertainty
Ease of Linkage
with Other
Jurisdictions
Effects on
Carbon Price
Volatility
Interactions with
Complementary
Policies
Potential for
Market
Manipulation
Complexity and
Administrative
Requirements

37

Table 3:
Most Important Cap-and-Trade Systems

Geographic
Scope
System

Coverage
&
Sectors

Time
Period

Allowance
Allocation
Method

Cost
Containment
Mechanisms

Leaded Gasoline
Phasedown

USA

Gasoline
from
Refineries

1982-1987

Free

Banking

Sulfur Dioxide
Allowance Trading

USA

SO2 from
Electric
Power

1995-2010

Free

Banking

Regional Clean Air
Incentives Market
(RECLAIM)

South Coast
Air Quality
Management
District, CA

NOx &
SO2 from
Electric
Power &
Industrial
Sources

NOX Trading in the
Eastern United States

12-21
U.S. States

Regional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative

Nine
northeastern
U.S. States

AB-32 and AB-398
California Cap-andTrade

European Union
Emissions Trading
System

California,
USA

27 EU
Member
States plus
Iceland,
Lichtenstein,
& Norway

NOx from
Electric
Power &
Industrial
Sources

CO2 from
Electric
Power
CO2 from
Electric
Power,
Industrial,
& Fuels

CO2 from
Electric
Power,
Large
Industrial,
& Aviation

Environmental
and
Economic Performance
Phasedown completed
successfully, faster than
anticipated, with cost savings of
20% or $250 million/year
Cut SO2 emissions by half, with
cost savings of $1 billion/year;
but market closed due to judicial
actions
Emissions lower than with
parallel regulations; unquantified cost savings;
electricity crisis caused
allowance price spike and
temporary suspension of market

1993present

Free

---

1999-2008

Free

---

2009present

Nearly
100%
Auction

Banking, Cost
Containment
Reserve, Auction
Reservation Price

Cap non-binding then barely
binding due to low natural gas
prices; has generated more than
$1 billion for participating states

2013- 2020
2021-2030

Transitions
from Free
to Auction

Banking,
Allowance Price
Containment
Reserve, Auction
Reservation Price

Covers 85% of emissions,
reduced 40% below 1990 by
2030; reduces competitiveness
effects w/output-based updating
(OBU) allocation; linked with
Quebec cap-and-trade system

Transitions
from Free
to
Increased
Use of
Auctions

Banking after
2008, previous
use of offsets
from CDM

2005-

Significant price volatility in
first year; NOx emissions
declined from 1.9 (1990) to 0.5
million tons (2006); cost savings
40-47 percent

Covers half of emissions, has
cut abatement costs by about
50% compared with no trading;
over-allocation by member
states in pilot phase; suppressed
allowance prices due to
”complementary policies,”
CDM glut, slow economic
recovery

SOURCE: Table is adapted from Schmalensee and Stavins 2017a. Sources include: Carlson
et al. 2000; Cludius et al. 2019; Ellerman et al. 2000; Ellerman and Buchner 2007; Fowlie et al.
2012; Keohane 2003; Schmalensee and Stavins 2013, 2017a, 2017b; and U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency 1985.
38

Figure 1:
Carbon Price and Emissions Coverage of Implemented Carbon-Pricing Initiatives

SOURCE: World Bank Group 2018

39

REFERENCES
Akerloff, George et al. 2019. “Economists’ Statement on Carbon Dividends.” Opinion/Commentary.
Wall Street Journal, January 16.
Aldy, Joseph E. 2018. “Carbon Tax Review and Updating.” Unpublished paper, John F. Kennedy
School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge.
Aldy, Joseph E., Marc Hafstead, Gilbert E. Metcalf, Brian C. Murray, William A. Pizer, Christina
Reichert, and Roberton W. Williams. 2017. “Resolving Inherent Uncertainty of Carbon Taxes.”
Harvard Environmental Law Review, volume 41, pp. 1-13.
Aldy, Joseph E., and Robert N. Stavins. 2012. “The Promise and Problems of Pricing Carbon: Theory
and Practice.” Journal of Environment and Development 21(2): 152-180.
Amdur David, Barry G. Rabe, and Christopher Borick. 2014. “Public Views on a Carbon Tax Depend
on the Proposed Use of Revenue.” Issues in Energy and Environmental Policy, Number 13, July.
Anderson, Soren, Ioana Marinescu, and Boris Shor. 2018. “Who Joined the Pigou Club? A Postmortem
Analysis of Washington State’s Carbon Tax Initiative I-732.” June 6.
Arrow, Kennth J. 1969. “The Organization of Economic Activity: Issues Pertinent to the Choice
of Market versus Non-Market Allocation.” Congress of the United States, The Analysis and
Evaluation of Public Expenditures: The PPB System, pp. 47–64.
Beck, Marisa, Nicholas Rivers, Randall Wigle, and Hidemichi Yonezawa. 2015. “Carbon Tax and
Revenue Recycling: Impacts on Households in British Columbia.” Resource and Energy
Economics 41: 40-69.
Becker, Gary S. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98(3):371-400.
Bodansky, Daniel, Seth Hoedl, Gilbert Metcalf, and Robert Stavins. 2015. “Facilitating Linkage of
Climate Policies through the Paris Outcome.” Climate Policy, August 5.
Boden, T.A., Marland, G., and Andres, R.J. 2017. National CO2 Emissions from Fossil-Fuel Burning,
Cement Manufacture, and Gas Flaring: 1751-2014. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis
Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy.
Bohi, Douglas and Dallas Burtraw. 1992. AUtility Investment Behavior and the Emission Trading
Market.@ Resources and Energy 14: 129-153.
Borenstein, Severin, James Bushnell, Frank A. Wolak, and Matthew Zaragoza-Watkins. 2018 “Expecting
the Unexpected: Emissions Uncertainty and Environmental Market Design.” Energy Institute at
Haas Working Paper 274R. June.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 1996. AOptimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence
of Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses.@ American Economic Review 86: 985-1000.
Boyce, James K., and Matthew Riddle. 2007. “Cap and Dividend: How to Cap Global Warming while
Protecting the Incomes of American Families.” Amherst: University of Massachusetts.

40

Burtraw, Dallas, Richard Morgenstern, Amelia Keyes, and Clayton Munnings. 2019. “Carbon Pricing in
Oregon: Memoranda for the Oregon Climate Policy Office. Washington, January, Report 19-01.
British Columbia. 2007. Climate Action Plan. Vancouver, Canada.
Bruvoll, Annegrete and Bodil Merethe Larsen. 2004. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions in Norway: Do
Carbon Taxes Work?” Energy Policy 32: 493-505.
Buchanan, James M., and Gordon Tullock. 1975. APolluters' Profits and Political Response: Direct
Control Versus Taxes.@ American Economic Review 65: 139-147.
Calel, R. and Dechezlepretre, A. 2016. “Environmental policy and directed technological change:
Evidence from the European carbon market.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98(1): 173-191.
Carl, Jeremy, and David Fedor. 2016. “Tracking Global Carbon Revenues: A Survey of Carbon Taxes
versus Cap-and-Trade in the Real World.” Energy Policy 96: 50-77.
Carlson, Curtis, Dallas Burtraw, Maureen Cropper, and Karen Palmer. 2000. SO2 Control by Electric
Utilities: What Are the Gains from Trade? Journal of Political Economy 108: 1292-326.
Carattini, Stefano, Maria Carvalho, and Sam Fankhauser. 2017. “How to Make Carbon Taxes More
Acceptable.” London: Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, and
Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy, London School of Economics and Political
Science.
Chen, Yunguang, and Marc A. C. Hafstead. 2018. “Using a Carbon Tax to Meet U.S. International
Climate Pledges.” Climate Change Economics 10(1): 195002-1 – 195002-19.
Climate XChange. 2019. “Cap-and-Trade Could be Coming to Oregon – Here’s What You Need to
Know.” Carbon Pulse, February 8.
Cludius, Johanna, Vicky Duscha, Nele Friedrichsen, and Katja Schumacher. 2019 “Cost-Efficiency of
the EU Emissions Trading System: An Evaluation of the Second Trading Period.” Economics of
Energy and Environmental Policy 8(1): 145-161.
Coase, Ronald. 1960. AThe Problem of Social Cost.@ Journal of Law and Economics 3: 1-44.
Crocker, Thomas D. 1966. AThe Structuring of Atmospheric Pollution Control Systems.@ In The
Economics of Air Pollution, ed.. H. Wolozin, pp. 61-86. New York: W. W. Norton and Company,
Inc.
Dales, J. H. 1968. ALand, Water, Ownership.@ Canadian Journal of Economics 1: 791-804.
Datla, Anjani and Henry Lee. 2016. “Pricing Carbon: The Birth of British Columbia’s Carbon Tax.”
Harvard Kennedy School Case Number 2062.0.
Daugjberg, Cartsen and Anders Branth Pedersen. 2004. “New Policy Ideas and Old Policy Networks:
Implementing Green Taxation in Scandinavia.” Journal of Public Policy 24(2): 219-249.
Doucet, Joseph A., and Todd Strauss. 1994. On the Bundling of Coal and Sulfur Dioxide Emissions
Allowances. Energy Policy, Volume 22, Number 9, pp. 764-770.

41

Driesen, David. M. 2019. “Toward a Populist Political Economy of Climate Disruption.”
Environmental Law, volume 49, number 2, forthcoming.
Duff, David G. 2008. “Carbon Taxation in British Columbia.” Vermont Journal of Environmental Law
10: 85-105.
Edenhofer, Ottmar, Christian Flachsland, Christoph, Lisa Katharina Schmid, Anna Leipprand, Nicolas
Koch, Ulrike Kornek, and Michael Pahle. 2017. “Decarbonization and EU ETS Reform:
Introducing a Price Floor to Drive Low-Carbon Investments.” Berlin: Mercator Research
Instituteon Global Commons and Climate Change.
Ellerman, A. Denny, and Barbara K. Buchner. 2007. The European Union Emissions Trading Scheme:
Origins, Allocation, and Early Results. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, volume 1,
number 1, pp. 66-87.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Frank J. Convery, and Christian de Perthuis, eds. 2010. Pricing Carbon: The
European Union Emissions Trading Scheme. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University
Press.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, and David Harrison. 2003. Emissions Trading in the U.S.:
Experience, Lessons, and Considerations for Greenhouse Gases. Arlington, Virginia: Pew Center
on Global Climate Change.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, Richard Schmalensee, Juan-Pablo Montero, and Elizabeth M.
Bailey. 2000. Markets for Clean Air: The U.S. Acid Rain Program. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Ellerman, A. Denny, and Juan-Pablo Montero. 1998. AThe Declining Trend in Sulfur Dioxide Emissions:
Implications for Allowance Prices@, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 36:2645.
Fankhauser, Samuel, Cameron Hepburn, and Jisung Park. 2010. “Combining Multiple Climate Policy
Instruments: How Not to Do It.” Climate Change Economics 1(3): 209-225.
Fischer, Carolyn, Ian W. H. Parry, and William A. Pizer. 2003. AInstrument Choice for Environmental
Protection when Technological Innovation is Endogenous.@ Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 45: 523-545.
Fowlie, Meredith, Stephen P. Holland, and Erin T. Mansur. 2012. “What Do Emissions Markets Deliver
and to Whom? Evidence from Southern California’s NOx Trading Program.” American Economic
Review, Vol. 102, No. 2 (April), pp. 965-993.
Fowlie, Meredith, Mar Reguant, and Stephen P. Ryan. 2016. “Market-Based Emissions Regulation and
Industry Dynamics.” Journal of Political Economy 124(1): 249-302.
Furman, Jason, Jason E. Bordoff, Manasi Deshpande, and Pascal J. Noel. 2007. AAn Economic Strategy
to Address Climate Change and Promote Energy Security.@ The Hamilton Project, Strategy Paper.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Gillis, Justin. 2018. “Forget the Carbon Tax for Now.” New York Times, December 27.
Government Offices of Sweden.
2019.
“Sweden’s Carbon Tax.”
Accessed, January 25,
https://www.government.se/government-policy/taxes-and-tariffs/swedens-carbon-tax/
42

Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the ‘Double Dividend’: A Reader’s Guide.”
International Tax and Public Finance 2(2).
Goulder, Lawrence H. 2019a. Presentation at Winter Luncheon and Annual Business Meeting,
Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, Atlanta, Georgia, January 5.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 2019b. “Addressing the Urgency of Climate-Change Policy.” Working paper,
Stanford University, March.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Mark A. C. Hafstead. 2018. Confronting the Climate Challenge: U.S. Policy
Options. New York: Columbia University Press.
Goulder, Lawrence H., Marc A. C. Hafstead, GyuRim Kim, and Xianling Long. 2018. “Impacts of a
Carbon Tax across U.S. Household Income Groups: What are the Equity-Efficiency Trade-Offs?”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25181, October.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Richard D. Morgenstern. 2018. “China’s Rate-Based Approach to Reducing
CO2 Emissions: Attractions, Limitations, and Alternatives.” American Economic Review Papers
and Proceedings 108: 458-462.
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Andrew R. Schein. 2013. “Carbon Taxes versus Cap and Trade: A Critical
Review.” Climate Change Economics 4(3).
Goulder, Lawrence H., and Robert N. Stavins. 2011. “Challenges from State-Federal Interactions in U.S.
Climate Change Policy.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, volume 101,
number 3, pp. 253-257.
Hafstead, Marc, Gilbert E. Metcalf, and Roberton C. Williams. 2017. “Adding Quantity Certainty to a
Carbon Tax: The Role of a Tax Adjustment Mechanism for Policy Pre-Commitment.” Harvard
Environmental Law Review, volume 41, pp. 41-57.
Hahn, Robert W. 1984. AMarket Power and Transferable Property Rights.@ Quarterly Journal of
Economics 99: 753-765.
Hahn, Robert W. and Albert M. McGartland. 1989. “The Political Economy of Instrument Choice: an
Examination of the U.S. Role in Implementing the Montreal Protocol.” Northwestern University
Law Review 83(3): 592-611.
Hahn, Robert W., and Robert N. Stavins. 1992. “Economic Incentives for Environmental Protection:
Integrating Theory and Practice.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 82: 464468.
Hahn, Robert W., and Robert N. Stavins. 1999. What Has the Kyoto Protocol Wrought? The Real
Architecture of International Tradeable Permit Markets. Washington, D.C.: The AEI Press.
Hahn, Robert W., and Robert N. Stavins. 2012. “The Effect of Allowance Allocations on Cap-and-Trade
System Performance.” The Journal of Law and Economics 54(4), pp. S267-S294.
Harder, Amy. 2019. “In Shadow of Green New Deal, Other Climate-Change Bills Proliferate.” Axios,
April 10.
Harrison, Kathryn. 2013. “The Political Economy of British Columbia's Carbon Tax.”
Environment Working Paper No. 63. OECD Publishing.
43

OECD

Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp. 2001. “Taxes and Quotas for a Stock Pollutant with Multiplicative
Uncertainty.” Journal of Public Economics 82: 91-114.
Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp. 2002. “Taxes versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant.” Resource and
Energy Economics 24: 367-384.
Holt, C. A., and Shobe, W.M. 2016. “Price and Quantity Collars for Stabilizing Emission Allowance
Prices: Laboratory Experiments on the EU ETS Market Stability Reserve”, Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 76, 32-50.
Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon. 2016. “United States Government Update of the
Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis under Executive Order 12866.” Washington.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2018. Global Warming of 1.5o C, IPCC Special Report,
Summary for Policymakers. World Meteorological Organization and United Nations Environment
Program.
Jaffe, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. 2005. ATale of Two Market Failures:
Technology and Environmental Policy.@ Ecological Economics 54: 164 174.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Robert N. Stavins. 1995. ADynamic Incentives of Environmental Regulation: The
Effects of Alternative Policy Instruments on Technology Diffusion.@ Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 29: S43-S63.
Jaffe, Judson, Matthew Ranson, and Robert N. Stavins. 2010. ALinking Tradable Permit Systems: A
Key Element of Emerging International Climate Policy Architecture.@ Ecology Law Quarterly 36:
789-808.
Joskow, Paul L., and Richard Schmalensee. 1998. “The Political Economy of Market-based
Environmental Policy: The U.S. Acid Rain Program.” Journal of Law and Economics 41:81-135.
Jung, Chulho, Kerry Krutilla, and Roy Boyd. 1996. AIncentives for Advanced Pollution Abatement
Technology at the Industry Level: An Evaluation of Policy Instruments.@ Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 30: 95-111.
Kagubare, Ines. 2019. “Legislators Roll Out Climate Bills as Session Opens.” Climate Wire, January
15.
Kalt, Joseph P. and Mark A. Zupan. 1984. “Capture and Ideology in the Economic Theory of Politics.”
American Economic Review 74(3):279-300.
Kaplow, Louis. 2010. ATaxes, Permits, and Climate Change.@ National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 16268.
Karp, Larry, and Christian Traeger. 2018. APrices versus Quantities Reassessed.@ CESifo Working
Paper 7331. Munich Society for the Promotion of Economic Research, November.
Kelman, Steven P. 1981. What Price Incentives? Boston: Auburn House.

44

Keohane, Nathaniel O. 2003. “What Did the Market Buy? Cost Savings under the U.S. Tradeable
Permits Program for Sulfur Dioxide.” Working Paper YCELP-01-11-2003, Yale Center for
Environmental Law and Policy.
Keohane, Nathaniel O. 2009. ACap and Trade, Rehabilitated: Using Tradable Permits to Control U.S.
Greenhouse Gases.@ Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 3: 42-62.
Keohane, Nathaniel O., Richard L. Revesz, and Robert N. Stavins. 1998. “The Choice of Regulatory
Instruments in Environmental Policy.” Harvard Environmental Law Review, volume 22, number 2,
pp. 313-367.
Klaassen, Ger. 1999. Emissions trading in the European Union: practice and prospects. In S. Sorrell and J.
Skea Eds., Pollution for Sale: Emissions Trading and Joint Implementation pp. 83-100. Cheltenham,
UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Kneese, Allen V. and Charles L. Schultze. 1975. Pollution, Prices, and Public Policy. Washington:
Brookings Institution.
Kotchen, Matthew J., Zachary M. Turk, and Anthony A. Leiserowitz. 2017. “Public Willingness to Pay
for a U.S. Carbon Tax and Preferences for Spending the Revenue.” Environmental Research Letters,
volume 12.
Leonhardt, David. 2019. “The Problem with Putting a Price on the End of the World.” New York Times
Magazine, April 9.
Lithgow, Matt. 2019a. “Washington State Senator Circulates WCI-Modelled Cap-and-Trade Outline.”
Carbon Pulse, January 17.
Lithgow, Matt. 2019b. “Maine Legislator Proposes State-wide Carbon Tax without RGGI Exemption.”
Carbon Pulse, January 25.
Lithgow, Matt. 2019c. “New Mexico Governor Calls for Market-Based Programme in Climate Order.”
Carbon Pulse, January 29.
Lithgow, Matt. 2019d. “New Hampshire Legislators Propose $20 Carbon Tax Bill.” Carbon Pulse,
January 30.
Lithgow, Matt. 2019e. “Renewed Oregon Cap-and-Trade Push Underway as Bill Released.” Carbon
Pulse, February 1.
Lithgow, Matt. 2019f. “LCFS Market: California Prices Near Return to $200 as PG&E Fears Pass.”
Carbon Pulse, February 8.
Maloney, Michael T., and Robert E. McCormick. 1982. “A Positive Theory of Environmental Quality
Regulation.” Journal of Law and Economics 25: 99-123.
Malueg, David A. 1990. AWelfare Consequences of Emission Credit Trading Programs.@ Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 18: 66-77.
Mankiw, L. Gregory.
2006.
AThe Pigou Club Manifesto.@
http://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2006/10/pigou-club-manifesto.html

45

Greg

Mankiw=s

Blog.

McCubbins, Matthew and Terry Sullivan. 1984.
Choice.” Quality and Quantity 18:299-319.

“Constituency Influences on Legislative Policy

McGraw, Dan. 2019. “U.S. Jurisdictions Working on TCI Carbon Pricing Game Plan.” Carbon Pulse,
February 8.
Mehling, Michael A., Gilbert E. Metcalf, and Robert N. Stavins. 2018. “Linking Climate Policies to
Advance Global Mitigation.” Science 359 (6379), March 2, pp. 997-998.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2007. A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap: An Equitable Tax Reform to Address
Global Climate Change. The Hamilton Project, Discussion Paper 2007-12. Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2009. AMarket-Based Policy Options to Control U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions.@
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (2): 5-27.
Metcalf, Gilbert E.
forthcoming.

2018.

“The Distributional Impacts of U.S. Energy Policy.”

Energy Policy,

Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2019. Paying for Pollution: Why a Carbon Tax is Good for America. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2019.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David Weisbach. 2012. “Linking Policies When Tastes Differ: Global Climate
Policy in a Heterogeneous World.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 6(1): 110-129.
Milliman, Scott R., and Raymond Prince. 1989. AFirm Incentives to Promote Technological Change in
Pollution Control.@ Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 17: 247-265.
Mills, Sarah B., Barry G. Rabe, and Christopher Borick. 2015. “Cap-and-Trade Support Linked to
Revenue Use.” Issues in Energy and Environmental Policy, Number 23, June.
Montero, Juan-Pablo. 2007. ATradable Permits with Incomplete Monitoring: Evidence from Santiago's
Particulate Permits Program.@ In Moving to Markets in Environmental Regulation: Lessons from
Twenty Years of Experience, eds. J. Freeman and C. Kolstad, pp. 147-170. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Montgomery, David W. 1972. AMarkets in Licenses and Efficient Pollution Control Programs.@ Journal
of Economic Theory 5: 395-418.
Murray, Brian, William A. Pizer, and Christina Reichert. 2017. “Increasing Emissions Certainty Under a
Carbon Tax.” Harvard Environmental Law Review volume 41, pp. 14-27.
Murray, Brian, and Nicholas Rivers. 2015. “British Columbia’s Revenue-Neutral Carbon Tax: A
Review of the Latest ‘Grand Experiment’ in Environmental Policy.” Energy Policy 86: 674-683.
Newell, Richard G., Adam B. Jaffe, and Robert N. Stavins. 1999. AThe Induced Innovation Hypothesis
and Energy-Saving Technological Change.@ Quarterly Journal of Economics 114: 941-975.
Newell, Richard G., and William A. Pizer. 2003. ARegulating Stock Externalities Under Uncertainty.@
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45: 416-432.
Newell, Richard G., and Robert N. Stavins. 2003. ACost Heterogeneity and the Potential Savings from
Market-Based Policies.@ Journal of Regulatory Economics 23: 43-59.
46

Nordhaus, William D. 2007. ATo Tax or Not to Tax: Alternative Approaches to Slowing Global
Warming.@ Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1: 26-44.
Nordhaus, William. 2015. The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and Economics for a Warming
World. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2001. Environmentally Related Taxes in
OECD Countries: Issues and Strategies. OECD, Paris.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2011. Interactions Between Emission
Trading Systems and Other Overlapping Policy Instruments. Environment Directorate, OECD,
Paris.
Parry, Ian W. H., and Roberton C. Williams. 2010. “What are the Costs of Meeting Distributional
Objectives for Climate Policy?” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 10(2): 1-35.
Parry, Ian W. H., Roberton C. Williams, and Lawrence H. Goulder. 1999. “When Can Carbon
Abatement Policies Increase Welfare? The Fundamental Role of Distorted Factor Markets.” Journal
of Environmental Economics and Management 37: 52-84.
Paterson, Matthew. 2011. “Who and What are Carbon Markets for? Politics and the Development of
Climate Policy.” Climate Policy 11: 1-16.
Peltzman, Sam. 1976. “Toward a More General Theory of Regulation.” Journal of Law and Economics
19:211-240.
Perino, Grischa. 2018. “New EU ETS Phase 4 Rules Temporarily Puncture Waterbed.” Nature Climate
Change 8(4): 262-264.
Perino, Grischa, Robert A. Ritz, and Aruthur van Benthem. 2019. “Understanding Overlapping Policies:
Internal Carbon Leakage and the Punctured Waterbed.” NBER Working Paper 25643, March.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Pigou, Arthur C. 1920. The Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan.
Pindyck, Robert S. 2017. “Coase Lecture – Taxes, Targets, and the Social Cost of Carbon.” Economica
84: 345-364.
Pizer, William A., and Brian C. Prest. 2019. “Prices versus Quantities with Policy Updating.” NBER
Working Paper 22379 (2016). National Bureau of Economic Research, June. (Revised, January 6,
2019).
Pizer, William A., and Xiliang Zhang. 2018. “China’s New National Carbon Market.” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 108: 463-467.
Plumer, Bradford. 2010. “B.C.’s Carbon-Tax Experiment Seems To Be Working.” The New Republic,
July 27.
Pretis, Felix. 2019. “Does a Carbon Tax Reduce CO2 Emissions? Evidence from British Columbia.”
February 8. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3329512
Reklev, Stian. 2019. “China Aims for 2020 ETS Start, Quick Expansion – Sources Citing Govt Plan.”
Carbon Pulse, April 12.
47

Roberts, Marc J., and Michael Spence. 1976. “Effluent Charges and Licenses Under Uncertainty.”
Journal of Public Economics 5: 193-208.
Rozenberg, Julie, Adrien Vogt-Schilb, and Stephane Hallegatte. 2019. “Instrument Choice and Stranded
Assets in the Transition to Clean Capital.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
forthcoming.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. 2018. “For Climate Safety, Call in the Engineers.” Project Syndicate. December 20.
Schatzki, Todd, and Robert N. Stavins. 2018a. “GHG Cap-and-Trade: Implications for Effective and
Efficient Climate Policy in Oregon.” Harvard Project on Climate Agreements Discussion Paper 1892, November.
Schatzki, Todd, and Robert N. Stavins. 2018b. “Key Issues Facing California’s GHG Cap-and-Trade
System for 2021-2030.” Discussion Paper, July.
Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N. Stavins. 2013. “The SO2 Allowance Trading System: The Ironic
History of a Grand Policy Experiment.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 27, Number 1,
Winter, pp. 103-122.
Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N. Stavins. 2017a. “Lessons Learned from Three Decades of
Experience with Cap and Trade.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Volume 11,
Number 1, Summer, pp. 59-79.
Schmalensee, Richard, and Robert N. Stavins. 2017b. “The Design of Environmental Markets: What
Have We Learned From Experience With Cap and Trade?” Oxford Review of Economic Policy
33(4): 572-588.
Sedor, Noelle. 2015. “Why Fee and Dividend is Better than Cap and Trade at Fighting Climate Change.”
Los Angeles Times, March 5.
Shepsle, Kenneth A. and Barry R. Weingast. 1984. “Political Solutions to Market Problems.” American
Political Science Review 78:417-434.
Shepsle, Kenneth A. and Barry R. Weingast. 1994. “Positive Theories of Congressional Institutions.”
Legislative Studies Quarterly 19(2):149-179.
Speck, Stefan. 2008. “The Design of Carbon and Broad-Based Energy Taxes in European Countries.”
Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 10: 31-59.
Stavins, Robert N., ed. 1988. Project 88 - Harnessing Market Forces to Protect Our Environment:
Initiatives for the New President. A Public Policy Study sponsored by Senator Timothy E. Wirth and
Senator John Heinz. Washington, D.C.
Stavins, Robert N. 1995. ATransaction Costs and Tradeable Permits.@
Economics and Management 29: 133-146.

Journal of Environmental

Stavins, Robert N. 1996. “Correlated Uncertainty and Policy Instrument Choice.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 30: 218-232.
Stavins, Robert N. 1997. “Policy Instruments for Climate Change: How Can National Governments
Address a Global Problem?” The University of Chicago Legal Forum, volume 1997, pp. 293-329.

48

Stavins, Robert N. 1998. AWhat Can We Learn from the Grand Policy Experiment? Positive and
Normative Lessons from SO2 Allowance Trading.@ Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(3): 69-88.
Stavins, Robert N. 2003. “Experience with Market-Based Environmental Policy Instruments.”
Handbook of Environmental Economics, Volume I, eds. Karl-Göran Mäler and Jeffrey Vincent,
Chapter 9, pp. 355-435. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Stavins, Robert N. 2006. “Vintage-Differentiated Environmental Regulation.” Stanford Environmental
Law Journal, Volume 25, Number 1 (Winter), pp. 29-63.
Stavins, Robert N. 2007. A U.S. Cap-and-Trade System to Address Global Climate Change. The
Hamilton Project, Discussion Paper 2007-13. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
Stavins, Robert N. 2008. “A Meaningful U.S. Cap-and-Trade System to Address Climate Change.”
Harvard Environmental Law Review 32(2): 293-371.
Stavins, Robert N. 2010. “Both Are Necessary, But Neither is Sufficient: Carbon-Pricing and
Technology R&D Initiatives in a Meaningful National Climate Policy.” An Economic View of the
Environment. Blog, October 21.
Stavins, Robert N. 2011. “Polarized Politics Paralyze Policy.” The Environmental Forum 28(6): 16.
Stavins, Robert N. 2012. “Cap-and-Trade, Carbon Taxes, and My Neighbor’s Lovely Lawn.” An
Economic View of the Environment. Blog, October 24.
Stavins, Robert N. 2014. “What are the Benefits and Costs of EPA’s Proposed CO2 Regulation?” An
Economic View of the Environment. Blog, June 19.
Stepp, Matthew, and Alex Trembath. 2013. “A Climate Policy That Would Actually Work.” The Hill.
October 11.
Stigler, George J. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics 2:3-21.
Tschirhart, John T. 1984. ATransferable Discharge Permits and the Control of Stationary Source Air
Pollution: A Survey and Synthesis.@ In Economic Perspectives on Acid Deposition Control,
Thomas D. Crocker, ed. Boston: Butterworth.
United Nations. 2015. “Paris Agreement.” Adopted December 12; entered into force November 4, 2016.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1985. Office of Policy Analysis. Costs and Benefits of
Reducing Lead in Gasoline, Final Regulatory Impact Analysis. Washington, D.C.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2014. “Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Proposed Carbon
Pollution Guidelines for Existing Power Plants and Emission Standards for Modified and
Reconstructed Power Plants.” EPA-452/R-14-002 (June).
U.S. House of Representatives. 2018. “Energy Innovation and Carbon Dividend Act of 2018,” H.R.
7173, 115th Congress, introduced November 27.
U.S. House of Representatives. 2019. “Resolution 109 Recognizing the duty of the Federal Government
to create a Green New Deal.” Washington, D.C.: 116th Congress, 1st Session, introduced by Ms.
Ocasio-Cortez, February 7.

49

Weber, Thomas A., and Karsten Neuhoff. 2010. ACarbon Markets and Technological Innovation.@
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 60: 115-132.
Weisbach, David. 2010. AInstrument Choice is Instrument Design.@ In U.S. Energy Tax Policy, ed.,
Gilbert E. Metcalf, pp. 113-158. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1974. “Prices vs. Quantities.” Review of Economic Studies, 41(4): 477-491.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2014. “Can Negotiating a Uniform Carbon Price Help to Internalize the Global
Warming Externality?” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists 1-2:
29-49.
Weitzman, Martin L. 2017. “On a World Climate Assembly and the Social Cost of Carbon.” Economica
84: 559-586.
World Bank Group. 2016. Emissions Trading in Practice: Handbook on Design and Implementation.
Partnership for Market Readiness and International Carbon Action Partnership. Washington, D.C.
World Bank Group. 2018. State and Trends of Carbon Pricing. Washington, D.C.
World Bank Group. 2019. “Carbon Pricing Platform.” Accessed February 12.

50

