                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                GROWTH, TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS, AND TRADE




                             Elhanan   Helpman




                         Working Paper No. 2592




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May 1988




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2592
                                                 May 1988



                 Growth, Technological Progress, and Trade




                                  ABSTRACT




         Recent developments in the theory of economic growth and dynamic

 trade theory are reviewed and interpreted. These include growth based on

 economies of scale, trade with product development, and product cycles. It

 is argued that there is need for more work in this area in order to

 understand the relationship between trade and growth.




Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel
                                                            Revised: March 1988.



                    GROWTH. TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS. D TRADE

                                       by

                                Elhanan Helpman1

                          Tel Aviv University and MIT




1.   Introduction

     This paper deals with the relationship between international trade and

economic growth.     It deals, therefore, with an old question, but also a

question in search to a new answer.         The renewed interest in this subject

has arisen as a result of a combination of events, research results (or more

to the point, a lack of satisfactory research results), and the availability

of new tools. As far as events are concerned, there is the decline of output

growth in the 1970s that was associated with a productivity slowdown. During

those years the volume of world trade declined for the first time since World

War II.   Despite the general slowdown, however, some counties managed to

maintain relatively high growth rates.         For example, the average rate of

growth of the four Asian NICs- -Korea, Hong-Kong, Taiwan and Singapur- - remained

at the high average level of 8.3 percent per annume during 1973-1984.       This




      paper was prepared for the symposium on "Structural Economic Problems

and International Trade" that was organized by the Confederation of European

Economic Associations and was held in Hernstein, Austria, on March 2-4, 1988.

I would like to thank Gene Grossman for allowing me to use insights from our

joint ongoing work in the preparation of this paper, and to Paul Romer and

Martin Weitzman for comments on an earlier draft.
raises the question: Why were some countries painfully affected by the adverse

shocks to the world economy while others have avoided much of the damage?

Naturally, an answer to this question- -which refers to a particular episode--

requires a detailed understanding of the episode itself.       But a reliable

answer also requires an understanding of the broad forces of economic growth

and their relationship to international trade. This is the more so in view of

the fact that as a rule, output growth is often strongly correlated with

export growth (see Michaely (1977), Feder (1982), and Helpman and Trajtenberg

(1987)).   For example, during the years of the slowdown 1973-1984 exports of

Korea and Taiwan grew at an average rate of about 15 percent.

     The traditional approach to economic growth as a process of capital

accumulation has provided important insights, but failed to provide a

satisfactory account of the data. This brought about a shift of attention to

technical progress. Viewed in broad terms, technical progress should be able

to explain the residual in growth accounting.     It is, however, an illusive

term that needs to be filled up with concrete details in order to be useful,

and this has proved to be a difficult task (see Grilliches (1979)). Recent

developments in the theory of industrial organization, which treat explicitly

research and development and economies of scale, may help to fill in this gap.

     On the other hand, the theory of international trade has been influenced

by advances in industrial organization for close to ten years. However, the

major buick of work in this area was static. The recent revival of interest

in dynamic trade issues provides an opportunity to extend this work in order

to deal with dynamic trade issues.     It may prove helpful in explaining the

long-run relationship between trade and growth.     We need a theory that can

address fundamental questions, such as: Does growth drive trade or is there a

reverse link from trade to growth? Many authors have emphasized the role of




                                       2
free trade in promoting growth (see, for example, Bhagwati (1978) and Krueger

(1978)).     Nevertheless, there also exist argu1ents that trade policy was

central in the promotion of fast growth in Japan and some of the NICs.

Current theory is not suitable to deal in a satisfactory way with these

alternative views.

     Then there exists the question of the determinants of long-run growth.

Neoclassical theory predicts declining growth rates, unless there is technical

progress. On the other hand, growth rates of the most advanced countries have

not been declining, and growth rates seem to be positively autocorrelated (see

Romer (1986)). Moreover, developed countries grow on average faster than less

developed countries. Does it indicate that there are no diminishing returns

to growth? And how is all this related to trade?

     There    is,    of course, a debate concerning the proposition that

productivity levels converge.    Baumol (1986), for example, has argued that

they do (see also Maddison (1987)).    However, his sample of countries--that

builds on Maddison's (1982) data set--suffers from a sample selection bias

that leads to this conclusion even if the proposition is wrong. More careful

examination of the data suggests that convergence of productivity levels is

at least doubtful (see De Long (1987) and Rotner (1988).      Is international

trade an important element in these processees? Some observers belive that it

is, and that international learning goes far beyond direct trade relationships

(see, for example, Pasinetti (1981, chap. XI)).

     I cannot offer answers to all these and other related questions. What I

can offer instead is a description of some recent work which helps to think in

novel ways about them. Some of this work is exploratory in nature; most of it

is rather fragmented. It nevertheless has a lot in common, as I will try to

explain, and may eventually lead to a coherent theory.     This is an exciting




                                       3
renewed area of enquiry.         I will start with a brief description of the

neoclassical aggregative approach to growth in order to set up the stage for

the following discussion.      I will then proceed to discuss new lines of work on

the theory of economic growth that emphasize economies of scale.             These

studies deal with closed economies, but I will also discuss their implications

for the role of international trade. This will be folloed by a description of

a disaggregated approach in which trade figures prominently. Finally. I will

deal with the role of product cycles which have not yet been integrated into

this line of research--a task awaiting to be done.



2.   Agzrezative Aroach
     Every theory of economic growth builds on the saving-investment

relationship.    It is therefore possible, at least in principle, to build a

theory in which the main driving force is either saving or investment.         The

neoclassical theory underlines the role of saving, in the sense that it

emphasizes the desire to allocate consumption over time, making investment

respond to the consumption needs. I will therefore concentrate on growth in

consumption per capita.         Since the role of population growth is well

understood in these frameworks, I abstract from population growth altogether.

With this clarification in mind, we can formulate the consumption choice

problem that is at the heart of neoclassical growth theory as follows:




          wax        e0tu[c(t)]dt,
                Jo



subject to the intertemporal budget constraint




                                          4
              fet)c(t)dt —


where   p      is the subjective discount rate,   u(c)   is the temporal utility

function, c is consumption, R(t)        is the discount factor,    ()   is wealth at

time zero, and t is a time index. Wealth at time zero is defined as the value

of existing assets plus the present value of income from nonmarketable assets

(such as labor income).       The wealth level is taken to be exogenous by the

individual consumer, but it is in fact endogenous to the economy at large; it

depends on the time pattern of wages, technological factors, and the like.

Similarly for the interest factor; it is exogenous to the individual consumer

but endogenous to the economy (in the context of international economics the

interest factor might also be exogenous to a single country- -    the small country
assumption--but it is endogenous to the world economy). A major difficulty in

the derivation of a complete characterization of equilibrium trajectories is

indeed the solution of variables that are exogenous to the individual decision

maker but endogenous to the economy.

      The solution to the consumer's problem yields the following equation for

consumption growth:



(1)           —fl(r - p),


where    fi     is   the inverse of the elasticity of the marginal utility of

consumption, defined to be positive, and r— is the instantaneous real

interest rate. This is the fundamental equation that I will use to discuss

aggregative growth.         It implies that positive growth requires the real

interest rate to be larger than the subjective discount rate.             Since the

subjective discount rate is taken as an exogenous constant, issues of growth




                                         5
become inseparable from factors that determine the real interest rate and its

change over time.     In order to concentrate on the main issues, I now assume

that the elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption is constant, which

amounts to assuming an isoelastic utility function.

     The fundamental growth equation (1) reveals a great deal about what is

possible in frameworks that rely on it.         For one thing, it shows that

sustained long-run growth is possible only if the real interest rate can be

maintained above the subjective discount factor.      But the behavior of the

real interest rate is related to the technology of production and

accumulation. Therefore the possibilities of sustained long-run growth depend

on the nature of these technologies.

     In the one-sector neoclassical model output y is a concave function of

the capital stock k (the constant labor supply is suppressed):           y-.f(k).

Abstracting from adjustment costs in capital formation, suppose that a unit of

output can be converted into one unit of capital. Then at each point in time

the cost of a unit of capital is        1    (in terms of output, which is the

numeraire).      On the other hand, without depreciation the return to the

ownership of a unit of capital is the entire future stream of its marginal

product value (it is also possible to specify this relationship by taking

explicit account of the possibility of resale of the capital unit), with this

stream depending on the time path of the economy's capital stock. No capital

accumulation takes place when current costs exceed the present value of the

return (assuming irreversibility of investment; otherwise divestment will take

place). If, however, capital accumulation does take place at a point in time

t,   or   it is just marginally profitable to invest, then the current value of a

unit of capital, which is 1,       is equal to the present value of its marginal

product value,




                                         6
(2a)
           feR(tflfk[k(r)Idr -1.


In a competitive equilibrium the left-hand side of (2a) cannot exceed 1.

       Equation (2a) represents a standard asset pricing equation.     In the

context of growth it provides a link between the real interest rate and

capital accumulation. Differeniation with respect to time yields



(3a)       r(t) —



namely, the real interest rate is equal to the marginal product of capital
(the presence of adjustment costs generates a more complicated relationship).

Since capital accumulation reduces the marginal product of capital, it also

leads to a declining real interest rate.      Therefore, capital accumulation

cannot lead to sustained long-run growth; it leads to declining real interest

rates, and when the real interest rate becomes equal to the subjective

discount rate consumption growth ceases and the economy reaches a steady

state. The long-run interest rate is equal to the subjective discount rate.

       These results have certain implications for a system of countries. In a

world economy in which there exist no international capital movements

countries will grow at independent rates, as determined by their subjective

discount rates, the elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption,

technology, population, and initial capital stocks.      However, the rate of

growth of every country eventually converges to zero.      In the zero-growth

steady state real interest rates differ across countries in so far as

subjective discount rates differ.

       In a world with integrated capital markets the real interest rate is



                                       7
determined by the country with the highest marginal product of capital

(assuming irreversible investment).         Investment is first channeled to the

country with the highest marginal product of capital, until its marginal

product falls to the level of the country with the next highest marginal

product. From then on investment takes place in both, maintaining equality of

marginal products, which also determine the real interest rate.           Uhen the

marginal product of capital in these two countries falls sufficiently to equal

the marginal product in the country with the third highest marginal product of

capital, the third country too begins to accumulate capital. And the process

continues along the same line with other countries.

     The above described process of capital accumulation determines output

growth; i.e., CDP.   Thus, for example, the country with the lowest marginal

product of capital might not experience output growth for some time (or

forever). Nevertheless, its consumption and GNP may be growing.          Integrated

capital markets lead to equalization of real interest rates. It is therefore

evident from equation (1) that consumption of countries with subjective

discount rates below the interest rate will be rising independently of their

marginal product of capital.          In particular, if they have identical
preferences (i.e., common values of         and p   ),   consumption will grow at a
common rate, converging eventually to zero.         If subjective discount rates
differ but      is the same, the most patient country; i.e., with the lowest

discount rate, has the fastest growing consumption, and it ends         up (in the

limit) consuming the entire world output. Its consumption growth ceases when

the real interest rate drops to its discount rate.

     It is clear from this discussion that the neoclassical growth model fails

to predict sustained long-run growth as a result of capital accumulation. One

way out of this predicament is to introduce technical progress.                 Its




                                        8
introduction as an exogenous process helps growth accounting but is not

satisfactory.     In order to understand the evolution of economies along

sustained growth trajectories and the role of trade in this process it is

necessary to further explore the "unexplained residual" in growth accounting.

If (1) is the basis of this inquiry, it is necessary to do away with the

negative association between the real interest rate and the capital stock.

One line of research in this direction, that has been explored by Romer

(1986a,b) and Lucas (1985), breaks this link by introducing economies of

scale.     The essential elements of this approach are taken up in the next

section.




3.   Economies     Scale

     The idea that economies of scale can lead to a self perpetuating process

of economic growth goes back to at least Allyn Young (1928).           Romers

contribution lies in its precise formulation and linkage to neoclassical

growth theory.    One major obstacle to a precise formulation was associated

with the usual difficulty to construct general equilibrium models with

economies of scale. In each one of the cited papers he explores a route which

is by now well known in the theory of international trade.     The first is to

consider economies of scale that are external to the firm but internal to the

industry; the second is to consider economies of scale that are internal to

the firm, with firms producing differentiated products and engaging in

monopolistic competition. I will discuss both possibilities.



A.   External Economies

     External economies have been widely discussed in international trade

theory (see Helpman (1984)).   In the static models this takes the form of a




                                      9
production function in which the output level of an individual firm depends on

its inputs and on the output level of the industry. This is usually refered to

as Marshalian externalities.     The idea is that a larger industry supports

larger    industry   specific public   inputs,   such as finer     stages of
specialization, thereby benefiting all firms.    Following Arrow (1962), Romer

shifted the externality from output to capital. Namely, the output level of

an individual firm depends not only on its stock of capital, but on the stock

of capital of the industry at large. In this context the stock of capital can

be broadly interpreted to include human capital or knowledge.      The precise

interpretation dictates what would be reasonable assumptions about the

production and accumulation technology, but is of no consequence for the

points I wish to make here. Let us therefore maintain the interpretation of

physical capital accumulation.

       The production function of a single producer is taken to be     f(k,K),

where K is the economy's capital stock and k is the capital stock of the

producer (we suppress the share of labor that the producer employs in

equilibrium). All producers are alike. Suppose also that there is a continuum

of them, and that their measure is one. Then K—k at each point in time.

       A single producer takes the economy's capital stock as given. Therefore

from his point of view the marginal product value of a unit of capital is

            If a unit of output can be costlessly converted into a unit of

capital, as we have assumed in the discussion of the neoclassical model, then

the break-even condition for profitable investment (or the asset pricing

equation) becomes




(2b)
           ieRtkT,TT -                      1,




                                       10
which iniplies




(3b)       r(t) —



It   is clear that in this case accumulation of capital by individual firms

drives down the real interest rate via the own    capital   stock effect, given the

concavity of f(k,K) in the first argument. Now, however, the real interest

rate is also affected by the economy wide capital stock K (with K—k), which

represents the external effect. If an increase in the economy's capital stock

raises the marginal product of capital of individual firms, capital
accumulation raises the real interest rate via the external effect.              The

combined direct plus indirect effect of capital accumulation may therefore

increase or reduce the real interest rate, depending on the nature of the

production function.      If               is rising in     k,    the interest rate
                                 fk(k,k)
increases; if it is declining, the interest rate falls.                Of particular

interest for our purposes is whether the limit of the private marginal product

of capital can be bounded above the subjective discount rate when the capital

stock goes to infinity.        If it is, there will be sustained long-run growth.

The answer to this question is in the affirmative, as shown by the following

example.

       Let f(k,K)—AKlog(l+k), where A)O is a constant and log indicates

the natural logarithm.            The social production function,        defined by

F(K)—f(K,K)      exhibits increasing returns to scale, with the marginal product

of capital increasing with the capital stock. The private production function

f(k,K)     is concave in the private capital stock k,            exhibiting declining

marginal productivity of private capital.         At each point in time the real

interest rate is given by fk(k,K)_AK/(l+k)         (see (3b)). Since K—k on the




                                           11
equilibrium path. the time pattern of interest rates is



                             r(t) — A    k(t)




Hence, capital accumulation leads to rising real interest rates and rising

growth rates. Given k(O) a sufficiently large value of A ensures r(O)>p,

so that consumption grows from the very beginning, with its rate of growth

rising over time until it reaches the long-run sustainable level (A-p).

     This model with external economies of scale has two important

general implications: first, the growth rate may be rising rather than

falling; second, the economy may reach a sustainable positive long-run growth

rate. It has also important implications for a system of countries.       In the

absence of international capital mobility every country grows at its own rate,

depending on preferences, technology, labor, and the initial capital stock.

The larger the initial capital stock the higher the growth rate, because a

larger capital stock brings about a larger marginal product of capital.

Growth rates do not converge necessarily to zero, and there may exist

differences in the sustained long-run growth rates.

     In the presence of free international capital mobility real interest

rates are equalized. Consequently, consumption growth rates can differ across

countries only in so far as preferences differ. This is similar to the result

in neoclassical growth models.      Here, however, investment takes a very

different course. The real interest rate is determined by the country with

the highest private marginal product of capital                  and this is the
                                                      fk(k,K),
country that attracts all investment as long as its private marginal product

of capital is the highest (the social marginal product of capital

Fg(K)_fk(K,K)+fK(K,K)   is not necessarily the highest in this country).      If




                                        12
the private marginal product of capital is declining with the capital stock,

taking into account both the direct and the external effects, then the real

interest rate and the growth rate will be declining until the private marginal

product of capital in this country falls to the level existing in the country

with the next highest marginal product.      If, however, the private marginal

product is increasing in the capital stock via the joint direct and external

effects, the real interest rate and the growth rate will be rising. In this

case the gap in marginal productivities of capital never closes and investment

is indefinitely channeled into a single country. It is now easy to see what

happens when the marginal product falls in the highest marginal productivity

country but is rising in the second highest, or in any other country down the

line of the marginal productivity ranking. The first country down the line

whose marginal private product of capital increases with the capital stock

ends up accumulating capital for the world, provided its turn to invest is

ever reached.       Hence, there may exist agglomeration effects in capital

accumulation.     They may provide a significant    advantage to countries that

attract investment, thereby working in favor of large countries that have a

large capital stock to begin with. This advantage is partly realized by means

of returns to fixed factors of production, including labor (it is easy to

calculate these advantages from the production function AKlog(l+k)). Hence,

in this type of an environment it may make sense to pursue policies that

stimulate growth, including the attraction of foreign investment.

        In this formulation the production function is a black box. Particularly

disturbing is the lack of explicit accounting for the external effects.       It

is, however, possible to imagine plausible situations in which the nature of

the externality depends on the firms' conduct, on market structure, and the

like.     Consequently, it is premature to draw policy conlusions from models




                                        13
chat do not specify        explicitly   these relationships   Experience sugges:s rht

the nature of useful policies depends on those unspecified links.



B,    Differentiated Inputs

      The second route to sustain sufficiently large real interest rates in the

long-run, thereby ensuring long-run growth, is based on the notion of

specialization refinements that was introduced by Ethier (1982). Ethier's

original purpose was to provide a better foundation for his earlier work on

international trade, in which he argued in favor of an external economy

approach, but in which the output level of an individual firm depends on the

size of the world's industry rather than the country's in which it is located.

This was accomplished by constructing a model in which there exist

differentiated intermediate inputs with which the final output is produced.

These inputs are produced with economies of scale, with the market structure

being monopolistic.          Using a CES production function for the final good,

productivity of the final good sector depends on the number of available

middle products.           In the context of international trade it makes the

productivity level of a country's industry depend on the size of the world's

industry when middle products are traded. A second benefit of this approach

is that it underlines trade in intermediate inputs, which is indeed the bulk

of world trade.

      In the context of a growth model the production function of the final good

can be written as




(4)        y —          x(i)mdi,    0 < <1,         A > 0,
                 AJ 0




where n is the number (measure) of available intermediate inputs (stages of




                                               14
specialization) and          x(i)     is the quantity of variety    i   being eizploved.

Labor employment is being suppressed as before (it is part of the constant

A).     Given prices p(i)           for intermediate inputs in terms of the final good

and     A—i,      profit maximization by producers of the final good yield the

following demand functions for middle products:



(5)            x(i) -    a1p(i).
      Now suppose that middle products are produced only with capital.               The

capital requirement for x units of output of a single variety is                   g(x),

where average requirement             g(x)/x   is declining over some range so as to

exhibit economies of scale.               Using the demand functions (5) monopolistic

competition with free entry into the intermediate goods industry implies

markup pricing over marginal costs as well as average cost pricing. Hence, if

r stands for the rental rate on capital these conditions yield



(6)            ap(i) —   rg'[x(i)],
(7)             p(i) —   rg[x(i)]/x(i).

Given      r,     (6) and (7) solve for prices and quantities.            Clearly, all

varieties are equally priced and produced in the same quantity. Taking also

account of (5) provides a solution for r. Hence, (5)-(7) determine uniquely

(x,p,r).

      Finally, assume as before that a unit of the final good can be costlessly

converted into a unit of capital.              Then the interest rate has to equal the

rental rate on capital, because the present value of the rental rates has to

equal the cost of a unit of capital, which is 1.              consequently,   r is the




                                                15
real interest rate and it     is   constant.    If this technologically determined

real interest rate is larger than the subjective discount rate the economy

settles instantly on a fixed, positive, growth rate path.             The rate of

consumption growth equals the rate of growth of the capital stock, which

equals in turn to the rate- of growth of the number of intermediate inputs.

     In a system of countries every country benefits from the opportunity to

purchase intermediate inputs from its trading partners. If they have the same

technologies, the rental rate on capital is equalized (see (5)-(7)), and so is

the real interest rate, even if there is no international capital mobility.

In this case there is no particular equilibrium investment pattern when

capital markets are integrated; aggregate world inv'estment can be distributed

across countries in any feasible way.          When capital markets are segregated

savings of a country determine (as usual) its investment level. In both cases

countries have common growth rates of consumption if preferences are also

identical.

     When production functions differ, there are richer dynamics.          Suppose

that only the technology to produce intermediate inputs differs across

countries.     Then from (5)-(7) it is seen that it will induce differences in

output per variety, their price, and the rental rate. Differences in price

will not eliminate the incentive to trade intermediate inputs, so that the

static gains from trade will be realized.           The effects of differences in

rental rates depend on the degree of integration of financial markets.          If

there is no international capital mobility, the rental rate of every country

determines its domestic real interest rate and the growth rate of its

consumption, capital stock, and the number of products (with the latter two

being equal to each other). Every country settles immediately on a constant

growth path.




                                          16
        With integrated capital markets the real interest rate is determined h

the     country with the highest rental rate on capital.         Growth rates of

consumption differ only if there are differences in preferences.         Since the

rental rates do not change through time (they do not depend on the capital

stocks; see (5)-(7)), a country that begins with the highest rental rate

maintains its position forever, thereby determining forever the real interest

rate.     This is also the country to which investment is channeled; it is in

fact the only country with capital accumulation (unless there is more than one

country with the highest rental rate) and the only country that introduces new

varieties of middle products. The latter, however, are used worldwide.

        A comparison of the two approaches outlined in this section reveals a

great degree of similarity, as well as the suitable specification of the

external effects suggested by Ethier.         Consider for simplicity the case in

which all varieties are equally priced. Then a producer who spends resources

z on producing the final good obtains an output level           y-.An(z/pn)m       (see

(4)).      This output level exhibits declining marginal productivity in his

resources z- -which is analogous to declining marginal productivity of k in

f(k,K). And it increases with n--which is analogous to the external effect

K.      The latter is even more evident when one recognizes that               n     is

proportional to the economy's capital stock. A special feature of the economy

with intermediate inputs is that the private marginal product value of capital

is independent of the capital stock.           In a many country world         n     is


proportional to the world's capital stock rather than the country's in which

the producer operates, provided intermediate inputs are traded. Therefore the

external effect is not country specific but rather worldwide.

        Finally, I would like to point out that the fixity of the rental rate in

Romer's second model is a result of the specific functional form used in (4)




                                         17
rather than   the model   itself. This can be seen as follows.      Let q he me
value of the integral on the right hand side of (4).         and let the production

function be (q). Then (5) is replaced by



(5a)        x(i) —



Since a single producer of a variety of intermediate input takes q as given,

this does not change the nature of (6) and (7). From (6) and (7), however, we

obtain a—g'[x(i)]x(i)/g[x(i)], which fixes x at the same level for every

variety. Using this result together with (5a), (7), and the definition of q,

we obtain r—ax°'(nx)/g(x).          It is clear from here that the rental rate

increases with n if and only if ''(q)>O. In the original specification

''(q).O, which explains the constancy of the rental rate.             Since n    is


proportional to the capital stock          (in fact,   n—K/g(x)),   we see that the

rental rate can be increasing or declining in the capital stock, and when

increasing it can reach a constant value as the stock of capital goes to

infinity.



4.     Acauired Conrnarptive Advarttaze

       So far I have dealt with aggregative grovth issues, leaving little scope

for the role of temporal trade.           To be sure, intertemporal trade played a

major role in this discussion, as is evident from the central role assigned to

international capital mobility, which is the main channel of intertemporal

trade.    But what about the traditional form of trade; i.e., the exchange of

goods at a point in time? A study of the dynamics of this form of trade

requires a disaggregated framework.

       Early work in disaggregated frameworks concentrated on the effects of




                                            18
growth on the terrn of trade see Bhagwati l5S.              This 1ea to a
identification of conditions under which at constant prices capital

accumulation or technical progress bring about an expansion of the export

industry that exceeds the increase in local demand for its product. Under

these conditions the terms of trade deteriorate.         Later on, with the

development of two-sector neoclassical growth theory, Oniki and Uzawa (1965)

extended it to a two-country setup in order to study the effects of capital

accumulation on the pattern of trade. Since they employed a framework without

international capital mobility, capital accumulation of every country was

driven by the propensity to save.    Consequently, saving behavior determined

the evolution of Hecksher-Ohlin comparative advantage. Work along these lines

is surveyed by Findlay (1984) and Smith (1984), and its results are too well

known to be repeated within the constraints of this paper.         I proceed,

therefore, to discuss a new line of research.    There is, however, one point

related to this approach that needs to be clarified at this juncture. In my

discussion of the issues I pointed out that the extremely fast growth of

exports in some of the NIC's gives the impression that international trade

plays an important role in this process.   It can nevertheless be argued that

the comovement of output and exports stems from internal sources that bring

about output growth, which induces in turn export growth.      If this is the

case, then causality is from trade to growth rather than the other way around.

This argument, which is made in detail in Helpman and Trajtenberg (1987),

proceeds as follows.

     Suppose there is Hicks-neutral technical progress in the exporting

industries. Then at constant prices it becomes relatively more profitable to

produce exportables. Consequently, resources are driven from import competing

industries to exporting industries.         Factor rewards adjust to this




                                      19
reallocation in the usual way. The result is that output of exporcables r:ses

both because they employ more resources and because their production is more

efficient.    Since GDP rises while the import competing industries contract,

output of exportables grows necessarily faster than CDP. As long as there is

no particularly strong demand bias towards exportables when expenditure rises,

exports are bound to grow faster than output.    This explanation seems to be

consistent with the data.    Moreover, by introducing a spectrum of qualities

for exportables it is possible to derive conditions on cost and price

structures under which this process will also be accompanied by an upgrading

of the quality of exports (as, for example, in Korea and Taiwan).

     Our theoretical description fits the stylized facts.      Is it the correct

explanation? There is not enough evidence to form a final judgment. It is,

however, my opinion that this is at best a partial explanation. For one thing

it is necessary to explain why technical progress is concentrated in exporting

industries.    Is it just a coincident or is it after all the result of a

mechanism in which foreign trade plays a major role? I tend to believe the

latter. This suggests the need to explore alternative lines of research which

are more explicit about productivity gains.        Investigations of acquired

comparative advantage are major candidates for this purpose.

     Factor accumulation changes the degree of Heckscher-Ohlin type

comparative advantage, and in a predictable way the pattern of trade (see the

recent studies by Leamer (1984,1987)).      However, many changes in world

trade are probably associated with acquired comparative advantage, such as the

development of new products, the development of new production technologies,

learning to produce existing products, and the like. Therefore, important as

factor accumulation might be, it cannot explain all changes in world trade.

Recent work on international trade in the presence of economies of scale and




                                       20
noncompeti:ive market structures, which was static in nature, provides a

suitable point of departure for the study of trade dynamics with acquired

comparative advantage.

     The static theory emphasizes the role of differentiated products that are

produced with economies of scale, and the importance for welfare of the

available number of such products (see Helpman and Krugman (1985)).    It is,

however, clear upon reflection that the development of new products cannot be

satisfactorily analyzed in static frameworks.     A significant part of fixed

costs in the production of specialized products is associated with their

development and design, which takes up time and resources.      Moreover, the

fixed costs of R&D are not recovered instantaneously but rather through sales

over prolonged periods of time. This implies that the incentive to invest in

R&D depends on expectations of future profits, which depend in turn on the

expected evolution of the industry (worldwide), the length of available patent

protection laws, the speed of imitation by other countries (which also depends

on their investment in reversed engineering and other forms of learning), and

the like.

     In order to take account of these complications it is necessary to

construct explicit, dynamic models of international trade, in which R&D is

considered as an economic activity. Their study will help to understand the

evolution of trade when acquired comparative advantage plays a central role.

It should also shed new light on the process of economic growth and the

relationship between trade and economic growth.    As I indicated before, the

link between trade and growth was traditionally analyzed by considering the

effects of factor accumulation or technological improvement on trade. The new

approach may illuminate the reverse causal link; from trade to growth.      It

should eventually also provide a suitable framework for a study of the role of




                                      21
economic policy in   promoting   acquired comparative advantage and growth. Such

policies have been widely discussed, and used to explain the success of some

of the high performance countries (such as Japan and some of the NIC's).

However, so far these arguments have been made without a suitable theoretical

underpinning, and it is therefore difficult to evaluate their validity.

Studies along the above suggested line should help to evaluate them.

     An example of this line of theorizing is provided by Grossman and Helprnan

(1988).   This work is limited is scope and incorporates only a few of the

above listed features.    It is, however, more complete than other studies in

its detailed outline of dynamic economic forces, Of particular interest for

our purpose is the treatment of R&D. Suppose that there exists an industrial

sector that produces horizontally differentiated products. Preferences are of

the Spence-Dixit-Stiglitz type and there exists a continuum of such products.

There exists a technology for product development, which is represented by a

cost function c(w), where w is a vector of factor prices. An entrepreneur

who incures these costs at a point in time obtains in return the know-how to

produce a variety of the industrial product. This variety is unique, in the

sense that no one else knows how to produce it. In principle it is possible

to assume that this variety-specific knowledge is limited in time, or that the

time of acquired monopoly power is uncertain, and it is possible to link it to

patent laws and imitation activities of other entrepreneurs (possibly from

other countries).      These complications are avoided by assuming that a

developer gains indefinite monopoly power for his product.

     Under these circumstances it pays to develop a product if the present

value of operating profits derived in the future is at least as high as

current R&D costs. Competitive entry ensures that entrepreneurs break even in

present value terms. Namely,




                                         22
(2c)                                     -




where    ,r(t)   are operating profits at time t.         This is the counterpart of the

asset pricing equations (2a) and (2b).                Choosing R&D as the nunieraire,

c[w(t)J—l at all time periods. Then (2c) implies



(3c)         r(t)—r(t),



i.e., the real interest rate--measured in terms of R&D value--is equal to the

instantaneous operating profit rate.

        Next, if a share s           of total spending is allocated to industrial goods,

then in symmetrical equilibria the instantaneous profit rate can be shown to

equal (l-a)sE/n,              where a is a parameter of the utility function over

differentiated products, which has the form given in (4);                  E   is total

spending; and n is the number of available varieties. The expenditure share

is taken to be constant due to a Cobb-Douglas specification of upper-tier

preferences for different product categories, whose number is assumed to be

two.     The second is a traditional good.            Assuming a unitary elasticity of

substitution in consumption over time implies that aggregate consumption

expenditure E (on both product categories) satisfies (1) with —l. Taken

together all this yields a differential equation in spending



                              E
(6)              —   (l-a)s   —   - p.


        For the competitively produced traditional product price equals marginal

costs while for the differentiated product, whose production takes place under




                                                23
constant returns to scale after it is developed, price ,s marKed up aove

marginal   costs in the usual way. In addition there are factor market clearing

conditions. All these static relationships enable one to solve prices, factor

rewards, and output levels as functions of the spending level          E.    In

particular, the level of R&D- -as measured by the number (measure) of newly

developed varieties- -is a function of expenditure;




(7)        —v(E).


Equations (6) and (7) constitute an autonomous system of differential

equations, which together with the initial condition on the number of products

and the transversality condition from the consumer's decision problem yield a

unique equilibrium trajectory for a closed economy.          Provided suitable

stability conditions are satisfied, an economy that begins with a small number

of products will experience a rising number of products and consumption

expenditure. It will, however, reach a steady state with constant consumption

and a constant number of products.

      In this model the number of products plays the role of a capital stock;

all investment is channeled into R&D which leads to the accumulation of more

and more variety.    The accumulation process ceases when the profit rate- -and

with it the interest rate- -drop to the level of the subjective discount rate.

From this point of view it is similar to the neoclassical model.     The reason

for this similarity is further revealed by considering a one-sector

representation (which is close in spirit to Romer's, although quite different

in implications). Suppose there is no traditional good. Then            Suppose

also that available factors of production can produce a fixed quantity Q of

a resource that can be used for product development or the production of




                                       24
differentiated products.    Let   one unit of the resource develop a single

variety and let a units of the resource he required to manufacture a unit of

the final good. Then the market price of the resource is 1 (remember that R&D

is the numeraire) and the price of the final product is 1 for all varieties

(the markup condition implies that price is a times marginal costs).        In

this case (7) reads



(7a)       —Q. E,

which is the usual saving-investment relationship.     In this form the model

reduces to a variant studied by Judd (1985), although in a somewhat different

representation. It makes clear why growth ceases; the profit rate and with it

the interest rate, have to fall. But it also makes clear what is required for

sustained growth; accumulation of variety is not enough to maintain

indefinitely sufficiently high profit and interest rates.     The introduction

of new products squeezes profits.      Accumulation of productive resources is

required to prevent profit rates and interest rates from falling to the

subjective discount rate.

       Grossman and Helpman consider a two-country, two-good, two-factor

version.    The two factors are interpreted to be unskilled labor (or just

labor) and human capital. The traditional good s the most labor intensive.

Preferences are the same everywhere and so are technologies, which are of the

constant coefficients type.       Financial capital is mobile internationally.

Within a wide range of endowment structures there is factor price equalization

at each point in time.      The wage rate is rising and the return to human

capital is falling. The price of traditional goods is rising, while the price

of manufactured differentiated products is rising slower, if at all (measured




                                        25
in terms of the nuxneraire; i.e..   the   R&D activity). It is necessarily failing

when manufacturing of industrial goods is more human capital intensive than

R&D. Otherwise it is rising. Investment in R&D declines through time while

output of manufactures increases.         Output of traditional goods increases if

and only if R&D is more human capital intensive than manufacturing of

industrial goods.

     The relatively human capital rich country runs a deficit on current

account at the initial stages of development (the world starts with zero

variety).   The rate of accumulation of new products is the same in both.

Despite the existence of unbalanced trade, the human capital rich country is a

net exporter of manufactures and an importer of the traditional good at every

point in time.      When R&D is more human capital intensive than manufactures,

the volume of trade grows faster than consumption spending and also faster

than GNP.   Under the same relative intensity ranking a sufficiently large

difference in factor composition brings about the emergence of multinational

corporations in the human capital rich country. From this point in time the

rate of product innovation is not the same in both countries and the human

capital rich country may end up importing manufactures.             Multinationals

develop new products and locate manufacturing activities in the labor rich

country (assuming that manufacturing requires labor while headqurter services

require human capital). The degree of multthationality, as measured by the

number of products produced by subsidiaries, their output volume, or their

employment, increases initially and also close to convergence to a steady

state. This seems to be a rich model, but not rich enough to account for all

unexplained phenomena. Further extensions and elaborations are required.

     Studies along this line can be helpful in explaining the role of acquired

comparative advantage in the dynamic evolution of trade, in the process of




                                           26
economic growth, arid the interaction between thern.   This type   of resea'cn s
its   infancy, and it has to go a long way before its full            potential    is


realized. Time will tell how large is this potential.



5.     Product Cycles

       In the previous section countries were treated symmetrically and it was

assumed that product developers maintain indefinite monopoly power.               The

latter assumption excluded the possibility of imitation which is at the heart

of the product cycle approach.        Also at the heart of this approach is an

inherent asymmetry between the North, which knows how to develop new

products, and the South that knows only how to imitate their production.

Vernon's (1966) original insight was formalized by Krugman (1979) in a

framework with differentiated products, and recently generalized in various

direction by other authors.       I will provide a brief description of Krugman's

approach itt order to discuss its potential and the need to merge it with the

approached outlined in the previous section. Following this discussion I will

point out additional variations that are of potential interest.

       Preferences for variety are the same as in the previous section, but

there is oniy one product; manufactures. Only the North acquires the know-how

to produce new varieties and this is achieved at no cost (this is a critical

and deficient assumption). The exogenous rate of innovation is          i,   so that

i     times n is the number (measure) of newly introduced products at a point

in time, where n is the number of products available 'in the world economy.

At a point in time northern producers maintain monopoly power in

varieties, while southern producers know how to produce n5 varieties, with

             These      numbers are determined as follows.    The South tries to
n_nN+nS.
imitate production of varieties in which the North has monopoly power.             At




                                          27
each point in time it                learns how to procuce a proportion   j.s   of goods ir.

which the North has monopoly power. This too is cosciessly achieved (another

deficient assumption).               In this case           and                 Namely, the

number of products which the South learns how to produce equals the rate of

imitation     p        times the number of products in which the North maintains

monopoly power while the addition to the number of products in which the North

maintains monopoly power equals the overall addition to available variety

minus the number of products whose production technology is acquired by the

South. Denoting by 5N the share of products in which the North maintains

monopoly power this calculus implies



(8)
             SN
                  —i   -    (i   +




This is a differential equation that describes the evolution of product
composition. If the initial value of the share is smaller than i/(i+p) the

share rises over time until it reaches the steady state value i/(i+p). If it

is larger, it declines towards the steady state value. In the steady state it

is equal to the rate of innovation divided by the rate of innovation plus the

rate of imitation. The larger the rate of innovation and the smaller the rate

of imitation the larger the share of products in which the North maintains

monopoly power in the long-run. This makes, of course, sense.

      So far I have described the mechanics of product innovation and
imitation.        These mechanics have simple and sensible properties, but little

economic content.                Some economic content is added by the following
considerations.            Suppose that goods are produced only with labor, with one

unit of labor producing one unit of any variety, and that initially the wage

rate is higher in the North. There is perfect competition in the South. Then




                                                    28
the South wi proouce all goods for which it has the required know-how;

namely.          The North will produce all goods in which it maintains monopoly

power. Given the suitable pricing and market clearing conditions this implies

the following equilibriuiit relationship between relative wages and the share
                                                                                           SN



               — a   f      SJL .(1-a)
(9)
                         (l•sN)LN J


where         is the labor force in country j. It is clear from here that if

the share SN is rising the gap between northern and southern wages widens

over time and if it is declining the wage gap narrows down.                       This is an

important insight.2 In the steady state the wage ratio is higher the larger

the rate of product innovation and the smaller the rate of imitation.                    This

too is a sensible result.

      This model has been extended by Dollar (1986) to allow for two factors of

production and for the rate of imitation to depend on the production cost

differential between North and South.                   Another variant, due to Jensen and

Thursby (1987), makes the rate of innovation depend on resources devoted to

R&D, but assumes that all the innovation is done by a single northern

monopolist.      It seems to me that future research will benefit from an

integration of the approach presented in the previous section with the product




      the latter case the wage gap may disappear before a steady state is

reached, which will eliminate the identification of the number of products

produced in the South with the number of products it knows to produce. This

minor point can easily be taken care off.                     For current purposes suppose it

does not arise.




                                                   29
cycle model. By this I mean to endogenize the rate of innovation and the rate

of imieaton by 'means of explicit economic considerations that consist of an

intertemporal cost-benefit analysis. Surely, the rate of imitation depends on

resources devoted to reversed engineering, learning, and the like.         The

incentive to engage in this activity depends on expectations of future

benefits, which dependin turn on the degree of protection provided by patent

laws and other devices by means of which monopoly power is preserved.

Similarly for the rate of innovation.      The incentive to engage in this

activity depends on expected future profits, which also depend on the above

mentioned factors. It is therefore clear that the equilibrium values of these

rates are interrelated in important ways, and they are jointly determined with

other activities that draw on an economy's resources.

     An alternative product cycle model has been proposed by Flam and Helprnan

(1987) (see also Segrstrom, Anat, and Dinopoilos (1987)).    There horizontal

product differentiation is replaced with vertical differentiation.     Namely,

goods differ in quality.      Using a competitive structure they consider

situations of labor growth (the only factor of production), changes in

income distribution, and technical progress in manufacturing. The demand for

different qualities of manufactured products is driven by differences in

household incomes. Income distribution may differ across countries. They show

that when the North has comparative advantage in the production of high

quality products a quality based product cycle can emerge.     Both North and

South may be moving up the quality spectrum of produced goods, with the North

introducing ever better products and the South abandoning production of lowest

quality varieties.   Moreover, as the North too abandons production of its

lowest quality products, the varieties that were produced in the North are

eventually picked up by the South and produced there until abandoned at a




                                      30
later stage.       This process explains an ooserved phenomenon.         Various

commodities are replaced over time with       higher   quality products, and the

lowest qualities disappear from the market.

     It should be clear from this description that introduction of vertical

differentiation carries great potential in the treatment of trade and growth.

Much of the increase in the standard of living has been achieved not so much

by producing larger quantities as by providing higher quality products. By

the same token much of international trade is an exchange of goods of

different quality.     It is most desirable to develop the theory along this

line, paying explicit attention to the resource cost of higher quality product

development and the incentive to engage in it.           I will not repeat the

arguments already made on this subject in reference to horizontal

differentiation; they equally apply to vertical differentiation. The problem

is, of course, that treatment of dynamic general equilibrium models with

vertical product differentiation and noncompetitive market structures is much

harder. Harder, yes, but not hopeless.



     I have outlined a number of problems that require attention from

international trade theorists, and which--I believe--can also greatly benefit

from careful empirical studies.     I have also described some recent work,

trying to highlight ways in which it can be used to shed new light on these

problems. It appears that the way is now open for new inquires into the

relationship between international trade and economic growth, and eventually,

into the possible role of trade and industrial policy in the promotion of

economic growth.




                                       31
                                    Re ferences




Arrow, K.J., "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing," Review

    Economic Studies, 1962, 24, pp. 155-173.

Baumol, W,J,, "Productivity Growth, Convergenece, and Welfare: What the

    Long-Run Data Show," Anierican Economic Review, 1986, 76, pp. 1072-1085.

Bhagwati, J.N., "Imxniserizing Growth: A Geometrical note," Review      Economic

     Studies, 1958, 25, pp. 201-205.

            Foreizn Trade Regimes             Economic Develonment: Anatomy

     Consequences     Exchange Control Regimes, Lexington: Rallinger for the

     NBER, 1978.

Dc Long, B. ,   "Have Productivity Levels Converged?" NBER Working Paper No.

     2419, 1987.

Dollar, D., "Technological Innovation, Capital Mobility, and the Product

     Cycle in North-South Trade," American Economic Review, 1986, 76, pp.

     177-190.

Eithier, W.J., "National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern

     Theory of International Trade," American Economic Review, 1982, 72, pp.

     389-405.

Feder, G., "On Exports and Economic Growth," Journal       Develonment Economics,

     1982, 12, pp. 59-73.

Findlay, R., "Growth and Development in Trade Models," in Jones, R.W. and

     Kenen, P.8. (eds.), Handbook       International Economics vol.1, Amsterdam:

     North Holland, 1984.

Flam, H. and Helpman, E., "Vertical Product Differentiation and North-South

     Trade," American Economic Review, 1987. 77, pp. 810-822.

Grilliches, Z., "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and




                                         32
     Developmen: jr Productivity rowh,"                   ouri          Economics. iT9, l,
     pp.   92-116.

Grossman, G.M. and Helpman, E .," Product Development and International Trade,'

     mimeo, 1988.

Helpman, E., "Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition, and Trade Theory," in

     Jones, R.W. and Kenen, P.B. (eds.), Handbook                 International Economics

     vol.1, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1984.

           and Krugman, P.R., Market Structure and Foreign Trade, Cambridge: The

     MIT Press, 1985.

           and Trajtenberg, M., "Dynamic Comparative Advantage and the Hypothesis

     of Export-Led Growth," mimeo, 1987.

Jensen, R. and Thursby, M.               "A Decision Theoretic Model of Innovation,

     Technology Transfer and Trade," Review of Economic Studies, 1987, 55.

     pp. 631-648.

Judd, K.L. ,       "On the Performance of Patents," Econometrica, 1985, 53, pp.

      567-585.

Krueger, A.O., Forei2n Trade Regimes                  Economic Development: Liberalization

     Attempts            Consequences, New York: Columbia University Press for the

     NBER,    1978.

Krugman, P.R., "A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World

      Distribution of Income," Journal                  Political Economy, 1979, 87, pp.

      253-266.

Learner,   E.E.,    Sources       International Comparative Advantaze, Cambridge: The

      MIT Press, 1984.

           "Paths of Development in the 3-Factor, n-Good General Equilibrium

      Model," Journal           Political Economy, 1987, 95, pp. 961-999.




                                                 33
Lucas. RE. Jr., "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," mimeo, the

     Marshall and Horowitz lectures, 1985.

Maddison, A. ,    Phases Q Catjtalist Development, Oxford: Oxford University

     Press, 1982.

          "Growth and Slowdown in Advanced Capitalist Economies: Techniques

     of Quantitative Assessment," Journal 2 Economic Literature, 1987, 25,

     pp. 649-698.

Michaely, M., "Exprts and Growth: An Empirical Investigation," Journal

     Develovment Economics, 1977, 4, pp. 49-53.

Oniki, H. and ljzawa, H., "Patterns of Trade and Investment in a Dynamic        Model
     of International Trade," Review           Economic Studies, 1965, 32, pp. 15-38.

Pasinetti, L. ,    Structural   Change and Economic Growth, Cambridge: Cambridge

     University Press, 1981.

Romer, P.M., "Increasing Returns and Long-run Growth," Journal              Political



—    Economy, 1986, 94, pp. 1002-1037..

     "Increasing     Returns, Specialization, and External Economies: Growth as

     Described by Allyn Young," Working Paper No. 64, Rochester Center for


—    Economic Research, 1986.

     "Capital     Accumulation in the Theory of Long Run Growth," Working Paper

     No. 123, Rochester Center for Economic Research, 1988.

Smith, M.A.M., "Capital Theory and Trade Theory," in Jones, R.W. and Kenen P.3

     (eds.), Handbook           International Economics vol.1, Amsterdam: North

     Holland, 1984.

Vernon, R., "International Investment and International Trade in the Product

     Cycle," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1966, 80, pp. 190-207.

Young, A.A., "Increasing Returns and Economic Progress," Economic Journal,

     1928, 38, pp. 527-542.




                                          34
