                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 REDISTRIBUTIVE EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT PENSION SYSTEMS WHEN LONGEVITY
                   VARIES BY SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS

                                    Miguel Sánchez-Romero
                                        Ronald D. Lee
                                       Alexia Prskawetz

                                       Working Paper 25944
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25944


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




This project has received funding from the Austrian National Bank (OeNB) under Grant no.
17647. Ronald Lee’s research was supported by the grant NIA 5R24–AG045055. This project has
also received funding from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Program for research,
technological development and demonstration under grant agreement no. 613247: “Ageing
Europe: An application of National Transfer Accounts (NTA) for explaining and projecting
trends in public finances”. Alan Auerbach provided useful comments. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the views of any of the above. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Miguel Sánchez-Romero, Ronald D. Lee, and Alexia Prskawetz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Redistributive Effects of Different Pension Systems When Longevity Varies by Socioeconomic
Status
Miguel Sánchez-Romero, Ronald D. Lee, and Alexia Prskawetz
NBER Working Paper No. 25944
June 2019
JEL No. H55,J1,J11,J14,J18,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

We propose a general analytical framework to model the redistributive features of alternative
pension systems when individuals face ex ante differences in mortality. Differences in life
expectancy between high and low socioeconomic groups are often large and have widened
recently in many countries. Such longevity gaps affect the actuarial fairness and progressivity of
public pension systems. However, behavioral responses to longevity and policy complicate
analysis of possible reforms. Here we consider how various pension systems would perform in a
general equilibrium OLG setting with heterogeneous longevity and ability. We evaluate
redistributive effects of three Notional Defined Contribution plans and three Defined Benefit
plans, calibrated on the US case. Compared to a benchmark non-redistributive plan that accounts
for differences in mortality, US Social Security reduces regressivity from longevity differences,
but would require group-specific life tables to achieve progressivity. Moreover, without separate
life tables, despite apparent accounting gains, lower income groups would suffer welfare losses
and higher income groups would enjoy welfare gains through indirect effects of pension systems
on labor supply.

Miguel Sánchez-Romero                                   Alexia Prskawetz
Institute of Statistics and                             Institute of Statistics and
Mathematical Methods in Economics                       Mathematical Methods in Economics
Vienna University of Technology                         Vienna University of Technology
Wiedner Hauptstr. 8-10/E105-3                           Wiedner Hauptstr. 8-10/E105-3
1040 Vienna                                             1040 Vienna
Austria                                                 Austria
and Wittgenstein Centre of Demography                   and Wittgenstein Centre of Demography
and Global Human Capital (IIASA,                        and Global Human Capital (IIASA,
VID/ÖAW, WU)                                            VID/ÖAW, WU)
Miguel.Sanchez@oeaw.ac.at                               afp@econ.tuwien.ac.at

Ronald D. Lee
Departments of Demography and Economics
University of California, Berkeley
2232 Piedmont Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
rlee@demog.berkeley.edu



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25944
1    Introduction
There are large differences in mortality by socioeconomic status in rich industrial nations and in
some developing countries as well, according to a growing literature which has also found that
these differences have often widened in recent decades (NASEM, 2015; OECD, 2016; Waldron,
2007; Bosworth et al., 2016; Chetty et al., 2016; Rosero-Bixby and Dow, 2016; Rostron et al.,
2010). While these increasing inequalities in health are themselves an urgent and critically impor-
tant problem for policy, here we will focus on a different issue: These mortality differences interact
with government programs, particularly those for the elderly such as public pensions, health care,
and long term care. The economically advantaged groups survive for more years than those with
lower income, and thereby receive more costly benefits from each of these programs. Unless tax
and contribution structures, on the one hand, and benefit structures on the other, take such differ-
ences into account the result can be a net transfer of income from the poor to the rich through
these programs. To the extent that programs are designed to be progressive, and intended to re-
distribute income from rich to poor, these mortality differences will reduce or even reverse the
direction of redistribution. Effects of this sort on government programs in the United States were
recently quantified and found large (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine,
2015; henceforth NASEM, 2015). For example, the widening of the longevity gap between the
top and bottom income quintile in the US raised the present value of lifetime government bene-
fits for the top quintile relative to the bottom by $132,000 for men and by $157,000 for women
(NASEM, 2015, :11). Consequences of this kind are surely present in other countries as well, and
have begun to draw broader attention (Holzmann et al., forthcoming; Ayuso et al., 2017; Lee and
Sanchez-Romero, forthcoming; OECD, 2016).
    As populations age, the fiscal sustainability of government programs for the elderly has been
increasingly threatened, leading to strong pressures for policy adjustments now and in the near
future. Potential policy adjustments, such as raising the Normal Retirement Age for pensions or
indexing each generation’s benefit level to its remaining life expectancy, will have different effects
on groups with different mortality, effects that will increase if the mortality differences continue
to widen. The interactions of mortality differences with policy adjustments were also analyzed by
the NASEM study, for selected program changes.
    Analysis of these effects and interactions is far from straightforward, due both to data limita-
tions and to the likelihood of broader behavioral responses by individuals to policies and to their
own mortality risks. On the data side, assessments require calculation of taxes and benefits over an
entire adult lifetime in relation to mortality differences across an entire lifetime. Since work often
starts before age 20, and because many individuals survive past 100, analysis requires longitudinal
data for each generation over a span of something like 80 years, disaggregated by socioeconomic


                                                  2
status. Such data are seldom if ever available. Empirical studies such as NASEM (2015) have
in practice been based on a mixture of observed, simulated and projected data, reflecting many
assumptions and introducing many uncertainties, and even after these efforts data on some key
variables may be unavailable for parts of the lifecycle.
   There are also difficult theoretical issues. Presumably these mortality differences are to some
degree known to the actors, who then take them into account as they formulate their lifecycle
plans for education, consumption, saving, and retirement, plans that are further complicated by
individual differences in ability. Once government programs are added to the picture, all sorts
of new incentives and distortions arise, with different effects for different longevity and ability
groups. Analysis of the redistributive effects of government programs must also consider the way
that these individual behavioral responses will affect the outcome.
   In this paper we focus on public pensions rather than considering the whole range of public
programs for the elderly. We develop a general equilibrium model for a small open economy, the
population of which exhibits heterogeneous ability and mortality leading to differences in edu-
cation, income, and retirement planning. Mortality differences by long term earnings are based
on the analysis in NASEM (2015), which hereinafter we refer as the Report, and the parameters
of our theoretical model are calibrated to match key aspects of the Report findings. We restrict
our analysis to the steady state and develop a general analytical framework of pension systems.
Within this framework we focus on redistributive effects of six different public pension systems:
three Notional Defined Contribution (NDC) plans and three Defined Benefit (DB) plans. An NDC
pension system is a PAYG system which is designed to mimic a standard Defined Contribution
(DC) system, in the sense that participants make mandatory contributions to a notional account
that earns a rate of return stipulated by the government, not determined by the stock market, and
is generally chosen to equal or be close to the sustainable rate of return that a PAYG system can
pay —that is, the growth rate of GDP or of the wage bill. On retirement the participant uses the
notional account to purchase from the government an annuity based on a similar rate of return and
the remaining life expectancy, based on the life table for the participant’s generation. The NDC
system provides an actuarially fair tradeoff between retirement and continuing to work, and it is
expected that participants will view these contributions as an investment rather than as a tax. An
NDC system should by design be approximately fiscally sustainable. In our analysis, one version
of these NDC and DB plans ignores mortality differences at retirement as do all current programs.
Another three versions —one NDC and two DB plans— differ in their approaches to structuring
taxes/contributions or benefits so as to reduce or avoid the program inequities arising from dif-
ferences in life expectancy, or to achieve redistribution more generally. These five systems are
compared to an ideal NDC plan (our benchmark) in which both contributions and retirement ben-
efits are adjusted for the mortality of each group. For concreteness, our analysis draws in various

                                                 3
ways on the results of the Report for the US case, either with a core DB system closely resembling
that of the US, or a modified NDC system that shares some quantitative features of the US case.
In order to focus on the role of the mortality differences, we simplify in various ways, including
assuming that the systems are in long term fiscal balance.
    Our main findings stem from the behavioral responses arising from the difference in retirement
age between NDC and DB plans. NDC systems minimize labor market distortions by better linking
contributions to pension benefits. Thus, in NDC systems earlier or later retirement ages tend to
be as neutral as possible to the budget of the social security and the individual, since benefits
are automatically adjusted according to the remaining years-lived in retirement. In contrast, DB
systems poorly link contributions to pension benefits as life expectancy increases. In order to re-
introduce actuarial fairness, DB pension systems apply penalties/rewards for early/late retirement
ages. However, when these penalties/rewards are not in line with those that are actuarially fair,
the pension system not only modifies retirement behavior, but it also leads to a series of other
behavioral responses that affect the wealth and welfare of individuals. In particular, our estimates
indicate that under the mortality regime of the 1930 birth cohort in the US, individuals would have
retired between ages 61 and 64 in NDC plans, whereas individuals would have retired on average
one year later in DB plans. This difference in the retirement age raises the marginal benefit of
education in DB plans. Hence, the average number of years in schooling and the stock of human
capital is higher in DB plans. However, we find that in DB systems the average increase in lifetime
income is accompanied by a fall in lifetime welfare, since the increase in lifetime income comes at
the expense of less leisure time during the working period and in retirement.
    Throughout the article, we will focus on how the six public pension systems redistribute income
across income groups and how individuals respond to alternative pension settings. The paper is
structured as follows. In Section 2 we detail the demographic characteristics of the population.
In Section 3 we set a general accounting framework for simultaneously analyzing NDC and DB
pension systems. In Section 4 we introduce a lifecycle model of labor supply in which individuals
decide their education, hours worked, and the retirement age. Details about assumptions, data
used, and parameter values are provided in Section 5. The redistributive properties of each pension
system by income quintile under two mortality regimes are presented in Section 6. Section 7
concludes. We provide a detailed derivation of the economic model in the Appendix.


2    Demographics
We assume that the mortality of each individual is completely determined by their lifetime income.
We denote by I = {1, 2, . . . , I} the set of I income levels. Let µi (t)   0 be the mortality hazard
rate at age t of an individual of group i 2 I. Table 1 shows the life expectancy at ages 15, 50,

                                                   4
and 65 for the US male cohorts born in 1930 and 1960 based on the Report.1 The data shows that
the difference in life expectancy between the highest and the lowest quintiles is 6.5, 5.1, and 3.3
years at age 15, 50, and 65, respectively, for the birth cohort born in 1930. The differences in life
expectancy between these two income groups widens for the cohort born in 1960 to 16.2, 11.9, 9.4
years. For details see Appendix A.

Table 1: Life expectancy at ages 15, 50, and 65 by income quintile, US males, birth cohorts of
1930 and 1960

                                     1930 birth cohort                     1960 birth cohort
                                     Life expectancy at                   Life expectancy at
              Income level       age 15 age 50        age 65        age 15     age 50           age 65


              Quintile 1           56.3       25.6       15.0          55.6      25.1             14.7
              Quintile 2           57.1       26.2       15.3          58.5      27.3             16.0
              Quintile 3           58.3       27.1       15.9          65.1      32.4             19.7
              Quintile 4           60.0       28.8       16.9          70.5      36.8             23.2
              Quintile 5           62.8       30.7       18.3          71.7      37.8             24.1

              Notes: Authors’ estimates based on data from the Report.



        To simplify the demographic analysis, we assume each income group grows steadily at a rate
n and that the total number of births across income groups is the same. These two assumptions
imply that fertility is slightly higher for lower income groups, to overcome the lower proportion of
females surviving through the reproductive ages.


3        The pension model
In order to provide comparable results across pension systems, we need a framework that allows us
to compare simultaneously all pension plans. For this purpose we will use a pension point system,
described below, that can reproduce both a defined benefit (DB) system and a defined contribution
(DC) system (see, for instance, Börsch-Supan, 2006; OECD, 2005).
    1
        See https://www.ssa.gov/oact/NOTES/as120/LifeTables_Body.html. Note that the Report
only gives life expectancy by income quintile by age 50. To obtain survival probabilities below age 50 by income
quintiles we use cohort-life tables from SSA. More specifically, for each income quintile we choose the cohort-life
table from SSA that best matches the corresponding life expectancy at age 50 from the Report.



                                                        5
3.1       Parametric components
In order to keep the model as tractable as possible, we exclude disability benefits, survivor benefits,
and widowhood benefits. The pension system only pays benefits to those workers who survive to
retirement. Let us assume that workers contribute an amount ⌧ y(t), where ⌧ is the contribution
rate and y(t) is the labor income subject to payroll tax, for which workers gain pension points
pp(t) that entitle them to receive a pension benefit upon retirement. Suppose that workers earn
  pension points per unit of social contribution paid. Pension points earn a rate of return equal
to an interest rate r̃ plus a mortality risk premium. The risk premium arises because we exclude
benefits from disability, survivorship, and widowhood. The interest rate r̃ is assumed to be equal to
or lower than the market interest rate, which we denote by r. Most of the interest rates, or indexes,
used in pension systems fit into one of the following three cases: (i) when r̃ = 0, past contributions
are only adjusted for inflation; (ii) when r̃ = r, past contributions are invested in the market and
capitalized according to the interest rate r (i.e., funded system); and (iii) when r̃ = n+g, where n is
the population growth and g is the productivity growth rate, then past contributions are capitalized
according to the growth rate of the national wage bill at the macro level, which corresponds to the
intrinsic rate of return of a PAYG pension system (Samuelson, 1958).2 The amount of pension
points earned depends on the system. In a DC system, they are equal to the contribution paid (i.e.,
  = 1). In a DB system, they are equal to the yearly pension benefit accrual, which is a fraction
( = %/⌧ ) of the contributions paid (i.e., ⌧ y = %y). Thus, the total number of pension points
accumulate over the working life according to

                           @ppi (t)
                                    = (r̃ + µ̃(t))ppi (t) + ⌧ yi (t) with ppi (0) = 0,                            (1)
                             @t
where r̃ is the interest rate used by the pension system, µ̃(t) is the mortality hazard rate at age t
used by the pension system, and yi (t) is the labor income. The total number of pension points in
Eq. (1) receives a different name in each pension system. For instance, in a DC system, the total
number of pension points before retirement is equal to the pension wealth, while in a DB system
the total number of pension points at retirement is equal to the average indexed yearly earnings.
       To calculate the pension benefit of a retiree, bi (Ri ), the government applies a conversion factor,
fi (Ri ), that transforms at retirement the pension points accumulated (pp) into pension benefits

                                              bi (Ri ) = fi (Ri )ppi (Ri ).                                       (2)

In a DC system, the government transforms the pension wealth into an annuity using cohort-
specific life tables and an effective interest rate. As a consequence, a higher life expectancy at
   2
       Samuelson (1958) shows that the internal rate of return of a transfer system is equal to the growth rate of the
contribution base of the system.


                                                           6
retirement, holding the effective interest rate constant, leads to a reduction in benefits in a DC
system. Thus, the conversion factor at the age of retirement, Ri , is

                                            fi (Ri ) = Ei (Ri )/Ã(Ri , r̃),                                          (3)

where Ei (Ri ) is a factor that corrects for the difference in life expectancy of individuals of type
i 2 I relative to the average individual at retirement. Similar to Ayuso et al. (2017) we assume
the correction factor is specific to the group to which the individual belongs and depends on the
retirement age Ri .3 Ã(Ri , r̃) is the present value of a life annuity of a dollar per year, paid from
age Ri onwards, calculated with an effective interest of r̃ and a mortality hazard rate µ̃(·).
        In the DB system, the government multiplies the average indexed yearly earnings by a re-
placement rate, '(pp), and then applies an adjustment factor (Ri ) for early or late retirement to
determine the pension benefit of the retiree. The replacement rate can be constant (i.e., '(pp) = ')
or it can decrease as the average indexed yearly earnings increases (i.e., '0 (pp) < 0). To consider
actuarial fairness we implement for the DB system the penalties/rewards for early/late retirement
established in the US pension system for each birth cohort. As a result, in a DB system, the
conversion factor at the age of retirement Ri is

                                       fi (Ri ) = Ei (Ri ) (Ri )'(ppi (Ri )),                                         (4)

where Ei (Ri ) is the same correction factor introduced in Eq. (3). Thus, while the DC system takes
into account the life expectancy through Ã(Ri , r̃), there is no such relationship in the DB system.


3.2       Pension wealth
Given that individuals expect to receive future benefits during retirement out of their contribu-
tions, the pension system generates a transfer wealth, which is known as the social security wealth
(SSW). SSW is defined as the present value of the survival weighted stream of future benefits mi-
nus the present value of the survival weighted stream of remaining social contributions. Hence, if
we compare individuals with similar stream of contributions, but different life expectancies, those
individuals with high life expectancy will have a higher SSW than individuals with low life ex-
pectancy. As a consequence, individuals with high life expectancy will value their contributions
more than those with low life expectancy. To explicitly account for the mortality differential effect
on the value of contributing to the pension system, we compare for each individual the value of
    3
     We denote the actuarial present value at the exact age x, using the mortality hazard rates µi (·), when the effective
                                 R! Rt
interest rate is r as Ai (x, r) = x e x r+µi (j)dj dt. The correction factor proposed by Ayuso et al. (2017) is Ei (Ri ) =
Ã(Ri , r̃)/Ai (Ri , r̃).



                                                            7
investing, from age t < Ri until retirement, a dollar in the pension system to the value of investing
the same dollar in the capital market
                                                            R Ri
                                                                   r̃+µ̃(j) (r+µi (j))dj
                            Pi (t) = fi (Ri )Ai (Ri , r)e    t                             .                     (5)

The term fi (Ri )Ai (Ri , r) is the present value of the weighted stream of benefits from retirement
until death that results from the contribution of a dollar. The exponential term accounts for the
difference from age t until retirement between the rate of return of the pension system, r̃ + µ̃, and
the rate of return of the capital market, r + µi .
   Using (5), we can rewrite the evolution of the social security wealth over the working life as
follows                            ✓                                   ◆
                    @SSWi (t)                         1 @Pi (t)
                              =        r̃ + µ̃(t) +                        SSWi (t) + ⌧ yi (t)                   (6)
                       @t                           Pi (t) @t
                                                                                                   1 @Pi (t)
with SSWi (!) = 0. The derivation of (5) is provided in Appendix 6. The term                     Pi (t) @t
                                                                                                               is the
evolution of the value of investing a dollar in the pension system at age t < Ri to the value of
investing the same dollar in the capital market, which from (5) is equal to

                                 1 @Pi (t)
                                           = (r          r̃) + (µi (t)       µ̃(t)),                             (7)
                               Pi (t) @t

and ⌧ yi (t) is the social contribution paid. When µ̃(t) = µi (t), we have that Pi increases more
rapidly with age when the market interest rate is higher than the interest used by the social se-
curity system (i.e, r > r̃). When r = r̃ and the social security system applies the same average
mortality rate to all individuals, those individuals with a life expectancy below the average level
(i.e., ei (x0 ) < ẽ(x0 ) or µi (t) > µ̃(t) 8t) will begin with a low valuation of their contributions but
it will increase with age, while those individuals with a life expectancy above the average level
(i.e., ei (x0 ) > ẽ(x0 ) or µi (t) < µ̃(t) 8t) will begin with a higher valuation of their contributions
but it will decrease with age. See Figure 1 for an illustration. Thus, the second component of (7)
accounts for the redistribution of resources within the cohort from those with low life expectancy
to those with high life expectancy.


3.3    Basic components of alternative pay-as-you-go pension systems
We implement the pension model introduced in sections 3.1 and 3.2 to analyze six alternative
PAYG pension systems (3 DCs and 3 DBs). To ease the comparison across pension systems and
clearly show their main features, we will for the moment introduce three assumptions that are
convenient for understanding how the six alternative pension systems affect eqs. (2)–(7) across
individual types. First, we assume the market interest rate coincides with the internal rate of


                                                     8
                                       Pi (t)
             Pi (t) > 1, more
                                actuarially




                                                                                 if µi (t) < µ̃(t)
                                than
                                              fair




                                                              actuarially fair
                                                     1                                                       if µi (x) = µ̃(x)
             Pi (t) < 1, less
                                actuarially




                                                                                 if µi (t) > µ̃(t)
                                than
                                              fair




                                                     0
                                                         x0                                          Ri   Age t

Figure 1: Stylized evolution of the relative value of a dollar contributed to the pension system at
age x for an individual who plans to retire at age Ri , Pi (t). Case: when r̃ = r.

return of a PAYG pension system (i.e., r = r̃ ⌘ n + g, so Eq. (7) depends on µi (t) and µ̃(t)).4
Second, the retirement age Ri is assumed to be the same across individual types and coincides
with the normal retirement age established by the pension system, which we denote by Rn . In
other words, we abstract from any penalty/reward for early/late retirement (i.e.,                                        (Rn ) = 1).5
Third, all pension systems provide the same replacement rate for the average individual within
each cohort, which implies that ' = (⌧ /%)/Ã(Rn , r̃). However, the first two assumptions will not
hold in our simulation results, which are based on actual data for the US.
       The following pension systems are implemented:

   1. A standard notional defined contribution system (NDC-I) in which the government applies
         the same average life table for all income groups for computing the pension points and
         calculating the retirement benefits.

   2. A notional defined contribution system (NDC-II) in which the government computes the
         pension points using an average life table for all income groups. However, unlike NDC-
   4
       Note that, for the sake of simplicity, here, we assume no difference between a funded and an unfunded pension
system. Later, in Section 6 we assume that r > r̃.
   5
     The parametric component (Rn ) is in fact one of the ways that differential mortality affects actuarial fairness of
PAYG pension systems. In Section 6 we use the actual penalty/reward function by birth cohort from the US pension
system.


                                                                                 9
      I, the government uses the income-specific life table for the calculation of the retirement
      benefits. This pension system mimics the one proposed by Ayuso et al. (2017).

   3. A notional defined contribution system (NDC-III) in which the government applies the
      income-specific life table associated to each individual type both for the computation of
      the pension points and for the calculation of the retirement benefits.

   4. A defined benefit system that uses all the parametric components of the US pension system,
      except for the replacement rate that is assumed to be constant at 0,417 (DB-I).

   5. A defined benefit system with a progressive replacement rate (see Fig. 2 in Sánchez-Romero
      and Prskawetz, 2017). This pension system mimics the US pension system (DB-II).

   6. A defined benefit system with a two-tier replacement rate (DB-III). One tier introduces a
      progressive replacement rate as in the US pension system, while the second tier corrects for
      differences in life expectancy similar to the NDC-II.

   Table 2 summarizes how each pension system may affect eqs. (2)–(7) across individual types.
Table 2 is divided in two sections. The top section contains the information for the defined contri-
bution systems (from NDC-I to NDC-III), while the section at the bottom provides the information
for the defined benefit systems (from DB-I to DB-III). For each pension system the information
is divided in two groups of individuals. Individuals with an average life expectancy below the
average level (ei < ẽ) and individuals with an average life expectancy above the average level
(ei > ẽ). Table 2 shows that under the presence of a heterogeneous population by life expectancy,
those individuals who have a priori an average life expectancy below (resp. above) the average
level become (a) net contributors (resp. beneficiaries) in a NDC-I, NDC-II, DB-I systems —i.e.,
SSWi (x0 ) < (>)0, they become (b) neither contributors nor beneficiaries in a NDC-III system
—i.e. SSWi (x0 ) = 0, while (c) the sign of the social security wealth is a priori ambiguous in a
DB-II and a DB-III systems. Nonetheless, if pension systems are highly progressive, then it should
be expected that those individuals with low (resp. high) income, who also have a life expectancy
below (resp. above) the average level, will become net beneficiaries from (resp. contributors to)
the pension system.
   Table 2 can also be used for understanding the impact of each pension system on the social
security wealth after relaxing the first two assumptions. In particular, if we first allow r > r̃, the
overall value of a pension point will decline in all pension systems and thus the social security
wealth at age x0 will be lower. Second, if individuals retire before (resp. after) Rn , the social
security wealth value will be smaller (resp. bigger) but the signs will remain.



                                                 10
Table 2: Alternative PAYG pension systems and their impact on the social security wealth at age
x0 by life expectancy

                                                                           D EFINED C ONTRIBUTION (DC)
                                                 Avg. Life Table (LT)        Corrected Avg. LT                      i-th LT
                                 Symbol                  NDC-I                      NDC-II                         NDC-III
      Indexation                 r̃                      n+g                         n+g                             n+g

      Point factor                                         1                            1                               1

      Correction factor          Ei                        1                 Ã(Rn , r̃)/Ai (Rn , r̃)                   1

      Replacement rate           fi                 1/Ã(Rn , r̃)            Ei (Rn )/Ã(Rn , r̃)                1/Ai (Rn , r̃)
                                                  8                         8
                                                  << 1 for e < ẽ,          << 1 for e < ẽ,
                                                                 i                       i
      Value of $1 contributed Pi (x0 )                                                                                  1
                                                  :> 1     for ei > ẽ.     :> 1 for e > ẽ.
                                                                                             i
                                                  8
                                                  << 1     for ei < ẽ,
      Value of $1 contributed Pi (Rn )                                                  1                               1
                                                  :> 1     for ei > ẽ.
                                                  8                         8
                                                  << 0     for ei < ẽ,     << 0       for ei < ẽ,
      Soc. sec. wealth           SSWi (x0 )                                                                             0
                                                  :> 0     for ei > ẽ.     :> 0       for ei > ẽ.


                                                                               D EFINED B ENEFIT (DB)
                                                   Non-Progressive               Progressive               Corrected-Progressive
                                 Symbol                  DB-I                        DB-II                          DB-III
      Indexation                 r̃                      n+g                         n+g                             n+g

      Point factor                                        %/⌧                         %/⌧                             %/⌧

      Correction factor          Ei                        1                            1                    Ã(Rn , r̃)/Ai (Rn , r̃)

      Replacement rate           fi                      (Rn )'                (Rn )'(ppi (Rn ))         Ei (Rn ) (Rn )'(ppi (Rn ))
                                                  8
                                                  << 1     for ei < ẽ,
      Value of $1 contributed Pi (x0 )                                                71                              71
                                                  :> 1     for ei > ẽ.
                                                  8                                                          8
                                                  << 1     for ei < ẽ,                                      <> 1      for ei < ẽ,
      Value of $1 contributed Pi (Rn )                                                71
                                                  :> 1     for ei > ẽ.                                      :< 1      for ei > ẽ.
                                                  8
                                                  << 0     for ei < ẽ,
      Soc. sec. wealth           SSWi (x0 )                                           70                              70
                                                  :> 0     for ei > ẽ.


      Notes: ‘ẽ’ denotes the life expectancy at birth of the reference population group used by the social security system, which
      we assume is calculated using the average survival probability of the birth cohort. ‘ei ’ denotes the life expectancy at birth
      of the individual analyzed. x0 is the minimum working age. All the calculations are done under the following assumptions:
      (a) the life expectancy is positively correlated with the income level, (b) the market interest rate r is equal to r̃ = n + g, (c)
      the pension replacement rate ' is equal to (⌧ /%)/As (Rn , r̃) so as to coincide with the defined contribution system, and (d)
      the retirement age is fixed at the normal retirement age for all population groups, which implies that (Rn ) = 1. Ai (Rn , r)
      denotes the actuarial present value of an individual of type i at the exact age Rn when the effective interest rate is r.




                                                                     11
4     The economic model
In the previous section we presented a general accounting framework for analyzing most pension
systems. Next, we explain the main features of the life cycle model implemented to construct the
labor income earned, the contributions paid, the total pension points accumulated, and the pension
benefits claimed by each individual type i 2 I across the six pension systems analyzed.


4.1     The individual problem
Let us consider an individual, who belongs to quintile i 2 I, starts making decisions after finishing
the compulsory educational system at age x0 , and lives up to a maximum age !. Assume the stock
of human capital accumulates at age t 2 [x0 , Si ) according to a Ben-Porath (1967) technology

                                 @hi (t)
                                         = ✓i hi (t)     hi (t) with hi (x0 ) = 1,                           (8)
                                  @t
where ✓i is the learning ability of an individual belonging to group i 2 I,               2 (0, 1) is the returns
to scale to the time devoted to education, and               is the human capital depreciation rate. From
age Si onwards our individual earns a wage rate per hour worked wi , which is assumed to be
a function of years of schooling and years of post-schooling experience. Let the wage rate be
wi (S, t) = hi (S)w̄(t     S), where hi (S) is the stock of human capital of an individual with S years
of schooling and w̄(t S) > 0 accounts for the returns to t S years of post-schooling experience.
Assume the wage rate per hour worked increases with post-schooling experience according to the
following Mincer (1974) equation

                          w̄(t    S) = exp       0 (t   S)      1 (t   S)2 for t     S,                      (9)

where    0,   1   > 0 are parameters that guarantee the usual hump-shape of the wage rate per unit of
human capital (see, for instance, Table 2, p. 326, in Heckman et al., 2006).
    During the working period the individual supplies her/his intensive labor in exchange for the
wage rate wi (S, t) and pays contributions to the pension system. Assume individuals relate their
contributions to their future benefits, and so they do not see them as a tax on labor income. This
assumption connects the economic model with the general pension model introduced in Section 3.
Once the individual reaches the retirement age, she/he receives the corresponding pension benefits
and enjoys leisure.

Budget constraint.        The choice of the path of consumption ci , hours worked `i , length of school-
ing Si , and the retirement age Ri are bounded by a lifetime budget constraint.



                                                        12
       We assume the existence of a perfect annuity market in which individuals can purchase life-
insured loans, when they are in debt, and annuities in case of having positive financial wealth.6
Moreover, individuals start with zero assets, ai (x0 ) = 0, and in the terminal age ! they do not
hold wealth, ai (!) = 0. Thus, the consumption over the remaining lifespan is financed by current
assets ai (x), by the present value at age x of the remaining flow of labor income, and by the social
security wealth at age x, SSWi (x). The lifetime budget constraint at age x is
          Z ! R                                   Z Ri R
                    t                                    t
               e x r+µi (j)dj ci (t)dt = ai (x) +     e x r+µi (j)dj yi (Si , t)dt + SSWi (x),                                       (10)
                 x                                                       x

where r is the market interest rate, µi (t) is the mortality hazard rate at age t, and yi (Si , t) =
wi (Si , t)`i (t) is the (gross) labor income earned at age t by an individual of type i after working
`i (t) hours for a wage rate per hour worked of wi (Si , t).

Preferences. The individual chooses the consumption path ci , the length of schooling Si , the
number of hours worked `i for the wage rate wi , given by (8)–(9), and the retirement age Ri by
maximizing the lifetime expected utility Vi at age x 2 [x0 , S), which is given by
                      Z ! R                              Z Ri R
                             t                                   t
                               ⇢+µ   (j)dj
            Vi (x) =      e x      i
                                           U (ci (t)) dt     e x ⇢+µi (j)dj ↵i v (`i (t)) dt
                               x                                                       Si
                                   Z       Si       Rt
                                                                              Z    !        Rt
                                                e   x    ⇢+µi (j)dj
                                                                      ⌘dt +            e    x    ⇢+µi (j)dj
                                                                                                              '(t)dt.                (11)
                                       x                                          Ri

The first two components on the right-hand side of (11) are, respectively, the lifetime utility from
consumption and the lifetime disutility from work. The third term accounts for the disutility from
attending school (Sánchez-Romero et al., 2016; Restuccia and Vandenbroucke, 2013; Oreopoulos,
2007) and the last term captures the utility of leisure during retirement. ⇢ is the subjective discount
factor, U (c) is an instantaneous utility function that is assumed to be twice differentiable with
U 0 (c) > 0 and U 00 (c) < 0, ↵i > 0 is the weight of the disutility of the labor supplied for an
individual of type i, v (`) is the disutility of working ` hours (with v 0 (`) > 0 and v 00 (`) > 0), ⌘ > 0
is the marginal disutility from attending school and '(t) > 0 (with '0 (t)                                              0) is the marginal
utility of leisure during retirement, which increases with age as the amount of retirement time is
squeezed by later and later retirement.
       The last three terms in (11) are key (i) for reproducing the supply of labor during the working
life, which is hump-shaped, (ii) for taking into account that the return to schooling exceeds the
marginal cost of education (Heckman et al., 2006), and (iii) for replicating actual retirement ages
given that individuals would never retire because continuing to work would raise consumption and
reduce intensive labor.
   6
       In case of death the insurance keeps the debt/assets. Therefore, individuals die without assets at all ages.


                                                                         13
4.2          Optimal decisions
The primary objective of this section is to explain how each pension system affects the economic
behavior of our heterogenous individuals with respect to mortality. We first solve the problem of
maximizing lifetime utility (11) subject to the lifetime budget constraint (10) and the laws of mo-
tion (1) and (6)–(9). The definition of the Hamiltonians and the first-order conditions are reported
in Appendix D.
       We start by analyzing how each pension plan affects consumption and hours worked for a
given length of schooling and retirement age. Next, given the optimal consumption and labor
supply, we analyze the impact that each pension plan has on the length of schooling and on the age
of retirement.

Consumption and hours worked. Given a length of schooling and retirement age, the opti-
mization yields the following optimal dynamics of consumption and intensive labor supply (hours
worked):
                        1 @ci (t)
                                  =   c (r       ⇢),                                                            (12)
                      ci (t) @t
                                             @w(t Si )                                         @P (t)
                                                                                                        !
                                                                                                i
                        1 @`i (t)                                              ⌧ P i (t)
                                  =   l
                                                @t
                                                              (r    ⇢) +                       @t
                                                                                                            ,   (13)
                      `i (t) @t              w(t       Si )                1   ⌧ + ⌧ P i (t) P i (t)
where         c   =   U 0 (c)/cU 00 (c) > 0 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for consumption
and      `   = v 0 (`)/`v 00 (`) > 0 is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for labor. Eq. (12) is the
standard Euler equation for consumption and shows that the rate of increase of consumption is
not affected by the pension system. In contrast, Eq. (13) shows that pension systems influence the
evolution of the intensive labor supply through P i . The value of P i is calculated as the marginal
rate of substitution between social contributions and assets:7
                                    @Vi (t)/@ (ppi (t)/ )
                          P i (t) =                       = Pi (t) (1                 "i ) .                    (14)
                                       @Vi (t)/@ai (t)
P i (t) compares the value of an additional dollar invested in the pension system to the value of
investing the same additional dollar in the capital market. Hence, P i differs from Pi because, as a
result of paying an additional dollar to the pension system, the pension replacement rate may fall
                                                       ppi (Ri ) @fi (Ri )
                                          "i =                                 0.                               (15)
                                                        fi (Ri ) @ppi (Ri )
We can distinguish two cases:8
   7
       A similar expression to (14) can be found in Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) and Sánchez-Romero and Prskawetz
(2017).
   8
     We exclude from our analysis any pension system that is a priori regressive; i.e, a pension system that a priori
transfers resources from the poor to the rich.


                                                              14
     (i) A flat pension system in which the replacement rate is invariant to the pension points ac-
           cumulated ("i = 0); i.e. P i = Pi . This is the case for pension systems NDC-I, NDC-II,
           NDC-III, and DB-I.

  (ii) A progressive pension system in which the replacement rate decreases with the number of
           pension points accumulated ("i > 0); i.e. P i < Pi . This is the case for pension systems
           DB-II and DB-III.

         From Eq. (13) it follows that an increase in P i over age will induce a postponement of labor
supply to higher ages, whereas a decline in P i over age will induce an anticipation of labor supply
to earlier ages. From eqs. (7) and (14) we know that an increase in P i (x) over age occurs when
(r        r̃ + µi (t)    µ̃(t)) > 0 and it declines when (r                      r̃ + µi (t)        µ̃(t)) < 0. Therefore, pension
systems incentivize individuals with µi (t) < µ̃(t) to supply more labor early in the working life.
Moreover, the extent to which the labor supply varies with changes in P i (t) depend on its level.
Thus, flat pension systems have a stronger effect than progressive pension systems on the path of
labor supply.

Length of schooling. Given a retirement age Ri and the optimal paths of consumption and labor
supply, the optimal length of schooling S ⇤ satisfies:9
                                                                                       ⌘
                                   rih (S ⇤ ) = riw (S ⇤ , Ri ) +                                           .                               (16)
                                                                    U 0 (c   i   (S ⇤ ))W   i (S
                                                                                                   ⇤, R )
                                                                                                       i

See the derivation of the optimal length of schooling condition in Appendix D.2. The left-hand
                                                                                                                         @hi (S ⇤ )
side of (16) is the return to education at the S ⇤ th unit of schooling, rih (Si⇤ ) =                               1
                                                                                                                hi (S ⇤ ) @S
                                                                                                                                    .   The first
term on the right-hand side of (16), riw (S ⇤ , Ri ), is the marginal cost of the S th unit of schooling         ⇤

expressed in terms of foregone earnings. The last term in (16) is the marginal disutility from
attending schooling, ⌘, relative to the utility given to the present value of the stream of labor
earnings out of effective social contributions, U 0 (ci (S ⇤ ))Wi (S ⇤ , Ri ). The term
                                       Z Ri R
                                              t
                      Wi (S ⇤ , Ri ) =     e S⇤ r+µi (j)dj (1 ⌧i (t))yi (S ⇤ , t)dt,                                                        (17)
                                                  S⇤

and ⌧i (t) = ⌧ 1            P i (t) is the effective social contribution rate.
         Assuming a logarithmic utility function in consumption and given that consumption, ci (S ⇤ ),
depends on Pi —see eqs. (6) and (10)— while Wi (S ⇤ , Ri ) depends on P i , from (16) we have that:
(i) a flat pension system (i.e. Pi = P i ) does not change the optimal length of schooling because the
non-pecuniary cost of schooling remains constant. In contrast, (ii) a progressive pension system
     9
         See Sánchez-Romero et al. (2016) for a detailed explanation of the influence of the nonpecuniary cost of schooling
on the optimal decision making process of the individual.


                                                               15
(i.e. Pi > P i ) reduces the optimal length of schooling, because this pension system increases the
non-pecuniary cost of schooling.

Optimal retirement age.               Consider now a fixed length of schooling Si . Under this setting the
optimal retirement age R satisfies the following condition
                                  ⇤



                         U 0 (ci (R⇤ ))yi (Si , R⇤ )(1   ⌧GW
                                                          i  (R⇤ )) = ↵i v (`i (R⇤ )) + '(R⇤ ).                  (18)

See the proof in Appendix D.3. Eq. (18) implies that individuals choose the retirement age that
equates the marginal benefit of continue working (left-hand side) to the marginal cost of continue
working (right-hand side). The right-hand side of (18) is the sum of the disutility from work and
the marginal utility loss of leisure from not being retired. The new term ⌧GW
                                                                           i  (R⇤ ), located on the
left-hand side of (18), is the effective tax/subsidy rate on additional work at older ages calculated
by Gruber and Wise (1999). This rate assesses the marginal change in the social security wealth
from delaying retirement, relative to the labor income the individual would have earned. Given that
in Section 3 we assumed that all DB systems implement the same penalties/rewards for early/late
retirement established in the US pension system, all DB systems will have similar retirement in-
centives. Likewise, all NDC systems will have similar incentives for early/late retirement based on
the remaining life expectancy at retirement.


5         Parametrization
We calibrate our model to match data for our reference group —i.e. US males born in 1930—
on the length of schooling, the retirement age, and the present value of lifetime benefits at age
50 for each income quintile. Data on the length of schooling and the retirement age for each
income quintile is taken from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS).10 The present value of
lifetime benefits (PVB) at age 50 for the cohort born in 1930 is taken from the Report. Table 3
summarizes the model economy parameters. We detail the assumptions and the strategy followed
in our calibration process in Appendix C.
         Table 4 reports the optimal length of schooling Si and the optimal retirement age Ri for the
benchmark scenario (US males born in 1930, US pension system). In Appendix E, tables 6 and 7
report the optimal length of schooling and retirement ages for all pension scenarios, respectively.
Life expectancy and total years-worked are calculated using the specific mortality rates for each
income quintile. The last column in Table 4 shows how, in our model, individuals in higher income
quintiles spend a longer period of time in retirement relative to the total number of years worked.
    10
         Data from the HRS on length of schooling and retirement age for males born in 1930 was provided by Arda Aktas
and Miguel Poblete-Cazenave.


                                                            16
                                                      Table 3: Model parameters

     Parameter                                   Symbol Value                         Parameter                             Symbol   Value


     Demographics                                                                     Preferences
     First age at entrance                       x0          14                       Subjective discount factor            ⇢        0.005
     Maximum age                                 !           114                      Utility cost of not being retired     '(t)     186.29(e(t))    1.8559

     Annual population growth                    n           0.005                    Labor elasticity of substitution          `    0,33
     Minimum length of schooling                 S           10                       Utility weight of labor               ↵(q1)    250
     Maximum length of schooling                 S̄          20                                                             ↵(q2)    160
                                                                                                                            ↵(q3)    140
     Technology                                                                                                             ↵(q4)    130
     Market interest rate                        r           0.030                                                          ↵(q5)    130
     Labor-augmenting technological progress g               0,015
     growth rate
                                                                                      Education
     Social security system                                                           Returns of scale in education                  0.65
     Minimum retirement age                      R           NDC=55, DB=62            Disutility of schooling               ⌘        3.5
     Maximum retirement age                      R           70                       Mincerian eq.                             0    0.07
     Capitalization factor                       r̃          0.02                                                               1    0.0011
     Accrual rate in DB systems                              1/45                     Learning ability                      ✓(q1)    0.110
     Avg. replacement rate in DB systems         f           0.4167                                                         ✓(q2)    0.110
     Social contribution rate                                                                                               ✓(q3)    0.110
       Cohort 1930                               ⌧1930       0.1183                                                         ✓(q4)    0.115
       Cohort 1960                               ⌧1960       0.1328                                                         ✓(q5)    0.120




Table 4: In-sample performance of the model: Optimal length of schooling (Si ), retirement age
(Ri ), and present value of lifetime benefits (PVB) by income quintile. US males born in 1930, US
pension system (DB-II)

                        Schooling             Retirement                 PVB                   Life          Years-worked            Years-retired
                                                                       at age 50           expectancy                                        to
                                                                      (in $1 000s)          at Si + 6                                years-worked
                                                                                                                                           ei (Si +6) YWi
                                Si                Ri                                        ei (Si + 6)                   YWi                     YWi
      Quintile        Bench.         Data    Bench.      Data        Bench.    Data               Bench.              Bench.                      Bench.


      q1                11.40        11.20    63.30      63.18          130     126                54.20                  42.20                     0.28
      q2                11.80        11.04    63.60      63.60          151     141                54.60                  42.20                     0.29
      q3                12.30        12.28    63.90      63.56          170     166                55.40                  42.40                     0.31
      q4                13.00        12.84    63.80      63.52          193     192                56.40                  41.90                     0.35
      q5                15.00        14.55    64.90      64.23          234     226                57.30                  41.60                     0.38

      Notes: Small figures highlighted in gray are data from the HRS on length of schooling and retirement age for males
      born in 1930, and from the Report on the present value of lifetime benefits for the same cohort.




                                                                          17
6                                      Redistributive effects of each pension system

6.1                                       Internal rate of return
One measure to analyze the redistributive characteristics of a pension system, which is not affected
by the scale of contributions (i.e., ppi ), is the internal rate of return (IRR). Thus, we report in Fig-
ure 2 the IRR values of each pension system by income quintile and birth cohort. The differences
in IRR across income quintiles, shown in Fig. 2, are explained by the fact that a pension point
earned by an individual with low life expectancy has a lower value than a pension point earned by
an individual with higher life expectancy (see Eq. (5) and Table 2).

                                                     DB−I                            DB−II                        DB−III                           NDC−I                        NDC−II
                                  3
 Internal rate of return (in %)




                                      NDC−III                         NDC−III                          NDC−III                       NDC−III                         NDC−III
                                  2



                                  1



                                  0
                                       1.42 1.57 1.79 2.15 2.51        1.8 1.81 1.96 2.12 2.15          2.07 2.01 2.08 2.06 1.85      1.53 1.64 1.81 2.1 2.44         1.82 1.86 1.94 2.05 2.17


                                       q1       q2    q3    q4   q5    q1       q2    q3     q4   q5    q1       q2   q3   q4   q5    q1       q2   q3   q4   q5      q1       q2   q3   q4   q5
                                                                                                           Income quintile

                                                                                           (a) Mortality regime of 1930 cohort

                                                     DB−I                            DB−II                        DB−III                           NDC−I                        NDC−II
                                  3
 Internal rate of return (in %)




                                      NDC−III                         NDC−III                          NDC−III                       NDC−III                         NDC−III
                                  2



                                  1



                                  0
                                      −0.25 0.39 1.55 2.54 2.76        0.92 1.09 2.03 2.37 2.34         1.84 1.9 2.18 2.06 1.92       0.6      1    1.79 2.38 2.52    1.57 1.72 1.98 2.13 2.16


                                       q1       q2    q3    q4   q5    q1       q2    q3     q4   q5    q1       q2   q3   q4   q5    q1       q2   q3   q4   q5      q1       q2   q3   q4   q5
                                                                                                           Income quintile

                                                                                           (b) Mortality regime of 1960 cohort

Figure 2: Internal rate of return of each pension system by income quintile (in percentage). US
males, with mortality regime of birth cohorts 1930 (Panel a) and 1960 (Panel b)
Notes: Horizontal lines depict the internal rate of return of the NDC-III system. The numbers at the bottom of each
column report the internal rate of return for each income quintile group.


                                                                                                                  18
   In a stable, mature PAYG pension system, the implicit rate of return equals the rate of growth
of the population plus the rate of growth of productivity, or in this case 2.0% per year. In Fig. 2 we
see that this rate of return is achieved by all income groups and mortality regimes under NDC-III
—see black solid line— in which both point accumulation and the annuity rate are adjusted for the
mortality of each group. This is the benchmark against which we can assess the rate of return for
the groups under the other pension systems. For the NDC-I and NDC-II cases, we see that the lower
income quintiles q1, q2 and q3 have IRR<2.0 —see the numbers in black at the bottom of each
bar— and therefore are redistributing income to the higher income q4 and q5 who have IRR>2.0,
and this redistribution is greater for the mortality regime of the 1960 birth cohort. The situation
is more complicated for the DB systems. The actual US system, corresponding quite closely to
DB-II, is explicitly designed to be redistributive from rich to poor through explicit differences in
the replacement rates by income. However, we see that because of differential mortality, DB-
II fails in this goal, and instead redistributes from q1 and q2 to q4 and q5 under both mortality
regimes, but particularly with more unequal mortality. The q3 group does redistribute to others, at
least slightly, under the 1930 mortality regime and becomes a net receiver under the more unequal
mortality. In other words, the differential mortality completely undoes and mostly reverses the
intended progressivity of the DB-II system (Sánchez-Romero and Prskawetz, 2017). Under DB-
III, which both has progressive benefit levels and makes additional adjustments to benefits for
differential mortality, there is a significant improvement, but the degree of progressivity is also
weakened with the more unequal mortality regime.


6.2    The value of investing an additional dollar in each pension system
Another method to measure the redistributive effects of a pension system is to look at the relative
value of investing an additional dollar in the pension system compared to the value of investing
an additional dollar in the capital market; i.e P i . Hence, as shown in sections 3.2 and 4.2, P i can
be used to study at each age and across individual types the redistributive effect of each pension
system. Moreover, P i complements the information provided in the previous section, since the
IRR measures the redistributive effects of each pension system over the whole life cycle, while P i
does it by age.
   To understand the redistributive properties by age, we compare the value of P i for each pension
system to our benchmark (NDC-III). We report in Figure 3 the difference in the evolution of P i
for each pension plan and that in the NDC-III by income quintile and birth cohort. Vertical axes
in Fig. 3 reflect whether the contribution to the system represents a subsidy from other income
groups (positive values) or transfer to other income groups (negative values). We see that NDC-I,
NDC-II, and DB-I (pension plans with a flat replacement rate) redistribute income from poor (q1,


                                                 19
                             DB−I                     DB−II                        DB−III                   NDC−I                        NDC−II
                0.25




                                         0.25




                                                                      0.25




                                                                                               0.25




                                                                                                                            0.25
                0.00




                                         0.00




                                                                      0.00




                                                                                               0.00




                                                                                                                            0.00
Pi − PNDC−III
                −0.25




                                         −0.25




                                                                      −0.25




                                                                                               −0.25




                                                                                                                            −0.25
      i




                                                                                                                                                  q1
                                                                                                                                                  q2
                −0.50




                                         −0.50




                                                                      −0.50




                                                                                               −0.50




                                                                                                                            −0.50
                                                                                                                                                  q3
                                                                                                                                                  q4
                                                                                                                                                  q5
                        30   40     50           30   40      50              30    40    50           30   40     50               30    40    50
                             Age                      Age                           Age                      Age                          Age

                                                            (a) Mortality regime of 1930 cohort

                             DB−I                     DB−II                        DB−III                   NDC−I                        NDC−II
                0.25




                                         0.25




                                                                      0.25




                                                                                               0.25




                                                                                                                            0.25
                0.00




                                         0.00




                                                                      0.00




                                                                                               0.00




                                                                                                                            0.00
Pi − PNDC−III
                −0.25




                                         −0.25




                                                                      −0.25




                                                                                               −0.25




                                                                                                                            −0.25
      i




                                                                                                                                                  q1
                                                                                                                                                  q2
                −0.50




                                         −0.50




                                                                      −0.50




                                                                                               −0.50




                                                                                                                            −0.50
                                                                                                                                                  q3
                                                                                                                                                  q4
                                                                                                                                                  q5
                        30   40     50           30   40      50              30    40    50           30   40     50               30    40    50
                             Age                      Age                           Age                      Age                          Age

                                                            (b) Mortality regime of 1960 cohort

Figure 3: Relative value of investing an additional dollar in the pension system, P i (x), from age
30 to 55 by income quintile relative to NDC-III. US males, with mortality regime of birth cohorts
1930 (Panel a) and 1960 (Panel b)


q2, and q3) to rich income groups (q4 and q5). The situation is reversed in the progressive pension
systems DB-II and DB-III, in which we see that the higher income quintiles q4 and q5 have a lower
                                                                                                                 N DC III
value of P i than lower income quintiles q1 and q2. The fact that P i                                        Pi             is negative for all
income quintiles is due to the fact that the marginal replacement rate of DB-II and DB-III systems
compared to the marginal replacement rate of the NDC-III system —see first column in Table 5—
is 23%(=1-0.32/0.417) lower, for individuals with pension points between one-sixth and one av-
erage labor income, and 64%(=1-0.15/0.417) lower, for individuals with pension points between
one and two times the average labor income. Comparing the results between the two mortality
regimes (cf. panels (a) and (b)), we see further redistribution of income from poor individuals to


                                                                                   20
          Table 5: Marginal and average replacement rates at the normal retirement age

      Case          Marginal replacement rate                         Replacement rate
                    fi (Rn , ppi (Rn ))(1 "i )                        fi (Rn , ppi (Rn ))
                      8                                                 8
                      >
                      >  0.90 for ppi  ȳ/6,                           >
                                                                        >  0.90                  for ppi  ȳ/6,
                      >
                      >                                                 >
                                                                        >
                      >
                      >                                                 >
                                                                        >
      DB-II           <0.32 for ȳ/6 < pp < ȳ,                         <0.32 + 0.58 ȳ          for ȳ/6 < ppi < ȳ,
                                            i                                           6 ppi

      DB-III         >
                     > 0.15   for ȳ < ppi  2ȳ,                       >
                                                                        > 0.15 +       1.60 ȳ
                                                                                                 for ȳ < ppi  2ȳ,
                     >
                     >                                                  >
                                                                        >                6 ppi
                     >
                     >                                                  >
                                                                        >
                     :0.00    for 2ȳ < ppi ,                           : 3.40 ȳ                for 2ȳ < ppi ,
                                                                               6 ppi




      DB-I
      NDC-I
                    0.417                                             0.417
      NDC-II
      NDC-III


      Notes: The term ȳ denotes the average labor income of the economy.



rich individuals under NDC-I, NDC-II and DB-I plans and similar implicit taxes between poor and
rich individuals in the more unequal mortality regime.


6.3   Wealth
The fact that pension systems redistribute income across income groups leads individuals to re-
spond in order to cope with the increase/loss of wealth. The lifetime wealth measure (LW) gives
the most comprehensive assessment of the effects of the different pension designs on economic
wellbeing, because it includes the general behavioral responses. These responses are reflected
in the LW —see Eq. (10)— through changes in the social security wealth at age x0 , SSW(x0 ),
and through changes in the stock of human capital (HK) at age x0 valued as the present value of
expected lifetime earnings
                                            Z    Ri       Rt
                                                               r+µi (j)dj
                              HKi (x0 ) =             e   x0
                                                                            yi (Si , t)dt.                              (19)
                                                Si



   To analyze the changes in LW across pension systems by income quintiles, we again use the
NDC-III system as a benchmark against which we can assess these changes —see Table 9 in
Appendix E. Figure 4 shows the percentage change in SSW (green bars) and HK (dark red bars)

                                                          21
                               DB−I                       DB−II                     DB−III                    NDC−I                   NDC−II
                20


                10
 Change in %




                 0


               −10


               −20
                     q1   q2    q3    q4   q5   q1   q2    q3     q4   q5    q1   q2    q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5
                                                                              Income quintile
                                                                  Social security wealth          Stock of human capital


                                                             (a) Mortality regime of 1930 cohort

                               DB−I                       DB−II                     DB−III                    NDC−I                   NDC−II
                20


                10
 Change in %




                 0


               −10


               −20
                     q1   q2    q3    q4   q5   q1   q2    q3     q4   q5    q1   q2    q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5
                                                                              Income quintile
                                                                  Social security wealth          Stock of human capital


                                                             (b) Mortality regime of 1960 cohort

Figure 4: Effects of each pension system and mortality regime on human capital and Social Se-
curity wealth by income quintile (measured in percentage change with respect to the results in the
NDC-III system). US males, mortality regimes of birth cohorts 1930 (Panel a) and 1960 (Panel b).
Notes: Bars are plotted in ‘stacked’ format. When bars have opposite signs, lifetime wealth is the difference between
both bars. When bars have similar signs, lifetime wealth equals the height of the two bars.


by income quintile between the alternative pension systems and the NDC-III system. Figure 4
shows that while the alternative pension plans produce similar SSW values, they induce behavioral
reactions, through changes in the length of education and on retirement, that affect HK —see
tables 6–7 in Appendix E. Looking at each pension plan, we can see that the DB-I system leads
to an increase in HK for all income quintiles under the mortality regime of the 1930 cohort, while
under the mortality regime of the cohort born in 1960, the DB-I system benefits mostly the higher
income quintiles. In all cases the increase is driven by the postponement in the retirement age, the
additional years of schooling, and by the higher wage rate due to further investments in human

                                                                                   22
capital. Instead, the actual US pension system —i.e., DB-II— reduces HK of q4–q5 under the
mortality regime of the cohort bon in 1930 due to the significant drop in the relative value of
investing an additional dollar in the pension system for these two income groups (see Fig. 3).
Under the mortality regime of the cohort born in 1960 the overall effect of the DB-II plan on HK
is negative. This is because individuals respond to the decline in the relative value of investing
an additional dollar in the pension system and in the returns to education by reducing the length
of schooling. The quintile q3 faces a higher relative value of investing an additional dollar in the
pension system than the other quintiles, because while the length of schooling does not change
relative to that in the NDC-III plan, the retirement age is higher relative to that in the NDC-III
plan.
   The impact of the DB-III system on HK is similar to that in DB-II but now the progressivity of
the pension system is re-introduced. It is striking that in DB plans the indirect effects on HK arising
from incentives for school, work, and retirement, usually are far larger than in NDC plans. This
is because DB plans, with the retirement incentives designed in the US pension system, produce
an incentive to retire at later ages, which does not necessarily coincide with incentives of the NDC
plans. As a consequence, the increase in the retirement age leads to an increase in the length of
schooling in the DB-I plan. However, in DB-II and DB-III plans, the increase in the non-pecuniary
cost of schooling offsets the increase in the returns of education, leading to a lower length of
schooling relative to that in the NDC-III plan.
   Under the NDC-I and NDC-II plans, lower income quintiles q1–q3 experience a reduction in
HK, whereas the HK of higher income quintiles increases. Under the mortality regime of the 1960
birth cohort, the increase in HK under the NDC-I and NDC-II is due to a postponement of the
retirement age compared to the NDC-III plan.


6.4     Welfare
We have shown in the previous section that differences in lifetime wealth come with changes in
schooling and leisure time, through age at retirement. Given that our lifetime utility (see Eq. 11)
includes disutility of schooling, labor, and the utility from retirement, we can assess the impact of
the different pension plans on lifetime welfare by income quintile. We will not attempt to assess
how well the pension system solves the underlying problem that some people cannot provide for
their own retirement. Instead, we see how lifetime utility under each pension program would differ
from lifetime utility under the neutral NDC-III program structure (NDC with separate life tables)
for each income quintile. These differences are shown in Figure 5.
   In Figure 5 we show the impact on lifetime welfare of each pension system by income quintile
relative to the NDC-III plan. By comparing outcomes to those for the NDC-III system for each


                                                  23
                                   DB−I                       DB−II                   DB−III                   NDC−I                    NDC−II
                  0.25



                  0.00
 Change (in %)




                 −0.25



                 −0.50



                 −0.75
                         q1   q2    q3    q4   q5   q1   q2    q3     q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5
                                                                                 Income quintile

                                                                (a) Mortality regime of 1930 cohort

                                   DB−I                       DB−II                   DB−III                   NDC−I                    NDC−II
                  0.25



                  0.00
 Change (in %)




                 −0.25



                 −0.50



                 −0.75
                         q1   q2    q3    q4   q5   q1   q2    q3     q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5   q1   q2   q3   q4   q5
                                                                                 Income quintile

                                                                (b) Mortality regime of 1960 cohort

Figure 5: Impact of each pension system on welfare by income quintile (relative to the NDC-III
system). US males, with mortality regime of birth cohorts 1930 (Panel a) and 1960 (Panel b).


income quintile, we isolate the impact on welfare of each pension plan relative to a non redistribu-
tive pension system. The first important result can be seen by comparing in Fig. 5 the differences
between the NDC plans and DB plans. Recall that all DB plans are implemented with the penal-
ties/rewards for early/late retirement established in the US pension system, which give individuals
an incentive to retire at a later age than NDC plans. In our particular case, under the mortality
regime of the 1930 cohort, individuals retire between ages 61 and 65 in NDC plans, whereas in-
dividuals retire at older ages under the DB systems —see Table 7 in Appendix E. This difference
in the retirement age between NDC and DB plans accounts for the strong behavioral response, its
impact on the stock of human capital (see Fig. 4), and the welfare loss through the heavy cost in
leisure.


                                                                                     24
    In NDC plans we do not observe significant differences in the length of schooling. Thus, the
sign of the change in welfare across income quintiles is explained by the impact of the pension
system on retirement. Moreover, given that the NDC-II is closer than the NDC-I to the NDC-III,
the NDC-II plan creates smaller welfare differences across income quintiles than the NDC-I.
    Comparing the results across DB plans is slightly more complicated. First, we know that the
DB-I plan gives individuals higher incentives to retire later —increasing their marginal benefit
of education— and to stay longer in schooling. This explains the increase in the stock of human
capital (see Fig. 4) under the mortality regime of the 1930 cohort, and for q3–q5 under the mortality
regime of the 1960 cohort. However, the increase in human capital comes at the expense of facing
a higher disutility from schooling and a loss in leisure. Only those in the highest income quintile
are better off due to the strong redistribution of resources from short-lived and poor individuals
to long-lived and rich individuals (see Fig. 2). Unlike the DB-I plan, the US pension system
(DB-II plan) introduces a high implicit tax on work to all income quintiles. As a consequence,
individuals retire in the DB-II earlier than in DB-I, though still later than in the NDC plans due to
the penalties on early retirement. Moreover, given that the DB-II system produces a high implicit
tax on labor, decreasing the marginal benefit of education, the length of schooling is shortened. The
combination of these three behavioral reactions explains the reduction in human capital (see Fig. 4)
and the increase in welfare to all income quintiles relative to DB-I, except for q5 that now transfers
resources to short-lived and poor individuals. DB-III corrects for differences in life expectancy,
leaving the short-lived and poor individuals better off, compared to the DB-II, and worsens the
situation for long-lived and rich individuals.


7    Conclusion
Public pension systems are intended to provide a stable source of post retirement income, given
that individuals have well-known difficulties saving for retirement. Some pension systems are also
designed to redistribute income from individuals with higher lifetime incomes to those with lower.
Almost all public pension systems are PAYG, delivering an average rate of return to participants
equal to the rate of growth of the economy, which is typically lower than the market rate of interest,
and consequently participants may view their contributions at least partially as a tax on labor.
Pension systems modify labor supply incentives in two important ways. First, the perceived tax
on labor may lead participants to work less than otherwise. Second, in DB systems the benefit
structure has often created incentives for early retirement, and built in progressivity may provide
further disincentives for labor. NDC systems were developed to avoid the early retirement incentive
effects by mimicking funded DC programs, but they cannot avoid the “tax on labor” disincentive
so long as they are PAYG.

                                                 25
   It is increasingly realized that socioeconomic differences in longevity add a regressive element
on the benefit side of pensions, so long as systems use a one-size-fits-all life table to establish ac-
tuarial tradeoffs and set the benefit rate and normal retirement age. Researchers and policy makers
are seeking policy options to offset this regressive effect. However, it is important to keep in mind
that policy adjustments will have both direct and indirect effects on systems and their progressivity
through the behavioral responses of socioeconomic groups, effects which can be evaluated using
actuarial calculations. The policy adjustments will also alter the decisions and behavior of indi-
viduals in different socioeconomic groups, because incentives for getting education, for hours of
work, and for retirement age, will all be affected.
   Here we have assessed the direct and indirect effects of a variety of policy adjustments to DB
and NDC pension programs, which are assumed to have existed over the long term, operating in
environments of more or less mortality heterogeneity (reflecting the mortality regimes of the 1930
vs 1960 birth cohorts). We have not yet attempted to investigate transitions from one program to
another, although that is the situation that policy makers must face. Our analysis is based on a
general equilibrium context for a small open economy in which wages and interest rates are set by
international markets, while individuals make optimizing choices for education, labor effort, age
at retirement, and consumption trajectories. We have a number of important findings.

   1. We replicate, in our simulations, the regressive effect of socioeconomic differences in mor-
      tality, and the large increase in regressivity moving from the mortality regimes of the 1930
      and 1960 birth cohorts, for single life table systems, whether DB or NDC.

   2. Taking an actuarial approach (not general equilibrium) we find that the progressivity in ben-
      efits built into the US Social Security system greatly reduces the regressivity that mortality
      variation imparts, under either mortality regime. However, only when each group has its
      own appropriate life table is that regressivity overcome, resulting in a slightly progressive
      system as measured by the IRR (internal rate of return). Apparently achieving progressivity
      in lifetime benefits would require more than the current progressivity in annual benefits in
      combination with life tables for each group.

   3. If we also take into account the behavioral responses to policy adjustments, these have siz-
      able indirect effects. One way to assess these is through their impact on lifetime wealth.
      Under all NDC versions, the indirect effects of policy adjustments on wealth are relatively
      small and regressive. For the DB systems, the indirect effects are stronger. The indirect
      effects can be positive with non-progressive pension plans when the difference in life ex-
      pectancy across income quintiles is small. However, this same system induces highly regres-
      sive effects under an environment with more mortality heterogeneity. The indirect effects


                                                  26
      of adding progressive benefits are strongly negative at higher incomes, and these change but
      little when group-specific life tables are added. In general these indirect effects are quite
      similar in the two mortality regimes in combination with life tables for each group.

   4. But variations in lifetime wealth may mask offsetting variations in leisure, and the most
      complete assessment of policy effects emerges from comparisons of lifetime utility across
      pension programs. Relative to the neutral NDC-III lifetime utility, we find welfare losses
      for lower incomes and small welfare gains for higher incomes. This pattern arises from the
      utility cost of harder and longer work, which comes at a heavy cost in leisure. A reduction
      in welfare losses for the lower incomes and welfare gains for richer incomes can be achieved
      through the progressivity of benefits. However, only when benefits are adjusted using differ-
      ent life tables for each group do we observe slight welfare gains for the lower income groups
      relative to NDC-III.

   5. Pension systems that introduce separate life tables for each group achieve the best welfare
      outcomes for the bottom three quintiles, in both NDC systems and DB systems. This finding
      suggests that policy makers should seriously consider pension policies of this sort.

Besides the above mentioned findings, in this paper we also propose a general pension frame-
work for simultaneously analyzing existing pension systems. In this general framework we exploit
the relative value of investing an additional dollar in the pension system, which can be used for
studying the redistributive properties of each pension system as well as the behavioral response
on education, hours worked, retirement, and consumption caused by each pension system. This
general pension framework can be used for addressing some currently debated pension reforms
that hinge on life expectancy heterogeneity (Breyer et al., 2010; NASEM, 2015). For instance, we
show that pension plans in which benefits are based on different life tables (Ayuso et al., 2016,
2017; OECD, 2017; Holzmann et al., forthcoming) still provide a higher return to individuals with
higher lifetime income than to those with lower. Thus, to restore an equal treatment of the pension
system to all income groups requires additional measures.


References
Arrazola, M., de Hevia, J., 2004. More on the estimation of the human capital depreciation rate.
  Applied Economic Letters 11 (3), 145–148.

Auerbach, A. J., Kotlikoff, L. J., 1987. Dynamic fiscal policy. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
  bridge.


                                                27
Ayuso, M., Bravo, J., Holzmann, R., 2016. On the heterogeneity in longevity among socioeco-
  nomic groups: Scope, trends, and implications for earnings-related pension schemes. IZA Dis-
  cussion Paper No. 10060.

Ayuso, M., Bravo, J., Holzmann, R., 2017. Addressing Longevity Heterogeneity in Pension
  Scheme Design. Journal of Finance and Economics 6 (1), 1–24.

Ben-Porath, Y., 1967. The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings. The Journal
  of Political Economy 75 (4), 352–365.

Bosworth, B., Burtless, G., Zhang, K., 2015. Sources of increasing differential mortality among
  the aged by socioeconomic status. CRR WP 2015-10.

Bosworth, B., Burtless, G., Zhang, K., 2016. Later retirement, inequality in old age, and the grow-
  ing gap in longevity between rich and poor. (The Brookings Institution)

Börsch-Supan, A,. 2006. What are NDC systems? What do they bring to reform strategies?. Pen-
  sion reform: Issues and prospects for non-financial defined contribution (NDC) schemes, 35-55.

Breyer, F., Hupfeld, S., 2010. On the fairness of early-retirement provisions. German Economic
  Review 11 (1), 60–77.

Burtless, G., 2013. The impact of population aging and delayed retirement on workforce produc-
  tivity. CRR WP 2013-11.

Cervellati, M., Sunde, U., 2013. Life expectancy, schooling, and lifetime labor supply: Theory and
  evidence revisited. Econometrica 81 (5), 2055–2086.

Chetty, R., 2006. A new method of estimating risk aversion. American Economic Review, 96 (5),
  1821–1834.

Chetty, R., Stepner, M., Abraham, S., Lin, S., Scuderi, B., Turner, N., Bergeron, A., Cutler,
  D., 2016. The association between income and life expectancy in the United States, 2001–2014.
  The Journal of the American Medical Association, 315 (14), 1750–1766.

Committee on the Long-Run Macroeconomic Effects of the Aging U.S. Population Phase II, 2015.
  The growing gap in life expectancy by income: Implications for federal programs and policy
  responses. Washington, D. C.: The National Academies Press.

Gruber, J., Wise, D., 1999. Social security programs and retirement around the World. Research in
  Labor Economics, 18, 1–40.


                                                28
Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L. J., Todd, P. E., 2006. Earnings Functions, Rates of Return and Treat-
  ment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond. In: E. Hanushek and F. Welch, Editor(s),
  Handbook of the Economics of Education 1, 307–458.

Heijdra, B. J., Reijnders, L. S.-M., 2016. Human capital accumulation and the macroeconomy in
  an ageing society. De Economist, 164, 297–334.

Holzmann, R, Alonso-Garcı́a, J., Labit-Hardy, H., Villegas, A. M., forthcoming. NDC schemes and
  heterogeneity in longevity: Proposals for re-design. In: R. Holzmann, E. Palmer, R. Palacios,
  and S. Sacchi (Eds), Progress and Challenges of Nonfinancial Defined Pension Schemes. Vol 1:
  Addressing Marginalization, Polarization, and the Labor Market

Holzmann, R., Palmer, E., Palacios, R., S. Sacchi (eds), forthcoming. NDC Pension Schemes in a
  Changing Pension World, Volume 3: Progress and Challenges of Nonfinancial Defined Pension
  Schemes. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank and Swedish Social Insurance Agency.

Lee, R. D., Sánchez-Romero, M., forthcoming. Overview of the relationship of heterogeneity in
  life expectancy to pension outcomes and lifetime income. In: R. Holzmann, E. Palmer, R. Pala-
  cios, and S. Sacchi (Eds), Progress and Challenges of Nonfinancial Defined Pension Schemes.
  Vol 1: Addressing Marginalization, Polarization, and the Labor Market.

Mincer, J., 1974. Schooling, Experience and Earnings. New York: Columbia University Press.

OECD, 2005. Pensions at a glance. Public policies across OECD countries. Chapter 2. OECD
  Publishing, Paris, 27–35.

OECD, 2016. Fragmentation of retirement markets due to differences in life expectancy. In OECD
  Business and Finance Outlook 2016, Chapter 6. OECD Publishing, Paris, 177–205.

OECD, 2017. Preventing ageing unequally. OECD Publishing, Paris.

Oreopoulos, P., 2007. Do dropouts drop too soon? Wealth, health and happiness from compulsory
  schooling. Journal of Public Economics 91, 2213–2229.

Oreopoulos, P., Salvanes, K. G., 2011. Priceless: The nonpecuniary benefits of schooling. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 25 (1), 159–84.

Restuccia, D., Vandenbroucke, G., 2013. A century of human capital and hours. Economic Inquiry
  51 (3), 1849–1866.

Rosero-Bixby, L., Dow, W. H., 2016. Exploring why Costa Rica outperforms the United States in
  life expectancy: A tale of two inequality gradients. PNAS, 113 (5), 1130–1137.

                                               29
Rostron, B. L., Boies, J. L., Arias, E., 2010. Education reporting and classification on death cer-
  tificates in the United States. Vital and Health Statistics Series 2, 151, 1–21.

Samuelson, P., 1958. An exact consumption-loan model of interest with or without the social con-
  trivance of money. The Journal of Political Economy, 6 (December): 467–482.

Sánchez-Romero, M., d’Albis, H., Prskawetz, A., 2016. Education, lifetime labor supply, and
  longevity improvements. Journal of Economics Dynamics and Control 73, 118–141.

Sánchez-Romero, M., Prskawetz, A., 2017. Redistributive effects of the US pension system among
  individuals with different life expectancy. The Journal of the Economics of Ageing 10, 51–74.

Sullivan, D., 2013. Trends In Labor Force Participation. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Tomiyama, K., 1985. A two-stage optimal control problems and optimality conditions. Journal of
  Economic Dynamics and Control 9, 317–337.

Waldron, H., 2007. Trends in mortality differentials and life expectancy for male Social Security-
  covered workers, by socioeconomic status. Social Security Bulletin, 67 (3), 1–28.




                                                 30
