                        NBER WOEXING PAPER SERIES




             UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE, RECALL EXPECTATIONS AND
                          UNEMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES




                            Lawrence F. Katz

                             Bruce 0. Meyer




                         Working Paper No. 2594




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 May 1988




We thank Walter Corson for providing data and answering numerous questions
end Robert Scheinerman for research assistance. We have benefitted from
the comments of Steve Albert, Joe Altonji, Larcy Kenny, Cary Solon, Larry
Summers, Robert Topel, participants in the NBER Summer Institute Workshop
on the Labor Market and the Macroeconomy, and seminar participants at
Chicago, Cornell Florida, Harvard, MIT and Northwestern. The research
ceported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies, Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper    2594
                                                 May 1988



                Unemployment Insurance, Recall Expectations and
                             Unemployment Outcomes




                                   ABSTRACT

    This paper shows the importance of explicitly accounting for the

possibility of recalls when analyzing the determinants            of

unemployment spell durations and the effects of unemployment
insurance (UI) on unemployment outcomes in the United States.                 These

issues are examined using a unique sample of UI recipients from

Missouri and Pennsylvania covering unemployment spells in the 1979—

1981 period.    We find that those expectjn recall who are             n
recalled tend   to have quite long unemployment spells.            Furthermore,

ex-ante temporary layoff spells (the spells of individuals' who

initially expect to be recalled) may account for over 60 percent of

the unemployment of UI recipients and appear to account for much more

unemployment than ex-post temporary layoff spells (spells actually

ending in recall).     We estimate a competing risks model in which the

finding of a new job and recall are treated as alternate routes of

leaving unemployment.      Our results using this approach show that the

recall and new job exit probabilities have quite different time

patterns and are often affected in opposite ways by explanatory
variables.     We also find that the probability of leaving unemployment

(both through recalls and new job finding) increases greatly around
the time that UI benefits lapse.



Lawrence Katz                                    Bruce Meyer
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Harvard University                               Northwestern University
Cambridge, MA 02138                              Evanston, Illinois 60208
   Temporary layoffs, where workers are laid of f when demand
declines and often rehired by their original employers, are an

important feature of the U.S. labor market.   Feldstein (1975) and

Lilien (1980) conclude from examinations of establishment data on

turnover that over seventy percent of workers laid of f in U.S.

manufacturing in the 1970's were subsequently rehired by their former

employers.   The layoff—rehire process also appears to be widespread
outside of manufacturing.   Data from the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics for 1980 and 1981 indicate that about fifty percent of heads
of households laid off from nonmanufacturing jobs have unemployment

spells ending in recall.1   Not only do many unemployment spells end

in recall, but a large fraction of the total weeks of unemployment

accumulated by some labor force groups (e.g. unemployment insurance

recipients, manufacturing workers, and prime—age males) occur in

temporary layoff spells.    For example, Feldstein finds that forty

percent of all weeks of unemployment for men age 45—59 in the 1966—71

period were accumulated by individuals who did not change employers,2
    This paper shows the importance of explicitly accounting for the

possibility of recalls when analyzing the composition of

unemployment, the determinants of unemployment spell durations, and
the effects of unemployment insurance (UI) on unemployment outcomes

in the United States.   These issues are examined using a unique


     1This data set is described and analyzed in Katz (1986).

     2Temporary layoffs are also a substantial component of
unemployment in Canada. Robertson (1988) finds for Canada in 1984
that approximately 35 percent of total weeks of unemployment were
accounted for by persons who eventually returned to their former
employers.
                                       2

sample of UI recipients from Missouri      and   Pennsylvania   covering
unemployment spells in the 1979—1981 period.         This data set oombinas

continuous Wage and Benefit History (CWBH) UI administrative records

with information from a follow-up survey conducted approximately one
year after individuals filed for UI benefita The CWHH questions,
which ware asked at the time an individual filed for UI, include
whether   or not each person expected to be reca11ed        The follow—up

aurvay determined whether each unemployment apell ended in recall,
ended In the fInding of a new job. or yes censored at the survey
date. This informatioo allows us to determine the relationship
between reoall axpeotations and unemployment experience for UI
recipients    in the two states.

       The first focus of our empirical work is on the composition of

unemployment of UI recipients.      In particular, we attempt to

determine the fraction of unemployment spells and fraction of time

spent unemployed accounted for by the layoff-recall process. Most

previous research has concluded that temporary layoffs account for
                                                                   of
large fraction of unemployment spells, but a much smaller fraction
total time spent unemployed.3       Two distinct measures of temporary

layoffs    have been used   to determine the fraction of total

     3see Feldstein (1975) and Lilien (l98O) On the other hand,
clark and Summers (1979) argue that temporary layoffs do not account
for a large share of total unemployment in the United States. The
difference in the conclusions appears to come from the emphasis of
the first papers on joblosers, manufacturing employees, and prime-
age males, all of whom (like UI recipients) are more likely to be
involved in temporary layoffs. Murphy and Topel (1987) present
evidence for 1968 to 1985 on the fraction of ongoing unemployment
spells in the Current Population Survey that are classified as
temporary layoffs.
                                      3

unemployment time accounted for by the layoff—recall process.          The

first captures the proportion of unemployment from spells involving

no job change, while the second looks at the fraction of the

unemployed at a point in time who expect to be recalled.       These

measures are likely to underestimate the total amount of unemployment

affected by recall prospects.    The first measure does not include the

unemployment of those who waited for recall but were not eventually
recalled.    The second measure only partially includes people who

expect to be recalled, since recall expectations are likely to fade
as an unemployment spell continues.       We provide evidence that those

jjg         recall who are      recalled tend to have quite long

unemployment spells.    Furthermore, ex—ante temporary layoff spells

(the spells of individuals' who initially expect to be recalled) may
account for much more unemployment than ex—post temporary layoff

spells (those actually ending in recall).
    The second part of our empirical work shows the value of

explicitly treating the possibility of recall when analyzing

unemployment spell durations.    Models that allow recalls naturally

lead to a competing risks specification of the duration of

unemployment spell in which the finding of a new job and recall are
alternate routes of leaving unemployment (Katz, 1986). This

specification differs from the single risk approach typically used in
most studies of unemployment spell durations.       Our findings using the

competing risks approach shows that the recall and new job exit

probabilities have quite different patterns and are often affected in

opposite ways by explanatory variables.       We also find that the
probability of leaving unemployment    (both through recalls and new jcb

finding) increases greatly around the time that UI benefits lapse.
    The reoainder of the paper is organized as follows%        Section I

discuases several theoretical models of the recall process and the
impact of the potential duration of unemployment benefits on
unemployment   outcomes.   These models both guide the empirical work

and aid the interpretation of the results.     Section II describes the

MiasouriPennaylvania unemployment insurance recipients data set.
Section III analyzes the compoaition of unemployment, the search

behavior of the unemployed, the distribution of unemployment spell

durations, and pcstunemployment wages using the Missouri—

Pennsylvsnia data set.     Section IV uses econometric duration models
to empirically determine the impact of recall expectations,

demographic characteristics, and UI variables on unemployment spell
durations and the likelihood of a spell ending in recall.        Section V
concludes



I. Theoretical Backeround



Ell    Pros acts an   Unem   lpent   S all Durat ions

   The duration of unemployment is typically analyzed using a

standard job search model in which unemployed workers generate job

offers by costly search. This approach leads to    a    single risk model
of unemployment spell durations in which unemployment spells can only

end through the finding of an acceptable new job. This formulation is

less appropriate when analyzing the unemployment durations of workers
                                      5

on   layoff   with some possibility of recall. The prospect of recall

affects the probability of leaving unemployment directly through the

rate of actual recalls and indirectly by affecting worker search

behavior. Katz (1986) extends the standard McCall (1970) model of job

search to include an exogenous probability of recall.4      Katz finds

that under reasonable conditions better recall prospects reduce the

new job finding rate by raising the reservation wage and reducing the

likelihood of search.     This suggests that workers who expect to be

recalled may have extremely lpng unemployment spells if their

expectations are not fulfilled.
     Katz (1985) also analyzes a model in which unemployed workers

learn about their recall prospects in a Bayesian manner.     He shows

that the longer a worker is unemployed, all else held constant, the

lower will be his or her subjective probability of recall.      This
result leads to a decreasing reservation wage and possibly increasing

search intensity.     Consequently, the new job finding rate for those
who initially expect to be recalled should rise with unemployment

duration (display positive duration dependence) under this scenario.

     Furthermore, the statistical model of unemployment spell
durations generated by the job search models extended to allow for

recalls is a competing risks model in which unemployment spells can

end either through recall or the finding of an acceptable new job.5

The predictions of standard job search models for how variables


     4Burdett and Mortensen (1978) and Pissarides (1982) also analyze
job search models that incorporate the possibility of recalls.
     5See Kalbfleisch and Prentice
                                   (1980) for a detailed discussion
of competing risks models.
                                              6

affect the escape rate from unemployment really refer to the new job

finding rate and these predictions need not hold for the overall

escape rate from unemployment (the            aunt     of the recall and new job

finding rates)      .     Information   on whether spells ended through reoall

or the finding of a mew job allows an econometrician to estimate a

competing risks model,          The competing risks specification has the

advantage of permitting one to identify the distinct impact of
variables on   the recall rate and the            new    job finding rates,

ThLQLt2QLhL±btnqffls                 and

       The impact       of finite duration UI     on worker
                                               job search and
ecplnyer recall behavior has been analyzed in several ways.
Mortansen (1977) utilizes a standard dynamic search model with no
recall   possibility, a stationary known wage offer distribution, and a
constant rate of job offers.            As the remaining number       of   weeks    of
benefits decreases, the value of remaining unemployed also decreases.
This drop causes search intensity to rise and the resenatiom wage to
fall    as an individual gets closer to when benefits lapse.                    These

changes in behavior imply that the hazard rate (or escape rate) from

unemployment rises till the date of benefits exhaustion and stays
constant   after the       exhaustion date.       On   the other hand,     if
individuals   can locate jobs and arrange mot to begin work until their

benefits run out, one could find a discrete increase in the escape

rate near the point of benefits exhaustion.

   An alternative approach is taken by Moffitt and Nicholson                       (1982)
who use a static model where unemployed workers have preferences over
                                     7

income and unemployment.    Some unemployment is valued because of its

leisure component and because one can search while unemployed.      At

the tine of job loss, individuals choose income and weeks of

unemployment subject to a budget constraint.      The budget constraint

has a convex kink at the week of UI exhaustion because unemployment

ceases to be subsidized.    This kink implies that there may be a

bunching of unemployment spell durations around the time benefits

lapse.
   Mortensen   (1987)   analyzes a joint wealth maximizing model of job

separations with transitory demand changes facing firms and limited
duration of unemployment benefits.       The discrete change in the flow

value of being unemployed when benefits are exhausted yields the

prediction that many firms may recall laid-off workers around the
benefit exhaustion point.

    The theoretical models of unemployment spell durations surveyed

indicate the importance of explicitly taking into account the recall

process and the limited duration of unemployment benefits when

analyzing the unemployment spells of UI recipients.



II. Data Description: The Missouri—Pennsylvania     UI Recipients Sample

    We use a unique data set to determine the fraction of

unemployment of UI recipients due to ex-ante and ex—post layoffs and
the relation of recall expectations to worker job search behavior.

The data set consists of a sample of unemployment insurance

recipients from Missouri and Pennsylvania beginning their

unemployment insurance benefit years during the period October 1979
                                        8

to March igso.6    The data set ccmbines records collected by the

Unemployment Insurance Service under the Continuous Wage and Benefit

History (CWBH) system with ipformation from special supplemental

telephone interviews ccnducted in late 1980 and early 1981.          The CWBH

data include recall expectations, pre—Ul weekly income, and

demographic veriebles obtained from a survey administered when

individuals tiled for UI.    Also included are edministrative records

on wsekly UI   benefits, the number of weeks of benefits for which en
individual   was eligible, end the timing end number of weeks
collected.    The follow-up telephone       interviews ask when a job was
found, the   weekly wsges on the job,        whether the job was with the
pre-Ul employer,   end edditional information.       The construction of

original data set is described by Corson and Nicholson (1983)
   The major advantage of this deta set is that it provides

information on whether individuals expected to be recalled at the

time they filed for UI benefits, on how their initial unemployment

spells ended, end on the level end length of unemployment insurance

benefits available to each individual. Most previous work has used

either CWBH data or survey date in isolation. Studies using only CW8H

data (e.g. Moffitt, 1985; Meyer, 1988) miss the period prior to


     61n other words, the individuals in the sample all filed for
unemployment insurance benefits during the October 1979 to March 1980
period. The initial unemployment spells for almost all of these
individuals began during this time interval. The rare exceptions are
those individuals with unemployment spells that began before October
1, 1979, but who did not file an unemployment insurance claim until
after October 1, 1979,

     7corson and Hilton (1982) provide detailed documentation of the
version of the data set we utilized to extract our sample.
filing for UI, the uncensored length of spells for those who exhaust

benefits, and whether spells end through recall or the finding of a
new job. Studies using micro survey data sets such as the Panel Study

of Income Dynamics or National Longitudinal Survey (e.g.   Dynarski and

Sheffrin, 1987. Katz, 1986) tend to have poor information on the UI

system parameters facing unemployed individuals and may have greater

measurement error because of the retrospective nature of many of the

questions.    One disadvantage of the data set that we use is that it

contains individuals from only two states over a short time period so

that there is not a great deal of variation in the UI system

parameters.    A second disadvantage is that the data set does not

allow us to examine the unemployment experiences of those who do not

receive UI.    This is an important issue because a large and

increasing fraction of the unemployed in the U.S. are not UI
recipients
    The original Missouri-Pennsylvania telephone interview data set

contains 2035 observations. Exclusions for missing demographic data

end incomplete or inconsistent information on unemployment spells

leaves a sample of 1499 observations.9   Variable definitions and


     8Burtless (1983), Murphy and Topel (1987), and Kane (1988)
document the decline in the fraction of the unemployed receiving UI
in the U.S. and examine alternative explanations for this phenomenon.


     9observations were deleted for missing information on age, sex,
marital status, education, the weekly UI benefit level, recall
expectations, and on whether a definite recall date was given.
Individuals who filed a UI claim but were disqualified before
receiving benefits were deleted. 41 individuals in Missouri who
received no weeks of full UI and apparently received partial UI while
working part-time were also deleted. Finally, those individuals with
missing UI claim dates, missing start dates of their initial
                                    10

basic descriptive statistics for   this sample are given in Table 1.
    We focus   most of our analysis on the initial spell of
unemployment in the benefit year for each individual in the sample.
Since the data set consists of a sampling of workers beginning
unemployment insurance spells within a reasonably short interval in
each state, the sample provides an approximation to a random sample
drawn from the inflow of UI recipients into unemployment.10 For an
economy in a steady state, the distribution of first spells of
unemployment of entrants into unemployment is the same as the
distribution of the completed spells of a orosssection of the
unemployed.   This provides some justification for analyzing the

characteristics of initial unemployment   spellsJ    Our further

justification is that the data set provides much better informstion
on first spells then on total unemployment in the benefit year for


unemployment spell, or irreconcilable inconsistencies among their
claim dates, spell start dates, and spell end dates were deleted.

     10Wbila the entire sampling frame covers UI spells beginning
from October 1979 to March 1980, the vast majority (95 percent) of
the individuals from Missouri have benefit year begin dates in from
November 1979 to Jenuary 1980 end the vast majority (92 percent) from
Pennsylvania have benefit year begin dates from January to March 1980.
     0ne    problem with the data set is that the steady state
assumption is likely to be violated, First, since the sample
includes individuals with spells starting in the fourth and first
quarters, meny seasonally unemployed workers are likely to be
included. This is especially likely in Pennsylvania since most of the
sample has unemployment spells beginning in the first quarter. The
likely importance of seasonal unemployment means one must be somewhat
cautious in drawing inferences concerning the distribution of
unemployment over the full year from this sample, Second, fewer
weeks of UI benefit eligibility, if any, are likely to be remaining
for second or third unemployment spells in a benefit year. Thus, the
incentives during the first unemployment spells examined here are
different from those in a random sample of unemployment spells of UI
recipients.
                                     11

each individual.

   We have developed several different measures of unemployment

spell durations.     IUSR measures the unemployment spell starting from

the UI claim date which is available from administrative records, and

FSPELL measures the spell from the respondent's self—reported spell

start date.     These two measures can be computed for both Pennsylvania

and Missouri.     PAYSPELL is an alternative measure that more fully

utilizes administrative records on the actual number of weeks of

benefits received, but it can be computed only for individuals from

Missouri.12     All three unemployment spell measures lead to similar

conclusions concerning the fraction of unemployment due to either

spells ending in recall or individuals who expected recall.     The
PAYSPELL measure provides much more accurate information for

analyzing the distribution of unemployment spell durations.

                is defined as weeks from UI first payment date until
reemployment (or until the interview date if the first unemployment
spell is still in progress at the interview date). We utilized
administrative records rather than respondent retrospective
information whenever possible in constructing PAYSPELL. CWBH
administrative information on the first payment date and on the weeks
of benefits received in the benefit year were only available for
Missouri. For individuals who had a single compensated unemployment
spell in the benefit year and who gained reemployment before benefits
were exhausted, PAYSPELL can be computed from CWBM administrative
records and equals the weeks of benefits received in the benefit
year. Since the available CWBH data does not disaggregate the total
number of weeks of benefits received in a benefit year into
individual spells of compensated unemployment, we were forced to use
respondent retrospective information on weeks of benefits received
for individuals with multiple compensated unemployment spells in the
benefit year. In this case, PAYSPELL equals the survey respondent's
self—reported weeks of benefits received during his or her initial
unemployment spell. For individuals who exhausted their benefits
during their initial unemployment spell, PAYSPELL is given by weeks
from the UI first payment date (from CWBH records) until the self—
reported reemployment date (or until the interview date if the spell
is censored)
                                        12

       The descriptive statistics in Table 1 indicate that the prospect

of recall was relevant for a large majority of the UI recipients in

tha sample.       When asked soon after their unemployment spells began,

seventy—five percent expected to be recalled end eighteen percent had
e definite recall date from their      employerJ3   Fifty-seven percent of
the individuals in the sample had initial unemployment spells ending

in recell.       The mean un employment spell duretion is about 15 veeks

when    measured from the claim date and about 16 weeks when meesured
rrom toe end ot the pro-UI job. 14
    Unemployment insurance recipients in Missouri and Pennsylvania
largely consisted of blue collar occupations end workers previously
employed in construction sod meoufecturimg. The importance of
recells varied substantially across industries, Sixty—six percent of
the workers laid—off from construction, mining, sod manufacturing hed
spells ending in recall as opposed to thirty—seven percent of the
workers from transportation, trade, services end administretioo.


       The   unemployment spell durations are substantially longer on

average for the Missouri sample.       The mean spell length using IUSR is

apprmximetely 17 weeks for Missouri and approximately 13 weeks for

Peonsylvenia.      The fraction of spells ending in recall is 64 percent


     13The recall expectations information arises from a claimant
survey questionnaire which clearly indicates that the information is
confidential and only for statistical mnd research purposes. The
information is not utilized to determine claimant job search
requirements or benefits eligibility.
     14These means are underestimates of the true mean duration of
completed spells since only incomplete spell durations are available
for the 8 percent of the spells censored at the interview date.
                                    13

in Pennsylvania and only 51 percent in Missouri.

   The rules concerning the level and duration of UI benefits were
much more generous in Pennsylvania than in Missouri during the period

of our sample.15 In particular, the maximum weekly benefit available

was $105 in Missouri and $170 in Pennsylvania in 1980.    In fact, the

mean weekly benefit amount of $125 for individuals from Pennsylvania

in our sample is greater than the maximum possible benefit in

Missouri.   Pre-Ul earnings were similar in the two states leading to

a much higher replacement rate in Pennsylvania.    Regular UI benefits
in Pennsylvania had a uniform duration of 30 weeks, while Missouri

had a maximum potential duration of 26 weeks with variation in the

potential duration that depended on base period and high quarter

earnings.   The Missouri sample provides substantial variation in the

potential length of benefits, while the Pennsylvania sample provides
almost none. Extended benefits were triggered in February 1980 in

Pennsylvania   and in May 1980 in Missouri.   The extensions raised the

potential length of benefits to 39 weeks in Pennsylvania and
increased the potential length by fifty percent in Missouri.

     The extent to which firms' UI payroll taxes depended on their

previous layoff rates also differed greatly in the two states.     A

firm's future payroll taxes increased with layoffs until the firm's

unemployment rate reached 6.3 percent in Missouri as compared to 3.6

percent in Pennsylvania.    On the other hand, Topel (1985) calculates


     15Topel (1985) provides detailed information on the
characteristics of the UI systems for Missouri, Pennsylvania and
several other states circa 1980. Corson and Nicholson (1983) provide
further information on the rules concerning the determination of UI
benefit levels and potential durations in Missouri and Pennsylvania.
                                      14

that the marginal affect of layoffs on future taxes was much greater

in Pennsylvania than in Missouri when unemplolnnent was below the

maximum.

     These UI system characteristics indicate that firms in highly

cyclical or seasonal industries in Pennsylvania were unlikely to be

experience-rated on the margin end that the replacement rate was ouch

higher in Pennsylvania.      These factors help explain why a larger

fcsction   of UI   recipients in Pennsylvania were involved in short

layoff spells ending in recall to their original employer. 25
percent of recipients in Pennsylvania had definite recell dates        end
64 percent were recalled,     The corresponding figures for Missouri

were 12 end 51 percent.



flsesThe combination of administrative records and survey data
available in the Missouri-Pennsylvania date set provides a unique
opoortunity to explore the accuracy of survey information on weekly
benefit levels, weeks of benefit receipt, end unemployment spell
durations, The date set allows us to compare accurate administrative
records with the survey responses of the UI recipients.      We find that

the sample members provide quite accurate information on the level of

UI benefits they received and quite poor information on the weeks of

benefits received and the dates of the beginning and ending of their

unemployment spells.     67.5 percent of the 1408 individuals in our

sample that provided information on the level of weekly benefits

reported exactly (to the dollar) the benefit level indicated by
                                     15

administrative records.     85 percent of the sample were within $10 of

the true amount.     The mean self—report was slightly downward biased

($102 reported vs. $105 actual) and the variance of the reporting
error divided by the variance of the true value was a fairly small

.26.

        On the other hand, very few individuals in the sample reported

weeks of benefit receipt the same as indicated by their CWBH records.

Only 15 percent of the 561 individuals in Missouri with a single

spell of unemployment in the benefit year reported weeks of benefit

receipt equivalent to the number provided by administrative records,
35 percent have deviations from CWBH records of over 4   weeks)6    The

mean absolute difference between weeks reported by respondents and

CWBH records is 4.5 weeks.     Many inconsistencies in reported dates
are apparent in the sample (e.g. reported end date of pre-Ul job

after UI claim date or UI first payment date available from

administrative records).     It appears that people may remember salient

dollar amounts far better than the timing of events such as the start

and end dates of unemployment spells.



III. Recall Expectations and Unemployment Outcomes: Some Evidence

       In this section, we analyze the fraction of the unemployment of

UI recipients in Missouri and Pennsylvania that can be accounted for


     16Consistent comparisons of self—reported weeks and
administrative records can only be done for individuals from Missouri
with a single spell of unemployment. Administrative records on weeks
of benefit receipt are not available for Pennsylvania.   Individuals
with multiple spells from Missouri may include weeks of benefit
receipt in latter spells outside the benefit year covered in our CWBH
data set.
                                    16

by ex-ante and ax-post layoffs, the relation between recall

expectations and job search behavior, and the importance of taking
into account the possibility of recall when analyzing the

determinants of unemployment spell durations



Reca11ptatlons, JobSearch         and   theCposijonofUnipygnt
    The usual method of assessing the contribution of temporary

layoffs to unemployment uses an ax-post concept of temporary layoffs

(Feldstein, 1975; Lilian, 1980)    Ex—post temporary layoffs are

unemployment spells that end through rehire to the original employer.
This concept is appropriate if one Is interested in the amount of

unemployment that does not involve a change in employers.
     This concept is not the correct one for assessing the
contribution of the temporary layoff process to total unemployment,

The ax—post approach does not take into account the fact that some

workers who expect to be recalled at the tire of layoff are not

recalled or find other jobs before being recalled. Workers expecting

recall whose expectations are not met, may have quite long

unemployment spells since they are unlikely to search intensively for
a new job as long as they regard the probability of recall to a

valuable old job as high.   If these workers receive UI benefits, they

may be willing to wait as long as the benefits last before searching
for another job.   Imperfectly experience—rated firms may have an
incentive to encourage workers in whom they have invested to wait for

recall.   Other employers may be unwilling to incur the initial fixed

costs of hiring and training workers with reasonable prospects of
                                         17

recall to   a   more attractive job.    These factors suggest an ex— ante

temporary layoff concept as the proper measure of the amount of

unemployment affected by the layoff-recall process. We define ex-ante

temporary layoff unemployment as the unemployment arising in spells

in which the individual expected to be recalled at the time of

layoff.     The recall expectations information in our Missouri—

Pennsylvania data set allows us to compare this unemployment concept
with the usual ax-post temporary layoff approach.

    Table 2 presents the distribution of first unemployment spells

and weeks of first spell unemployment by spell outcome, recall

expectations, and definite recall status for our entire sample using

the ItJSR unemployment concept.        Since it is unlikely that many of the

long censored spells ended in recall, it appears reasonable to
conclude that about 57 percent of the unemployment spells and 32

percent of the weeks of unemployment of UI recipients in our two
states are accounted for by ax-post temporary layoffs.17        The typical

spell ending in recall was substantially shorter than those ending in
the finding of a new job.      Less than 10 percent of unemployment is

accounted for by spells in which individuals had a definite recall

date.     On the other hand, almost 64 percent of unemployment is

accounted for by ex-ante temporary layoffs. Table 3 yields

qualitatively similar findings for Missouri alone using the PAYSPELL

unemployment Spell measure which more fully uses available

     17The share of
                     unemployment accounted for by temporary layoffs
is likely to be overstated in this sample relative to a random sample
of unemployment spells over the calendar year since most of the
spells started in the peak period for temporary seasonal layoffs
(December, .January, and February).
                                      18

administrative information than the ITJSR measure.

    Table 4 provides more detailed information on the relation

between recall expectations and unemployment outcomes,       72 percent of

those who expected to be recalled and 13 percent of those who did not

expect to be recalled had spells actually ending in recall.        An

interesting finding from this table is that      flgpgthe vast

flanfiftsercent     of the total une
he recall ad is accounted for by the minq
                                             of       hx     ected to
                                                owgqu4_ecalled.
UI recipients who cx ante expected to be recalled and ax post were
not recalled tend to have quite long unemployment spells. While this
group accounts for only 21 percent of the entire sample, it accounts
for approximately 34 percent of first spell unemployment.        Since many

of the individuals of this group had spells censored at the interview

date, 34 percent may be an underestimate.18

    One plausible reason why those who expect be recalled but are not

tend to have long unemployment spells is that they may rationelly

decide to wait for recall and not search very intensively for a new

job.   (They may also have a difficult time gaining new jobs since

employers will be reluctant to hire those likely to return to their
old jobs.)   Table 5 provides some information on the search behavior

of the UI recipients in our sample.        59 percent of the UI recipients

claimed to have looked for work at the time they were laid off. The

average searcher spent 12 hours   a   week looking for work. Those that



     180n the other hand, many of the censored spells may involve
individuals who have dropped out of the labor force.
                                      19

expected to be recalled were substantially less likely to search than
those who did not expect to be recalled and they searched many fewer

hours on average as well.     This result is consistent with the finding

of Barron and Mellow (1979) that those who classify themselves as

being on "temporary layoff" in the Current Population Survey spend

less time searching than do other individuals who classify themselves

as unemployed. Low search intensity may play a role in the low rate

of new job finding of those who expect to be recalled.

    One may be interested in the distribution of total weeks of

unemployment in   a   benefit year rather than just first spell

unemployment.     If some groups have proportionally more unemployment

in second and third spells, examining only the first spell would give

a distorted picture of the distribution of unemployment.      This bias

would occur if past unemployment was either an inoculation against

future unemployment or a cause for greater difficulty in finding and

keeping a job.    While the data set does not allow the construction of

a good measure of total unemployment weeks in the benefit year, it

does provide information on total weeks of compensated unemployment

(Weeks of UI benefit receipt) for the Missouri sample.      This measure

is also directly relevant for evaluating the fraction of UI benefits

accruing to individuals involved in temporary layoffs.
    The distribution of total compensated unemployment in the benefit

year by outcome of the first spell and first spell recall

expectations is presented in Table 6.      Individuals whose first spell

ended in recall account for almost 41 percent of the total weeks of

compensated unemployment.      This percentage is substantially larger
                                  20

than their share of total weeks of first spell unemployment.       This

difference arises because those recalled are more likely to have

multiple spells of UI receipt in a year and because weeks of

unemployment after UI exhaustion are not included.     A   reasonable

conclusion from this table is that a large fraction (maybe 40 percent

or more) of the weeks of compensated unemployment in Missouri in this

period were accounted for by ax-post temporary layoff Spells.       This

finding is quite similar to that of Robertson (1988)    for Canada.

Robertson finds that 44 percent of total UI weeks in Canada in 1984

were accounted for by ex-post temporary layoffs.     Thus, a substantial

proportion of insured unemployment in both the U.S. and canada

appears to be related to the layoff—recall process.


mentEarnins
    An important element in the evaluation of the success of a UI

program is the effect of UI on the wages of reemployed workers.
Table 7 provides information on the post—UI job earnings relative to

pre-Ul job earnings of those individuals in the Missouri-Pennsylvania

sample reemployed by the interview date.19   Those with unemployment

spells ending in recall appear to go back to their old jobs since
their post-UI hourly earnings are quite similar to their pre-Ul



     19Pre—UI earnings are from information provided by respondents
at the time that they made their UI claims. Post-UI earnings are
from the follow-up survey. The choice of deflator (Average Hourly
Earnings vs. CPI) affects conclusions about the magnitude of earnings
changes. The earnings losses are substantially larger when the CPI
is used as the deflator. On the other hand, the choice of deflator
does not substantively affect any conclusions concerning relative
earnings changes of any of the groups compared.
                                    21

hourly earnings. On the other hand, the usual weekly hours of those
rehired by their previous employers do decline by about 4.5 percent

on average.   The reduced hours of those recalled suggest may relate

to the cyclical downturn that gained force by the middle of 1980.

    Individuals with spells ending through the finding of new jobs

typically experienced substantial earnings declines.   In particular,

the hourly earnings of those who expected to be recalled but were not

fell by 15 percent on average, while new job finders who did not

expect to be recalled experienced 11 percent earnings losses on

average.   Table 7 also illustrates that individuals who exhausted

their benefits experienced the largest earnings declines by a

substantial margin.   Their hourly earnings declined by 30 percent on

average and their weekly earnings declined even further.   The large

losses of exhaustees suggest that reservation wages are likely to
fall substantially and that the new job finding rate is likely to

increase substantially as benefits run out.   An alternative

explanation for the low relative reemployment earnings of those with

long spells is heterogeneity in reemployment prospects.    Workers with

low job offer arrival rates are likely to have both low reservation

wages and low escape rates from unemployment for many plausible wage
offer distributions   (Mortensen, 1986).


The Distribution of Unemoloyinent Spell Durations

   The pattern of initial unemployment spell durations in our

Missouri sample of UI recipients using the PAYSPELL unemployment

spell concept is illustrated in Table 8 and Figures 1 and 2.    We
                                    22

focus our duration analysis on the Missouri sample since more

information to construct accurete spell durations is available for

thie        than for Pennsylvania Table 8 gives the Kaplsn—Meiar
       sampie
anpirical hazards for the PAYSPELL data. The overall empirical
has5rd for a given week is the fraction of spells ongoing at the

start of that week which end during the woek° The recall end new
job eopiricai hazards crc analogously defined es the frsrtion of
spells onooing at tho start of the week which end during the week
through recall end through the finding of e new job respectively.
The totel hezard hesiceily trends downward except for a rice at 12
end If weeks end e valley at around 32 weeks. The overall hazard
masks the quite distinct patterns in the recall sod new job hazards.
The recell hazard drops sharply over time except for spikes et 12 end
16 weeks end becomes quite low after about 25 weeks.    The new   job
hazard   starts out quite low and increases on average until shout 28

weeks21     These basic differences in the recall and new job finding

hazards are quite similar to those found for UI recipients in a

national sample of household heads from the PSID analyzed by Katz

(1986).    The upward sloping new job hazard provides some support for

the UI exhaustion effects emphasized by Mortensen (1977) and the


       20More formally, the Kaplan—Meier empirical hazard for week t
                                                      divided by the
(H), is the number of failures during the week (D&,
sfle of the risk set at the beginning of the week. The size of the
risk set at the beginning of week t (R), is the number of people
whose spells hawe not ended or been oerisored at the beginning of week
t. Thus, Ht = Dt/Rt.

          pronounced even—odd effect, where the hazard tends to be      -




higher  in even weeks, is also evident in Figures 1 and 2. A possible
explanation for this anomaly is that the cards used to claim benefits
in Missouri. are nailed two at a time to potential recipients.
                                   23

impact of changing recall expectations on job search behavior
discussed by Katz.   Direct evidence on exhaustion effects is somewhat

masked in Figures 1 and 2 because of the fair amount of variation in

potential durations contained in the Missouri sample.

    Figures 3 and 4 provide a direct look at possible effects of
finite length UI benefits on spell durations.   The figures present

time until exhaustion empiri'al hazards analogous to the usual

Kaplan-Meier estimators. The time axis is tine until benefits lapse
rather than time since a spell began.   The data behind these plots

are reported in Table 9.   There is a large spike in the hazard at the

week of benefits exhaustion.22   This spike is apparent for both the

new job and recall hazards.   The new job finding rate remains

relatively high after exhaustion, while the recall rate becomes

minuscule after exhaustion.   This suggests that workers may stop

waiting for recall and start taking new jobs as their benefits run
out.   In fact, when we look only at workers who indicated when their

spells began that they expected to be recalled, the new job finding
rate is extremely low early in spells and there is a prolonged sharp

increase in the new job escape rate from four weeks before exhaustion

through three weeks after exhaustion.

    The recall spike around exhaustion in figure 4 provides some

support for the Mortensen (1987) joint wealth maximizing model of the

layoff-recall process. The model predicts many recalls occurring when

     22The spike in the hazard function at the week of benefits
exhaustion is not primarily a phenomenon related to hiring halls and
seasonal fluctuations in the construction industry. Only 4 of the 26
individuals with spells ending in the UI exhaustion week were
construction workers.
                                       24

the flaw velue af being unemplayed drape discretely es benefits run

nut.    In this case, recalls may make sense even if demand has nat

recovered.      Additianally, a ratating system af layoffs and recalls

aay make sense when benefits are af limited duratian,
    The exhauetian spikea suppart the findings an a PSID sample af
Katz (1986) and an a CWBH sample by Maffitt (1985) and Meyer (1988).
Katz misc found that spikes in the hazard near likely axhaustian
points (26 ond 29 weeks) were nat apparent far non-UI recipients The
absence of similar spikes for non-UI recipients provides strong
support for the view that the exhaustion spikes for UI recipients are
strongly related to the finite length of UI benefits

IV, Formal Duration Models_for the Misanon       Sasle of Ul,pqjpiefltq
       In this section,   we analyze the impact af recall expectatians,

indiwidual      and pre—Ul jab characteristics, and UI system variables an
the total,      recall, and new job exit rates fram unemplayment for the
Misaouri sample af UI recipienta.


Modejppification
       The   exit rates fram unemployment are analyzed using farmal hazard

madel techniques.      Hazard madele have several advantages aver ather

techniques for analyzing unemployment spell data;        Unemployment

spells are positive randam variables which are often censared (9,3

percent are censored in our sample).        Many important explanatory
variables (e.g. weeks until benefits exhaustion, local labor market

conditions, etc.) change values during an unemployment spell.           The
                                    25

entire time path of time—varying explanatory variables and the

possible censoring of the dependent variable are easily incorporated
in a hazard model.

    We use a proportional hazards model estimator that allows for

time—varying explanatory variables and which nonparametrically
estimates the change in the hazard over time.         This semiparametric

approach is analyzed in detail in Meyer (1986).           The estimates are
the parameters of a continuous time hazard model and thus retain a

clear interpretation.    Nonparametrically estimating the change in the
hazard over time eliminates the need to impose        a   potentially
restrictive functional form that has no theoretical justification.

If an incorrect functional form were assumed,         all of the parameter
estimates from the model would be inconsistent.           This danger is
avoided by nonparametricaily estimating the baseline hazard.

    Formally, we paran-teterize the overall hazard rate from
unemployment for individual i at time t,              using the
                                               (t),
proportional hazards form.
Let T1 be the length of individual i's unemployment spell.              Then
               =                             T.StJ
                   lim÷prob[t+h>T.t      I
                   h.O
                               h

               =

where

        A(t)   is the baseline hazard at time t, which is unknown,

               is a vector of time dependent explanatory var oles for
        z(t)           individual i, and

          is a vector of parameters which is unknown.
                                                      26

The probability of a spell lasting until tel given that is has lasted

until t is easily written as a function of the hazard:
                                                               1t±l
(1)          PLT    a t+l       T      a t]   = exp   {    —
                                                                     A(u)du]
                                                               it
Assuming that z1(t) is constant between t and t±l, equation (I) can
be rewritten as

(2)          P[T1 a t±l         T a t) = exp          (    —
                                                               exp(z4(t)'fl       7(t))

where
                               t+ 1
(3)          y(t) = ln{ H(u)du}.
       The   log-likelihood for a scruple of                   N    individuals can be written
as a function of terms such as (2)23:

(4)    I        =
                    I'd1      ln[l—exp(—exp17(a1)tz1(k)                 flj'    —rxp   yt)z(t,31}
where    k=     the    time a spell ends or is censored, and
         d1 =   I if    the spell ends before the survey date and
                0 if    the    spell     is   censored.

This approach assumes that censoring does not provide any information
about T4 beyond that available in the coveriates.
       We utilize an analogous methodology to estimate the recall and

new job hazards within a competing risks model framework, The recall

and new job hazards are specified analogously to the total hazard

above,       In the estimation of the recall hazard, spells ending in the

finding of a new job are treated as censored                                   = 0) at the date of
                                                                        (d
new job finding.            Spells ending in recall are analogously treated as


     23See Meyer (1986) for a discussion of the derivation of the
likelihood function and the properties of this estimator.
                                   27
                                               of the new job hazard.
censored at the recall date in the estimation
                                           on the hazard rates are
    The effects of unemployment insurance
                                          level and the time until
measured using functions of the benefits
                                     UI benefits is included as a
benefits lapse. The level of weekly
                                        allowed to vary depending on
time varying covariate whose impact is
                                           benefits or has exhausted
whether the individual is still receiving
                                                   exhaustion dummy
benefits.   Also included are time until benefit
                                       both weeks before and after
variables for five intervals covering
                                          are designated UI 6—10
benefits have expired. These variables
                                               exhaustion dummies takes
through UI a-i. Each of these time-varying
                                     interval and takes on the value
on the value of 1 in its designated
                                          UI 6—10 takes on the value 1
of 0 in all other periods. For example,
                                              exhaustion, UI 0 takes on
when the individual is 6 to 10 weekS until
                                                       and UI a-I takes
the value of 1 in the week of benefits exhaustion,

 on the value of 1 when the individual  S  one week or more after
                                      before exhaustion are the
 exhaustion. Those 11 or more weeks
                                             to the omitted dummy
 comparison group, the group corresponding

 variable.



 Results for the Missouri ui Recipient  smpj
                                 estimates of the total, recall and
     Semiparametric hazard model
                                               the PAISPELL
 new job hazards for the Missouri sample using
                             are presented in Table 10.24 Initial
 unemployment spell variable
                                          on the hazards, raising the
 recall expectations have a strong effect

                                                    model estimates
       24The sample size falls to 756 in the hazard    have missing
  since 52 individuals in the original Missouri sample
                    data.
  pre-Ul job.tenure
                                    28
 recall and reducing the new job hazarda
                                         aubstantially. Using the
 estimates in Table 10, those
                              expecting recall have a recall hazard
 that is almost ten times as high as those who do
                                                  not expect to be
 recalled. Furthermore, those expecting recall have a
                                                       new job hazard
 vhich is almost forty percent lower.   The large negative coefficient
 on expect recall in the new job hazard
                                         indicates that workers who
 expect to he recalled and are not, tend to have much
                                                       longer
 uneoplovtent spells than observationelly equivalent workers who
realized they were permanently diaplaced at the time
                                                     of layoff. This
result is consistent with the
                              finding of Pets (1986) that individuals
with unemployment spells in)tiated by
                                      plant closings have higher new
job finding rates than those with unemployment
                                               spells initiated by
lsyoffs, Tho expect recall and definite recall variables also have

strong effects on the total hazard in the estimates presented in
Table 10, Those that have s definite recall
                                              date (end necessarily
expect recall) have a total hazard which is over twice as
                                                           high as
those, not expecting recell, A definite recall date also
                                                          increases
further the recall hazard by a factor of
                                         1.7,  but has no significant
effect on the new job hazard. 2R

     Increases in pre—Ul job tenure, a possible measure of firm


     25The industry dummy variable coefficients are
                                                      fairly smell and
statistically insignificant when expect recall and definite
date are included in the hazard model estimates,              recall
                                                   The recall rate is
substantially higher in nondurable
is substantially lower in durable goods and the new job finding rate
                                   goods than in other industries in
the specifications presented in Table  10. When the expect recall end
definite recall date dummies are
variables have much larger end    excluded, the industry dummy
construction, durable goods, andstatistically significant effects with
                                  nondurable goods industries
significantly higher recall rates and significantly lower new having
finding rates than other industries.                            job
                                          29

specific human capital or job match quality, is associated with         a

significantly increased recall hazard and decreased new job hazard.
Older workers appear to have longer spells because of both lower

recall and new job finding rates after controlling for tenure.          The

total hazard estimates mask many large differences between the

effects of the covariates    o'i   the   recall and new job finding hazards.

    The large and significant increases in the recall and new job

hazards apparent in Figure 4 at the week of benefits exhaustion are

strongly confirmed in the more sophisticated hazard model estimates.

Higher UI benefits are associated with higher recall rates and lower

new job finding rates.      The UI benefit coefficients in the new job

hazard appear reasonable; higher benefits greatly depress the new job

finding rate, and this effect disappears after benefits are
exhausted.     The positive and significant coefficient in the recall
hazard is a puzzle.     High UI benefits may be linked to the short-term

temporary layoff sector of the Missouri economy.          The effect of UI

and the pre-Ul wage on the total hazard are of opposite sign from the

findings of most studies, although they are not statistically

significant.     The odd UI benefit coefficient estimates may arise

because the variation in benefits in Missouri has a peculiar form:

over 71 percent of the sample received either exactly $105 or exactly

$85 in benefits.     Variation in benefits across states and points in

time is usually available in studies finding that UI benefits

increase unemployment spell durations (e.g.         Ehrenberg and Oaxaca,

1976; Meyer, 1988).

    We further examine the time pattern of the baseline hazards from
                                                 30
these   rodels    flow   that we have controlled for observable differenoes

rross     individuals.       After xncludxng explanatory '-'enables,            the time

pattern of the         hazcjrds Is captured      by the 5!aj 'a, the beseline hazard
parameters defined in equation (3).                   These    parameters confirm the

patterns    sear in Figures         1   and 2.   A    total hazard which falls with

unempoyoent       duratron masks the conn>ictr             -
                                              of an upward sloping new
job hazard ann a downward oping cC.' al hazard. t test of thece
patterns whsc conforms the -'iaue spressi's see perfo-ned osing GUI
repr'salon or the asaline bzzorn concocteta the 'ençth of spoil   c
As a aonn:y of the data, s'e teal tor spacoficatoan

/ t) — a t Ic (c           ThIs spec 13 cation rougo:y 000reerrr?z to o
iieibull baseline canard. These regressions yield a positive
coefficient or ln (t) for the new job hazard, and a negative
cocificient      or-   ln(t) for the total hazard and the recall hazard, all
of whir-n are nnniflcant at the 5 percent level, These results
clecrly snow t-r - aThe of the oorceting rirkn specification whioor
silo cc rTh disentangling of the two affects which produce the total
hazard, Furtherncre, the finding that the new job escape rate rises
with    spell duration, even after controlling for the remaining

potential duration of         III   benefits, suggests that falling reservation

wages from dcc: ining assets and changing recall expectations may play
an important role in the reemployment process of laid—off workara/6


     6Although uncontrolled heterogeneity biases estimates of the
overall hazard towards spurious findings of negative duration
dependence, a bias in the opposite direction is possible for an
individual escape route hazard in a competing risks framework. If
uncontrolled factors that raise the recall hazard also lower the new
job hazard, then one can in theory find spurious positive duration
dependence in the new job hazard. Han and Hausman (1986) have
                                                31
     A potentiai problem with the estimates in Table 10 is that it is

likely that sose individual attributes which affect the hazard zate
are omitted from the list of covariates.                If unobserved heterogenesty
is present, but not allowed for in the estimation, the coefficient

estimates will be biased (Lancaster 1979, 1985).                Table 11 reports

estimates which allow for individuat specific omitted attrlbutea

under the sssunptlon that a garna distnibotion Is a reasonable

approxlmatlln to the dIstrsotIon of hetaroenelty In the

population.
                  27
                       The estimates     an tab1 a   ii ore very similar to tb ss in
Table    10   except or the rescoiinp effect suggested by fancasCer
(1935)   .    Lancaller finds boat the ooission of heterogenezty biases
parameter saflnates tow rds zero, even though elsaticities of moan
duration witn respect to covariates may not change.
    Specifications acre also tried which Included several additional
covariaes      cLoxvy zariable sat equai to £ if the individual engaped
in oo searn at the tica of ob iosa, the time-varying state
unemployment rate, and five occupation dummy variables, None of
these additono noticeably chenged the key findings. The state

developed an estimator to handle correlated, unobserved heterogeneity
in a competing risks model. They implement their estimator on the
PSID layoff unemployment spell data sat developed by Katz (1986) and
find essentially zero correlation among the unobserved heterogeneity
factors      in
           the new job and             recall
                                  hazards.
     27Whether or not the gamma distribution is sufficiently flexible
is a subject of debate. Hecknan and Singer (1984) argue that it is
not, but their results come from am example where a fairly
restrictive parametric form for the baseline nazard is assumed.
Ridder and 'Jerbakal (1983) offer some evidence that the gamma
distribution does fairly well. Some pralzminary Monte Carlo
experiments by one of the current authors indicates that coefficient
estimates are relatively insensitive to the distribution of
heterogeneity when the baseline hazard is estimated nonparametrically.
                                   32

unemployment rate and occupation dummies were always insignificant.
The behavior of the search variable again illustrates the usefulness

of the competing risks approach.   In the total hazard the search

variable comes in negative and highly significant, implying that

those who search initially are reemployed less quickly,     However,

this may arise because initial search acts as a further proxy for the

likelihood of recall.   Those who strongly expect to be recalled may

not search and may also be recalled quickly.    The recall and new job

hazard estimates provide some support for this interpretation.      The

search variable has a large negative value in the recall hazard, but

is small and insignificant in the new job hazard.

    Overall, the lack of variation in the UI parameters within

Missouri suggests the need to look at a date set covering more states
and a longer time period to more accurately determine the impect of

the length and level of UI benefits on spell durations,28     The

results with the Missouri sample do indicate that the recall process

plays a major part in determining the duration of unemployment spells
of UI recipients and the increase in unemployment escape rate around

when benefits lapse,

     We also examined hazard model estimates for the Pennsylvania

subsample, though we were less confident about the accuracy of the

spell lengths since their derivation relied more heavily on survey

responses rather than administrative records,    The benefit level and


     28We are currently neginning an analysis of a large data set
that is better suited to the estimation of UI effects. The data set
covers 9 states over a six year period and includes most of the
variables available in the Missouri—Pennsylvania data set plus other
information.
                                            33

pre—TJI wage coefficients      in the   total     hazard   had   the   signs   found

previous   studies      (e.g. Classen, 1979), but they were not

significantly dcfferent fros zero.              The signs and significanre of the

expect recall and dennita recafl date jsriablea were very cicilar tu
those found for Missouri.        The definite recall oats csefficients

tended to be larger than fur Missouri,              Thin is nor surprising give;

tne    greeter  af uefinit,. rea21 Yates in Pannsyiiania as seen in
                 use.
Tsule I. tefi ,ate recaY hal me expecred nsgatc:e aign in the ncv

jso nazaru ,nh tte effects of tenure an ths preYaous job sets san:1o
In tna tvo at,ts,
     virally, several authara, including fascnrcoh  1177) nave
suggestac a ubte rcasrn sny cradles wnah use weeks ccnpenrateo by
UI as the tecendent variabe rjght yield tlnsed benefit coefficients
They suggcst nat higher nanef its sight anduce people to clan
ours prsaptly, so met nrger traction 51 en unemployment spell of
a given lantth wuall Sn span" receizing "1. TPis affect night lead
to the f'ndrg that righer bencf its ,ase lunger cospensated spells
even wean there is no sliest on the total length of unesploymant
This   effect Is of potential isportance in our Missouri sample share

the nean nurber of weeks from loss of 3ob till UI scala is 3.6 weeks

and the standard deviation is 4.3 weeks.               This hypothesis was         teted
by estimating hazard nodeis where the dependent variable is the time
from lOSS of job to the UI clam          date.      We used a set of control

variables like that used for the unemployment spell specifications.

The Mamermesh hypothesis would require a large positive coefficient
on the benefit level, but the estimated coefficient was close to
                                    34

zero, negative and insignificant.   This result provides some support

for the reliability of studies which use weeks compensated as the

dependent variable.29


V. Conclusion

    This paper has examined the extent to which the unemployment of

UI recipients in the U.S. can be attributed to alternative concepts

of temporary layoffs and the impact of the potential duration of UI

benefits on the distribution of unemplonent spell durations of UI

racipiants.
    We find that an understanding of the layoff-rehire process is

critical to understanding the composition of unemployment

(particularly insured unemployment) in the United States,   Over 30
percent of the total weeks of unemployment of UI recipients in
Missouri and Pennsylvania were attributable to unemployment spells

ending in recall,   Tx-ante temporary layoffs (those in which the

individual initially expected to be recalled) may account for over 60

percent of the unemployment of UI recipients.   Individuals who

initially expect to be recalled search less intensely for new jobs
than other UI recipients and tend to have extremely long unemployment

spells if they are not actually rehired by their original employer.
The recall rate is quite high at short spell durations and right

around the point at which UI benefits lapse.

    The potential duratict of UI benefits appears to have a



     29Solon (1981) found a similar result in am examination of CWBH
data for 3 states during the 1978—79 period.
                                        35

substantial impact on the length of the .anamployment spells of U.S.

UI recipients.   Our findings indicate that the probability of leaving

unemployment (both through recalls and new job finding) increases

greatly around tha time that benefits are exhausted.        Furthermore,
some rough sioulationa based on hazard model estimates for taelve

states in Katz and Meyer (1988) indicate that an increase in the

potential duration of benefits of tne size that naturally occurs when
a state passes through an extended benefIts trIgger increases the

mean weeks of corpensated oneoployrent in a benefit year by 15

percent (2.6 weeks1.   This is a large effect given that most spells

are corpleted well before regular benefits run out,        In fact, the

impact of the extended benefits trigger on the duration of UI

recipient unemployment spells ix estimated to be almost identical to
the io'pact of a uniform   2')   percent increase in the level of benefits.

Alterstively, Moffitt and Nicholaon '1982, using a labor supply
estimatIon framework find that a one—week Increase in the potential

duration of benefits increases the length of an average spell by 0.1

week.

    These findings cuggeats that a further examination of the impact

of the potential length of UI benefits on onemployment could be quite

useful.   Most work on the effects of UI focuses on differences in

replacement rates or experience rating provisions,        Rules concerning

potential benefit durations very greatly across OECD countries with
the typical potential duration ranging from 26 weeks in the United

States, to two end a half years in Denmerk, and to a virtually
unlimited duration in Belgium (Emerson, 1988).        Shorter maximum
                                   36

durations of UI and the much greater importance of the layoff-recall

process   may play a major role in the lower incidence of extremely
long—term unemployment in the U.S. and Canada than in most European

countries.
                                               37

                                       References


Barron, John H. and Wesley Mellow. "Search Efforts i' the Labor
Market," Jcurnai of Human Resources 14 (1979): 359-404.

Burdett, Kenneth and Dale Mortensen. "Labor Supply Under
Uncertairty," Research in Labor Economics 2 1978): 109—57.

Burtless, Gary. "Why      Is
                     the Insured Unemployment Rate So Low?,"
Brookings P3oerspconomicActjvj (1983:1).

Classen,Kathleen P. "UnepoJnent Thauranco and Job Search." In S A.
        ani '.J. MCC'alI, eta,, Studiesr. the Ecocorrics of Search,
Limprnann
Amsterdan: Ncrth tcllant, )975,
Clark,    Kim B, and   Larenoe       K. Summers     "labor Market Dyr,arlcs and
Unemployment:    A
Activity (la79:l):
                     Reccts ide ation
                        13—60.
                                           Thkio
Ccrson,    ''a'ter nd   Susan   "lt
                                  "Unecpio,'ront Spells
Documentato-," Mimso, Matheinatlca Policy Research, February
                                                                   Public ice
                                                                          1982,
                                                                                  lll
Corson,    Katcr
               ar,3 halter Nicholsor., "An Analysis of UI Recipien's'
Unemployment Spells," Unerploymant Icsurar'-'e Occasional Paper 83—.,
U.S. Departmeot of Labor, E,rnployment and Training Administration,
1983

Dynarski. K and S.       Sho:trn,
                              "New Evidence on the Cyclical Behavior
of Gnemploy,ent Durations,' in K. Lang and 1. Leonard, eds,,
fl.pDlo ent and the Stroctore of Labor Marthts. London: Basil
Blackwell, 1987.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Ronald L. Oexac-', "Unemployment Insurance,
Duration of Unemployment, and Subsequent Wage Growth." American
Economic Review      66 (1976)   :   754—66.

Emerson, Michael, What      Model     for Europe?. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press,
198 8.

Feldstein, Martin S. "The Importance of Temporary Layoffs: An
Empirical Analysis." Brookinps Papers on Economic Activity (1975:3):
725—44.

Hamermesh, Daniel. Jobless Pay and tne Econorny. Baltimore: John
Hopkins Press, 1977.

Han, Aaron and Jerry A. Hausman, "Semi—Parametric Estimation of
Competing Risks Models." MIT Working Paper, November 1986.

Heckman, James J. and Burton Singer. "A Method for Minimizing the
Impact of Distributional Assumptions in Econometric Models for
                                  38

Duration Data." Econometrica 52 (1984): 271-320.


Kalbfleisch, John B. and Ross Prentice. Th   tat.jstical   Analysis of
Failure Time Data. New York: Wiley, 1980.

Xane, Thomas J. "What Happened to Unemployment Insurance? Harvard
Administrative Reforms and Compositional Changes." Mimeo,
University, Kennedy School of Government, February 1988.

Katz, Lawrence F. "Worker Mobility and Unemployment." Unpublished
Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT, 1985.

Katz, Lawrence F. "Layoffs, Recall and the Duration of Unemployment,"
NBER Working Paper No, 1825, January 1986.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Bruce D. Meyer. "The Timing of Unemployment
insurance Payments: Theory and Evidence." Mimeo, May 1988.

Lancaster, Tony. "Econometric Models for the Duration of
Unemployment." Econometrics 47 (1979): 939-56.

Lancaster, Tony. "Generalised Residuals and Heterogeneous Durations
Models with Applications to the Weibull Model." Journal of
Econometrics 28 (1985) : 155—169.

Lilien, David H. "The Cyclical Importance of Temporary Layoffs."
Review of Economics and Statistics 62 (1980) 24—31.
                                             :




McCall, J.J. "Economics of Information and Job Search."    QRRrl
Journal of Economics 84 (1970): 113—26.

Meyer, Bruce D. "Semiparanietric Estimation of Hazard Models." Mimeo,
MIT, November 1986.

Meyer, Bruce D. "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells,"
NEER Working Paper No. 2546, March 1988.

Hoff itt, Robert. "Unemployment Insurance and the Distribution of
Unemployment Spells." Journal of Econometrics 28 (1985): 85—101.

Moffitt, Robert and Walter Nicholson. "The Effect of Unemployment
Insurance on Unemployment: The Case of Federal Supplemental
Benefits." Review of Economics and Statistics 64 (1982): 1—11.

 Mortensen, Dale T. "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Outcomes."
 Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30 (1977): 595—512.

 Mortensen, Dale T. "Job Search and Labor Market Analysis." In 0.
 Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 2.
 New York: North Holland, 1986.
                                           39

Mortensen, Dale T, "A Structural Model of UI Benefit Effects or the
Incidence and Duration of Uneri'ployment." Mimeo, Northwestern
University, June 1987.

Murphy,   Kevin   M,   and   Robert Topel. "The Evolution of     Unemployment in
the United States: l9o8-l985"           HBER   MacroecOnOmiCg   nua  2 (1987).
Pisserides, Cnristopher A. "Job Search and the DuratIon of Layoff
Unemp1oyment' QAAeri' Jouna1 of EconoGs 97 (1982j: 595—612.
Ridder, Geert and Wim 1erbakel. 'On tne Estimation of the
Proportional Hazard Model in the Presence of Unobserzed
Heterogeneicy" Mimer, Unijers cy or Amsterdam, l983
Robertson, Matthew.            Laof5s and roe Measuremont of
                             :eoporry
Uneirployrient An Empirical Aoysis for Canada." M3meo, Empoyment
and Immigrstoo Canada, Ottova, 1ICL
Solon, Gary. "Unemployment :nsurance. Fi11ng DeICI, and Unemployment
Duratior."  Princeton University Industrial Relations Section WorkIng
Paper       orroser 1981.

Topel, Robert.     'oenloyment and hnemployment          Insorance, '   searrh ir
LaoorEcononcs       7 (1985): pm. 9l—135
           Table   1: Descriptive         Statistics for UI Recipients'    Data Set

                              Missouri and Pennsylvania
                       Unemployment Spell Start Dates in 1979-80
                                                                       Mean (SD.)
Varohi a                   -
                               Descriotion                     MO          PA


IUSR          weeks from UI claim date until                 16.64         12.91       14.92
              reemployment or until interview               (15.62)       (14.47)     (15.15)
              date if spell is censored

FSPELL        weeks from end of pre-Ul job until 19.35                     16.21       17.90
              reemployment or until interview   (16.66)                   (16.54)     (16.67)
              data if spell is censored

PAYSPELL      weeks from UI first payment date               15.27
              until reemployment or until                   (14.81)
              interview        date   f    spell is
              censored (Missouri only)

PD1           potential benefits duration in                 22.92         34.88       28.44
              weeks at claim date                            (4.52)        (4.49)      (7,47)


UI benefit    augmented weekly benefit amount                88.80        124.76      105.38
                                                            (17.64)       (42.38)     (36.28)

Pre-UI wage   usual weekly earnings on pre-UI               258.35        256.13       257 .33
              job                                          (133. 12)    (122.97)      (128 50)

EXPREC        —    I of claim
                       if expect recall at time                .74            .76         .75

DEFREC        — 1 if have definite recall date                 .12            .25         .18

Ret all       — 1 if spell ended in recall                     .51            .64          57

New Job       —    I
                  if spell ended in taking                     .40            .28         .34
                  a new job
Censored      — 1 if spell is censored at                      .09            .07         .08
                  interview date
Age           age in years                                   36.43         36.80       36.60
                                                            (13. 19)      (13. 59)    (13.37)
Female        — 1 if female                                    .33           .25         .30

Married       — 1 if married                                   .69            .63         .66

Education     years of schooling                             11.37         11.56       11.46

Spwk          —    I if   spouse works
                                                             (2.11)
                                                               .45
                                                                           (1.76)
                                                                             .37
                                                                                       (1.95)
                                                                                         .41

PA            —    I   if Pennsylvania                         .00          1.00          .46
                                   Table 1: continued


                                                               Mean   (SD)
V-1 h1                                                   MO           PS     Tn1

Industry   Dummies

Mining             I if mining                           01           03       02

Construct      —   1 if constrction                       30          .28      29

Durablas       —   2 if durable goods manufacturttg       21          .24      22

Nondurables        I if nondurable goods                  16          .17     .16
Transport          L   ifcommunicationsor
                          manufacturing
                          transportation.                .06          .04     .05
                                         utilities
Trade          —   I   if wholesale or retail trade       12          .13     .22

Admin          —   1 if public administration            03           03      .03

Service            1 if services                          11          .08     .10

tionDie
Prof               I if professional,       technical,   .06          .05     .05
                     or managerial
Clerical           I if clerical or sales                .10          .09     .10

Supervisor         1 if supervisor                       06           .04     .05

Craft         — 1 if craft and related                   .34          .38     .36
                  occupations
Operator      — 1 if operator                            .23          .29     .26

Laborer            1 if laborer                          .21          .15     l8
Sample size                                              808      691        1499
           Table 2: Characteristics of First Spells of Unemployment
                   Entire Sample: Missouri and Pennsylvania



                         Unemployment Measure — IUSR
                                   n—1499

                                            Percentage of       Mean
                            Percentage      Total Weeks of    Duration
                            Lie1ls          Unemolovment      in Weeks

Scell Outcome

Recall                        57.2               32.4            8.4

New Job                       34.4               39.1          17.0

Censored                       8.4               28.5          50.6



Recall Exectations

Expect Recall                 75.2               63.8           12.7

Don't Expect                  24.8               36.2           21.8
Recall



Definite Recall

Definite Recall Date          18.1                9.7            8.0

No Definite Recall            81.9               90.3           16.5
Date




The length of the unemployment spell up to the interview date is utilized as
the unemployment spell duration for censored spells in the percentage of
unemployment and mean duration in weeks calculations.
           Table 3:   Characteristica of First Spells of Unemployment
                                  Missouri 0niy



                         Unemployment Measure — PAYSPELL
                                      n808

                                               Percentage of          Mean

                              nemloentieeks
                               Percentage      Total Weeks of       Duration




Recall                                             30.2               9   j


New Job                         39 6               39.7              15.3

Censored                         9,3               30.1              49 6




Exectatos
Expect Recall                   74.4              65.7               13.5

Dont  Expect                    25.6              34.3              20.4
Recall



iteRecai
Definite Recall Date            12.0               7.1                9.1

No Definite Recall              88.0              92.9              16.1
Date




The length of the unemployment spell up to the interview date is utilized as
the unemployment spell duration for censored spells in the            of
                                                                percentage
unemployment and mean duration in weeks calculations.
           Table 4: Recall Expectations and Unemployment Outcomes
                  Entire Sample: Missouri and Pennsylvania

                        Unemployment Measure     IUSR
                                    nl499




                                              Percentage of      Mean
                           Percentage         Total Weeks of   Duration
                           f Spells
lOutcome
Recall                       71.7                 46,4          8.2

New Job                      22.2                  29.0         16.5

Censored                      6.1                  24.6         50.8

                                    nll27




                                    Don t ExDect Ret all


                                              Percentage of      Mean
                           Percentage         Total Weeks of   Duration
                           of Soells          Unemo1oynent     in Weeks

Stell Outcome

Recall                       13.4                7.6            12.3

New Job                      71.2                57.0           17.4

Censored                     15.3                35.4           50.4

                                    n—372
                  Table 5: Search Behavior of UI Recipients
                  Entire Sample: Missouri and Pennsylvania
                                   n—149 9




                                         Mean Search          Unconditional
                           Percent       Hours Per Week       Mean Search
                         Who Searched    of Those Who         Hours Per
                                         Searched             Week



Entire Sample               59              12.1                7.1


Outcome

Recall                      41               9.8                4.0

New Job                     85              14.3               12.1

Censored                    78              11.3                8.8


ecraciona
Expect Recall               52              10.9                5.7

Don't Expect Recall         83              14.5               12.0


Definite Recall

Definite Recall             33              11.7                3.8
Date

No Definite Recall          65              12 2                7   9
Date




The percent who searched calculations are based on the yes-no answers of
workers to the following question: "I'd like to ask you about the period of
time after that job [pre-Ul job[ ended. Did you look for work at that time?"
Workers who answered yes to this question were later asked "And about how many
hours per week on the average would you say you spent looking for work?"
              Table 6: Distribution of Total Compensated Unemployment
                                 in Benefit Year

                                   Missouri Only
                                       n8O8



                                        Mean Weeks of          % of Total
                            Percentage of
                                        Compensated            Compensated
                             Indivtduals pemploym.en           Unemp1pymen
Outcome of
First Spell

Recall                          51.1                11.3           40.7

New Job                         39.6                15.3           42.9

Censored                         9.3                    25.1       16.4



First Spell
Recall Expectations

Expect Recall                   74.4                    13.2       69.5

Don't Expect                    25.6                    16.9       30.5
Recall



Entire Samtle

Mean Weeks of CompensatedUnemployment — 14.2

S.D. of Weeks of Compensated Unemployment     —   9.9
             Table   7   Post-UI Job Earnings Relative to Pre-Ul Job Earnlgs
                         for those Reemployedby the Inteiiew Date

           Earnings Change Measure — Log(Post-UI Earnings /               Pre-Ul       Earntngs)
                               Missouri and Pennsylvania


                                        Entire Sarple

                                                 Change in Log                Change in Log
                                                 Weekly Earnings              Hourly Earnings
                             Sar"pIe
                             Size                Mean          Me(an          Mean        Medan
0utcre
Recall                        838            -    059          -   .046   -    014        -    023
                                             (.011)                       (.009)

New Joo                       93             -    156          -   103    -    128
                                                  023)                    (.019)




                                       New       Job   Finders

                                                 Change   in   Log            Change in Log
                                                 Weekly   Earnings            Hourly Earnings
                             Sample
                             Size                Mean          MedIan         Mean       Median
Recall Expectations
Expect Recall                 240            - .201            - .141     -   .151        - .104
                                             (.034)                       (.028)
Don't Expect                  253            - .113            - .081     -   .106        - .081
Recall                                       (.031)                       (.027)

Whether Exhausted

Exhausted                      67            - .520            -   .425   -
                                                                              .301        -   .246
Benefits                                     (.078)                       (.058)
Didn't Exhaust                426            - .098            -   .086   -   .101        -   .085
Benefits                                     (.023)                       (.020)


The nwnbers In parentheses are the standard errors of tie means.  Earnings are
deflated by average hourly earnings of U.S. private nonagricultural workers
(series AHEEAP from DEl).  The base period for the deflator is the second
quarter of 1979. Pre-Ul job earnings are deflated from the end date of the
pre-Ul job. Post-UI job earnings are deflated from the interview date.
                 Table 8: Empirical Hazards for Missouri Sample
                   Using PAYSPELL Unemployment Spell Concept

                    Number   of   Spells That End       Empirical Hazard
  Weeks    Risk
Unemployed Set      Total     Recall     New Job     Total   Recall   New Job


    1      756        75          59       16       0.0992   0.0780    0.0212
    2      681        48           36      12       0.0705   0.0529    0.0176
    3      633        46          27       19       0.0727   0.0427    0.0300
    4      587        36           23      13       0.0613   0.0392    0.0221
    5      551        24          15        9       0.0436   0.0272    0.0163
    6      527        35          23       12       0.0664   0,0436    0,0228
    7      492        29          14       15       0.0589   0.0285    0.0305
    8      463        40          24       16       0.0864   0.0518    0,0346
    9      423        16           12       4       0.0378   0.0284    0.0095
   10      407        32           14      18       0.0786   0.0344    0.0442
   11      375        19            9      10       0.0507   0.0240    0.0267
   12      356        45           28      17       0.1264   0.0787    0,0478
   13      311        20           12        8      0.0643   0.0386    0.0257
   14      291        16           11        5      0.0550   0.0378    0.0172
   15      275        22           14        8      0.0800   0.0509    0.0291
   16      253        27           16      11       0.1067   0.0632    0.0435
   17      226        12            6        6      0.0531   0.0265    0.0265
   18      214        15            8        7      0.0701   0.0374    0.0327
   19      199         9            4        5      0.0452   0.0201    0.0251
   20      190        14            6        8      0.0737   0.0316    0.0421
   21      176          3           1        2      0.0170   0.0057    0.0114
   22      173        12            2       10      0.0694   0.0116    0.0578
   23      161         7            3        4      0.0435   0.0186    0.0248
   24      154        11            6        5      0.0714   0.0390    0.0325
   25      143          5           1        4      0.0350   0.0070    0.0280
   26      138          8           3        5      0.0580   0.0217    0.0362
    27     130         4            0        4      0.0308   0.0000    0.0308
   28      126          5           3        2      0.0397   0.0238    0.0159
   29      121         4            1        3      0.0331   0.0083    0.0248
   30      117          2           0        2      0.0171   0.0000    0.0171
   31      114          1           0        1      0.0088   0.0000    0.0088
   32      113          1           0        1      0.0088   0.0000    0.0088
   33      112          2           0        2      0.0179   0.0000    0.0179
   34      110          3           0        3      0.0273   0.0000    0.0273
   35      107          5           2        3      0.0467   0.0187    0.0280
   36      102         4            1        3      0.0392   0.0098    0.0294
   37       98          6           1        5      0.0612   00l02     0.0510
   38       92          3           1        2      0.0326   0.0109    0.0217
   39       89         4            0        4      0.0449   0.0000    0,0449
   40       85          2           1        1      0.0235   0.0118    0.0118
      Table 9: Empirlcal Time Until Exhaustion Hazards for Missouri Sample
                   Us.ng PAYSPELL Unemployment Spell Concept

                    Number of Spells That End         Empirical Hazard
ks  Until    Risk
Exhaustion   Set    Total    Recall   New Job     Total    Recall   Sew Job

     25      415      41       33        8       0.0987    0 0795    00192
     24      404      39       25        5       0 0743    0.0618    0 0123
     23      -.03     30       18       12       0.07-.4   0,0447    00298
     22      404      26       24        6       0.0644    0.0435    00149
     21      410      26       19        7       0.063     0.0463    007G
     20      427      32       23        9       0 0758    0.0545    00213
     19      425      25       15       19       0.0588    0,03t2    30235
     18      -.'      34       18       46       02815     0.0432    00384
     17      442      23       14        9       0.3558    9.0340    0.0218
     15      -.1      21       12        9       0.0504    00288     0.0216
     15      422      49       10        9       U 0450    0 0237    00213
     14      431      40       24       16       0.0928    0.0557    00371
     13               31       14       1'       0 0749    0.0338    0.0411
     12      409      24       14        7       9.0513    00342     0.0171
     11      408      25       13       12       0.0613    0.0319    0.0294
     10      398      24        9       15       0.0603    0.0226    0 0377
      9      374      21       13        8       0.0561    0.0348    0,0213
      8      350      27       14       13       0,0771    0.0400    0.0371
       7     320       8        4        4       0 0250    0.0125    00125
      6      304      12        7        5       0.0395    0.0230    0,3164
       5     291      13        3       10       0,0446    00103     0 0344
      4      268      16        7        9       0.0597    0 0261    0.0336
      3      254      11        6        5       0.0433    0.0236    0.0.97
       2     244      17        9        8       00697     0.0369    0.0328
       1     220      17        6       11       0.0773    0.0273    0.0500
      0      201      26       11       15       0.1294    0 0547    0.0746
     -l      164       1        2        5       0.0427    0.0122    0.0305
     -2      151       4        2        2       0 0265    0.0132    0.032
     -3      143       4        2        2       0.0280    0.0140    0.0140
      -4     137       2        1        1       0.0146    0.0073    0.0073
     -5      129       4        0        4       0.0310    0.0000    0.0310
     -6      115       3        0        3       0.0261    0.0000    0.0261
      -7     107       4        1        3       0.0374    0 0093    0.0280
     -8       98       4        1        3       0.0408    0.0102    0.0306
      -9      88       0        0        0       0.0000    0.0000    0 0000
     10       85       1        0        1       0 0118    0.0000    0.0118
     -11      72       0        0        0       0.0000    0.0000    0 0000
     -12      59       1        1        0       00169     00169     0.0000
     -13      54       1        0        1       0.0185    0.0000    0.0185
     -14      51       2        0        2       0.0392    0.0000    0.0392
     -15      47       2        0        2       0.0426    0.0000    0.0426
     -16      43       1        0        1       0.0233    0.0000    0.0233
     -17      40       0        0        0       0.0000    0.0000    0,0000
     -18      36       1.       0        1       0.0278    0.0000    0.0278
     -19      34       1        1        0       0.0294    0.0294    0.0000
     -20      32       2        0        2       0.0625    0.0000    0.0625
                  Table 10: SemiparametricHazard Model Estimates8
                           Missouri UI Recipients (n—756)



                                     Total           Recall         New Job
                                     Hazard          Hazard         Hazard

Expect Recall                     .423               2.236           -.500
                                 (.099>              (.272)          (.135)
Definite Recall                   .445                .509            .218
                                 (.138)              (.148)          (.282)
UI Benefit ($lOO's), PreExhaustb  .381               1.640          -1.115
                                 (.322)              (.438)          (.447)

UI   Benefit   ($lOO's), Post-Exhaust .496                          - .150
                                     (.838)                         (1 136)

Pre-VI Net Weekly Wage ($l00s)       -.026           -.075           .048
                                     (.045)          (.059)         (.061)
Age                                  -.043           -.039          -.054
                                     (.024)          (.031)         (.040>
Age Squared / 100                     .046            .041           .053
                                     (.029)          (.039)         (.050)
Pre-VI Job Tenure (years>             .0139           .0260         - .0304
                                     (.0073)         (.0088)        (.0191)
Education                             .032           -   .049        .128
                                     (.018)          (.030)         (.029)
Black                                - .404          - .392          .459
                                     (.193)          (.247)         (.288)
Female                               - .161           .027          - .416
                                     (.118)          (.145)          (.182)
Time Until Exhaustion DummiesC:
   UI 0                               .928            .835            .789
                                     (.235>          (.371)          (.329)
     Ull                              .393            .385            .410
                                     (.300)          (.479)          (.405)
     UI 2-5                          -.090           -.045           -.164
                                     (.194)          (.273)          (.291)
     UI 6-10                         - .167          - .166          - .182
                                     (.146)          (.208)          (.220)
     UI a-l                          - .636          - .470         -1.423
                                     (.732)          (.416)          (.976)

Log Likelihood Value                -2416.2         -1388.4         -1275.6


Continued on the next page
                               Table 10 continued

5The unemployment spell duration measure utilized is PAYSFELL, Other controls
included in each of the specifications ate number of dependents, spouse works
and marrIed durorr:ss, a dummy inditsting whether the spell started befote
February 1 198)       industry dummies weeks from end of pre-Ul job ntil claim
dare, weeks from claim date until first payment date. In toe total and new
job hazard models individual oaselne harard parameters are eatizatsd for
Qeeks I to 52 spells lorger than 52 weeks are censored at 52.     In the recall
hazard parsxreeci are estimated fun the   first 30 weeks  sf'er whIch spells ao
censored     The kuolbersIn parentheses ste asymptotic standard errors
°The UI   benefit level variable is constrained to have the same effect before
and   after exhaustIon in the recall hazard model.

°The time until exhaustIon dummy varoabuos are defined in the test
                Table 11: Semiparametric Hazerd Model Estimates
                          Allowing Gamma Heterogeneitya
                         Missouri UI Recipients (n756)



                                  Total            Recall         New Job
Variable                          Hazard           Hazard         Hazard

Expect Recall                        .634          2.744          -    .874
                       .
                                   (.171)          (.330)          (.253)
Definite Recall                      .523           .626            .193
                                   (.211)          (.229)          (.396)
                                b                  2.237           -.834
UI Benefit ($l00's), Pre-Exhaust     .602
                                   (.441)          (.599)          (.683)
UI Benefit ($l00s) Post-Exhaust 1.397                               .395
                                  (1.058)                         (1.522)
Pre-UI Net Weekly Wage ($100's)    - .045           - .107          .075
                                   (.064)           (.084)         (.100)
                                   -   .072         - .066         -   .003
Age
                                   (.038)           (.045)         (.067)
Age Squared / 100                   .080             .076           .013
                  .                (.046)           (.055)         (.082)
Pre-UI Job Tenure (years)           .0187            .0339         -.0646
                                   (.0121)          (.0136)        (.0296)
Education                           .029            -   .057           .189
                                   (.032)           (.041)         (.058)
Black                              - .748           -   .554       -   .934
                                   (.284)           (.354)         (.503)
Female                             - .173            .075          - .686
                                   (.181)           (.218)         (.311)
Time Until Exhaustion Dummieac:
   UI 0                             .925             .799           .851
                                   (.276)           (.412)         (.390)
   UI 1                             .314             .319           .439
                                   (.341)           (.533)         (.454)
   UI 2-5                          - .187           - .121         - .172
                                   (.225)           (.318)         (.330)
   UI 6-10                         - .232           - .215         - .190
                                   (.162)           (.228)         (.244)
   UI   -l                        -1.200            - .552        -1.538
                                   (.869)           (.485)        (1.255)
heterogeneity variance              .836             .880         1.611
                                   (.257)           (.368)         (.589)

Log Likelihood Value              -2405.2          -1384.3        -1265.3




Continued on the next page
                                Table 11 continued

aThe unemployment spell duration measure utlLzed is PAYSPELL. Other controLs
included in each of the specifications ere number of dependents, spouse works
and married dmirles. a dummy indicating whether the spell started bafore
Februsry 1 1980, 6 industry dummies, weeks from end of pre-Ul job ur'til           dale
date, weeks from claim dste onrl first payment date. In the total and tee
job hazard models  individ_al baseline hazard parameters are estomated for
weeks I to
            '
               spells longer than 12 weeks ate censored at 52. In me reds.
hszscd psrste   a are estinsted  for the fIrst 30 weeks, after which spells at—
censored   The nt.ooers in perenfieses are aoymptotio standard errors

bm    UI   benefit laid   srIaoe   cc   constrained to   have   the sane effect before
end   after eabsascion In the recel' Isrerk todd.
'Tha time .snril exhaustIon   dummy     vacables are defined in the text.
                    unemp'oyed weeks
50   45   40   35    30      25    20   15   10   5     1



                                                            0



                                                            0.0313



                                                            0.0625



                                                            0.0938



                                                            0.125



                                                            0.1563
                                                      hazard


                HAZARD TOTAL

                            [fL)F
                                            i/V'i
                      RECALL AND NLW JOB IA/ARDS
  reafl hazard       new job hazard
    ho z or d
0.08/5
 0075
0.0675
  0.05
0.0375
                                                                    /\
0 025
0.012
        0        LL.1 L I LL LLU      IJJ LUJ 1..LI
            1   5      10       15        20     25    30      35        40   45   50
                                            weeks unernpoyed
                           left   UI   of weeks
—20   —15   '—10      -5      0            5      10   15   20    25
                                                                    0



                                                                    0.0313




                                                                    0.0625



                                                                    0.0938



                                                                    5 0.12



                                                                    3 0.156
                                                                 hazard

                   HAZARU EXHAUSTION UNTIL TIME TOTAL


                                       3
                                   UM[ UN IL. [XHAU1 ION
                               R CALl AND NLW JOB HA/ARDS
  recoil hazard        new job hazard
    hazer 0
o o8i
 0 075
0 0625
  0 05
0 03 75
                                                                    A
                                                                •       /
 0 025
0 0175
           /\
            Li.. LL1 I LI LI L ! LLLLLL L_LJJL1 I
      25          20          15        10      5       0
                                             weeks of UI left
