                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    MARKET STRUCTURE, STRIKE ACTIVITY,
                        AND UNION WAGE SETTLEMENTS




                               John M, Abowd
                              Joseph S. Tracy




                          Working Psper No. 2595




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Caabridge, MA 02138
                                  May 1988




This paper was prepared for the Third Berkeley Conference on Industrial
Relations.  We are grateful to Glen Cain, Peter Cappelli and Ronald Ehreoberg
for comments on the first version.   Harriet Berlin of the Bureau of National
Affairs, Inc. supplied data from the BNA'a Collective Bargaining Negotiations
and Contracts and Work Stoppage files that were used in this paper. Data
from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Bargaining Calendar and other BLS
sources were developed jointly with David Card and Sheena McConnell with
financial support from the Industrial Relations Settion, Princeton
University, and Yale University.   The research supported here is part of rho
NBER's  research in Labor Studies.  Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #2595
                                                     May 1988




               MARXET STRUCTURE• STRIKE ACTIVITY • AND UNION WAGE SETTLEXENTS

                                             Abstract

     We attempt a synthesis      of   the industrial relations market structure hypothesis

with the modern asymmetric infonsation theory of wage and strike outcomes.          The

industrial relations literature contains a variety of arguments indicating that wage

settlements should be positively related to the degree of product market sales

concentration and the degree of product market coverage by the union. An asymmetric

information bargaining model is specified       that relates these same variables to strike


probabilities as well as wage settlements.

     Our empirical analysis is conducted for the periods from 1970-1980 (strikes)         and

1976-1980    (wages).    We find that the relation between trade-adjusted sales

concentration and wage settlements is positive at low levels of concentration hut

negative at high levels of concentration. The relation is always negative for strike

probabilities. We also find that the relation between the trade-adjusted percent of

the product market covered by the same       union   and the percentage covered by other union

are positively related to both wage settlements and strike probabilities. Our

empirical analysis includes a rich set of controls including unrestricted time and

industry    effects,    which do not affect the major conclusions.




    John H. Abowd                                    Joseph S. Tracy
    NYSSILR & JOSH                                   Department of Economics
    Cornell University                               Yale University
    Ithaca, NY 14851-0952                            New Haven, CT 06520
I. Introduction

    The market structure hypothesis in the industrial relations literature postulates

that unions should have the greatest power when they are effectively organized in

noncompetitive industries. According to this hypothesis, two key determinants of the

level of union wages are the firm's "ability to pay" and the union'a "ability to

appropriate". In this paper we empirically test these predictions by incorporating

measures of the market structure ard the bargaining structure in both union wage

settlement and strike equations. We also introduce a modern asymmetric information

theory that predicts the effects of market and bargaining structure variables on

strike probabilities and wage settlements. The information asymmetry model is used to

resolve some of the anomalies in the estimated equations that are not consistent with

the market structure hypothesis.

     The market structure hypothesis can be traced back to John R. Commons'    (1909)

discussion of the American Shoemakers)      Commons argued that prior to the Civil War,

the dynamics   of   the shoemaker's trade union movement was driven by market developments

and not by technological developments (j,. changes in the footwear production process

itself).   The modern formulation of the market structure hypothesis evolved out of two

long standing empirical observations concerning union wage determination. Ross and

Gardner (1950) and Segal (1961) demonstrated, using aggregate data, that union wage

levels are increasing in the level of unionization and in the level    of sales

concentration in the industry.     A theoretical literature developed that attempted to

rationalize these empirical findings (See Garbarino (1950) and Schlesinger (1958)).

     The hypothesis was not without its critics, however.     Rees (1962) argued that the

                                                                               in its
hypothesis had no clear theoretical foundation and that the empirical evidence

support was inconclusive. While a noncompetitive market structure may increase the

firm's ability to pay, Rees pointed out that it may also increase the firm's incentive

to resist unionism.     The fact that the oligopolistic industries were the last to be


           1We are grateful to Peter Cappelli for this citation,

                                                3
                                                     4

organized is consistent with this argument.          Finally,    Fees also claimed that the

existing empirical studies failed to document an independent effect of concentration

on union wages.     These studies examined only the manufacturing sector where

concentration and union coverage have a strong positive correlation.             To he

convincing. Fees felt that studtes should also include the nonmanufacturing sector

since the correlation between concentration and coverage is weaker in that sector.               He

concluded that ".,.    in   my judgemenr, data for    tha whole country would be much less

likely than data for manufacturing alone to show strong association between

unionization, enterprise monopoly,     and wage increases." (1962, pp. 133)         Further doubt

was cast on the hypothesis by Lewis (1963), Weiss (1966), and Rosen (1969) who found a

negative union wage coefficient on the interaction between coverage and concentration.

        Fees' critique led to   a series of papers that developed and refined the market

structure hypothesis (See Livernash (1963), Segal (1964), and Levinaon (1967)).

However,    few empirical tests of these newer models have been carried out (See

Hendricks (1975), Kwoka (1983), and Mishel (1986)).             This paper adds to this empirical

literature in many important respects.      A unique feature of our analysis is that we
examine the effects of market and bargaining structure on both union wage settlements

and strike activity.     This iS the first systematic empirical analysis        of the effects

of these variables on strikes.      We have also expanded the typical specification to

include several new variables. Union coverage rates are adjusted to reflect the

nonunion labor component embodied in imported goods.            Overall union coverage in the

industry is disaggregated into coverage by the union representing the bargaining unit

and coverage by all other unions.      In addition, we disaggregate nonunion coverage into

domestic and foreign components. Finally,      the importance of a particular industry to

the union's overall unionization pattern is measured by the percentage of the union's

total membership that is in that industry.

        Our findings are briefly summarized as follows.         First, consider strike incidence

rates    at the time of contract expiration. There       is   a weak negative relation between
                                               S

trade-adjusted industry four firm sales concentration ratioa and strike incidence.

There is a strong positive relation between the trade-adjusted coverage by the union

involved in the negotiation and strike incidence and a weaker positive relation

between the trade-adjusted coverage by other unions in the industry and strike

incidence. laport penetration is associated with lower strike incidence rates.        A

Herfindahl index of the extent of coapetitive unionism in the industry is also

negatively associated with strike incidence rates. There is a strong nonlinear

relation between the percent of the inion's total membership in the industry and

strike incidence, increases     in this variable are associated with lower strike

incidence   at low levels and higher strike incidence   at high levels.    Bargaining units

that are part of Association Agreements are less likely to strike.        Otherwise, strike

incidence   rates are not very different among the various bargaining structures. The

statistical precision of the estimated strike incidence effects is lower when

unrestricted year and industry effects are included in the analysis; however, the

qualitative pattern of the results is the same.

     Second,   consider wage settlements. Our findings here are consistent with the

pattern of complicated nonlinear relations previously reported.      Real wage settlements

increase    at a decreasing rate as the trade-adjusted four firm sales concentration

increases; however the interaction of sales concentration with both aeasurea of union

coverage (own and other union) is negative.    The sign of the marginal effect depends

upon whether unrestricted industry effects are also estimated, Real wage settlements

increase at decreasing rate as trade-adjusted coverage by the same union (or by other

unions in the same industry)   increases. The sign of the marginal effect does not

depend upon specification. The marginal effect of increased import penetration on

real wage settlements is specification dependent. Real wage settlements increase as

the Herfindahl index of union concentration increases. There is also a nonlinear

relation between the percent of a union's total membership in the industry and the
                                                              6

real wage settlements.                The marginal effect of increases         in this measure is positive

at    low levels and negative             at high levels for all specifications

Ii,    The Market         Structure Hypotheses
           The   reformulation       of   the market structure hypothesis       in the   1960's    is   presented
in    a clear fashion in Craypo              (l9g6)    This summary draws      heavily on that presentation.
The    central feature this reformulation is the               emphasis given to      the   need    for   the   uncn
to    effectively organired so that
      be                                              it
                                       is in a pcaition to appropriate some of the
noncompetitiva rents that may exist in the industry. The union's overall success in

raising the level of vages for its members depends both on the ability cf firma to pay
as    well       as    the ability   ci   the union to make the    firm pay.    This addressee the

of Race' theoretical critique of earlier formulations of the hypothesis.
           The ability of the firm to pay wage premis              to its employees is derived froa its


ability to pass on higher labor costs and its ability to offset higher labor coats

through reductions in other production costs.                     The degree to which the firm can shift

the incidence of wage preaia to other agents in the economy is determined by four

factors:              the level of concentration in the industry;        the extent      of "spatial

limitation" that exits in the product market; whether the firm is in a regulated

industry;             and the importance of government contracts and subsidies in the industry.

           Firms that exercise considerable market power in an industry can finance wage

premia out of the rents generated by nonmarginal coat pricing.                        In this case, the

incidence of the wage premia can be thought of as being shifted in part onto consumers

through higher prices. However, the wage premia may instead simply reflect a transfer

of rents from the firm's equity holders to the union members with no significant

change in the product price occurring. This would be the case if the union contract

reflected a bargaining outcome on a vertical contract curve±                         Empirical evidence


                2This is the "strong efficiency" bargaining outcome as described in Brown
           and Ashenfelter (19g6). See Abowd (1987) for evidence that unexpected changes
           in the value of a union contract generate on average dollar for dollar
suggests that there is a nonlinear relation between concentration and profitability

(See Scherer (1980)).   Marginal increases in concentration do not lead to significant

increases in profitability until the industry becomes highly concentrated.

Consequently, we might expect that there will exist a nonlinear relation between

concentration and union wages and between concentration and strike activity.

     There are several problems in using the four firm sales concentration data as

                                                            of domestically produced
published in the Census of Manufacturing. First, only sales

goods are included in the concentr   don   calculation. Variations in the level of

concentration across industries at a point in time or within an industry across time

                                                                             and
may not accurately reflect variations in market power due to cross-sectional

time-series variation in import penetration. Second, concentration figures may

overstate the degree of market power in those industries characterized by a few large

                                                                                rent
buyers of the industry's output.3 In this situation, much of the noncompetitive
                                                                                      the
may be appropriated by buyers of the product through price discounting. Finally,

unadjusted concentration figures do not take into account possible spatial limitations

of the product market or patent protection for specific product lines.4

     The Federal government has played an important role in collective bargaining in

two respects.   Government regulation of an industry may increase a firms ability to

                                                                                 in
pay wage premia by allowing the firm to pass through any increase in labor costs

the form of a rate increase.   Regulation, then, helps to take the wage "out of

competition". Examples include the trucking, railroad,     airline,   and telephone

industries. Recent deregulation of many of these industries provides a natural test


     transfers between equity holders and union members.

          3An example is the tire and tube industry.

          4The newspaper industry is an example of an industry with spatially
     limited product markets. Within the industry, the degree of concentration is
     quite low, although within a city, the degree of concentration is typically
     quite high. The pharmaceutical industry is an example of an industry in which
     the level of concentration is low although firms may earn noncompetitive
     returns on individual patented drugs. Weiss (1966) developed an adjusted
     concentration series that incorporated these concerns.
                                                  B

                                                                                       Rose
of    this model   by generating a before and after regulation act of union   wages.

(1987) provides a careful and detailed analysis of the total reduction        in regulatory

tents in the trucking industry and the distribution of this loss between trucking

firma and the Teamster Union,       Industries that do a significant amount of contract

work for the Government may also be in a better position to finance wage premia. A

"cost-plus' contract allows the firm to pass on to the government increases in overall

labor costs.       Examples include the aerospace industry.

        In addition to rent-sharing or shifting the incidence of labor cost increases

onto consumers or the government, firms can attempt to offset higher union wages

through    increases   in labor productivity.   This can take place through improvements in
the capital stock and/or elimination of union work rules. Both lead to larger totel
rents, which can be used to finance the labor costs.
        As Rams pointed out, noncompetitiwe market structures are not a sufficient

condition for high union wage levels.       The union must also be "effectively organized"

so as to be able to make the firm pay a wage premis.          Three factors that govern the

ability of the union to appropriate rents are the extent to which the union has

organized the "relevant" work force; the absence of "competitive unionism" in the

industry;    and whether the union has put in place the "appropriate" bargaining

structure.

        Ocganizscion of the relevant work force allows the union to take the wage out of

competition. What constitutes the "relevant" work force will vary by industry and
                                                              and try and regulate
occupation. Craft unions need to organize all skilled workers

the acquisition of the skills by new workers.         In contrast, industrial unions need to

organize each production facility in order to prevent firms from shifting output among
                                                                                   be
plants during strikes,       Similarly, regional redistribution of production must

offset by new ocganization drives.        The rise of the mini-mill steel companies in the

South is an example of this problem.
                                                      9


      Spatial considerations are also important for defining the relevant work force.

If the product market is spatially limited or a key aspect of the production process

is spatially limited,        then,   the union need not organize the entire work force.

Levinaon (1967) introduced the notion of spatial limitation.

     "Under this type of industrial structure, the union need only achieve a high
     degree of organizational strength within the limited strategic areas
     involved in order to be protected against the undermining effects of new
     nonunion entrants or of runaway shops, irrespective of how easy entry into
     the industry itself might be." (p. 202)

For example,     longahoring unions need only organize a few seaports rather than the

entire shipping process to he effectively organized. A second example is the

construction industry where the relevant work force is defined at a local level.

     In addition to organizing the relevant work force, effective unionism requires

that the structure      of   the organization is not fragmented between competing unions.

Craypo (1986) distinguishes between competitive unionism and "rival" unionism.

Competitive unionism refers to two or more unions that work against each other in

economic bargaining because they represent parts of the same relevant work force,           In

contrast,     rival unionism refers to two or more unions that represent different

relevant groups of workers within the same firm or industry.

     An     example   of the problems inherent in a fragmented bargaining structure is the

post-war experience of the electrical workers at General Electric (GE).           In 1946 the

United Electrical Workers (UE) union was involved in a two month strike with GE in an

attempt to force GE to match wage increases that had been negotiated in the auto and

steel industries. In response to this costly strike, GE adopted a take-it-or-leava-ic

bargaining philosophy that has since been named after its originator Lemuel Boulware.

The firm marketed its "fair, firm" offer directly to its workers rather than going

through the unions.

     The practice met with considerable success during the 1950's in part due to the

fragmentation that was taking place in the structure         of the electrical workers union

coverage.      In 1949 UE ceased paying dues to the Congress of Industrial Unions (GIG)
                                                             10

because of a charge that its 1eadershp was communist-dominatedand because of the

taiding of its bargaining units by other Gb unions. UE was later expelled from the

GIG, which chartered the International Union                 of Electrical Workers         (tUE)   to replace

UE.   In addition,        the American Federation of Labor (AFL) chartered the International

Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IEEW).                  These two competing unions ma well as other

unions were successful in winning GE bargaining unita away from UE.                            The end result

was   that   GE   workers were represented by            thirteen ucicns with over        60   contracts
      GE took      full advantage of its noniotegrated croduction process as well                      as the

degree of fragmentation in the union representation. The company would iaolete the
union that it felt was the moat in need of e settlement and offer it a contract just
marginally better than the "firm, fair" contract heng offered in general. GE would
pressure the uhion into a settlement by arguing that the union could not win a strike
on its own. Gnce a settlement was reached, GE would present the settlement tO all of
the   other uoiona as the best they could hope to negotiate.                       This tactic put the unions

on the defensive and gavethe bargaining initiative to GE. Aa a result, GE was
successful fn hreakng away from general settlement patterns in other industries
organized by       the GIG.      The average wage at GE fell from 9E% of the average in durable

manufacturing       in   1947   to   91%   in   1964.   The end   of   GE's   bargaining strategy came in
1969 when a Federal Appeals Gourt upheld an unfair labor practice charge against GE by

finding that "Boulwareimm" constituted a violation of the "duty to bargain in good

faith".

       The third factor in determining the effectiveness of a union's organization is

the bargaining structure used by the union.                   The appropriate bargaining structure will

depend on the structure of the product market and/or production process.                             Ideally,   the

bargaining mtructure should be broad enough to cover all workers whose products are

sold in competition. This does not require that a single contract cover all of these

workers.      Strong settlement patterns may serve as a substitute for a common contract


              4l8    F.2d 736 (2d Cir. 1969), cert.               denied,     397 U.S. 965 (1970).
                                                  11

(See Livernash (1963)).       There are two advantages that are derived by a union from

having the appropriate structure.

        "Because the relevant work force includes workers producing goods or
        services that sell in competition, a union aim is to expand the bargaining
        structure or pattern to include them all to obtain the greatest union impact
        during strikes.  Bargaining structures should be sufficiently centralized to
        ensure that economic terms and conditions affecting the relevant work force
        are negotiated at the same time. This structure removes the relevant work
        force from economic competition." (Craypo (1986). p. 34)

One counter balancing factor is that as the bargaining structure broadens, the union

is faced with representing a more eterogeneous work force,          This can make it more

difficult for the union to obtain a consensus on priorities in bargaining and more

difficult for the union to maintain cohesiveness during economic strikes.



III. Recent Empirical Evidence     on the Market Structure Iypothesis.

        The two most comprehensive empirical studies of the relation between market

structure, bargaining structure, and union wages are Hendricks (1975) and Mishel

(1986).     g0th studies use disaggregate data and control for a variety of measures of

the level and structure of unionism,       Hendrick's data consist of contract level

observations for 450 firms.      Contracts were included in the analysis if the contract

listed the wages for specific occupational groups. The sample period is from 1970 to

1971.     Mishel's data is gathered from the 1968, 1970, and 1972 Expenditure for

Employee Compensation (EEC) Surveys.       An establishment was included in the analysis if

at least 50% of the workers were unionized. The wage data consist of the average

total compensation for production workers at the establishment. Hendricks estimates

an error components model allowing for a      firm-specific,   a year-specific, and an

idiosyncratic error term.      Mishel uses ordinary least squares in his estimation,

        The degree of noncompetitiveness in the product market is proxied in each study

by   indicator   variables for "medium"   and "high" levels of sales concentration. The

                                                                              in the
sales concentration figures have been adjusted to reflect spatial limitations
                                                    12

production     process or the product market.6 Hendricks interacts concentration with

union coverage while Mishel interacts concentration (and a measure of barriers ro

entry) with bargaining structure variables.         Both studies include additional controls

for other features of the firm and/or product market.                  Hendricks includes        a measure oi

the ratio     of labor cost to total cost and a measure of firm               sire,   Mishel includes         a

subjective barriers to entry measure a measure of the industry price-cost aargin,                             and
the level and growth in the industry import penetration ratio.7
         Hendricks   finds a significant positive relation between concentration and wages

for janitors,     laborers, elsctricians,   and painters.           A negative and significant

relation was found for aechancs.         Across all occupation categories, the higher the

ratio     of labor costs   to total costs the lower the obsen'ed wage level.                   As observed iv

individualworkerdata, the size ef the firm had s significant and positive effect on
wage levels. Mishel also finds a positive and nonlinear relation between
concentration and      wages.   High concentration (60      -
                                                                100%) has neatly       three    times   the

effect     as medium concentration   (40 - 60%).   Higher       levels      of import penetration in an

industry     significantly lower wages, although changes in the level of import activity

had no effect.       No stable pattern of effects for the battier to entry measures or the

price-cost measure were found.        The discussion of the interactions with concenttations

will be given below,

         The ability of the union to make the firm pay is measured with a variety of

variables in each study.        This is the major contribution of the two studies.                  Previous

research focused on a single dimension of unionism              -   - the   level of coverage in the

industry/region/occupation. Hendricks includes indicators for the type of bargaining

structure for the contract being negotiated. Four different structures are identified


              6See Weiss (l966b) "Appendix to Concentration end Labor Earnings." mimeo.

              7The price-cost margin is defined as (Value Added - Payroll
         expense)/(Value of Shipments) using data from the Annual Survey of
         Manufactures. Import penetration is defined as Imports/(Impotts + Valueof
         Shipments).
                                                        13

in the data:      single firm/single plant; single firm/multiple plant; local
                                                                                 of
multi-employer; and industry-wide. Since Mishel used establishment level instead

contract level data, he only controlled for the bargaining structure at the industry

level.    The two specifications used in the analysis are the percent of workers in each

type   of bargaining structure and the dominant mode          of   bargaining. Mishel also

addresses the issue of the degree of competitive unionism in an industry.                Both the

number of unions in the industry,           the percent organized   by   the largest union,   and a

Herfindahi index of coverage are incorporated into the specification. Each study

allows the level of union coverage to have a nonlinear effect on wages.8

       Consistent with earlier studies using aggregate data and micro data on individual

workers, the level of union coverage has a significant and positive effect on wage

rates.     Mishel finds that the largest effect is in the range of coverage between 60                -


80%.     There is no difference      between the effect of coverage in the range 40       -   60% and


the range 80     -   100%.   Hendricks    finds   that increasing the level of concentration

(holding constant the level of union coverage) raises wages only when a high level of

coverage exists.        With both moderate and low coverage levels the interaction is

negative as found in previous aggregate studies.             This provides supports for Rees'

criticism that concentration per se need not lead to higher wages. Mishel finds that

the composition of coverage is important as well as the level of coverage.

Controlling for overall coverage, increasing the share of the dominant union leads to

higher wages.        Similar results were found when the Herfindahl index was substituted

for the dominant union share.            This evidence supports    the claim that competitive

unionism reduces the overall effectiveness of unions.

       Contrasting results are found for the effect of centralization of bargaining.

Hendricks finds for most occupation groups that local multi-employer bargaining is

associated with the highest wage settlements. The second most effective structure is



            8Union coverage is defined as the percent of production workers in an
       industry organized by any union.
                                               14

firm level bergaining. Single plant and industry-wide bargaining are associated with

lower wages with the lowest settlements associated with industry-wide units.       In

contrast,   Hishel finds that wages increase in general with centralization. Mishel

also finds that union workers receive higher wages in more concentrated product

markets regardless of the type of bargaining structure in place.

     Interpretation of these empirical findings regarding the effects of bargaining

structures on wage outcomes is made difficult by the fact that bargaining structures

are both an outcome of the bargaining process as well as a determinant of the

bargaining process, Unions and firms may value particular bargaining structures

independent of their effect on future wage settlements. For example,    more centralized

structures provide scale economies    in the costs of contract negotiation and

administration while decentralized structures provide more local autonomy.       The wage

effects discussed above could be interpreted as compensating differentials for

different bargaining structures.

     A few empirical studies have examined the role of bargaining structures as

outcomes of the bargaining process.    Deaton and Beaumont (1980) examine the

determinants of bargaining structure using British data while Hendricks and Kahn

(1982) use U.S. data.    Several of the variables used in our wage specifications (j,.,.

sales concentration) were found to be important predictors of bargaining structure.

This may make it difficult for the data precisely to determine independent effects of

bargaining structure and variables such as sales concentration on wages.     However,

there is no necessary statistical bias in the coefficient estimates themselves.

     The situation that would lead to statistical bias occurs when the error in the

wage (or strike) equation is correlated with the bargaining structure variables.        For

example,    if "strong" unions (or firms) can negotiate both their desired bargaining

structure and more favorable compensation terms, then our bargaining structure

coefficients would no longer measure the independent effect of bargaining structure on

wages.     Correcting for this excluded variable bias would require using predicted
                                               15

rather than actual measures of the bargaining structure. However, there seems to be

no proclivity as to which direction this bias would take.      Livernash (1963) writes 'On

the other hand, single-employer bargaining may prevail because of union inability to

organize the total product market.     Inability to organize has in recent years

essentially destroyed both multiemployer bargaining and unionism in hoisery and

textiles.     Single-employer bargaining also exista as a deliberate union choice were

pattern-setting and -following tdd to union strength in negotiating with a relatively

small number of large employers.     Single-employerbargaining thus appears both as a

sign of union weakness (inability to organize)      and as a sign of union strength" (p.

13).

       Given that there is no definite direction of the potential bias, we will follow

the previous empirical literature and include actual rather than predicted measures        of

                                                            will facilitate
bargaining structure in the wage and strike equations. This

comparisons of our results with this literature.



IV. Introducing Strikes into the Market Str'.icture    Hypothesis

       The final problem to consider before the empirical analysis is the role of

strikes in the market structure hypothesis. Modern strike models rely on an

information asymmetry or signalling structure in order to accommodate disputes as part

of an economically rational bargaining process.9 To model the implications of the

market structure hypothesis for strikes we consider a very simple asymmetric

information model in which the employer has perfect information about quasi-rents per

worker,     which are defined as the difference between net revenues and the alternative

wage rate of union labor, but the union only knows the distribution of these

quasi-rents. In the appendix we derive the implications of a single round bargaining
                                                                         can be
problem for wage settlements and strike probabilities. These conclusions



            9See Tracy (1987) and references therein for a summary of these models
       and a test of their implications of for strike incidence and duration.
                                                   16

summarized as   follows.    There are three types of parametric information to    vary:   the

expected level of net revenues per worker,        the dispersion in net revenues per worker,
                                    10
and the alternative wage rate.           Increasing expected net revenues per worker, hci.dtng

the dispersion of net revenues per worker and the alternative wage rate constant,

increases the wage settlement (there is more to divide) and decreases the strike

probability (there is a greeter cost to disagreement). Increasing the dispersion in

net revenues per worker, holding the expected value and alternative wage rate

constant,   increases    the wage settlement (the optimal offer increases) and increases

the strike probability (the higher offer is less likely to be accepted by the firm).

Finally,    increasing the alternative wage rate, holding the distribution of net

revenues constant,      increases wage settlements and strike probabilities (because labor

market opportunities outside of the bargaining unit are better).

     In order to     integrate   the market structure   hypothesis into this simple asymmetric

information model we must relate the key market structure variables (sales

concentration, union coverage,      and bargaining structure) to the parametric information

in the model.    All of the arguments in the literature suggest that increased sales

concentration is intended as a proxy for increased quasi-rents per worker.         This

implies that increases in sales concentration should be associated with incressed wage

settlements and decreased strike incidence.        The arguments in the literature also

suggest that the increased product market coverage by the union is associated with an

increased opportunity cost of time for the members of the bargaining unit.         This

implies that increases in product market coverage by the union involved in the

negotiation should be associated with increasedwage settlements and increased strike



          10Quasi-rents, in this model, are defined as the difference between
     revenues net of all variable costs except labor and labor costs evaluated at
     the alternative wage rate. Therefore, quasi-rents per worker are uncertain
     from the union viewpoint (because of the uncertainty about net revenues per
     worker) but are fully known from the firm viewpoint. When the alternative
     wage rate is held constant, varietion in the parsmetric distribution of net
     revenues is equivalent to variation in the parametric distribution of
     quasi-rents per worker.
                                                17

incidence.    The literature contains diverse arguments about the role of product market

coverage by other uniona and bargaining structure variables.       It ia clear that moat

researchers regard these measures as related to the labor market alternatives of the

union workers; however, the direction of that relation is unclear. This impliea that

changes in product market coverage by other unions (and other competitive or rival

union measures) should affect the wage settlement and strike incidence rates in the

same direction.

     Finally,   the literature is not replete with arguments that relate market

structure variables to measures of uncertainty about quasi.rents per worker.        We will

develop some of our own.    Incresses   in uncertainty should increase wage settlements

and strike incidence rates.

     It is important to note that while the information asymmetry or signalling model

of strikes   is the only economically rational model of both strikes and wage

settlements in current use, it does make some strong predictions that are potentially

refutable. In the context of the present paper, however,     we use this model only      to

help interpret the strike probability and wage settlement estimates produced by market

structure and union coverage variables, Hence, variables that have the same effect on

both the wage settlement and strike probability equations may be interpreted as

affecting either quasi-rent uncertainty or alternative wage rates in the direction

required to produce the common effect.     Variables that have opposite effects on the

wage settlement equation and the strike equation must be intetpreted as affecting the

expected size of quasi-tents pet worker in the appropriate direction, No direct

evidence   of the relations among the market structure, union   coversge,   bargaining

structure,   quasi-rents per worker or alternative wage rates is presented.



V. Data Sourcas and Empirical Specifications tlsad in This Analysis

     This paper contributes to the empirical literature on the market structure

hypothesis in. several dimensions. First, we analyze the role of the market and
                                              18

                                                                      The theoretical
bargaining structure on both wage settleaents and strike activity.
                                                          that many variables abould
development of the market structure hypothesis eaphasired

raise union wagea by increasing the union's ability to inflict economic damages on the

firm during a strike.   To our knowledge, however,   no systematic evidence exists on the

effect of these variables on the level of strike activity.    Second, we develop several

new measures for the structure of union coverage.    These new variables further refine

our understanding of the market structure hypothesis. Finally,    we estimate our

                                                                    of years than the
specificstions using a broader sample of firms over a larger number

samples used in previous studies.
                                                                            derived
     Msny of our additional measures of the structure of union coverage are

from s large psnel data set of union negotiations that has been collected by the

authors in conjunction with David Card and Sheens Mcconnell.     This data set consists

of all contract expirstions from 1970 to present that were listed in issues of the

Sureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Bargaining Calendar.      The BLS supplies an

identification number, which provides s panel structure to the data, making it

                                                                          The firm
possible to follow a bargaining pair through esch successive negotiation.

and union name, the number of workers covered by the contrsct, the two-digit industry

clsssificstion,   and a bargaining structure vsrisble are provided.   From unpublished

ZLS contrsct listings we were able to obtain the four-digit industry classification.

The bargaining structure variable indicates if the bargaining unit consists of a
                                                                             or
single firm/single plant, single firm/multiple plant, association agreement,

industry/area agreement. The BLS stopped reporting the employer unit variable in

1984.12

     The following methodology was used to create union coverage and bargaining

structure measures for the years used in our analysis.     Details are provided in Abowd


           t1prior to 1979 the publication was called the Wage Calendar.

          '2The unpublished BLS contract listings still indicate the employer unit
     classification. We are in the process of gathering these data for contracts
     expiring from 1984 to 1987.
                                                19

and Tracy (1987).     The employment number associated with each contract expiration is

meant to reflect the number of workers covered as of the beginning of the contract.

We linearly interpolated between these employment figures for each negotiation by a

given bargaining pair in our data.     This gives us month by month estimates of the

employment associated by each contract in the sample.     Union coverage measures were

constructed by first obtaining total monthly employment counts for each union/industry

pair in the data.     These monthly sums were then used to construct annual averages.

The total union coverage in an    in stry for   a particular year can then be calculated

as the sum of the individual union annual averages divided by the total industry

                                                    in our sample, we can decompose
employment. For any particular contract negotiation

the total union coverage into the percent covered by the union involved in the

                                                          In a similar manner, we can
negotiations and the percent covered by other unions.

calculate for each industry and year the distribution of union membership by type of

bargaining structure.

     The strike sample consists of contract negotiations in manufacturing that

occurred between 1970 and 1980.     Although it would be desireable to follow up on Rees'

suggestion and analyze both manufacturing and nonsnanufacturing   industries,

                                                                 sales concentration
nonmanufacturing contracts were dropped from the sample since no

data are available. While the employer unit data is available through 1983, the

estimates   of   the distribution of union membership by type of bargaining structure


begin to reflect the missing data as early as 1981,     For a three year contract

                                                                our calculations from
expiring in 1984, employment figures would be incorporated into

1981 to 1984.     To minimize the effect of the missing data on estimates of the

distribution of union membership by type of bargaining structure, the yeara from 1981

to 1983 were dropped from the analysis.

     Three sources of data were used to infer if a negotiation involved a strike.        The

BLS publication Industrial P.elations Facts provides a weekly summary of strikes in

progress using information gathered from a variety of public sources,     The 8LS 1ork
                                                20

Stoppage file, which is compiled from confidential surveys aent to firms and unions,

was used although some care is requited since the public use version available to

researchers deletes the names of the firm and union.     The third source is a listing of

strikes compiled by the Bureau of National Affairs,    Inc.   (BNA).1' The process used to

merge this strike information into rhe contract data is detailed in Tracy (l986)J4

     The wage settlement analysis was based on a sample of collective bargains

reported by the ENA in Collective Bargaining Negotiations end Contracts.      These

reports were published between January 1976 and December 1980.15 The twA data report

the wage rate,     scheduled deferred rhanges   and contingent COlA information. We used

a measure of    the wage settlement that suamarizes the expected annual rate of growth of

the contract wage rate from the last day of the old contract until the last day of the

naw contract.    This measure is based upon the deferred scheduled increases and the


          1These data are called the Work Stoppage Data by the twA. They are
     compiled by a group of reporters from a variety of public sources and
     interviews,  The data were provided by Harriet Berlin of the twA.

          4As might be expected, the three sources did nor always classify a
     negotiation in the same manner,   In 90% of the cases, all three sources
     provided the same classification.   The incidence of strikes in the sample
     varies considerably depending on the level of agreement we require among the
     three sources.   If we code a strike when   g  sources indicates a strike, then
     the strike incidence rate is 16.53%. If we code a strike when any two sources

     if we code a strike only when   gg
     indicate a strike, then the strike incidence rate falls to 11.62%.     Finally,
                                               sources indicate, then the strike
     incidence rate falls to 6.64%. The greatest degree of classification
     divergence is between the twA data and the two BLS data sources.    The
     robustness of the strike results to the particular definition of a strike used
     is discussed below.

          15The computerized version of the BNA wage settlement data are available
     through 1987, however, the time period from 1976 to 1980 is the maximum
     overlap with measures developed from our current Bargaining Calendar files.

          16The actual wage rate reported depends upon the contract and the
     reporter who records the information at the MA,   For about two-thirds of the
     contracts the wage rate reported is either the last wage rate in the previous
     contract or the first wage rate in the new contract for a representative
     member of the bargaining unit (e.g. journeymen operatives in the automobile
     pacts). For the other third of the contracts the wage rate is taken from
     published BLS data for the industry.
                                                21

expected COLA increases given information available on the date of sett1ernent)7 Wage

settlements were linked to the industry, union and state data using the same codes

that were used for the contract expiration sample.

      Import penetration data were developed by Abowd (1987) and are discussed in Abowd

and Freeman (1987).     The data were based on the BLS Trade Monitoring System four-digit

Import Standard Industrial Classificationmethod)8 BLS data are available for the

period 1972 to 1981.     Abowd's series run from 1958 to 1984.    The import penetration

ratio is defined as the import Sh. based value of imports divided by the comparable

value of domestic product shipments    (product class coded) plus value of imports.      The

measure corrects the value of domestic product shipments so that only the group of

products most comparable to the products included in the import SIC based value of

imports are used.

      Conditions in the industry and local labor markets may exert important influences

on   the wages written into new contracts and   on   the difficulty encountered in


negotiating them.     We include variables that control for the employment growth.

current conditions, and level of uncertainty for each labor market.       These variables

were derived from the time series regression on industry and state quarterly

employment, not seasonally adjusted19




           17See Abowd (1987) for a complete description of these data and the
      methods used to summarize the expected wage changes.

            18See Schoepfle (1982) for methods.  Original sources for these data are
      Bureau of the Census publications U.S. Commodity Exports and Imports as
      P,elated to Output and Annual Survey of Manufactures: Value of Product
      Shipments.

           19The input time series data were extracted from BLS computer tapes
      Employment and Earnings: National and Employment and Earnings: State and       Area.
                                                           22


(1)    In E.            +       + i2T2                 +
                                             +dijD.
           Uit     P1   Uj1 +    p2   U.2 + Ci
Data from 1958 to 1987 were           used   when available.    Otherwise, equation (1) waa

eatimated using data froa 1972 to 1987.20 The employment growth rate La calculated

using estimates for il and i2 The current condition in the labor market is
calculated to reflect both the seasonal employment affect as well as the predicted

component of the current employment residual. Finally, the overall level of

employment uncertainty in each labor market is proxied by the mean square error from
                  21
equation (1).

       An important feature of our study i5 the detail used to describe the extent and

nature of unionism in the industry.              A criticism of many empirical studies of union
                                                     controlled with a single overall
wage determination is that the extent of unionism is

coverage variable.          The two studies reviewed in the previous section made some

important    advances.      Hendricks (1975) adjusted coverage to reflect spatial limitations

in    the labor market.       In addition,     Hendricks distinguished between industry and

regional labor market coversge.              bUshel (1986) decomposed the overall coverage into

the percent covered by the major union and the percent covered by all other unions.

This yielded qualitatively similar results as using overall coverage and a Herfindahl

index of coverage concentration. We introduce several new variables into the

analysis.        These variables are meant more fully to reflect whether the union has

                                                                      unionism is a
organized the relevant work force and the extent to which competitive

problem.


             2Dgeries that begin in 1972 were analyzed using only a linear trend.

            21Tracy (1987) tests current gsme theoretic bargaining models of strikes
       by including a firm-apecific measure of uncertainty calculated as the standard
       deviation of the "excess" stock returns over a one year period preceding the
       expiration of the existing collective bargain.  This restricts the ssmple to
       firms that are traded on a major exchange and eliminates all bargaining pairs
       that uU association agreements.   For this reason, we have chosen to use the
       industry level measure of uncertainty discussed in the text.
                                                               23

       A limitation with all current measures of union coverage is that they                          ignore   the

labor content of imported goods, which is by definition outside the scope of American

labor law protection of the unions ability to organize. While Mishel (1986) included

an import penetration ratio (IPR) in his analysis,                      he did not attempt to adjust the

union coverage numbers to reflect import competition. If we are willing to assume

                                                                                   and foreign workers
that domestic union workers (LJ). domestic nonunion                       DN'                          (LF)

are equally productive, then we can adjust the conventional coverage numbers in a

simple manner Let k denote the cownon average productivity of labor,                            Recall that the

import penetration ratio is defined as:


(2)    IPR —



where S — Valueof domestic shipments, and

           H — Valueof imports.

Let C denote the conventional union coverage measure and C the trade-adjusted union

coverage measure.


               LDU
 3     C




 4C
C)
                      LDU


       The relation       between the two coverage measures can be seen by expressing the

numerator and denominator of the IPR in terms of the implied labor content,                            Ignoring

            we have H —                  and   S   + H — k(LDU + LDN +    L.),   which implies:
exports,                        k(L.f)
                       L
                        F
 (5)   IPR—           +         + LF
               LDU        LDN

                                 (3) through (5) gives that C           — (1 - IPR)C.      The same technique
Combining expressions

was used to adjust          the sales     concentration       figures   to account   for   imports.

       Since we know the union(s)                  involved in any particular negotiation in our samples,

a natural question to ask is whether the union coverage measure should reflect the
                                                24

percent of the industry employment organized by any union or organized by the

particular union(s) in question.     We diaaggregate the total coverage into theae two

components. Finally,      controlling for the level and composition of the union coverage

implicitly assumes that only the level and not the composition of the uncovered work

force is important. Recall that the uncovered work force consiata of domestic

nonunion workers and foreign nonunion workers.       Since the threat of unionization will

only apply to the first category of nonunion workers,      the composition of the nonunion

work force may be important. To allow for this pcssiblity, we include the IPR as a

separate variable as well as interacting (I
                                                -
                                                    IPR) with the coverage measures.22
     Nishel (1986) proxied the degree of industrial competitiveness with the percent

of the industry workers organized by the     largest union.     Since we have decomposed

overall coverage into a union-specific and a general component, we will use a

Herfindahl index of union coverage to proxy for the degree of fragmentation. In

addition,   we also include a variable that measures the relative weight that a

particular industry has in the distribution of a union's overall membership.

Specifically, we control for the percent of the union's total membership that is

organized in the industry in question.     Holding the level and concentration of

coverage constant, we expect that unions exert more influence in their primary

industries,

     The BLS   contract   data allow us to calculate the distribution of union workers in

an industry over four types of bargaining structures:         single firm/single plant,

single firm/multiple plant, association agreement,      and industry/area agreement.      In

the strike analysis we also know the specific structure of the contract that is being

renegotiated. This additional information was incorporsted in the analysis in several

forms.   The most strsight forward manner is to include indicstors for each type of


          22flishel (1986) included the IPR in his specification on the grounds that
     the variable helps to control for the competitive pricing pressures put on
     firms that operate in industries with significant import ectivity.   The
     coefficient on the IN will reflect both this effect end the composition
     effect discussed in the text.
                                                     25

contract-specific structure. The allows us to ascertain if the contract-specific

structure is important holding constant measures of the industry-specific structure.

An alternative specification is to code an indicator variable for the case when the

contract-specific structure is the same as the dominant structure observed in the

industry.        If the dominant structure reflects the most appropriate structure for that

industry,    then there may be gains to a union from being able to adopt that particular

structure in its bargaining.



VI. Empirical Results for Strike Activity

     The analysis of strike activity focuses on 3,575 contract expirations in the

manufacturing industries over the period 1970 to 1980.             We model the incidence rate of

strikes at contract negotiations. Other sources of strike activity,              such as

organization drive strikes and strikes during the life of an existing agreement, are

not included in this study.23       Table   I   presents summary statistics for the bargaining
units in our strike activity sample.         These statistics are simple averages of

bargaining units.       Overall there is a 17.85% strike incidence rate in the sample.

     We conducted a logistic regression analysis of the strike incidence rate

controlling for the variables listed in Table 1.           The specification was varied by

removing (column 1) and including unrestricted year effects (columns 2 and 4) and

unrestricted two-digit industry effects (columns          3   and 4).   The results are reported

in Table    2.    Rather than display logistic    regression coefficients, which are

inherently difficult to interpret due to the nonlinearity of the logistic regression

function,    we report the marginal effect of each control variable on the probability of

a strike, holding all other variables at their mean values.             These marginal effects

can be interpreted like standardized regression coefficients--the effect of a one

standard deviation change in the control variable on the probability of a strike.



          235ee Tracy (1986) for a detailed discussion of the focus on strike
     incidence at contract negotiation.
                                                   26


     Table    2   shows that the estimated logistic regressions are remarkably insensitive

to whether or not we include year effects and industry effects.          Hence,   we interpret

only column (1), which includes neither.        Incresses in the trade-adjusted four firm

concentration ratio are weakly assoclared with lower strIke rates,          Increases in the

                                                                       on strike
trade-adjustedcoverage by the same union have a strong positive effect

rates.     Increases in the trade-adjusted coverage by other unions has only a weak

positive effect.       Increases   in import penetration have a weak negative effect on

strike races.       As the Herfindahl index of union coverage increases    the strike rare

                                                                            chat is in the
goes down.        Similarly, as the percent of the union's total membership

industry increases the strike rate goes down.           The percent of an ndusrry'a workers in

association agreements is related to lower strike races.          The ocher bargaining

structures are nor different from rhe reference structure--single firm/single plant.

The effect of having the same bargaining structure as the industry dominant one ia

negative,    but statistically imprecise. The growth rate of industry employment and the

current industry employment residual are both associated with increaaed atrike

activity.     State employment growth and residual effects are not statistically precise
                                                                                      a
or economically lsrge.        Industry employment root mesn square is associated with
                                                  root mean square error is not
higher strike probability, while state employmenr

important.

         To check for the sensitIvity of our results to the definition of a strike used,

we re-estimated the basic strike specification for each possible definition. Recall

that we have three separate sources of strike information:          Industrial Relations Facts

(IRF),     Current Wage Developments (CWD), and Work Stoppages (WS).      When strikes are

coded baaed on the IRF data alone, the industry employment mean square error and the

IPR lose their significance. When strikes are coded based on the CWD data alone, the

                                                         and the industry/area and
industry employment growth rate is no longer significent
                                                                    lower strike
single firm/multiple plant bargaining structures have significantly

incidence. When strikes are coded based on the WS data alone, the sales concentration
                                                   27

loses its significance and the effect of coverage       by other unions is doubled in

magnitude. Finally,      when strikes are coded based on agreement between at least two

data sources,     then the industry employment mean square error and the sales

concentration variables lose their significance. In addition, single firm/multiple

plant bargaining structures have a significant negative effect.

     There are important nonlinearities in the strike incidence rate equations             The

negative marginal effect of the trade-adjusted four firm concentration ratio declines

in magnitude as the concentration Lises.        Table 3 displays this relation by evaluating

the marginal effects at various levels the concentration ratio.         The marginal effect

of the percent of the union's total membership in the same industry as the bargaining

unit is negative for low levels of the variable but positive for high levels.            Again,

Table   3   displays this relation.



VII. Empirical Results for Wage Settlements

     The analysis of wage settlements focuses on 3,485 contract settlements in the

manufacturing industries over the period 1976 to 1980.        The measure of wage settlement

used is the expected average teal wage rate over the life of the new contract.           This

measure     is defined as the nominal wage rate expected to hold during each year of the

contract inclusive of scheduled deferred increases and expected COLA payments divided

by the expected Consumer Price        Index during that year.24   We model the natural

logarithm of the expected reel wage rate.25 Table 4 presents summary statistics for



          245ee Abowd (1987, Appendix) for a detsiled description of the methods.
     The expected inflation rate used to calculate the expected COLA payments is
     the rate that prevailed during the twelve months that preceded the wage
     settlement. The expected COLA payments are based on industry and year
     specific linear COLA formulas and only apply to contracts known to contain
     contingent COLA agreements.

          25The logarithm has been multiplied by 100 and all proportions have been
     entered as percentages to simplify the display of regression coefficients and
     marginal effects.  Estimated coefficients retain the interpretationof
     elasticities.
                                                28

the bargaining units in our wage settlement sample.      These statistics ate employment

weighted averages of the batgaining units.

     The regtession analysis of wage settlements is shown in Table    5.   As in out

sttike models, we estimated equations that included no unrestricted affects (column

                                                                         effects
1), unrestricted year effects (column 2), unrestricted two-digr industry

(column 3), and both sets of unrestricted effects (column 4) ,    Regression coefficients

or marginal effects that are unaffected by the removal or inclusion of these

unrestricted effects may be interpreted unambiguously.     Regression coefficients that

                                                                              more
change depending upon which sets of unrestricted effects are included require
                                                                                  time
cautious   interpretationbecause we csnnot distinguish these effects from general

or industry pstterns.     All equations were estimated using weighted least squares with

bargaining unit weight proportional to bargaining unit sire.      This technique allows

one to   interpret the   coefficients as the average over all bargaining units for the

                                                                             in most
representative worker,26 The specification displayed in Table 5 is quadratic

of the interesting market structure variables with trade-adjusted four firm sales

concentration interacted with the main union coverage variables. Because this
                                                                             at
specification is very nonlinear, Table 6 presents estimated marginal effects
                                                                         have the
varying levels of the control variables. The marginal effects in Table 6

same interpretationas linear regression coefficients--namely,      they are the partial

derivatives of the regression surface evaluated at the indicated points.      The

discussion of our results will reference Tables 5 and 6 together.
                                                                            ratio
     Wage settlements increase as the trade-adjustedfour firm concentration

increases at low levels of sales concentration. The reverse is true at high levels of



          261f the regression included only an intercept, then the employment
                                                                for all unionized
     weighted estimated intercept would be the average increase
     workers and not for all bargaining units regardless of size. This technique
     allows for all the effects to vary across bargaining units. The regression
     coefficients are the employment weighted averages of these bargaining unit
                                                                                on
     specific coefficients. The weighted regression induces heteroscedasticity
     the model. Standard errors were corrected using the White technique.
     Standard errors have not been corrected for coefficient heterogeneity.
                                                  29

concentration. The cross-over sales concentration level is sensitive to which sets of

unrestricted effects are included in the model.        Table 5 shows that trade-adjusted

four firm   sales   concentration has a positive linear coefficient, negative quadratic

coefficient, negative interaction with same union coverage, negative interaction with

other union coverage (except specification 1), and positive interaction with import

penetration. All of these estimated effects are consistent with existing empirical

studies,    Table 6 shows; however, that the marginal effects of increased sales

concentration in our specificationsare positive at iow sales concentration levels and

negative at high concentration levels, which calls into question the direct

interpretation of the sales concentration ratio as a measure of quasi-rents per

worker

     The marginal effect of     increases in   trade-ad)usted coverage by the same union on

wage settlements is positive at    all   levels of   union   coverage (the only exception is   n
Table 6 is specification 2 at 67.9e coverage and the effect is imprecisely estimated).

This conclusion is unaffected by the specification or the level at which the coverage

variable is evaluated. The marginal effect of increases in trade-adjustedcoverage by

other unions in the same industry is also always positive and insensitive to

                                                                      is negative
specification. The marginal effect of increases in import penetration

when industry effects are omitted (specifications1 and 2) but it is positive when

these effects are included (specifications3 and 4)            Since the model is only

estimated using data from the period 1976 to 1980, most of the large swings in import

penetration do not occur during the sample period.           Therefore, it is not surprising

that import penetration effects cannot be distinguished from other industry specific
            27
patterns

      Increases in the Herfindahi index of union coverage concentration are associated

with increased wage settlements. The magnitude of this effect, but not its sign, is


                    (1986) did not include industry effects in his equations, so the
      robustness of his results to this type of specification check cannot be
      evaluated.
                                               30

affected by the specification. The marginal effect of the percent of total union

membership in the industry is positive for low levela of the variable and negative for
                                                                              result
high levels, which ia the opposite of its effect on atrike probabilities. The

is not sensitive to specification.

    Workers in industries where a large percentage of the unionized workers are

coveted by association agreements have somewhat lower wage settlements with the

magnitude of the difference depending upon the specification,        In particular,

inclusion of unrestricted industry effects substantially reduces the estimated

magnitude. Workers in industries where a large percentage of the unionized workers

are covered by industry/area agreements have wage settlements whose relation to the

reference   single   firm/single plant group is ambiguous (negative for specifications

without industry effects, positive otherwise). Finally, workers in industries where a

large percentage of the unionized workers are covered by single firm/multiple plsnt

agreements have larger wage settlements regardless of the specification. All of
                                                                                these


comparisons use the single firm/single plant agreement as a reference.             Industry

employment growth is negatively related to wage settlements. The estimated effect of

state employment growth is positive when unrestricted industry effects are estiaated

(specifications3 and 4) and negative otherwise.      The predictable transitory componeor

of industry employment growth (industry employment residual)       is generally positively

related to wage settlements (except specification 3)    .   The predictable   transitory

component of state employment growth is always positively related to wage settlements.

The estimated effect of industry employment growth uncertainty (industry employment

root mean squmre error) is imprecise and inconsistent across specifications. roe

effects   of   state employment growth uncertainty are always positive.

     Consider next the consistency of the estimated results with the asymmetric

information synthesis of the effects of market structure and union coverage variables

on wage settlements and strike probabilities. The primary market structure

varimble--trsde-adusted four firm sales concentration--may be consistently
                                             31

interpreted as proxying increased quasi-rents per worker at low levels of sales

concentration.   This is because at low levels of sales concentration the marginal

effect of an increase in the concentration measure is to increase wage settlements and

decrease strike probabilities. This configuration of results is only consistent with

a quasi-rent per worker nterpretstion.    At high levels of sales concentration the

effect of an ncresse in concentration is to decrease both wage settlements and strike

                                                             with the quasi-rents per
probabilities. This configurstion of results is inconsistent

worker interpretation.

     The primary union coverage variable--trade-adjusted coverage by the same

union--may be consistently interpreted as proxying increased alternative wage rates

for the union workers.   This is because at all 1.evela increases in coverage by the

same union are associated with higher wage settlements and strike probabilities.

                                                                 also be consistently
Trsde-sdjusted coverage by other unions in the same industry may
                                                         for union workers.   The
interpreted as proxying incressed alternative wage rates
                                                           for own union coverage in
pattern of its marginal effects is the same ss the pattern
both the wage settlement and strike probability estimates.

     The effects of increased import penetration cannot be given a consistent

                                                                    settlement
interpretation because of the specification sensitivity in the wage

equations.

     Increases in the Herfind.ahl index of union concentration cannot be consistently

interpreted as proxying increases   in the opportunity wage rate of union workers.     This

is because increases in the Herfindahi union concentration index are associated with

                                                                        settlements
higher wage settlements and lower strike probabilities. The higher wage

were predicted by the industrial relations theorists; however,   the only economicslly

consistent way to explain the strike probability result is to argue that this index

                                               could be true if union organizing
proxies expected quasi-rents per worker, which
                                                              or firms.28 The same
activity is targeted at high quasi-rent per worker industries


                 Abowd and Farber (1987) for an analysis of this model.
                                                 32

interpretation must be given to the percent of total union membership in this

industry.    This variable has opposite marginal effects on wage settlements and strike

probabilities, and these effects change signs at roughly the aame level of the

variable in the two analyses.

     Our direct measures of bargaining structure, industry employment opportunities

and uncertainty, and state employment opportunities and uncertainty generally produced

results   that were too imprecise to interpret in the context of the asymmetric

information model.     Only the positive effect of the predictable transitory coaponent

of industry employment gtowth was preoisely estimated in both equations. Thia is

consistent with the interpretation that this variable proxies increases     in the

opportunity wage rate of union workers.      The effect of the industry employment growth

rate, although relatively precise,     was negative in the siage settlement equation and

positive in the strike probability equation.      This is only consistent with an

interpretationthat the long run employment growth rate is positively related to

expected quasi-rents per worker.



VIII. Conclusions

     How important ia the market structure hypothesis for explaining strike and wage

settlement outcomes?    Our statistical analysis baa ahown that over the decade of the

1970's (late 1970's for wage settlements) trade-adjusted increases     in the four firm

sales ooncentration ratio were associated with higher wage settlements at low sales

concentration levels, lower wage settlements at high sales concentration levela, and

lower strike probabilities at all sales concentration levels.      These results are

inconsistent with the original market structure hypothesis. However,      the simple

asymmetric   information model of wage settlements and   strike probabilities suggests
that the inconsistency may   be due   to quasi-rents per worker (ability to pay) not
varying   monotonically with sales concentration. Scherer (1980) summarizes the many

reasons that industrial organization theorists have advanced to suggest that this
                                             33

explanation La at least plausible. Of course, a direct estimate of the relation

between quasi-rents per worker and trade-adjuated sales concentration could offer a

more complete explanation.

    Trade-adjusted coverage by the union involved in the negotiation fares

considerably better.   This variable is always positively related to both wage

settlements and strike probabilities. This result was predicted by the industrial

relations theorists and is consistent with the economic interpretation the increased

product market coverage by the union increases the alternative wage rate faced by that

union's workers
                                                  34

                                           References

Abowd,    John M. "Collective Bargaining and the Division of the Value of the

     Enterprise." NBER Working Paper No. 2137, 1987.

Abowd,    John M. "The Effects of International Competition on Collective Bargaining

     Settlements in the United States." prepared for the NBER Conference on

     Immigration, Trade and Labor Markets,      September 1987.

Abowd,    John M. and Henry S. Farber "Product Market Competition and Union Organizing

     Activity," mimeo April 1987.

Abowd,    John M. and Richard B. Freeman "The Internationalizationof the U.S. Labor

     Market." prepared for the NBER Conference on Immigration, Trade and Labor

     Markets,    September 1987.

Abowd,    John and Tracy, Joseph "On the Measurement of Union Product Market Shares"

     Working Paper, 1987.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Brown, James "Testing the Efficiency of Employment Contracts"

     Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, No.         3,    Part 2, (1986).

Bureau of the Census Annual Survey of Manufactures: Value of Product Shipments

     (Washington,    DC: CPO, annual).

Bureau of the Census U.S. Commodity Exports and Imports as Related to Output

     (Washington,    DC: OPO, biennial).

Cappelli,    Peter "Bargaining Structure and Wage Outcomes in the British Coal Industry."

     Industrial Relations, Vol. 26 No. 2 (Spring 1987): 127-145.

Commons,    John R. "American Shoemakers, 1648-1895,         A Sketch of Industrial Evolution."

     Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 24 (November            1909):   39-83.

Craypo,    Charles The Economics of Collective Bargaining (Washington,             DC: The Bureau ci

     National Affairs, Inc., 1986)

Deaton,    D. R. and Beaumont,   P   B. "The Determinants of Bargaining Structure: Some


     Large Scale Survey Evidence for Britain." British Journal of Industrial

     Relations, Vol. 18 No. 2 (July 1980): 202-216.
                                                   35

Freeman,    Richard and Medoff, James "The Impact of the Percent Organized on Union and

     Nonunion Wages." Review of Econoaics and Statistics,       Vol.   63 (November 1981).

Greenberg, D. "The Structure of Collective Bargaining and Some of its Determinants."

     Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Winter Meeting of the Industrial Relations

     Research Association (Madison, WI:        IRR.A,   1966)

Hendricks, Wallace "Labor Market Structure and Union Wage Levels." Economic Inquiry,

     Vol. 13 (September 1975),      pp. 401-16.

Hendricks, Wallace and Kahn, Lawrence "The Determinants of Bargaining Structure in

     U.S. Manufacturing Industries," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35,

     No. 2 (January    1982),    pp. 181-95

Kochan,    Thomas and Block, Richard "An Interind.stry Analysis of Bargaining Outcomes:

     Preliminary Evidence From Two-Digit IndustrIes." Quarterly Journal of Economics,

     (August 1977).

Kwoka, John "Monopoly, Plant, and Union Effects on Worker Wages." Industrial and Labor

     Relations Review, Vol. 36, No. 2 (January 1983), pp.q25157.

Levinson,    Harold Determining Forces in Collective Wage Bargaining, John Wiley and

     Sons,    1966.

Levinson,    Harold "Unionism,   Concentration and Wages Changes: Toward a Unified Theory."

     Industrial and Labor Relations Review, (January 1967), pp.198-205.

Lewis, H. Gregg Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States (Chicago,        IL:

     University of Chicago Press, 1963).

Livernash, E. "The Relation of Power to the Structure and Process of Collective

     Bargaining." Journal of Law and Economics, (October 1963), PP. 10-40.

Mishel, Lawrence "The Structural Determinants of Union Bargaining Power." Industrial

     and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 40, No. 1 (October 1986), Pp. 90-104.

Mitchell, Daniel "Union Wage Policies:        The Ross-Dunlop Debate Revisited." Industrial

     Relations, (February 1972).
                                                     36

Rees Albert The Economics of Trade Unions (chicago, IL:            University of Chicago Press,

       1962)

Rose     Nancy "Unionization and Regulation: The Division of Rents in the Trucking

       Industry." Journal of Political Economy (December 1967).

Rosen,    Sherwin "Trade Union Power, Threat Effects and the Extent of Organization."

       Review of Economic Studies,      Vol.   36, 1969.

Ross, Arthur and Ooldner,        William "Forces Affecting Interinduscry Wage Structure."

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 64, No. 2 (May 1950), pp. 254-61.

Scherer,    P. M. Industrial Structure and Performance 2nd Edition (Chicago,       IL:   Rand

       McNally, 1980)

Schoepfie, Oregory "Imports and Domestic Employment: Identifying Affected Industries."

       Monthly Ibor Review (August 19g2): 13-26.

Segal, Martin "Unionism and Wage Movements," Southern Economic Journal,          Vol. 28, No.   2


       (October 1961), pp. 174-81,

Segal,     Martin "Union Wage Impact and Market Structure." Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, Vol. 78, No. 1 (Pebruary 1964), pp. 96-114,

Tracy,     Joseph 5, "An Investigation into the Determinants of U.S. Strike Activity,"

       American Economic Review 76 (June 1986): 423-36.

Tracy,     Joseph   S.   "An Empirical Test of an Asymmetric Information Model of Strikes,"

       Journal of Labor Economics      5   (April 1987): 149-73.

Weiss, Leonard "Concentrationand Labor Earnings." American Economic Review, (March

         1966)

Weiss, Leonard "Appendix to Concentration and Labor Earnings." (1966b).
                                                            37

                                                     Appendix
Al.    A Simple Asymmetric Information Model               of Wages and Strikes
       In this appendix we present a simple one-period bargaining model that illustrates

the effect      of a set of variables on strike and wage                 outcomes,   For simplicity we

assume that negotiations consist of a single 'take-it-or-leave-it'wage demand by the

union.      If the firm rejects the union wage demand, then the bargaining pair dissolves

and the quasi-rents associated with the pair are lost.                       That is, the firm receives a

competitive return on its capital while the union receives the alternative wage for

its labor services,

       At   the     time   of   the negotiations, the firm       knows    its net revenues (i.e.   net of all

contractual costs          other than     labor)   for the next contract period ihile the union faces

some uncertainty over the            firm's net revenue.         We will ignore issues involving

wage/employment tradeoffs            by assuming a     fixed    employment    rule with bargaining only
over the contract wage.              Define the     following terms:

       Wa   —   Alternative wage rate
       W    —   Contract wage

       P    — Revenues net of nonlabor costs per union member

We assume that the union enters into bargaining with                      the belief that the firm's


profitability is uniformly distributed over the interval from P1 to h'                             P —
                                                                                                         U[P1,


       What is the union's optimal wage demand? Assuming that the union is

risk-neutral, then, it is straight forward to write down the union's decision problem.

Faced with any wage demand W, the firm's optimal response given the one-round nature

of the bargaining is to accept W if W is less than or equal to P and to reject

otherwise. Given the union's prior beliefs about F, the expected value from any

contract demand W is given by



       V(W)     —
                    "h      W]/[Ph
                                      -
                                          "11>
                                                 W + ([W
                                                           111h
                                                                     -
                                                                          'i
                                                             38




Maximizing V(W) over choices of W leads to an optimal wage demand function given by



      W —   Max   {
                      P1,    1/2   h   +   wi

We will focus on the case where                  < 1/2     +      W]   since this is the case which leads
                                            P1         t2h

to the possibility of a strike.                 If we denote ihe maximum quasi-rent as Q         P.   -


then, the optimal wage demand can be rewritten as


     W —   W    + 1/2 Q



That is, the union demands a contract wage which is equal to the alternative wage plus

a fifty percent share of the maximum potential wage.                    This implies that the union's

share of the actual rent will exceed fifty percent if it successfully negotiates a

contract with the firm.

     Define the probability of a strike as the probability that the firm rejects the

union's    wage demand.        This probsbility can be expressed in terms of the parameters of

the bargaining model by substituting for the union's optimel wage demand.



     Pr                            + 1/2            -
                                                        P)
                         -
               (1/2 2h                   W)/(Ph


     We are now ready to consider                the effects   of changes in   the bargaining environment

on the probability of a strike and the observed contract                   wage.    First,   consider the

effect of increasing the union's uncertainty over the firm's profitability holding

constant the expected size of the quasi-rents. This involves                       taking a mean-preserving

spread of the union's prior beliefs about P.                   Let e be a spread parameter (j,.g we

will shift up          by e and shift down P1 by e).              The contract wage and strike
                  h
probability as a function of e ate as follows.
                                                                     39



      W(e) —   1/2          + e + %J)



     Pr(e) —   [1/2   h     -
                                 p1
                                      + 1/2      W+       3/2 e] /    2h
                                                                              -     4   2e


                                        to the spread parameter at the point e—0
Evaluating the derivatives with respect

yields the following results.



      dW(e)    / de — 1/2 >           0


     dPr(e) / de      — (1/2      h       ÷ 1/2
                                                P1          Wa)/(Ph
                                                                          >2 >0

                                                                constant expected
Increasing the level of uncertainty over profitability, holding
                                                and contract wages.                                       Next.
quasi-rents, leads to a higher strike incidence
                                                           the quasi-rents holding
consider the effect of an increase in the expected size of
                                                                       rate.  This can
constant the uncertainty over the quasi-rents and the alternative wage

be investigated using a shift parameter a                         (j. we          shift up   h by s and we shift up
by   s).



              * 1/2          +            + s)
       W(s)           'h


      Pr(s) —(1/2     1'h
                            -         ÷ 1/2W          -
                                                          1/2   s)/(Ph
                                                                          -




The derivatives with respect to a (evaluated at s—O) are



      dW(s)   fda— 1/2>0

     dPr(s)    / ds —   -I       / (2      1h
                                                 -
                                                     P11)
                                                            <
                                                      40



Increasing the average size of the quasi-rents holding tonstant the unoertainty leads

to lower strike incidence and higher contrstt wsges.

     Finally,     consider the effect of increasing the alternative wage holding constant

both the mean and variance of P.            The derivatives with respect to W are
                                                                             a


    dW /   dW    — 1/2 > 0



   dPr / dW — 11(2           -
                                 P1)   )   >0


lmprovement in labor market conditions relative to the fin's profitability leads to

higher strike incidence and contract wages.



All. Summary Statistics for Bargaining Structure Variables

     Some descriptive information concerning the distribution of bargaining structures

is presented in Tables Al through A3.           In Table I   shows   the percent of union workers

in manufacturing who were covered by each type of bargaining structure. Separate

figures are given for the years from 1970 to 1950.             Industry/Area agreements acccunt

for the smallest proportion of workers although bargaining units using this structure

are large in size.      Comparing across years shows that there was a decline in the use

of plant level bargaining in the early to mid-seventies although this type of

structure regained its lost market share by l9gO.            Table A2 shows the distribution of

bargaining structures by two-digit industry classification. The figures reflect the

overall average for the industry over the sample period.              Distinct industry patterns

exist.   For example, while Asaociation agreements are the least used type of structure

in general,     they are the dominant structure used in Food, Apparel,         and Printing.   The

Chemical industry is atypical On its heavy use of Plant level bargaining. Because of

the panel structure of our contract data, we can detect bargaining units that changed
                                              41

their bargaining structure during our sample period.    In total, 21.8% of our

bargaining units changed structures. The three industries with the least stability

were Instruments (36.7%),   Petroleum (34.3%), and Rubber (34.4%).   The three industries

with the moat stability were Apparel (10.9%), Stone, Clay, and Glass (12.7%),    and

Printing (13.2%).   Table A3 shows the empirical transition matrix among the types of

bargaining structures. Centralized bargaining structures displayed the most stability

over the period. There was very little movement between Single Company structures and

more centralized structures. Most of the switches occurred between Single Plant and

Multiple Plant structures.
                                               Table I

                            Suary    Statistics for the Strike Sample


Variable                                                       Mean     Standard Deviation

Strike Indicator                                              17.85%           3830
                                                                                2,04
Industry Employment Growth Rate (annual)                      -1.20%

State Employment Growth Rate (annual)                          1.56%            1.00

                                                              -3.76%           29.24
Industry Employment Residual   (annual rate)

State Employment Residual   (annual rate)                     -0.32%            7.00

                                                               4.84%            1.84
Industry Employment Root Mean Square Error (annual rate)

State Employment Root Mean Square Error (annual rate)          4.12%            0.20

Industry Union Workera   n Aaaociaton Agreement               17.52%           28.06

                                                               4.18%           10.25
Industry Union Workers in Industry/Area Agreement

                                                                               27.89
Industry Union Workers in Single Firm/Multiple Plant          42.22%

Contract Specific Structure Same as Dominant Structure        55.94%           49.65

Trade-Adjusted Four Firm Sales Concentration Ratio            37.59%           15.78

Trade-Adjusted Coverage By Same Union                         26.30%           23.35

Trade-Adjusted Coverage By Other Unions                       16.17%           19.42

                                                               6.90%            6.44
Import Penetration Ratio

Herfindahi Index of Coverage Concentration                    51.52            25.12

Total Union Membership in This Industry                       22.23%           28.25

N — 3,575

Source: Authors' analysis of BLS Bargaining Calendar data. Authors' analysis of ELS and
      ENA work stoppage data. Sample period is contract expirations occurring from
      January 1970 to December 1980.




                                                    42
                                                 Table 2

                          Logistic Marginal Effects for Strike Analysis


                                                                   Mode I
Variable                                   (1)               (2)                 (3)           (4)


                                       00243             00243              0.0159         0.0112
Industry Empioyeent
Growth Rate                           (0.0067)           (0.0069)           (00088)       (0.0076)

State Employment                      -0.0033             0.0041             0.0051        0.0074
Growth Rate                           (0.0068)           (0.0070)           (0.0090)      (0.0077)

Industry Ernployeent                   0.0178             0.0143             0.0158        0 0118
Residual                              (0 0059)           p0.0061)           (0.0071)      (0 0062)

State EmpLoyment                      -0.0013            -0 0023            -0.0045       -0.0035
Residual                              .3 1057)           (0.0055)           (0,0072)      (0,0058)

                                       0 G102             0 0064            -0.0003       -0.0034
Industry Employment
Root Mean Sq.are Error                 0,0067)           (0,0065)           (0.0099)      (0,0081)

State Employment                       0.0010            -0.0023            -0.0006       -0 0018
Root Mean Square Error                 0.0065)      .
                                                         (0.0065)           (0.0086)      (0 0071)

6                                                        -0.0304            -0.0090       -0.0122
  Industry Union Workers              -0.0293
in Association Agreements             0  0094)           (0.0090)           (0.0147)      (0.0113)

6 Industry Union Workers              -0.0080            -00071             -0.0005       -0 0013
in Industry/Area Agreements           (0,0077)           (0 0074)           0.0l06)       (0 0085)

  Industry Union Workers              -0 0074            -0.0071             0 0025       -0 0016
in Single Firm/Multiple Plant         (0,0087)           (0 0085)           (0.0113)      (0.0094)

Contract Specific Structure           -0.0178            -0.0145            -0    0103    -00075
Same as Oominant Structure            (0.0106)           (0.0218)           (0    0247)   (0.0274)

                                                         -0.0104            -0,0158       -0    0115
Trade-Adjusted Four Firu              -0.0098
Sales Concentration Ratio             (0.0085)           (0,0082)           (0 0119)      (0    0094)

                                       0,0583             0.0573             0.0435        0 0329
Trade-Adjusted Coverage
                                                                                          (0,0103)
By Same Union                         (0.0090)           (0.0088)           (0.0123)

                                       0.0191             0.0177             0,0081        0.0033
Trade-Adjusted Coverage
By Other Unions                       (0.0066)           (0.0064)           (0.0093)      (0 0078)

                                                                                               (continued)




                                                        43
                                        Table 2 (continued)

                           Logistic Marginal Effects For Strike Analysis


                                                              Model
Variable                                 (1)            (2)              (3)         (4)

Import Penetration                     -00137        -0,0146          -0.0103      -0.0083
Ratio                                  (0.0067)      (0,0064)         (0.0089)     (0.0070)

Nerfindahl Index of Union              -0,0326       -0.0328          -0.0331      -0.0278
Coverage Concentration                 (0.0083)      (0.0080)         (0.0114)     (0.0091)

%   Of   Total Union Membership        -0.0467       -0.0500          -0.0410      -0.0380
In This Industry                       (0.0106)      (0.0100)         (0.0152)     (0.0117)

Year Effects Included                    No             Yes             No           Yes
  (degrees of freedom9)

Industry Effects Included                No             No              Yes          Yes
  (degrees of freedoml9)

LogLikelihood                       -1611.64       -1,586.56          -1,552.44   -1529.72

N — 3575

Note:      Marginal effects for all continuous variables reflect the change tn the probability
           of a strike resulting from a one standard deviation change in the variable: Matginal
           effects for qualitative variablea reflect the change in the probability of a sttike
           resulting from a change of the variable from a value of zero to one. All mstginal
           effects are evaluated at sample means of the data. Standard errors are given in
           parenthesea.




                                                   44
                                               able 3

                            Logistic Marginal Effects for      Variables      With
                            Linear and Quadratic Teras       in Strike Analysis

                                                                               ode1
Variable           Percentila       Level               1)              :2)               (37

Trade-Adjusted         10            18.0%        -O 0305          -00340            -00014       00354
Four Fira                                         '0 0205)         '0.0200)          (2.0227)    '0.0217,
Ooncentratiou
Rat                    25           25.4%         -0.0207          -0.0227           -0.0067     -0 0082
                                                  (0.0141)         (0.0135)          (0,0162)    ,3.015.)

                       50           35.9%         -0   0113        -0 0122           -0.0123     -0.0110
                                                   0   50)1)       (0.0088;          (0.0105)    ,0.Ol00)

                       15            )7    6      -3.0022          -0.0022           -0   0:76   -0 0136
                                                   0.Ou.3,         10 3075)          (0.0095)    (3.59O)
                       95           ,9    Se      .j 0094           0 0106           -0 u225     -0.0i2
                                                  (0 5130)         ,0 0125)          (0.0147)    .3 0142)


  of Total   Unn       1                          -0 1332           0   1488         -0 1020     -0 1551
Mesbership tn                                     '0 0269)         (0.0266)          (0 0290)     0.j541
This Industry
                       2,             ...5%       -0 1261           0.1404           -0.0967     -0 188
                                                  .0.0255)         (0.0251)          (0.0276)    (0..J209)

                       50            8,2%         -0.0966          -0.1061           -0.0741     -0.0826
                                                  (0 0196)         (0.0190)          (0 0218)    ,0 209)
                       'S           40 29         -0.0040          -0.0046            0.0033      0 0019
                                                  (0.0065)         (0.0061)          (0.0082)    (0.0076)
                      90            77,5%          0.1029           0.1111            0.1059      0.1127
                                                  (0.0239)         (0.0234)          (0.0293)    (0.0283)


Year Effects                                       No                Yes               No          Yes
Included

Industry Effects                                   No                No                Yes         Yes
Included

Note   Marginal effects reflect the change in the probability of a strike resulting from a
       one standard deviation change in the variable indicated   All other variables are
       evaluated at sample means, Standard errors are given in parentheses.




                                                   45
                                               Table 4

                      Summary Statistics for the Wage Settlement Sample


Variable                                                      Mean        Standard Deviation

Natural logarithm of average real wage (x 100)              119.59            2647

Industry Employment Growth Rate (annual)                     -1.56%             182
State Employment Growth Rare (annual)                         1.41%             0.79

Industry Employment Residual   (annual rate)                  9.36%           29.38

State Employment Residual (annual rate)                       2.82%             7,52

Industry Employment Root Mean Square Error (annual rate)      1.70%             1.74

State Employment Root Mean Square Error (annual tate)         4.15%            0.25

Industry Union Workers in Association Agreement               7,84%           20.38

Industry Union Workers in Industry/Area Agreement             7.89%           21.53

lndustry Union Workers in Single Fitm/Mu1tple Plant          53.77%           30.68

Trade-Adjusted Pour Firm Concentration Ratio                 44.61%           18.90

Trade-Adjusted Coverage by Same Union                        29.82%           30.29

Trade-Adjusted Coverage by Other Unions                      17.69%           16.55

                                                              9.76%            4.36
Import Penetration Ratio

Nerfindahi Index of Coverage Concentration                   52.79            26.78

Total Union Membership in This Industry                      54,40%           34.30

N — 3,485


Source: Authors' calculations based on 8NA Collective Bargaining Negotiations and Contracts
      data. Authors' calculations based on SLS Bargaining Calendar data. The contracts
      reported in the table were settled between January 1976 and December 1980.
      Statistics are weighted by the size of the bargaining unit.




                                                  46
                                               Table 5

                   Regression Coefficients for Wage Settlement Equation 0sirg
                               Quadratic Model with Interactions



Variable                                     (1)             (2)           (3

Industry Employment                   -1.3913            -l 1726    -09526        -2 06'E
Growth Rate                           (0.5046)           '0 4743)   (06292)       (0 6164)

State Employment                      -09197             -0 7702     1.1907        0.7782
Growth Rate                           (0.5li,            (0.3235)    0.-.557)     (0.463)

Industry Employment                    0 0325             0 1353    -C'   0476     0,0301
Residual                              (0.0139>            0 9l°6)   (0.0148)      .0 lIla)

State Employment                       i    laSS          0 2796     0 1580        0.1851
Residual                               0     526,        (0 3499)   (0.3154)       3.0440)

Industry Emplavmenr                    3.0371            -0.'-098    0,4533       -0 1754
Root Mean Square Error                )  2641            .u 2729)   '0 2191)      '32615)
State Emploiment                       9.llcl             9.1268     3 7437        2,7092
Root Mean Square Error                 1.5680)           (1.5785)   (l.60,         1.5605)

    Indastry UnIon Vorkers            -.3   3261         -0,2146     0 3527       -0   "I2
in AssocIation Agreemects             0.0269)            '1.0286)    0 0316)       0,326

¼ Industry Union Workers              -0.2176            -8.3051     0)283         0 c27
in Industry/Area Agreements           (0 0246)           (0.0231)   (0.3289)      (0,0293)

¼ Industry Union Workers               0.1412             0.1240     0 3921        0.0714
in Single Firm/Multiple Plant         (0.0161)           (0,0153)   (0 0178)      (0 0173)

Trade-Adjusted Four Firm              0.8058              0.9446     0 2444        0.3132
Sales Concentration Ratio             0.2723)            .0.2529)   (0 2837)      ,0 2914)

Sales Concentration Ratio             -0.0185            -0.0176    -0.0045       -0 0030
Squared                               (0.0029)           (0,0026)   (0 0031)      (0.0030)

Trade-Adjusted Covetage                0.6399             0.5391     0.7059        0,5361
by Same Union                         (0.1018)           (0.0944)   (0.0840)      (0.0874)

Coverage by Same Union                -0.0009            -0.0033     0.0002       -0,0014
Squared                               (0.0006)           (00006)    (0.0006)      (0.0006)

Coverage by Same Union                -0.0048            -0.0023    -0 0095       -0.0072
times Concentration Ratio             (00O19)            (0.0018)   (0.0017)      (0 0016)

                                                                                 (continued)




                                                    47
                                    Table 5 (continued)

                 Regression Coeffcienta for Wage Settlement Equation Using
                             Quadratic Model with Inreracrons



Variable                                 (1)              (2)          (3)             (4)



                                     0.0975            0.0671       0.4267         0,3208
Trade-Adjusted Coverage
by Other Unions                     (0.1382)          (0.1240)     (0.1324)       (0.1317)

                                                                                  -0.0007
Coverage by Other Unions            -0.0059           -0.0035      -0.0033
Squared                             (0.0013)          (0.0012)     (0.0010)       (0.0010)

                                                                   -0.0013        -0.0057
Coverage by Other Unions             0.0102           -0.0051
times Concentration Ratio           (3.0033)          (0.0030)     (0.0029)       (0.0027)

                                                                                   0.2953
import Penetration Ratio            -5.9236           -5,2129      -0.8135
                                    (0.5679)          (0.5108)     (0.5843)       (0.6352)

import Penetration Ratio             0.0618            0.0449      -0.0097        -0.0233
Squared                             (0.0129)          (0.0087)     (0.0132)       (0.0167)

import Penetration Ratio             0.0933            0,0919       0.0328         0.0096
times Concentration Ratio           (0.0105)          (0.0099)     (0.0093)       (0.0096)

Nerfindahi Index of Union            0.1076            0.1366       0.0140         0.0531
Coverage Concentration              (0.0283)          (0,0278)     (0.0363)       (0.0376)

% of Total Union Membership          0.2659            0.2046       0.1734         0,3342
In This industry                    (0.0611)          (0.0585)     (0.0535)       (0.0521)

% Union Membership in               -0.0025           -0.0017      -0.0014        -0.0010
Industry Squared                    (0.0006)          (0.0005)     (0.0005)       (0.00.35)


Year Effects included                    No               Yes           No            Yes
  (degrees of freedo-4)

Industry Effects Included                No               No          Yes             Yes
  (degrees of fteedo19)

Standard Error of Equation           15,0426          14.2929      11,9448        11.4792
Adjusted R-aquated                    0.6770           0,7084       0.7963         0,9119
Error degrees of freedom           3461             3457         3442           3438

N — 3485

Note: (a) The remaining variables in all models are identical to the ones used in Table 6.
      (b) The equations were estimated using weighted least squates with weights proportionaL
          to the size sf the bargaining unit. Standard errors (in parentheses) have been
          corrected for the hetetosced.aaticity induced by the weighting.
      (c) The standard error of the equation and the adjusted R-squared are based on
          conventional least squares formulas.


                                               48
                                                Table 6

             Marginal Effects for VarIables that Enter the wage Settlement Equation
              In Nonlinear Form, Based on a Quadratic Model with Interaction Terms


                                                                         Model
Variable                 Percentile   Value           (1)        (2)             (3)


Trade-Adjusted               mean     44,6%        0 1036      0,2864        -0.1415     -0,0911
Four Firm                                         (0 0439)    (0.0435)       (0.0629)    (0 3637)
ConcentratIon
Ratio                          10     21 1%        0.9697      1.1124         0.0677      0.0503
                                                  '0. 1588)   (0,1471)       (0 1805)    (0.1805)
                               25     31 8%        0.5755      0.7365        -0 0275     -0.0137
                                                  (0.1003)    (0.0942)       (0.1196)    (0.1209)

                               53     39.1%        3,3065      0 o799        -0.0925     -0 0578
                                                  (0, 0639)   (0.0616)       (0.0829)     0.0845)
                               75     63   1%     -0 5822     -0.3675        -0.3072     -u. 2034
                                                  (0 0978)    0.0884)        (0,1060)    (0.0999)

                               .,)    7Q 9%       -D 8672     -0.6393        -0.3761    -0. 2501
                                                  (0. 1397)   (0.1261)       (0.1485)   (0.1409)

Trade-Adjusted               cean     29   8%      0 3744      0.2405         0.2976      0.1355
Coverage                                          (0 0397)    (0.0397)       (0 0376)     0 0453)
by Same Union
in   This Industry             10      0.3%        0.4275      0,6343        0.2844      0. 2 156
                                                  (0.0597)    (0.0569)       (0.0640)   (0. 0682)
                               25      3.4%        0.4218      0 4134         0.2859     0.2069
                                                  (0.0568)    (0.0544)       (0.0607)   0 0653)
                               50     18.8%        0.3942      0.3126         0.2928     0 1653
                                                  (00449)     (0.0440)       (0,0461)   (0.0524)
                               75     44 3%        0,3485      0 1458         0.3043     0.0964.
                                                  (0.0392k    (0.0395)       (0.0313)   (0. 0403)
                               90     67.9%        0,3061     -0,0093         0.3150      0.0324
                                                  (0.0527)    (0.0518)       (0.0391)   (0.0461)

                                                                                        (continued)




                                                    49
                                      Table 6 (continued)

             Marginal Effects for Variables that Enter the Wage Settlement Equation
              In Nonlinear Form, Based on a Quadratic Model with Interaction Terms

                                                                       Model
Variable                 Percentile   Value        (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)

                                      17.7%     0.3424       0.1695         0.2507     0.0608
Trade-Adjusted               mean
Coverage by Other                              (0.0564)     (0.0540)       (0.0540)   (0.0585)
Unions in This
                               10      4.2%      0,5022      0.2633         0.3389     0.0610
Induatry
                                                (0.0817)    (0.0782)       (0.0686)   (0.0708)

                               25      7.6%      0.4624      0.2400         0.3170     0.0559
                                                (0.0747)    (0.0715)       (0.0641)   (0.0669)

                               50     14.9%      0.3754      0.1889         0.2689     0.0450
                                                (0,0608)    (0.0583)       (0.0562)   (0.0603)
                               75     23,0%      0.2795      0.1327         0.2160     0.0329
                                                (0.0497)    (0.0477)       (0.0514)   (0.0564)
                               90     31,9%      0.1742      0.0709         0.1578     0.0196
                                                (0.0463)    (0.0442)       (0.0524)   (0,0572)

         Penetration         mean      9.8%     -0.5631     -0,2472         0.4575     0 6700
Import
Ratio                                           (0.1384)    (0.1371)       (0.1510)   (0.1570)

                               10      3,9%     -1.2837     -0.7703         0,5702     0.9415
                                                (0.2179)    (0.1747)       (0.2580)   (0.2969)

                               25      6.3%     -0,9815     -0.5510         0.5230     0,8277
                                                (0.1736)    (0.1520)       (0.2061)   (0.2273)

                               50     11.0%     -0.4051     -0,1325         0.4328     0,6504
                                                (0.1377)    (0.1378)       (0.1396)   (0.   1452)

                               75     12.2%     -0.2534     -0.0224         0.4091     0.5532
                                                (0.1442)    (0.1417)       (0.1358)   (0.1452)

                               90     13.2%     -0,1331      0.0649         0,3903     0.5079
                                                (0.1538)    (0.1470)       (0.1382>   (0.1531)

                                                                                      (continued)




                                                 50
                                      Table 6 (continued)

             Marginal Effects for Variables that Enter the Wage Settlement Equattcn
              In Nonlinear Form, Eased on a Quadratic Model with Interaction bros


                                                                        Model
Variable                 Percentile   Value         (1)         (2)                 (3)

  of Total Union             sean     54.3%    -00013         0.0218            00204       0 0284
Mesbership In                                  (0.0157)      '0.0151)       (0.0145)        (0.0141)
This Industry
                               10      1.1%     0.2603        0 2008            0.1702      0    20
                                               '0 059%)      0,oS73)        (0    0524)     '0 0510>

                               25     20 2%     0 1666        0.1367         0 1165         0.0949
                                               0    0392)    (0.03'5)       (0.0344k        (0.0333

                               50     c6 2%    -D 0602       -O 0164        -0.     3113     0.0c51
                                               (0.0228)      (0.0219)           0.026)      (0.0200)

                               '5     '8.9%    -0   i22      -0 362         -0      0491    0.0197
                                                0   0350,     0.0335)           0   0311)   (0.0303

                               30     lj.6%    -0 1801        0 :004            0   082"    -0044
                                                3   G7          34)-j       '1 0415)        D.OG6;

Year   Effects
Included
Industry Effects                                 No           No            Yes             Yes
Inciuded

Note: Marginal effects are partial derivatives of the estraated regression equatiOn avaluated
at the values of the variables indicated ifl the /a1ue      coluand at the average a1ees of
all other varcooles. The estImation results are reported in Table 5, Standard errors (in
parentheses) have been corrected for the hetereced.asticity induced by the weightrg




                                                 Si
                                              Table Al

                            Annual Distribution of Union Membership
                                  in Manufacturing industries
                                By Type of Bargaining Structure


                                                                                      Number of
          Single Company/       Single Company/     Association       Industry/Area    Workers
Yeer       Single Plant         Multiple Plant       Agreement          Agreement

1970           31,34%                47.14%              18.78%            2.74%       4.26

1971           26.37                 53.39               17.18             3.06        4.28

1972           23.26                 55.76               17.80             3.18        4.27

1973           22.14                 57.33               17.08             3.46        4.40

1974           24.12                 55.49               17.26             3.12        0.41

1975           24,31                 55.19               17.13             3.36        4,32

1976           26.37                 51.38               17.80             4.44        4.18

£977           2902                  4926                1757             415            94

1978           30.93                 48.17               16.76             4.14        3.78

1979           32.51                 47.07               16.33            4.10         3.67

1980           32.98                 47.56               16.18             3.27        3.74

Note:   Figures do nor include contracts with missing bargaining structure information.




                                                   52
                                                Table A2

                             Industry 0istributon of Union Membership
                                  gy Type of Eargaining Structure


                            Single Company/    Single Company!     Association    industry/Area
Industry                     Single Plant      Multiple Plant       Agreement       Agreement

Food                            1935%              2565%                43.34%        11.66%

Tobacco                        46.37               52.89                 0,73          5.70

Textile                         35,75              22.54                23.03         18.67

Apparel                          1.82              12.71                76.82          8.65

Lumber                          15.57              38.86                28.48         17.09

Furniture                       31.74              37 49                29.42          1.34

Paper                          46.11               41.10                 6.97          5.82

Printing                        15.48               6.42                72.l           5.90

Chemicals                       66.77              33.12                0.11           0.00

Petroleum                       39,54              60.45                0.00           0 50

Rubber                          22.68              73.72                 3.60          0.50

Leather                        25.92               33 42                29.66         11.00

Stone, Clay, Class              19.02              63.67                12.56          4.74.


Primary Steel                  20.49               76.90                 1,40          1.22

Fabricated Steel               43.72              43 40                 11,04          1,84

                                                                                       0.28
Machinery Ex Elec              42.90               54.53                 2.29

Electrical Equipment           41.85               55.69                 1.16          1.30

                                26.94              69.77                 2.71          0.59
Transportation Equipment

Instruments                    48.78               51.22                 0,00          0.00

Misc. Mfg.                      29.18              31.77                31.05          7.99
Note:     Figures do not include contracts with missing bargaining structure information.




                                                  53
                                            Table A3

                            8argaining Structure Transition Matrix
                                 For Manufacturing Industries


                                             Subsequent Bargaining
                                                   Structure

Initial    Bargaining   Single Company!   Single Company!    Association   Industry/Area
        Structure       Single Plant      Multiple Plant      Agreement      Agreement      All

Single Company/              655               182               11                3        851
Single Plant               (76.97)           (21.39)            (1.29)          (0.35)

Single Company!              104               338                   9             7        458
Multiple Plant             (22.71)           (73.80)            (1.97)          (1.53)

Association                    9                 5               210              12         236
Agreement                  (3.81)            (2.12)             (88.98)         (508)

Industry/Area                  5                 0                   5            60          70
Agreement                  (7.14)            (0.00)             (7.14)          (85.71)

All Types of                 773               525               235              82       1,615
Agreements

8ote:    The unit of observation is a bargaining pair.   The numbers in parentheses are
         percents of row totals.




                                                 54
