                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO TAX INCENTIVES AFFECT BUSINESS LOCATION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT?
                  EVIDENCE FROM STATE FILM INCENTIVES

                                          Patrick Button

                                       Working Paper 25963
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w25963


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2019




 I thank Tim Bartik, Marianne Bitler, Jan Brueckner, Fernando Ferreira, Matthew Freedman,
 Andrew Hanson, Stephanie Leiser, Adrian McDonald, Kathleen Mullen, Carl Nadler, David
 Neumark, Matthew Shapiro, anonymous referees, and seminar participants at UCI, RAND,
 Tulane, CEA, SEA, APPAM, NTA, the Lincoln Institute, and ATPI for helpful feedback. I am
 grateful to Hayley Alexander, Connor Crowley, Sean Larkin, Justin Savage, Savannah Strachan,
 and Carl Vidrine for excellent research assistance. I am especially thankful to the John Randolph
 and Dora Haynes Foundation for generous funding through a dissertation fellowship, and to the
 National Institutes of Health and the RAND Corporation for funding under a postdoctoral training
 grant (5T32AG000244-23). The views expressed in this paper are my own and are not necessarily
 those of any funders. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
 reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2019 by Patrick Button. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
 paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
 notice, is given to the source.
Do Tax Incentives Affect Business Location and Economic Development? Evidence from
State Film Incentives
Patrick Button
NBER Working Paper No. 25963
June 2019
JEL No. H25,H71,L82,R38,Z11

                                           ABSTRACT

I estimate the impacts of recently-popular U.S. state film incentives on filming location, film
industry employment, wages, and establishments, and spillover impacts on related industries. I
compile a detailed database of incentives, matching this with TV series and feature film data from
the Internet Movie Database (IMDb) and Studio System, and establishment and employment data
from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages and Country Business Patterns. I compare
these outcomes in states before and after they adopt incentives, relative to similar states that did
not adopt incentives over the same time period (a panel difference-in-differences). I find that TV
series filming increases by 6.3 to 55.4% (at most 1.50 additional TV series) after incentive
adoption. However, there is no meaningful effect on feature films, and employment, wages, and
establishments in the film industry and in related industries. These results show that the ability for
tax incentives to affect business location decisions and economic development is mixed,
suggesting that even with aggressive incentives, and "footloose" filming, incentives can have
little impact.


Patrick Button
Department of Economics
Tulane University
6823 St. Charles Avenue
New Orleans, LA 70118
and NBER
pbutton@tulane.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w25963
1       Introduction

    Governments provide numerous incentives to encourage firms to choose their region for
business or to spur economic development. These incentives vary, but common strategies
include tax credits, grants, financing, enterprise and empowerment zones, and state taxation
rates in general. These incentives are increasingly common, having more than tripled since
1990 (Bartik, 2017). An in-depth analysis by the New York Times found 1,874 incentive
programs across the U.S., with a total cost of $80.4 billion per year.1 Bartik (2017) projects
that, for the entire nation in 2015, state and local business incentives had an annual cost of
$45 billion.

    Studying the economic impacts of incentives is essential both because of their popularity,
especially recently, but also because their effectiveness is still not fully known. Reviews of the
literature by Wasylenko (1999), Buss (2001), and Arauzo-Carod, Liviano-Solis and Manjón-
Antolı́n (2010) note that the effect of incentives on firm location and economic development
is still ambiguous. Some studies find at least moderate positive effects of incentives on firm
location (e.g., Bartik 1985; Bartik 1989; Walker and Greenstreet 1991; Papke 1991; Wu 2008;
Strauss-Kahn and Vives 2009), while others find a small positive effect or no effect at all
(e.g., Schmenner 1982; Plaut and Pluta 1983; Carlton 1983; Schmenner, Huber and Cook
1987; Blair and Premus 1987; Dabney 1991; Lee 2008).
    A particularly useful context to study to determine the effect of incentives is the rapid
diffusion of state film incentives (SFIs), which many U.S. states offer to encourage filming.2
The most common and generous forms of SFIs are grants, cash rebates, or refundable or
transferable tax credits for filming or motion picture production.
    Studying SFIs is illuminating for a few reasons. First, the film industry is one where
filming itself is relatively insensitive to locational characteristics, relative to businesses in
    1
      See     http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2012/12/01/us/government-incentives.html          (accessed
3/15/14).
    2
      Incentives for filming are equally popular at both the federal and provincial levels in Canada (Lester,
2013) and are also popular internationally. See https://www.productionincentives.com/ (accessed 2/21/19)
for a useful map and comparison tool.


                                                     2
general deciding where to locate. In the film industry, filming locations are relatively substi-
tutable because the majority of scenes can be shot anywhere.3 Relative to other industries,
filmmakers also tend to be less sensitive to local labor and input market characteristics as
they usually bring their skilled workers (e.g., principal actors, directors, and managers) with
them, and hire locally for less skilled workers (e.g., camera operators, extras) (Tannenwald
2010; Luther 2010). Filming also requires much less physical capital investment. Filming is
thus relatively “footloose” even given the large agglomeration economies in motion picture
production more broadly.4 Cost is becoming the most important decision in where to film,
trumping even creative concerns (Christopherson and Rightor, 2010).5
    This contrasts with firms in general who base business locations on a broader set of factors
(Arauzo-Carod, Liviano-Solis and Manjón-Antolı́n, 2010): agglomeration economies, wages,
skills or education of the labor force, city population or density, land price and availability,
energy costs, building costs, accessible markets for customers or suppliers, union activity or
labor laws, climate, local economic conditions, and local public goods. Firms often consider
incentives after first selecting finalist locations based on the above factors (Schmenner, Huber
and Cook 1987; Blair and Premus 1987; Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti 2010). This was
especially highlighted in the search for Amazon’s HQ2.
    Second, these incentives are incredibly common and aggressive. This makes it likely that
there are detectable effects of SFIs, both because the aggressive subsidies should lead to
more substantial effects, and because the large amount of variation provides more statistical
power. SFIs went from being almost non-existent before the 1990s to peaking in July 2009
with 39 states, plus the District of Columbia, having an SFI (Figure 1). There is also
   3
      While filmmakers often require some scenes at iconic landmarks or city-identifying locations, filmmakers
can use many strategies to fake the location, as discussed in Button (2018a).
    4
      Agglomeration economies for the film industry are large and are behind the concentration of this industry
in Greater Los Angeles and Greater New York City (Florida, Mellander and Stolarick, 2011). See Button
(2018a) for a more detailed discussion of agglomeration economies in the film industry.
    5
      For example, filmmakers are often told to change their scripts to fit new locations selected by manage-
ment (see, e.g., http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703816204574489153078960792 (accessed
10/13/14).) and independent filmmakers are expected to have SFI funding established before pursu-
ing private financing (see, e.g., http://independentfilmblog.com/why-film-investors-dont-want-you (accessed
10/13/14).)


                                                      3
increasing variation from states repealing these incentives, 14 states as of 2017. In addition,
states with existing SFIs often increased their subsidy rates (Figure 2).6 A typical SFI since
2009 subsidies between 20 and 30% of “qualified expenditure” on filming and motion picture
production. Given the popularity and strength of SFIs, expenditure on them is significant,
with an estimate of $1.5 billion in the fiscal year 2010 (Tannenwald, 2010).


                             [Figure 1 about here] [Figure 2 about here]


    Because filming is relatively “footloose,” SFIs are aggressive, and there is significant
variation in SFIs, studying the effect of SFIs on the film industry provides a “most likely”
“crucial case” case study (Gerring, 2012) that informs the study of incentives and business
location more broadly. That is if SFIs are “most likely” to affect filming location, but they
do not, then this suggests that other incentives are also unlikely to affect business location,
given that locational decisions in other industries are less flexible.
    In addition to telling us how incentives affect business location in general, studying SFIs
also tell us about the effectiveness, or lack thereof, of tax incentive or economic develop-
ment strategies more broadly. There is an extensive literature examining incentives, such
as enterprise zones (e.g., Neumark and Kolko 2010; Bondonio and Engberg 2000; Freedman
2013; Briant, Lafourcade and Schmutz 2015), empowerment zones (e.g., Hanson 2009; Han-
son and Rohlin 2013; Krupka and Noonan 2009), tax-increment financing, (e.g., Anderson
1990; Dye and Merriman 2000), foreign trade zones (e.g., Rogers and Wu 2012), and other
regionally-targeted incentives such as the New Markets Tax Credit (Freedman, 2015). Some
of these are case studies of incentives targeting specific industries (e.g., Moretti and Wilson
2014; Swenson 2017; Thom 2018a; Thom 2018b; Weinstein 2018; Button 2018a). Studying
SFIs also contributes to a small, but growing, literature examining how incentives can affect
specific industries and if they can create an industry cluster (e.g., Porter 2000; Rosenthal
   6
     This variation in SFIs is considerable relative to the variation in general state tax rates. For example,
from 2000 to 2012 there were 146 changes in state SFIs but only 49 changes in state sales tax rates, 45
changes in state corporate tax rates, and ten changes in state investment tax credits. These calculations are
available from the author upon request.


                                                      4
and Strange 2004; Moretti and Wilson 2014; Swenson 2017; Weinstein 2018; Thom 2018a;
Button 2018a.)
    However, this case study of SFIs and the film industry tells us more about the effectiveness
of incentives that attempt to generate clusters or that target specific industries. This is
especially the case if those industries are similarly footloose, whereby costs also trumps
other locational factors that affect production. This could include, for example, call centers
or manufacturing the relies more on lower-skilled work. SFIs also operate similarly to many
job creation tax credits (e.g., Neumark and Grijalva 2017; Chirinko and Wilson 2010) in that
both incentives provide significant incentives to increase employment. SFIs tell us less about
incentives that are focused on specific geographic areas (e.g., enterprise zones, empowerment
zones, and foreign trade zones.)
    In this study, I estimate the effect of SFIs on filming location for both TV series and
feature films, the effect on the film industry itself (employment, establishments, wages),
and the effect on related industries. I compiled a unique database of all SFIs since their
inception up until 2017. I combine this SFI database with two databases that track filming
locations: the Internet Movie Database (IMDb), which provides 16,593 TV Series and 61,480
feature films, and the Studio System database, which provides 1,563 TV series and 8,968
feature films. To estimate effects on employment, establishments, average weekly wages, and
total wages in the film industry, I use data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW) and County Business Patterns (CBP). I also use QCEW data to capture
the impact on spillover industries, such as independent artists, payroll services, hospitality,
                                                                                                   7
caterers, transportation rentals, costumes, and non-residential building leasing.
    To estimate the causal effect of SFIs on these outcomes, I use panel regression with
two-way fixed effects. This is akin to a difference-in-differences research design where states
that adopt SFIs are compared, before and after they adopt SFIs, to similar states that
    7
     I focus on the impacts on specific industries rather than data aggregated over all industries for two
reasons. First, this better estimates the policy-relevant question of if incentives affect the targetted industry.
Second, using aggregate data over all industries severely reduces the statistical power to detect economic
impacts, as many uncontrolled factors affect aggregate state economies.


                                                        5
do not adopt or have not yet adopted. This panel regression approach provides a much
more convincing estimate of the impacts of SFIs by controlling for both time-invariant state
characteristics and national trends in motion picture production. I start by estimating the
average effects of SFIs after adoption, and then I estimate the effects of SFIs over time (an
event study). I then explore the assumptions behind my difference-in-differences research
design: policy exogeneity, the parallel paths assumption, and the stable unit treatment value
assumption (SUTVA). Finally, I explore heterogeneous effects by studying if the effects of
SFIs vary by the timing of their adoption, their subsidy rates, and by the size of the existing
film industry (to measure agglomeration economies).
    I find evidence that SFIs have a large and mostly robust effect on the filming location
of TV series, but I find little evidence that SFIs affect the filming location of feature films.
Despite these impacts on filming, I do not find any meaningful effect on the size of the film
industry. At best I find non-robust evidence of small increases in employment in motion
picture production - at most an 18.2% increase, or 314 jobs on average, under extremely
generous assumptions. I also find almost no evidence of any impacts on related industries
that might get spillover benefits from motion picture production.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses my data sources,
Section 3 discusses my methodology, Section 4 presents and discusses the main results,
Section 5 presents the results of numerous robustness checks, Section 6 extends the main
model to investigate heterogeneous effects, Section 7 presents preliminary estimates of the
effect of repealing SFIs, and Section 8 discusses the results and conclusions.



2       Data

    To quantify the impacts of SFIs on filming, employment, and establishments, I use five
sources of data. First is a unique panel database I compiled of SFIs in the U.S. states.8

    8
     Bartik (2017) does not include data on SFIs. The data I compiled on SFIs is also more detailed than
other work, such Good Jobs Firsts’ data (Mattera et al., 2011) or other research quantifying the impact of


                                                    6
Second is filming location data from the Internet Movie Database (IMDb). Third is another
database of filming location: Studio System. Fourth is Quarterly Census of Employment
and Wages (QCEW) data on employment, establishments, average weekly wages, and total
wages in the motion picture production industry, and related industries. Fifth is County
Business Patterns (CBP) data on employment and establishments in the motion picture
production industry.


2.1     State Film Incentives Database

    There are different types of incentives for filming or motion picture production at the
state level.9 The most common type, which I quantify in this analysis and title State Film
Incentives (SFIs), are rebates, grants, refundable tax credits, or transferable tax credits. All
these give a percentage of a motion picture production’s “qualified expenditure” back to the
production company.10
    Online Appendix C details the history of SFIs in each state, and their features, for all
states and the District of Columbia. I compiled this database by locating the relevant laws,
via statutes in WestLaw, confirming changes in legislation over time using notes provided by
WestLaw, and locating the actual acts, through HeinOnline, that amended these laws. In
rare cases, supplementary sources such as government websites or consulting firm websites
were used to confirm details that were not codified explicitly in law.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics for my state film incentives database. From 1976 to

SFIs (Swenson 2017; Thom 2018a).
    9
      There are some incentives at the city or county level that I do not cover in this paper and are otherwise
hard to study. These incentives are usually services such as permitting or discounts on police escorts.
   10
      My focus on these stronger and more common incentives mirrors Adkisson (2013), Thom (2018a), and
Swenson (2017). The other less common and weaker state-level incentives that I do not quantify are the
few tax credits that are neither transferable nor refundable, sales and use tax exemptions or rebates, and
tax credits for investment in a motion picture production facility or capital program. Tax credits that are
neither refundable nor transferable are relatively weak incentives since they only cover the filmmaker’s low
tax liabilities. They are also less common: tax credits that are neither refundable nor transferable constitute
no more than 4.9% of observations where a state is observed with an incentive. These less common and
weaker incentives are rarely discussed in debates about tax incentives for the film industry and were usually
only used temporarily before states moved to the types of SFIs I analyze. I control for tax incentives that
are neither refundable nor transferable in my analysis.


                                                      7
2017, across all states, 23% of states are observed with an SFI (SF I = 1), meaning that the
state has an SFI that is accepting applications. 3% of states are observed where they had an
SFI, but it was repealed or suspended either temporarily or permanently (Repealed = 1).11
Appendix A contains information on SFI features, such as subsidy rates by category of
qualified expenditure, and information on weaker incentives (tax credits that are neither
refundable nor transferable) which I do not study since they are far less common and are
weaker. However, I do control for these in my analysis.


                                          [Table 1 about here]


2.1.1    State Film Incentive Characteristics

    The primary way that SFIs differ by state is in their subsidy rates for different categories
of expenditure on inputs into filming. The subsidy rates almost always target three categories
of expenditure: the payroll of state residents, the payroll of non-residents, and non-labor
expenditures. Non-labor expenditures include a broad, and often non-exhaustive, list of
spending on inputs such as set construction, wardrobe, photography, sound, lighting, rental
fees, transportation, caterers, and lodging. Advertising and distribution are not included.
Figure 2 shows how these subsidy rates have increased over time, and Appendix Table A1
panel (a) presents summary statistics for these subsidy rates. Full details are in Online
Appendix C.
    The second way that SFIs differ is in their rate of refundability, that is, how much
filmmakers receive beyond their often low state tax liabilities. Some SFIs are cash grants or
rebates, which provide filmmakers with direct cash, but the majority of SFIs are tax credits,
which are refundable, transferable, or neither. If a tax credit is refundable, it can be sold

  11
     This includes the following 14 states, with this data current to the end of 2017: Alaska from July 2015
onward, Arizona from January 2011 onward, Florida from July 2016 onward, Idaho from July 2010 onward,
Indiana from January 2012 onward, Iowa from December 2009 onward, Kansas in 2009 and 2010, and July
2012 onward, Maryland from October 2009 to June 2011, Michigan from October 2015 onward, Missouri
from September 2014 onward, Montana from January 2015 onward, New Jersey from July 2010 onward,
Vermont from June 2011 onward, and Wisconsin from Jan 2014 onward.


                                                     8
back to the state, though sometimes at a discounted rate. If a tax credit is transferable, it
can be sold, through intermediary brokers, to other firms with tax liabilities to the state.
These brokers typically take a cut of 20 to 30% of the credit (Luther 2010; Christopherson
and Rightor 2010). In either case, the filmmaker can receive a benefit beyond their often low
tax liabilities, a benefit not offered by tax credits that are neither refundable nor transferable.
Appendix Table A1 presents summary statistics for the characteristics of SFIs.


2.2     Internet Movie Database (IMDb) Data

    The Internet Movie Database at IMDb.com is a popular online database with information
on motion picture productions. IMDb includes information on over 5,310,913 titles.12 I use
text-based data files provided by IMDb to extract a sample of TV series (16,362) and feature
films (59,652) that include all productions with a release date from 1977 to 2018 that list a
filming location in a U.S. state.13
    Unfortunately, the IMDb data does not uniformly include the filming year for either TV
series or feature films. I use the year of release to estimate the filming year by assuming the
filming year was one year before the release year.14 For TV series, there is no comprehensive
data on when each season of each TV series was filmed, but IMDb does provide years for
which the series was in distribution.15 For TV series, I assign the filming equally across the
period when the TV series was in distribution.16 Once I have assigned a production to states
  12
       See http://www.imdb.com/stats (accessed 10/7/18).
  13
       I extracted this data on 8/4/18. IMDb categorizes productions into mutually-exclusive groups: TV
Series, TV Episode, TV Miniseries, TV Movie, TV Special, Movie, Video, Short, or Videogame. I ignore the
TV Episodes category because it provides separate data on some notable episodes, but all does not cover the
vast majority of TV episodes or series. Results using TV Episodes and TV Minieseries, however, are similar
and are available upon request. I exclude the categories of TV Special, Short, Video, and Video Game as
they are rarely targeted by incentives, as made clear in state statuates. There are, however, some states that
do cover video games, but an analysis of video game production is a separate question that requires better
data far beyond what I have collected here. I also exclude the Video category since this category is catch-all
for anything not already categorized. Finally, I fold the TV Movie category data into the Movie category
data since both are similar (TV Movies are just distributed on TV rather than in theaters), and I re-title
this category “feature films.”
    14
       As described later in the paper for the Studio System feature films data, which has filming dates, most
filming occurs the year before the release year.
    15
       The mean years of distribution is 3.8 (standard deviation of 4.0).
    16
       For example, for a series that was first in distribution from 2005 to 2010, it is assumed to have been


                                                      9
and years of filming, I then generate counts of the number of TV series and feature films
filmed in each state and year.17
    Figure 3a presents the number of IMDb TV series per year, and Figure 3c presents the
number of IMDb feature films released per year. Both rise over time, which is a function
of increased filming over time but also a function of the IMDb data being more complete
for more recent years. The rise is most steep after about 2001. There is then a dip in
productions in 2018 which reflects that data from 2018 is incomplete given that the year was
not complete when I compiled the data in July 2018.


                                           [Figure 3 about here]


    Table 1 panel (b) presents summary statistics for the IMDb data. The mean number of
TV series filmed in each state and year is 7.7, but the median is one, reflecting that most
filming is concentrated in states like California18 and New York.19 At least some TV series
filming occurs for about two-thirds of all state-year observations. For feature films, the mean
state-year has 28.7 feature films, with a median of 6.8. 93% of state-year observations have
at least one feature film.


2.3     Studio System Data

    Studio System (formerly Baseline) is a proprietary industry database of TV series and
feature films. The content is not user-generated like IMDb; instead, it is carefully managed
by professionals to ensure data quality and completeness. Compared to IMDb, the Studio
System data is more reliable, contains more information about each production, but contains

filmed from 2004 to 2009. If this was filmed only in California, then this counts as one TV series in California
in those years.
    17
       Some productions list more than one region of filming location. For those productions, the production
is split equally. I ignore filming locations for pilot episodes since these are not always where the entire season
is filmed.
    18
       For more background on the industry in California, see Thom (2018a).
    19
       The mean IMDb TV series (feature films) in California is 171.6 (486.6), and 54.2 and 209.0 in New
York, respectively. Across the entire sample, California has 43.7% (33.2%) of all IMDb TV series (feature
film) filming, and New York has 13.8% and 14.3%, respectively.


                                                       10
fewer productions, partly because it only focuses on nationally-distributed TV series or
feature films.
    I extract a database of 1,563 TV series20 and 8,968 feature films between 1985 and 2018
and where all TV series are filmed in at least one US state. I use a similar process as with
the IMDb data to allocate these TV series and feature films.21
    Figure 3b presents the number of TV series per year and Figure 3d presents the number
of feature films per year. For TV series, before 2001, there are 50 or fewer TV series active
each year, and this jumps up to about 300 per year from about 2005 to 2011, and then
jumps up to 400 from about 2012 to 2016. Like the IMDb data, productions drop in the
final year reflecting that the year had not completed yet when I extracted the data. For
feature films, filming dates are available at a monthly frequency, and, unsurprisingly, filming
varies seasonally by month. Feature films in the Studio System data do increase slightly over
time but are relatively constant at around 28 films per month.
    Table 1 panel (c) presents summary statistics for the Studio System data. Compared to
the IMDb data, there are fewer productions. The mean number of TV series (feature films)
is 3.2 (0.4), with a median of zero.22 35% (23%) of state-year (state-month) observations
have some TV series (feature film) filming.


2.4     Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) Data

    The Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), collected by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, provides data on employment and establishment counts, average weekly
  20
       I include only TV series that were distributed on a broadcast network or major online medium (e.g.,
Netflix).
    21
       Similar to the IMDb data, the Studio System data does not explicitly list the period of filming for
each TV series, so I follow the same process to assign TV series to state-year observations. The years of
distribution for the TV series range from two years to 28 years, with a mean of 3.7 and a standard deviation
of 3.0. Feature films, however, usually have filming dates (5,868 out of 8,968 have filming dates), allowing
me to assign these to state-month observations. When the filming date was unavailable, I assumed a filming
date of one year before the release date. Filming the year before distribution is the most common, 55.9% of
feature films in the Studio System data are distributed the year after filming (Button, 2018a).
    22
       In California, the means are 95.1 TV series and 8.5 feature films, and in New York, the means are 26.0
TV series and 4.0 feature films. Over the entire sample, California has 58.2% (41.6%) of TV series (feature
films), and New York has 15.9% (19.8%).


                                                     11
wages, and total wages, at different levels of industry specificity. In all cases, I only use the
estimates for private industry, which excludes government enterprises. Estimates by industry
are reported by six-digit North American Industry Classification Code (NAICS) system (1990
to 2017) and the four-digit Standard Industry Classification (SIC) system (1976 to 1989 or
1978 to 1989).23
   To quantify impacts on the film industry, I use estimates for “Motion picture and video
production” (NAICS 512110) from 1990 to 2017 and “Motion picture and video production”
(SIC 7812) from 1988 to 1989. For 1978 to 1987, estimates are listed separately for TV and
non-TV (“Motion picture production, except TV” (SIC 7813), “Motion picture production
for TV” (SIC 7814)). I sum these estimates to get employment, establishment, and total
wage counts, and calculate average weekly wages as the weighted mean of average weekly
wages for “except TV” and “for TV,” weighted by employment counts.24 Note that the
motion picture and video production industry does not include motion picture distribution
or exhibition, or sound recording, which all fall under separate NAICS or SIC codes.
   Table 1 panel (d) presents summary statistics for employment, establishment, total wages,
and average weekly wages. At the mean (median) there are 3,299 (611) employees and 289
(91) establishments per state and year. The mean (median) total wages is $18.3m ($2.30m)
in nominal dollars, and the mean (median) average weekly wage in nominal dollars is $730
($529). The small number of employees relative to establishments, especially at the median,
suggests that most establishments are small, with about a dozen employees per establishment
on average. The data again show a concentration of the industry in California and New
York.25




  23
      For some industries, data is not available for years 1976 and 1977.
  24
      In the case where either “except TV” or “for TV” doesf not disclose data, I code that observation as
missing even if data is available for the other sub-industry.
   25
      The mean employment (establishments) in California is 87,766 (5,070), and the means for New York
are 28,361 and 1,739, respectively. Over the entire sample, California has 52.2% (34.4%) of employment
(establishments), and New York has 16.9% (11.8%).


                                                   12
2.4.1      Issues with QCEW Employment Data for Motion Picture Production

   There are a few problems with the employment estimates in the QCEW that affect the
interpretaiton of the employment estimates.26 First, because filming is mobile and project-
based, some workers may relocate temporarily, and some jobs for these non-residents are
counted in the employment estimates. This upward biases the employment counts if job
creation for non-residents is not viewed as favorably as job creation for residents, which is
likely the case.
   Second, the QCEW data does not distinguish between full-time jobs and part-time jobs,
or between permanent and temporary jobs. Permanent jobs are more associated with es-
tablished motion picture production firms and are a better indication of an established film
industry. However, it is common for workers in the industry to string together several tem-
porary positions to achieve consistent employment (e.g., Luther 2010; Christopherson and
Rightor 2010). The more problematic issue is the inability to separate part-time jobs. Any
effects on employment that I estimate are therefore a combination of full-time, part-time,
permanent, and temporary jobs.
   Because I find few employment effects, these first two issues are less relevant. What is
more relevant are issues with the QCEW data that could bias estimated employment effects
towards zero. Two issues could do so. First, because the QCEW measures employment at
a specific time each month, it may not capture short-term employment that falls between
these monthly dates. This partly motivates my use of another dataset, County Business
Patterns, which measures employment at a different time.
   Second, and most importantly, is that the QCEW data includes employee jobs but not
contract jobs. 99.7% of employees (i.e., they get a W-2 tax form) appear in the QCEW
employment estimates, but contract workers who do not get a W-2 (they get a 1099 tax
form instead) are not included in this data. These contract jobs are more common in motion
picture production than in other industries. Not counting these jobs could bias estimated

  26
       Also see Button (2018a) for a discussion of this issue.


                                                       13
employment effects towards zero. This is a problem given that I find few employment effects,
and this merits further discussion and analysis.
    While these contract jobs are more common in the motion picture production industry
relative to in other industries, they are not too common in the context of the types of jobs
that would be created due to filming “on-site” in a state with an SFI. As discussed in detail in
Button (2018a) in case studies of Louisiana and New Mexico, states often discussed as having
had “successful” SFIs, there were between 3.8 and 6.7 employee jobs for each contract job in
Louisiana and New Mexico in motion picture production, according to data on nonemployer
statistics data. In 2008, when those states incentives seemed the most effective during the
case study, this was just 788 nonemployer jobs in New Mexico, and 357 nonemployer jobs in
Louisiana.
    Moreover, contract jobs created from filming are less likely to be created for locals.
There are somewhat strict requirements for an individual to be deemed a contractor over an
employee, such as having behavioral and financial control, setting their hours and location
of work, and often using their equipment (Internal Revenue Service 2012; Internal Revenue
Service 2018b; Internal Revenue Service 2018a). The vast majority of positions in filming
are “below the line,”27 and because management exerts control over these positions, they
are seldom able to be contracted. The Internal Revenue Service and others mention this
specifically.28 Contract positions are more relevant for “above the line” positions,29 but
these positions are usually reserved for those who are brought in from out of state.
    Thus, the fact that the number of contract jobs is small, and these jobs are less likely

  27
      As noted in Button (2018a), these positions include assistant director, art director, boom operator,
camera operator, character generator, costume designer, dolly grip, drivers, film editor, foley, gaffer, grip,
graphic artist, hair stylist, lighting technicians, line producer, location manager, make-up artist, production
assistant, property masters, script supervisor, set construction, sound engineer, stage manager, stagehand,
stunt performers, technical director (TD), unit production manager, video control broadcast engineering,
visual effects editor, and wranglers. See https:// entertainment.howstuffworks.com/what-does-below-line-
mean-movie-production.htm (accessed 8/7/18) for more information.
   28
      See,    e.g.,   http://www.screenlightandgrip.com/html/crew.html,         https://abspayroll.com/hiring-
independent-contractors/,         and http://movieinsure.com/blog/employee-vs-independent-contractor-for-
the-entertainment-industry/, all accessed 8/7/18.
   29
      E.g., writers, producers, directors, casting directors, and main cast.


                                                      14
to be created for locals during filming suggests that this issue, while not ideal, does not
render the QCEW employment data uninformative. To investigate this further, I use three
more sets of employment estimates. First, I also examine CBP data, which is generated
differently, as discussed below. This data provides another set of employment estimates that
are useful to measure the robustness of my estimates using the QCEW employment data.
Second, it is possible that some contract jobs could be created for those who are independent
artists, and these jobs are not captured in the employment estimates for the motion picture
production industry. I use QCEW data for the “Independent artists, writers, and performers”
(NAICS 711510)/“Entertainers and entertainment groups” (SIC 7929) industry to quantify
effects on this industry as well, as this industry could capture some of these jobs. Third,
some contract employment could fall under payroll companies (“Payroll services” (NAICS
541214)/“Services allied to motion picture production” (SIC 7819)) who manage human
resources for filming.


2.4.2   Related Industries to Motion Picture Production

   In additional to quantifying impacts on the “independent artists” and ”payroll ser-
vices” industries, which some employment may fall under, other industries may experience
spillover effects from increased filming. These include caterers (“Caterers” (NAICS 722320,
no corresponding SIC data)), hotels (“Hotels and motels, except casino hotels” (NAICS
721110)/“Hotels and Motels” (SIC 7011 from 1978 to 1989, SIC 7010 from 1976 to 1977)),
costumes (“Formal wear and costume rental” (NAICS 532220, no corresponding SIC data)),
building rentals (“Lessors of non-residential buildings” (NAICS 531120, no corresponding
SIC data)), and transportation rentals (“Truck, trailer and RV rental and leasing” (NAICS
532120)/“Truck rental and leasing, no drivers” (SIC 7513)). These industries are primarily
the ones discussed when advocates argue that SFIs have spillovers effects on other industries.
   Table 2 presents summary statistics for employment, establishment, and average weekly
wage estimates for these industries. Hotels and motels is by far the largest related industry


                                             15
in terms of employment (26,739 employees on average), followed by caterers (4,027), lessors
of non-residential buildings (2,951), payroll services (2,586), truck, trailer, and TV rental
and leasing (1,175), independent artists, writers, and performers (896), and formal wear and
costume rental (326).

                                        [Table 2 about here]


2.5      County Business Patterns (CBP) Data for Motion Picture

         Production

     I also use employment and establishment counts from County Business Patterns (CBP)
from 1986 to 2016 as a robustness check to the QCEW data, similar to Dube, Lester and
Reich (2010). This data is compiled from the Business Register,30 is annual from to 1998
to 2016, and uses the same industry classifications as the QCEW data.31 Table 1 panel (e)
presents summary statistics for this data. The CBP and QCEW data are similar, although
CBP has fewer employees (2,248) and establishments (209) on average compared to the
QCEW (3,299 and 289, respectively).



3        Methodology

3.1      Basic Model - Average Effects of SFIs

     I first conduct a panel regression with two-way fixed effects (a panel difference-in-
differences). While I use all states, plus D.C., in my analysis, the effect of SFIs is identified
only from states that at some point adopt an SFI. Intuitively, my approach compares states,
over time, that adopt SFIs to other states, over the same time period, that have not yet
    30
      The Business Register is a database of all known single and multi-establishment employer companies
maintained and updated by the U.S. Census Bureau. This Business Register contains up-to-date infor-
mation on these establishments. See https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cbp/about.html (accessed
10/13/18) for more detailed information.
   31
      “Motion picture and video production” (NAICS 512110) from 1998 to 2016 and “Motion picture and
video production” (SIC 7812) from 1986 to 1997.


                                                  16
adopted SFIs. This exploits the variation created from states adopting SFIs at different
times. This approach calculates the average increase in the outcome variable in the period
after SFI adoption.32 This regression is:


                            IHS(Yst ) = βSF Ist + δs ϕ + µt τ + Xst Φ + st                                (1)


Yst is one of the outcome variables (TV series filming, feature film filming, employment,
establishments, average weekly wages, total wages), for state s at time t.33 IHS is the inverse
hyperbolic sine function.34 Following established practice, I use the IHS function instead of
a log because there are zeros in the filming data, and these observations would drop. The
IHS avoids this while having the same interpretation as a log-linear regression (Burbidge,
Magee and Robb 1988; Mackinnon and Magee 1990).35 SF Ist is an indicator variable for
whether state s has an SFI (cash rebate, grant, refundable tax credit or transferable tax
credit) available at t.
    δs are state fixed effects which control for time-invariant state characteristics such as
the average filming, employment, or establishments by state. For example, without state
fixed effects, more populous states would be directly compared to less populous states, so
the effects of SFIs would get confounded with the fact that more populous states are more
likely to have SFIs (Leiser 2017; Thom and An 2017), or other sources of endogeneity from
time-invariant state characteristics.
    µt are time fixed effects which control for the national average change in the outcome

  32
      One could consider doing this analysis at a more local level, such as for metropolitan areas. There
are some benefits to this as one could explore effects within a state and could explore the few city-level
incentives that are available. However, this would be very difficult to do as it would require matching filming
to metropolitan areas instead of states, making the matching of IMDb and Studio System data more error-
prone and resulting in fewer matches. For example, cities are not always listed (or are incorrectly listed) in
the data.
   33
      The data frequency is annual for IMDb and Studio System TV series, IMDb feature films, CBP em-
ployment and establishments, quarterly for QCEW establishments, average weekly wages, and total wages,
and monthly for Studio System feature films and QCEW employment.
   34
      IHS(Yst ) = log(Yst + (Yst )2 + 1)0.5 ).
   35
      That said, I explore how my results differ for the QCEW variables, where the zeros are not an issue.
My results are similar for log-linear regressions instead. These estimates are available upon request.


                                                      17
variable in each period. These control for national trends or shocks in motion picture pro-
duction that affect all states. Since motion picture production has been increasing over time,
excluding time fixed effects would confuse this trend with the adoption of SFIs, which has
also been increasing over time.
    Xst is a set of other control variables that vary by state and time. These include controls
for the few SFIs that are neither refundable nor transferable, including a separate control for
California’s incentive of this type,36 and a control for states having a repealed SFI, analyzed
in Section 7. I also include the state unemployment rate, as Thom and An (2017)’s analysis
shows that SFI adoption was correlated with increases in unemployment rates, although
Leiser (2017) does not find evidence of this. In Section 5.2, I explore the robustness of my
results to the inclusion and exclusion of these and other control variables.37
    This panel regression model with two-way fixed effects provides an unbiased estimate of
the effect of SFIs under three assumptions: (1) the treatment and control states have “Par-
allel Paths” (discussed in Section 3.2), (2) SFI adoption is not endogenous to the outcomes I
study or anything I do not control for that is correlated with these outcomes (this is related
to “Parallel Paths” and is discussed in Section 3.4), and (3) the Stable Unit Treatment Value
Assumption (SUTVA) (discussed in Section 3.5).


3.2      Time Trends and the Parallel Paths Assumption

    A fundamental assumption behind the panel regression (difference-in-differences)
methodology is the “Parallel Paths” assumption (to use the terminology in Mora and Reggio
(2017), also called the parallel trends assumption). This assumption is that if the states that

   36
      See Thom (2018b) for an analysis of California’s incentives.
   37
      One possible control variable is state sales tax rates, although including this variable is complicated by
local tax rates. However, this control variable is unlikely to matter for a few reasons. First, state fixed effects
already control for average sales tax rates. Second, changes in sales tax rates would need to be correlated
with SFI adoption for the estimates on SF I to be biased. Third, prior work suggests that excluding this
variable leads to little omitted variable bias (Rohlin and Thompson, 2018). Another possible control variable
is incentives at the local level, although these are neither as common nor are as aggressive as SFIs. By not
including these, my estimates could be slightly biased towards finding no effect, as local incentives appear
positively correlated with SFIs.


                                                        18
had adopted SFIs (the treatment group), actually did not adopt them, then the changes in
outcomes would be the same for the treatment group and the control group (states that did
not adopt SFIs). Put another way, the control group provides the “business as usual” case
for what would have happened in a counterfactual world where states that adopted SFIs
chose instead not to adopt them.
    It is impossible to test explicitly for if this assumption holds, but some tests are helpful.
This parallel paths assumption is likely violated if the treatment and control group have
different existing trends or if there is endogeneity whereby trends in outcomes predict SFI
adoption, a point discussed in Section 3.4. To otherwise control for any differential trends
in outcomes that could be correlated with SFI adoption, I include, in one set of my main
regressions, controls for state-specific linear time trends. This linear trend controls for any
linear trend difference whereby states that adopted SFIs had rising (falling) filming or a
growing (contracting) film industry, relative to states that did not adopt. If this occurred,
then the parallel paths assumption is violated, and my estimates of the effects of SFIs are
biased. I follow a more modern approach of fitting my linear trends to the pre-treatment
period only rather than over the entire span of the data. This is to avoid possible attenuation
of the estimates, relative to estimating the trend over the entire span of the data.38
    The process of including this trend control, estimated off the pre-treatment period data,
is not as straightforward as the more traditional approach of just including linear trends by
state. First, I estimate the state-specific linear trends off the pre-treatment data only, using
a regression similar to Equation 1 (except without the SF Ist variable). Then I run the main
regression in Equation 1 but with the regression coefficients for each state-specific linear time
trend constrained to be the estimates from the earlier regression off the pre-treatment period
data only.
    Since this process requires running a regression based upon the results of a first regression
  38
     When treatment effects are dynamic, that is, where treatment effects occur in part as an increase in the
growth rate (slope change) rather than just an immediate jump in levels, then trends identified off both the
pre- and post-treatment period pick up some of this growth effect, attenuating estimates (Meer and West,
2016).


                                                     19
(which estimates the pre-trends), the process has to be bootstrapped to allow the error from
the first regression to be carried forward. I conduct a state-clustered bootstrap, with 10,000
replications, to estimate a bias-corrected percentile-based 95% confidence interval.39 Because
I estimate confidence intervals, my tables present confidence intervals in all cases to allow for
easy comparisons. For regressions without this linear trend, I cluster my standard errors at
the state level (Bertrand, Duflo and Mullainathan, 2004) and report 95% confidence intervals
based on these standard errors.
    In Section 5.1, I discuss and estimate results for a broader set of different trends to see how
robust my estimates are to these trends. These include trends at the Census Region, Census
Division, or state level, with these trends either based of the pre-treatment data only (as in
the main estimates) or based on the entire span of the data (the more classical approach).
This robustness check is crucial since Mora and Reggio (2017) shows that difference-in-
differences estimates are often sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of these trends.


3.3     Event Study - Effects Over Time

    I next conduct an event study to estimate effects separately by each year relative to
SFI adoption, following Mora and Reggio (2017) and Reber (2005). This fully relaxes any
parallel path assumptions (Mora and Reggio, 2017), going beyond the inclusion of state-
specific linear time trends to identify all changes in time non-parametrically, both pre- and
post-treatment. This approach allows any pre-trends to be seen visually, providing evidence
of if the parallel paths assumption (or less restrictive assumptions like “Parallel Growth,”
see Mora and Reggio 2017) is violated. It also estimates dynamic treatment effects, which
is important because the effects of SFIs may not have been immediate or long term.




  39
      As is recommended practice, I bootstrap a confidence interval rather than bootstrapping a standard
error, given that a percentile-based confidence interval is a pivotal statistic, unlike a standard error, which
is a function of unknown parameters (Horowitz 2001; MacKinnon 2002).


                                                      20
    For the annual data,40 the event study regression is:

                                   −2
                                   X                 X15
IHS(Yst ) = βt<15 SF Is,t<15 +            βt SF Ist +    βt SF Ist +βt>15 SF Is,t>15 +Xst Φ+δs ϕ+µt τ +st .
                                  t=−15              t=0
                                                                                                            (2)
Time, t, here refers to time relative to SFI adoption, where t = −1 is the period before SFI
adoption. In the equation, the first summation includes periods from 15 years before adoption
to the period just before adoption; the second summation includes the period of adoption
(t = 0) until 15 years after adoption. Also included is a variable for all periods before 15
years before adoption, SF Is,t<15 , and all periods after 15 years of adoption, SF Is,t<15 . I
exclude SF Is,t=−1 from the regression so that the remaining βt coefficients measure effects
relative to the period before SFI adoption (t = −1). The coefficients βt are interpreted as a
year-by-year difference-in-difference: the difference between states with SFIs and states that
have not yet adopted SFIs in time t relative to this difference at time t = −1.41
    In Figures 4 to B4, I plot the 95% confidence intervals of βt . This provides visual evidence
of whether a pre-trend exists in the SFI-adopting states before they adopt (discussed further
below) relative to non-adopting states, and illustrates how the treatment effects evolve over
time.


3.4     Possible SFI Endogeneity

    A fundamental assumption of a difference-in-differences (panel fixed effects) empirical
strategy is that policy adoption is exogenous, otherwise, estimates could be biased Besley
and Case (2000). Two studies, Leiser (2017) and Thom and An (2017), study the diffusion
of SFIs. Leiser (2017) finds that SFI adoption was positively related to the size of the state’s
existing film industry and how many other states had adopted (which explains the bandwagon
   40
       For the variables that are quarterly or monthly, the equation is similar but includes SF Ist variable for
each quarter or month.
    41
       For states that never adopt SFIs, all the SFI variables in Equation 2 are set to zero. Since SF Is,t=−1
is excluded from Equation 2, this sets the “relative time” variable to be t = −1 for these states. However,
these states that never adopt SFIs provide no identification to the SF I variables, as is the case for all other
analysis.


                                                      21
effect seen in the mid-2000s in Figure 1). Leiser (2017) finds that having neighboring states
with SFIs did not affect SFI adoption, nor did the Democrat/Republican balance of power
in the state. Thom and An (2017) confirm Leiser (2017)’s result that bordering states do not
drive adoption of SFIs. The fact that regional tax mimicking does not drive SFI adoption is
in contrast to many studies that find this to be important in policy diffusion (e.g., Walker
1969; Ladd 1992; Heyndels and Vuchelen 1998; and Shipan and Volden 2008 in some cases).
However, there are also many studies that find that this is not important or less important
than thought (e.g., Fletcher and Murray 2006; Volden, Ting and Carpenter 2008; Shipan and
Volden 2012). Thom and An (2017) do not find that the existing concentration of the film
industry matters, but, unlike Leiser (2017), do find that state unemployment rates predict
adoption.
   The fact that SFI adoption is possibly endogenous to the size of the existing film industry
(Leiser, 2017) is not too surprising, as larger industries were better at lobbying for these
incentives. Since my regressions include state fixed effects, I control for the existing size of
the film industry already and any other time-invariant factors. Similarly, the “bandwagon
effect” of adoption is not a concern, in terms of endogeneity, since if states are reacting to
national trends in adoption, then this is controlled for with the time fixed effects.
   However, endogeneity could occur from factors correlated with SFI adoption that vary
within states over time, and are not controlled for in Xst . More specific to SFIs, one could
be concerned that growth in the film industry, rather than economic conditions in general,
predicts adoption.
   I attempt to control for this possible endogeneity bias in two ways. First, I include
state-specific linear time trends in half my main specifications to control for existing trend
differences between states that adopt and do not adopt SFIs. I discuss these trends in detail
in Section 5.1, and I explore robustness to alternative trends. Second, in Section 5.2 I explore
how my results change when I include other control variables (from Leiser (2017) and Thom
and An (2017)) that may predict SFI adoption.


                                              22
3.5       State Competition and the Stable Unit Treatment Value As-

          sumption

    The “Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption” (SUTVA) (Rubin, 1980) is another
fundamental assumption behind the difference-in-differences (two way fixed effects) empirical
strategy. This assumption is that the treatment status of one unit (state) does not affect
outcomes for other units (states). Given that states may compete with each other for filming,
or there could be regional spillovers, this assumption may not hold, and this could have
implications for my estimates.
    A violation of SUTVA could create either a positive or negative bias to my estimated
effects of SFIs. The bias is positive if states with SFIs take productions from states without
SFIs.42   43
               Previous studies (e.g., Wilson 2009, and somewhat in Moretti and Wilson 2014)
found these “beggar thy neighbor” effects and these could occur in this context as well. On
the other hand, this bias could be negative if there are positive spillovers, which could occur
if a state with an SFI gets filming and some of this goes to nearby states.
    I explore SUTVA and the state competition issue in several ways. First, I estimate if the
effects of SFIs were moderated by SFIs in nearby states, following the approach of (Wilson,
2009). I test both if there are spillovers or regional state competition, by adding a variable
for if nearby states have SFIs. I also test if the effects of SFIs differ when nearby states
also have SFIs, by adding an interaction between nearby states’ SFIs and own state’s SFI. I
detail this approach and the results in Section 5.3.
    Second, I test the sensitivity of my results to the inclusion of Census Division-by-time
fixed effects (Section 5.2). This further allows me to explore if there is regional competition

   42
      In this case the effect of SFIs is identified off the increase in states with SFIs plus the decrease in states
without SFIs. This overstates the effects of SFIs by including the decrease for states without SFIs. This bias
could also be interpreted more like a relative substitution effect, where the treatment causes a substitution
of a benefit towards treated groups and away from the control group (see, e.g., the effects of discrimination
laws, where employment increases for the protected minority group relative to the control group (Button,
2018b).
   43
      This bias could still exist even though earlier analysis suggests that states do not adopt SFIs in response
to nearby states adopting SFIs (Thom and An 2017; Leiser 2017).


                                                        23
or spillovers by identifying the effects of SFIs only from the within-Census Division variation
in SFIs. This forces the control group to be states within the same Census Division rather
than states anywhere in the nation. If the estimated effects change from this different control
group, then it is suggestive of spillovers or state competition affecting the result. For example,
if state competition were fierce, then the estimated impact of SFIs would be larger when
Census Division-by-time fixed effects are included.
     Third, I estimate if my results are sensitive to the exclusion of California and New
York (Section 5.2). Instead of states competing regionally for filming, states with SFIs may
instead take filming from California or New York, where most filming occurs.44 If the results
are smaller with California and New York excluded, then this could suggest that my main
estimates were positively biased because filming was taken from California and New York,
and these two states formed some part of the control group for a period of time.



4        Results

4.1      TV Series

     Table 3 panel (a) presents estimates of the effect of SFIs on the number of TV series.
Columns (1) and (2) use the IMDb data while columns (3) and (4) use the Studio System
data. Even columns include state-specific linear time trends estimated off the pre-treatment
period only, while odd columns do not include any trends. Starting with column (1), the
coefficient on the SF Ist variable, β, is 0.292. This is an average increase in IMDb TV
series filming after SFI adoption of 33.9% (e0.292 − 1), statistically significant at the 1%
level. However, after adding a linear control for pre-trends (column [2]), this estimate loses
statistical significance and decreases in magnitude to 6.4%. The Studio System TV series
filming estimates show more substantial and robust effects: a 55.4% increase (without a trend


    44
     California has between 33.2% (IMDb feature films) and 58.2% (Studio System TV series) of filming in
the entire sample. For New York, this is 13.8% (IMDb TV series) to 19.8% (Studio System feature films).


                                                  24
control, column [3]) or a 37.7% increase (with a trend control, column [4]), both statistically
significant at the 1% level.


                                     [Table 3 about here]


   Figures 4a and 4b present the event study of the effects on the filming of TV series over
time, with IMDb and Studio System data, respectively. These figures show the difference in
filming between states with and without SFIs relative to this difference the year before SFI
adoption (t = −1), which is normalized to be zero. In Figure 4a there is an existing pre-trend,
whereby filming of IMDb TV series was already rising faster in SFI-adopting states, relative
to state that had not adopted. This confirms that controlling for pre-trends is crucial in
this case and that the estimate with these trends (column [2]) is likely more reliable. While
Figure 4a shows that filming is higher in the post-period, much of this could be attributed
to the continuation of the existing trend. While one estimate in the post period (t = 12, 12
years after the year of adoption) is statistically-significantly different from the estimate the
year before adoption (t = −1), this effect goes away in the following years and there is a
corresponding negatively statistically-significant estimate at t = −7. Thus, the event study
shows little evidence of effects on IMDb TV series filming.


                                    [Figure 4 about here]


   Figure 4b shows little evidence of any pre-trend in Studio System TV series filming, but
shows clear evidence of a meaningful increase in filming. The increase starts at about the year
after adoption, and peaks at 149.0% higher filming (relative to the difference at t = −1) at 12
years after the year of adoption. No estimates in the pre-period are statistically significant,
while the estimates in the range [3 ≤ t ≤ 13] are significant at the 5% level or more.
   In sum, there appears to be evidence of a large effect on TV series filming, although
the evidence is not entirely robust. To put the range of estimates in perspective, the lower
bound of a 6.4% increase in IMDb TV series corresponds to 0.67 additional IMDb TV series,


                                              25
and the upper bound of a 55.4% increase in Studio System TV series corresponds to 1.50
additional Studio System TV series.45


4.2     Feature Films

    Table 3 panel (b), columns [1] and [2] and Figure 4c presents estimates of the effect of
SFIs on the number of IMDb feature films. There is no evidence of a change in either the
table or in the event study figure. In the table, the estimate is insignificant and small (either
-0.028 or -0.027).
    Table 3 panel (b), columns [3] and [4] presents estimates of the effect of SFIs on the
number of Studio System feature films. The Studio System data, however, does show some
evidence of effects on feature films. In the regression without trends (column [3]), the
estimate is 0.076 (an increase of 7.9%), significant at the 1% level. However, the coefficient
decreases to 0.053 (5.4%) and becomes statistically significant only at the 10% level when
adding in the pre-trend control (column [4]).
    The coefficients in the event study figure, Figure 4d, are noisy given that the feature
film data is monthly. No estimates are statistically significant from the year before adoption
(t = −1).46 Nevertheless, the coefficient estimates show little change over time, at best a
slight upward trend. Given this, there is less reason to be concerned about pre-trends in the
estimates in this case.
    In sum, there is some non-robust evidence on a small effect on feature films, but even if
this small effect exists it is not of a meaningful magnitude. To put this in perspective, if we
assumed that the increase in Studio System feature films was 13.5% (the upper bound of the
95% confidence interval for the statistically significant estimate in column (3) of 7.9%), this
would only be 0.032 additional Studio System feature films relative to the mean number of

  45
      This calculation again uses the means from the period before SFI adoption: 10.4 (2.7) for IMDb (Studio
System) TV series, 39.7 (0.24) for IMDb (Studio System) feature films.
   46
      This may not necessarily be the case if months were combined into quarters or years, matching the
other outcome variables. Power would increase if the testing were between years or quarters, rather than
months.


                                                    26
Studio System feature films in the month before SFI adoption (0.24 feature films).


4.3     Employment in Motion Picture Production

   Table 4 panel (a) present estimates of the effect of SFIs on employment in motion picture
production using the QCEW data (columns [1] and [2]) and the CBP data (columns [3] and
[4]). The QCEW data shows no effect when excluding pre-trend controls, but an effect of
0.081, an 8.4% increase, statistically significant at the 5% level, when including pre-trends
controls. On the other hand, both estimates using the CBP data are negative, either -0.034
or -0.041, and the estimate without a pre-trend control (-0.034) is statistically significant at
the 10% level.

                                        [Table 4 about here]

   Figures 5a and 5b present the estimated effects over time for employment using the
QCEW data and the CBP data, respectively. Figure 5a shows an existing negative pre-
trend that persists into the treatment period, suggesting that the earlier positive estimate
with trends is preferred (column [2]) over the estimate without trends (column [1]). Despite
this existing negative trend, employment rises from about 6 to 9 years after adoption, after
which point it appears that the existing negative trend returns. This increase in employment
is of a magnitude of about ten percentage points net of the pre-trend. If this is taken as
causal, this would be only a modest increase in employment with a rather late onset. On
the other hand, the CBP data again does not show any effect. In sum, the evidence for
small employment effects exists but is not robust. Any possible employment effects are not
at a meaningful magnitude: a 8.4% increase in employment is only 146 jobs for the average
SFI-adopting state, or 314 jobs using the upper bound of the 95% confidence interval (an
18.2% increase).47

                                       [Figure 5 about here]
  47
    I calculate this using the mean employment for SFI adopting states at time t = −1, the month before
SFI adoption, which is 1,725 jobs.


                                                  27
4.4    Establishments in Motion Picture Production

   Table 4 panel (b) presents estimates of the effect of SFIs on the number of business es-
tablishments in the motion picture production industry. The QCEW estimates are negative
without a trend control (-0.029) and positive with one (0.051) but are not statistically signif-
icant in either case. The CBP data also shows no effect, with coefficient estimates closer to
zero (-0.010, -0.012). The event study estimates in Figures 5c and 5d also show no changes
over time, either before or after SFI adoption.


4.5    Wages in Motion Picture Production

   While there are no effects on employment, there could still be an effect on wages. If, for
example, the supply of labor is relatively fixed, then an increase in demand would materialize
as an increase in wages rather than as an increase in employment, which would be captured
in the average weekly wages variable from the QCEW. Similarly, if there is an increase in
hours only (e.g., part-time workers move closer to full-time work), this would not be picked
up in employment variable either but would be captured in the total wages variable in the
QCEW.
   Table 4 presents the estimates of the effect of SFIs on average weekly wages (panel [c])
and total wages (panel [d]) in motion picture production. These estimates use the QCEW
data only, as there is no wage information in the CBP data. The estimates for average weekly
wages are -0.048 without trends, statistically significant at the 10% level, and an insignificant
0.027 with trends. These estimates are more pronounced for total wages: -0.085 without a
trend control, statistically significant at the 5% level, or an insignificant 0.083 with a trend
control.
   Figures 6a and 6b present the results of the event study of average weekly wages and
total wages, respectively. Mirroring the estimates in the table, there appears to be a decrease
in average weekly wages and especially total wages, but it is due to the pre-existing negative
trend. Net of this existing trend there does not appear to be any effect on wages. In sum,

                                               28
the evidence suggests no effects on average weekly wages and total wages.

                                     [Figure 6 about here]


4.6    Effects on Related Industries

   While there are few, if any, effects on the motion picture production industry, this could
be because the QCEW estimates do not capture all of this employment, as some of the
employment may fall under “Independent artists, writers, and performers” or under “Payroll
services.” There could also be effects on other, related, industries, although this is unlikely
given the lack of impacts on the targeted industry itself. Table 5 presents estimates of the
effects of SFIs on employment, establishments, and average weekly wages in these industries,
and Online Appendix Figures B1, B2, B3, and B4 present the event study figures. Across
all these related industries there is little evidence of impacts.

                                     [Table 5 about here]

   Table 5 panel (a) present the effects on the “Independent artists, writers, and performers”
industry. For employment, the estimate is either statistically significant at the 10% level and
negative (-0.082, an 8.5% decrease), without a pre-trend control, or statistically significant,
at the 5% level, and positive (0.082), with a pre-trend control. The event study figure shows
clear evidence of a negative pre-trend, so the positive estimate with trends is preferred.
However, the event study figure shows no employment effect at all. So, the evidence of
a positive employment effect is not robust. Despite there possibly being a small positive
employment effect, there is no evidence effects on establishments or wages.
   Table 5 panel (b) and (c) presents the effects on the “Payroll services” and “Caterers”
industries, respectively. The regressions without pre-trend controls show negative effects on
employment and wages, but the regressions with pre-trend controls show no effect. There
are no effects on establishments. Panels (d), (e), and (f) show no statistically significant or
economically meaningful positive effects for hotels and motels, costume rental, or lessors of

                                               29
non-residential buildings, respectively, regardless of if pre-trend controls are included. For
“Truck, trailer and RV rental and leasing” (panel [g]), the employment estimate without
a pre-trend control is an insignificant 0.008 and with a trend control is a positive 0.032,
statistically significant at the 5% level. However, the event study figure does not show
evidence of any positive effect on employment, even net of the slightly negative existing
pre-trend. Thus, the evidence for employment effects is weak. There is no evidence of any
effects on establishments or wages.
    Thus, across all related industries, most of the evidence points towards no effects. The
only evidence of positive effects, albeit weak and non-robust, is evidence of small increases in
employment in the independent artists and transportation rental industries. However, across
all the variables and industries (3 x 7), it is not surprising to have one or two estimates be
significant at the 5% level even without effects. Even if these positive effects are taken
as given, most estimates are statistically insignificant, and there is are even negative and
statistically significant estimates, suggesting that the broader evidence points towards no
effects on related industries.



5     Robustness Checks

    I conduct numerous robustness checks of my main estimates. These include incorporating
alternative time trend controls (Section 5.1), adding control variables and sample restrictions
(Section 5.2), and exploring SUTVA and possible bias from state competition and regional
spillovers (Section 5.3). These robustness checks help explore if my results are biased due
to endogeneity, due to a violation of the parallel trends assumption, or due to a violation of
SUTVA.




                                              30
5.1    Alternative Time Trends

   My results could be sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of state-specific or group-
specific time trends, and to the type of these trends or how they are estimated. This concern
is by no means unique to my study, as Mora and Reggio (2017) find that many studies using
a similar methodology had results that were sensitive to time trends.
   In the main tables (Tables 3 to 5), I present results without trend controls and with state-
specific linear time trends that are identified off of the pre-trend only. To further explore
the robustness of my results to the specific type of trend used, I also consider some less
restrictive trends by Census Region and Census Division in addition to state-specific trends.
I estimate regressions with these three possible trends both where the trends are identified
off the pre-period data only (a more modern approach, and the approach I take in my main
estimates) and where the trends are identified off the entire span of the data (the traditional
approach).
   Figure 7 presents 95% confidence intervals of my estimates under all six types of linear
trends, plus no trends. From these figures, we learn to what extent the main estimates are
robust to different types of trends. We also learn how different types of trends tend to affect
the results, which is informative more broadly as it is never entirely clear to researchers
which trends to use, especially as identifying trends off the pre-treatment period data only
is growing in popularity.


                                    [Figure 7 about here]


   Across these seven confidence intervals, the confidence intervals without trends (#1 in
each figure) are nearly identical to the intervals with Census Region and Census Division
trends (#2, #3, #5, #6). This suggests that the trends do not differ much between Cen-
sus Regions and Divisions. The confidence intervals with state-specific linear time trends
identified off the pre-period only (#4) are also nearly identical to those identified off the
entire span of the data (#7). So generally the choice between identifying linear trends off

                                              31
the pre-period versus the entire span of the data does not matter much in this application.
    However, including state-specific trends does affect the estimates when there is evidence,
from the event study figures, of existing trends. For IMDb TV Series (Figure 7a), the es-
timates go from positive and statistically significant with no trend (#1) or with Census
Region or Division trends (#2, #3, #5, #6) to insignificant when including state-specific
linear time trends (#4 and #7). For all other filming variables (Figures 7b, 7c, and 7d) the
confidence intervals do not change much across specifications. For all four QCEW variables
(Figures 7e, 7f, 7g, and 7h) the estimates are generally small and negative (sometimes sta-
tistically significant) until state-specific linear trends are added (#4 and #7). These make
the estimates positive but usually not statistically significant, except for employment and
total wages with the preferred state trends identified off the pre-period (#4).
    In sum, the earlier conclusions are generally unaffected when considering alternative time
trends. The only changes are that these estimates with alternative trends are more suggestive
of positive effects on IMDb TV series and no effect on QCEW employment and total wages.
This strengthens the earlier observation of there only being an effect on TV series filming.


5.2     Control Variables and Sample Composition

    Since SFI adoption could be endogenous to time-variant state characteristics, I consider
how robust my estimates are to the inclusion of other control variables from Leiser (2017)
and Thom and An (2017) that may predict SFI adoption.48 I also explore how my results
change if I exclude the state unemployment rate control, exclude California and New York,
and if I add Census Division-by-time fixed effects as another way to control for regional
trends that could be correlated with outcomes and SFI adoption.
    Figure 8 presents 95% confidence intervals of estimates with these changes in controls
  48
     Leiser (2017) finds that the following predict SFI adoption: per capita gross state product (GSP), per
capita GSP in motion picture production, the age of the state film commission, and is a state that borders
Canada. State and time fixed effects control for the last two. Thom and An (2017) finds that SFI adoption
was driven by a national bandwagon effect (but not the adoption of neighbors) and by state unemployment
rates. Time fixed effects control for the former, and I control for state unemployment rates directly by
including them in my main analysis.


                                                    32
or sample composition. Mirroring the main estimates, I estimate all of these both without
state-specific linear time trends (confidence intervals #1 to #6) and with state-specific linear
time trends, estimated over the pre-period only (#7 to #11). Confidence intervals #1 and
#7 are the main specifications from preceding tables, which include unemployment rates as
a control variable and include New York and California.49 Relative to confidence intervals
#1 and #7, the other columns make the following changes (see the legend, Figure 8i):

   1. Removes state unemployment rates (#2 and #8).

   2. Adds Census Division-by-time fixed effects (#3).50

   3. Adds per capita Gross State Product (GSP) and GSP in motion picture production
        (#4 and #9).

   4. Adds the legislative professionalism measure from Squire (1992), Squire (2007), Squire
        (2012), and Squire (2017) (#5 and #10).

   5. Excludes California and New York (#6 and #11).


                                           [Figure 8 about here]


    Figure 8 shows that the results do not change much when these other controls are added
or the unemployment rate control is removed. The other robustness checks (adding Census
Division-by-time fixed effects, excluding California and New York) also do not affect the
results. Thus, this is further evidence that my results are unlikely to be biased from the
plausibly endogenous adoption of SFIs.

   49
       The other possible control variables that could predict selection in SFIs are not included in my default
specifications because they do not have data over the entire period. The GSP data is only available at an
annual frequency, from 1997 to 2016. The legislative professionalism data from Squire (1992), Squire (2007),
Squire (2012), and Squire (2017) is only available for the years 1979, 1986, 1996, 2003, 2009, and 2015. I
follow Leiser (2017) and use a linear interpolation of this data so that no periods of my data drop when I
include these controls.
    50
       I was unable to include state-specific linear pre-trends along with census division-by-time fixed effects.
Adding these numerous fixed effects requires the ”absorb” command, which cannot be used in conjunction
with a constrained regression.


                                                       33
5.3     SUTVA, State Competition, and Spatial Spillovers

   My analysis thus far has not incorporated the issue of competition between states which
could violate SUTVA, leading to biased estimates, as discussed in Section 3.5. It is the case
that states could compete with each other, perhaps on a regional basis, for filming, leading
to positively-biased estimates. On the other hand, the estimates could be negatively biased
if there are positive spillovers to nearby states when a state attracts filming.
   To explore this, I first explore whether SFIs in nearby states moderate the effect of SFIs
and if nearby SFIs affect filming. I extend the main regression, Equation 1, as follows:


 IHS(Yst ) = β1 SF Ist +β2 N earbySF Ist +β3 SF Ist ×N earbySF Ist +δs ϕ+µt τ +Xst Φ+st (3)


where SF Ist is the indicator variable for having an SFI, and N earbySF Ist is a variable
capturing the proportion of nearby states that have SFIs. I follow the approach of Wilson
(2009) and construct this variable by creating a weighted combination of the SF I variable
for other states, where the weights are equal to the inverse distance between each pair of
states.51 The coefficient on SF Ist , β1 , captures the effect of a state’s own SFI on its own
outcome. The coefficient on N earbySF Ist , β2 , captures if the outcome in state s is different
when nearby states have SFIs. If β2 is positive (negative), then there are positive (negative)
spillovers. The coefficient on SF Ist × N earbySF Ist , β3 , captures if SFIs are less effective
(β3 < 0) or more effective (β3 > 0) when nearby states also have SFIs.
   Tables 6 and 7 present the estimates from Equation 3. For TV series filming (Table 6
panel [a]) where there were effects in the main results, there are some effects of interactions
with nearby SFIs. For IMDb TV series, where there were positive effects without trend
controls, we again see positive effects of SFIs when trends are not included (column [1]),
with a coefficient of 0.183 on SF I, statistically significant at the 5% level. However, the
coefficient is significantly larger for N earbySF I, 0.694, and is also significant at the 5% level.
  51
    More specifically, I measure the distance between two states by using population centroids, calculated
from 2000 Census data. I thank Daniel Wilson for providing this data.


                                                   34
The coefficient on SF I × N earbySF I is positive, 0.146, but is not statistically significant.
These results suggest that SFIs again increase IMDb TV series filming but states also get a
significant boost in filming just be being nearby other states with SFIs. This is suggestive of
positive spillovers rather than negative spillovers. However, as in the main results, none of
these estimates are significant once trends are controlled (column [2]), and the event study
figure shows an existing trend. The results are similar, but are less precise, for Studio System
TV series. All three coefficients are positive, regardless of trend controls. However, none of
the estimates are statistically significant except for one at the 1% level (SF IxN earbySF I).
The magnitudes of the coefficients on N earbySF I and SF IxN earbySF I are large, ranging
from 0.484 to 0.708, again suggesting positive spillovers.


                                            [Table 6 about here]


    For feature films (Table 6 panel [b]) , the IMDb estimates again show no clear effects.
For Studio System feature films, the coefficients on SF Ist and N eighborSF Ist are never
statistically significant and are not of a particularly large magnitude. However, the estimate
on the interaction is either 0.150 or 0.184, both significant at the 5% level, suggesting that
the small, non-robust increase in Studio System feature films we saw in the main results
occurs only when neighboring states also have SFIs. For the QCEW variables (Table 7),
there continue to generally be no effects.52


                                            [Table 7 about here]


   52
      One exception is for average weekly wages (Table 7 panel [c]). For the regression with a trend control
(column [2]), the coefficient on SF I is -0.094 and is statistically significant at the 5% level, suggesting that
SFIs decrease average weekly wages. This mirrors some of the estimates earlier that found some negative
effects. The coefficient on the interaction SF I × N earbySF I, however, is 0.262 and is statistically significant
at the 5% level. This suggests that SFIs had a more negative effect on average weekly wages when few nearby
states had SFIs, but as the proportion of states that had SFIs increased, the effect moved more towards zero
and may have become positive. However, there is a limited range under which the sum of SF I, N earbySF I,
and SF I × N earbySF I is positive and statistically significant. The mean for N earbySF I when SF I = 1 is
0.69. At this mean the sum of all three coefficients is not statistically significant. This sum reaches statistical
significance at around the 80th percentile of N earbySF I when SF I = 1. Thus the evidence still generally
points toward either a negative effect or no effect on average weekly wages.


                                                        35
    While this analysis is not a conclusive test of regional competition and spillovers between
states, the results suggest that the main results do not change in a way that affects my
conclusions. This analysis shows some evidence of positive spillovers for TV series and
Studio System feature films, but no effects of spillovers otherwise. Positive spillovers suggest
that my earlier TV series and Studio System feature film estimates that did not consider
spillovers could have been negatively biased. For TV series, were the effects were large, this
suggests even larger effects. For Studio System feature films, this increases the likelihood of
there being some small effects, but does not change the conclusion that even if these effects
existed, they would be of a small magnitude.53
    As a second investigation of SUTVA, I test how my estimates change from adding Census
Division-by-time fixed effects. By adding these fixed effects, the control group changes from
any state without SFIs to only states within the same Census Division that did not have
SFIs, forcing the control group to be nearby states. If there is regional competition or
spillovers, we could see the estimates be sensitive to the inclusion of these fixed effects as
SUTVA would be more violated when comparing nearby states. Figure 8 presents how my
main estimates (#1 and #7) change when these fixed effects are included (#3). None of the
estimates change in any meaningful way.
    In my third test of SUTVA, I estimate if my results are sensitive to excluding California
and New York. Instead of competition occurring between nearby states, it could be states
taking filming from California and New York, who have the bulk of filming. If the results are
smaller with California and New York excluded, then this could suggest that my estimates
were positively biased because productions were taken from California and New York, which
were in the control group for a period of time because they adopted SFIs later. Figure 8
presents how my main estimates (#1 and #7) change when excluding California and New
York from the sample (#6 and #11). None of the estimates change in any meaningful way.

  53
     More specifically, if we take the larger coefficient on SF Ist xN eighborSF Ist for Studio System feature
films, and then take the upper bound of its 95% confidence interval (so a 47.0% increase in filming), this
suggests only 0.113 additional feature films, on average.


                                                     36
6        Heterogeneous Effects

     Next, I explore what moderates my main results and if there are perhaps effects that do
not appear on average but appear in other circumstances. I test if there are agglomeration
economies whereby the effects of SFIs vary by the existing size of the film industry (Sec-
tion 6.1), if my main estimates vary by the strength and characteristics of SFIs (Appendix
A), and if the effects of SFIs differed based on the timing of their adoption, where there
could be an early-mover advantage (Appendix B).


6.1      Agglomeration Economies

     A large prior literature tests for agglomeration effects (e.g., Kline and Moretti 2014;
Glaeser and Ward 2009; Greenstone, Hornbeck and Moretti 2010; Storper and Christopher-
son 1987; He and Romanos 2015; Rosenthal and Strange 2003; Feldman 1999; Ellison and
Glaeser (1999); Combes et al. 2010) which are often found to be significant factors in business
location or productivity. I take Equation 1 and replace the SF Ist indicator variable with
three separate, mutually-exclusive, SF Ist indicator variables that split states into three equal
groups (small, medium, large) based on the existing size of their motion picture production
industry.54 This estimates the effects of SFIs separately for these three size groups.
     Tables 8 and 9 present the results of these regressions with the three size groups. The
results do not show a clear trend of how the existing size of the film industry moderates
the effects of SFIs, except perhaps for TV series. For IMDb TV series, the positive effect
seen earlier for the main results without a trend control comes from states with medium or
larger industries (Table 8 panel [a], column [1]). However, in the main results there is no
effect after adding a trend control, but this analysis shows that there are positive effects on
    54
     To group states I calculate their average employment in motion picture production using the QCEW
over 1978 to 1985, which was before almost all states had incentives. The 17 states with the smallest
industries, in increasing order of size, are: WV, ND, SD, DE, ID, WY, AK, RI, NH, VT, ME, AL, MT, AR,
NE, SC, MS. The 17 states with the middle group, in increasing order of size, are: OK, IA, KS, KY, LA,
NM, OR, NV, WI, NC, CT, HI, WA, AZ, CO, IN, and UT, and the large group has the remaining 17 states,
in increasing order of size: MD, VA, NJ, DC, MN, MI, GA, MO, OH, TN, MA, PA, FL, TX, IL, NY, and
CA.


                                                 37
small states only (column [2]). For Studio System TV series, the effects by industry size
are the same regardless of if trends are included (Table 8 panel [a], columns [3] and [4]): no
effects for small states but large statistically significant effects for medium and large states.
For feature films, there is some evidence that the small increases in feature films occur in
medium states only.


                           [Table 8 about here] [Table 9 about here]


   For the QCEW variables, the effects do not seem to vary much by existing industry
size. More specifically, there is some evidence of decreases in employment, establishments,
average weekly wages, and total wages for states with large existing industries, but only
when trends are not included (Table 9 column [1]). These estimates without trend controls
are less reliable since there is some evidence of pre-trends. The magnitude of the estimates
with trend controls do point towards some modest effects for states with a medium or large
industry (and no effects or a negative effect for states with a small industry), but none of
these estimates are statistically significant.
   Generally, this analysis suggests that when there are effects of SFIs, these are concen-
trated in states with existing industries that are medium or large. Put another way, it seems
that states with existing industries that are small are not able to attract many positive
benefits.


6.2    Effects by SFI Characteristics

   All the analysis thus far estimates the average effects of SFIs. However. SFIs differ in
their strength, namely by the subsidy rates for three categories of spending: the payroll of
state residents, the payroll of non-state residents, and non-labor expenditure (e.g., catering,
transportation, costumes). This analysis is also useful since it could speak to if specific
characteristics of SFIs drive the earlier results, or if there are only effects of SFIs in certain
circumstances. For example, some states subsidize the payroll of state residents over other


                                                 38
expenditures, and this could incentivize employment.
    Appendix Tables A2 and A3 present the effects of SFIs by their characteristics. Generally,
there is no clear relationship between specific subsidy rates and outcomes, even for TV series
filming. In the few cases where there are statistically-significant estimates, there is no clear
trend as to which subsidy rates matter.55 Interestingly, no subsidy rates are strongly linked to
changes in employment. There is a significant positive effect of the resident labor subsidy on
employment in the regression without trends, but only at the 10% level (Appendix Table A3
panel [a], column [1]), but this regression is less reliable since there appear to be pre-trends
for employment. This effect decreases significantly and becomes insignificant when trends
are added (column [2]).


6.3      Effects by SFI Timing

    In Appendix Tables B1 and B2, I explore if the effect of SFIs was stronger if they were
adopted earlier when fewer states had SFIs. I take Equation 1 and add an interaction between
the SF Ist indicator variable and the year of SFI adoption (minus 2005). In most cases, this
interaction variable is not statistically significant. It is significant, however, for Studio System
TV series, but only when trends are included (Appendix Table B1 panel [a], column [4]). The
coefficient is negative and statistically significant at the 1% level, suggesting that the effects
on Studio System TV series are concentrated to the early 2000s and earlier when fewer states
had SFIs. For average weekly wages only when trends are included (Appendix Table B2 panel
[c], column [2]), there is a positive, statistically significant, interaction, suggesting that SFIs
increased average weekly wages for SFIs adopted in the later years. Outside of these results,
there generally is no effect of SFI timing.
   55
      For Studio System feature films, there is a statistically significant effect, at the 5% level, for the subsidy
for state residents in the regression with trends (Appendix Table A2 panel [b], column [4]). A one percentage
point increase in the resident subsidy rate is linked to about a one percent increase in Studio System feature
films. This suggests that the small and non-robust effect on Studio System feature films is concentrated
in states that subsidized resident labor more, especially relative to non-residents or non-labor expenditures
(which have negative estimates in the table). For QCEW establishments and total wages, the more reliable
regressions with trend controls (Appendix Table A3 panels [b] and [d], column [2]) show that higher subsidy
rates for the payroll of non-state residents are linked to increases in establishments and total wages.


                                                        39
7        A Preliminary Analysis of Repealed SFIs

     Given the effects of SFIs on TV series filming, there is a question of if filming would
remain after SFIs are repealed. This speaks to cluster theory, whereby once the benefits of
agglomeration have set in, agglomeration economies create a natural incentive for economic
activity to occur there, regardless of the incentives offered.
     As of the end of 2017, 14 states repealed their SFIs.56 The first repeal occurred in
2009 (Kansas), so there is a shorter time frame over which to estimate how states that have
repealed their SFIs have faired, hence why I deem these estimates to be preliminary. Table 10
presents the coefficients on Repealed, from Equation 1. These coefficients present the effect
relative to states without SFIs, controlling of course for states that still have SFIs.

                                          [Table 10 about here]

     For Studio System TV series, where there were meaningful and robust effects on filming,
the coefficient on Repealed is near zero and is statistically insignificant, regardless of if
trends are controlled. This suggests that the boost in Studio System TV series filming
goes away after the removal of SFIs. On the other hand, the IMDb TV series results may
show that the filming increase persists. There are positive estimates (0.242, 0.261), both
statistically significant at the 10% level. This matches the positive effect, without trends, in
the main results (0.292, Table 3 panel (a), column [1]). As for the other outcomes variables
- feature films and the QCEW variables - the estimates are all negative except one (but it is
insignificant).57
     In sum, there is some non-robust evidence that TV series continue to film in states that
have since repealed their SFIs, but this is hard to interpret given that it comes from from
IMDb TV series, where there may not have been an effect of SFIs, but not for Studio System
TV series, where there definitely was an effect. Outside of this possible effect on TV series
    56
      See footnote 11 for the list.
    57
      Two estimates are negative and statistically significant, at the 5% level: QCEW employment and total
wages, both without trends (column [1]), mirroring similar negative, statistically-significant estimates for the
effects of SFIs. However, these negative effects likely represent a continuation of the existing pre-trend.


                                                      40
filming, there are no lingering benefits for other outcomes. Revisiting this analysis when
more data becomes available would be a useful exercise.



8     Discussion and Conclusion

    Tax incentives for the film industry became wildly popular at the U.S. state level since
about the early 2000s. Studying them can tell us a great deal about how tax incentives affect
business location decisions and economic development for two main reasons. First, there is
a large amount of variation across time, states, and in the intensity of these incentives.
Second, filming is relatively insensitive to locational characteristics, so the film industry
provides a useful case study (a “most likely” “crucial case” case study, Gerring 2012) for
where incentives should especially matter.
    To estimate the impacts of SFIs on filming location, establishments, employment, and
wages, I first combine a database I created on state film incentives (SFIs) from 1976 to 2017
with data on filming locations from the Internet Movie Database (IMDb.com) and Studio
System. I also use employment, establishment, and wage data for the motion picture produc-
tion industry, and other related industries, from the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW), and employment and establishment data for the motion picture production
industry from County Business Patterns (CBP).
    I use panel regression (two-way fixed effects) to compare states before and after they
adopted SFIs to similar states over the same period who did not or have not yet adopted
SFIs (a panel difference-in-differences). I start by measuring the average effects of SFIs
on filming, employment, establishments, and wages, then I estimate effects over time (an
event study). I then explore the robustness of my results to the three assumptions behind
this difference-in-differences empirical strategy: parallel paths, exogenous adoption of SFIs,
and the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA). I then explore if other factors
moderate the effects of SFIs, such as state competition, the size of the existing film industry



                                              41
(to capture agglomeration economies), the strength and characteristics of SFIs, and the
relative timing of SFI adoption.
   Overall, I find that SFIs affect the location of TV series filming, with my preferred
estimates ranging between a 6.4% and 55.4% increase on average (corresponding to no more
than an additional 1.5 TV series). This effect on TV series filming is robust to all checks
except that the effect becomes insignificant using the IMDb data only when including state-
specific trends.
   Additional analysis suggests that this increase in TV series filming occurs gradually over
time, and is strongest about 12 years after SFI adoption. The increase in TV series is
concentrated in SFI adopting states which had a medium or large existing film industry size
(on the scale of Oklahoma or Iowa and larger), suggesting some agglomeration economies
even for “footloose” filming. The effect of SFIs on TV series filming is also higher when
nearby states also have SFIs, suggesting some positive regional spillovers rather than negative
regional spillovers, as might be assumed. There is some preliminary, non-robust, evidence
that the increase in TV series filming may persist after SFI repeal.
   There is, however, little evidence that SFIs meaningfully affect the filming location of
feature films. There is no effect on IMDb feature films. In some cases, there is a small,
statistically significant effect on Studio System feature films of no more than a 7.9% increase,
but this estimate is not robust. If taken as causal, and using the upper end of the 95%
confidence interval (a 13.5% increase), this would only be 0.032 additional Studio System
feature films.
   Why do SFIs affect the filming location of TV series but do not meaningfully affect
the filming location of feature films? It may be because TV series are longer and more
expensive, so the cost reduction from SFIs is more considerable. Also, if a filmmaker is
deciding to film in an unfamiliar state, there is a significant fixed cost required to gather the
required information on the available SFIs and their restrictions and requirements, filming
locations, local input firms, and local crew. This high fixed cost is more justifiable when the


                                               42
aggregate savings are more substantial, and the filming duration is longer, as they are for
TV series.
    I find that SFIs have almost no effects on employment, establishments, average wages,
or total wages in motion picture production, using either the QCEW data or the CBP
data. At best there is a possible small increase in employment in motion picture production
(an 8.4% increase, or about 146 jobs on average, or 18.2%, 314 jobs, using the upper end
of the 95% percentile) but this estimate is very much not robust. This lack of effects on
the motion picture production industry mirrors the conclusions of Adkisson (2013), Thom
(2018a), Thom (2018b), Button (2018a) and Swenson (2017) who find no or minimal effects
on the motion picture production industry for SFI adopters in general.58 There could be
spillover effects onto related industries, such as independent artists, caterers, hotels and
motels, and the rentals of costumes, transportation, and non-residential buildings. However,
using QCEW data I do not find meaningful effects on employment, establishments, or average
wages in these industries.
    Thus, while SFIs relocate TV series filming this increase in filming leads neither to the
development of a local film industry nor to any meaningful spillovers to related industries.59
This means that SFIs do not achieve two of their primary goals: establishing a local film
industry or creating economic development in general.
    There are, however, some possible benefits of SFIs, or reasons behind why policymakers
adopted SFIs, that I did not evaluate. First, there is increased press or notoriety for the
  58
      However, Swenson (2017) does conclude that incentives in New York and California were effective at
increasing employment and establishments, despite a more detail analysis by Thom (2018b) finding no effects
for California. However, it is difficult to put much weight on studies of New York and California only since
these states are unique and it is much less likely that the parallel paths assumption and SUTVA hold for these
states. Also, when analyzing a single state, the preferred approach is a synthetic control case study (Abadie,
Diamond and Hainmueller, 2010) or a panel difference-in-differences that employs Conley and Taber (2011)
confidence intervals (otherwise the precision of the estimates is overstated).
   59
      Another way to measure spillovers is through a general multiplier, but the multiplier for the film
industry is pretty average, suggesting that the film industry does not create large spillovers compared to
other industries. As an example, economist Bruce Seaman estimates that the multiplier for the film industry
is 1.83 in Georgia, a relatively average multiplier. This means that for each $1 spent by the film industry,
$1.83 of economic activity is created. This contradicts the much larger multipliers that industry lobbyists,
or their hired consultants, claim. See http://www.politifact.com/georgia/statements/2015/aug/07/georgia-
department-economic-development/film-industrys-impact-georgia-economy-overstated/ (accessed 5/9/18).


                                                     43
states that adopt SFIs, especially when filming brings in major actors and actresses or filming
features the state prominently. While it is hard to quantify the impacts of this, they are
unlikely to be large and do not materialize into an increase in tourism, at least in terms of
effects on the hotels industry. Second, SFIs are sometimes justified to bolster local culture
and local filmmakers. However, most SFIs target nationally or internationally-distributed
productions, which often are not written or produced by local filmmakers or do not feature
the location of filming prominently.60
    These low possible benefits of SFIs that I can quantify are in contrast to their high
costs.61 So even taking the perspective of a typical state, ignoring the externalities imposed
on other states by having an SFI, the costs of SFIs could likely exceed the benefits.62 The
small benefits I quantify here should be considered in a broader cost-benefit calculation.
    We also learn more broadly that even in cases where business location decisions are rel-
atively insensitive to locational characteristics, and incentives are lucrative, incentives can
still have little impact on business location and economic activity. These results mirror other
studies of incentives that find few effects or even adverse effects on economic development
(e.g., Schmenner 1982; Plaut and Pluta 1983; Carlton 1983; Schmenner, Huber and Cook
1987; Blair and Premus 1987; Dabney 1991; Bondonio and Engberg 2000; Dye and Merriman
2000; Lee 2008; Hanson 2009; Neumark and Kolko 2010; Hanson and Rohlin 2013; Freed-

  60
      Some SFIs do specifically attempt to target local filmmakers or encourage local con-
tent.      For example, there is the Indigenous Oregon Production Investment Fund.                          See
https://secure.sos.state.or.us/oard/displayDivisionRules.action?selectedDivision=4221 (accessed 2/21/19).
   61
      Nationally, SFIs cost $1.5 billion in the fiscal year 2010 (Tannenwald, 2010), exceeding spending in many
other state programs such as R & D tax credits (Tannenwald, 2010) and arts programs (Christopherson and
Rightor, 2010). As discussed by Button (2018a), SFIs of early, aggressive adopters in Louisiana and New
Mexico cost $446.9 million and $152.6 million, respectively over fiscal years 2004 to 2009.
   62
      One way to quantify the benefits of SFIs relative to costs is to estimate a cost per job created. Some
independent studies of specific SFIs estimated the cost per job created. These show high costs, such as Zin
(2010) which estimates that “The cost to taxpayers of employment associated with the tax credit ranged
from $186,519 per job to $42,991 per job, depending on whether only direct jobs or total employment impacts
are examined.” Button (2018a) estimates a cost per motion picture production job for the Louisiana (New
Mexico) incentive from 2002 to 2008 to be $67,757 ($48,002) under unrealistically optimistic assumptions
(notably that these employment effects are causal, when there are not statistically significant effects on
employment). There are also several independent reports that estimate the return-on-investment of SFIs,
showing that SFIs generate only some tax revenue for the state, such as 16-18¢p̃er dollar spent in Louisiana
(Albrecht, 2005) and 14.4¢ĩn New Mexico (Popp and Peach, 2008).


                                                      44
man 2015) but are in contrast to studies that do find meaningful effects (e.g., Bartik 1985;
Bartik 1989; Walker and Greenstreet 1991; Papke 1991; Wu 2008; Krupka and Noonan 2009;
Freedman 2013; Strauss-Kahn and Vives 2009; Rogers and Wu 2012; Moretti and Wilson
2014; Weinstein 2018). Given that this case study of state film incentives is one where one
would expect large effects, the conclusions of this study tip the non-consensus (Wasylenko
1999; Buss 2001; Arauzo-Carod, Liviano-Solis and Manjón-Antolı́n 2010) in literature some-
what more towards a conclusion that incentives are generally ineffective at creating industry
clusters or inspiring economic development.


References
Abadie, Alberto, Alexis Diamond, and Jens Hainmueller. 2010. “Synthetic Control
  Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco
  Control Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(490): 493–505.
Adkisson, Richard V. 2013. “Policy Convergence, State Film-Production Incentives, and
  Employment: A Brief Case Study.” Journal of Economic Issues, 47(2): 445–454.
Albrecht, Greg. 2005. “Film and Video Tax Incentives: Estimated Economic and Fiscal
  Impacts.” Louisiana Legislative Fiscal Office, Baton Rouge, LA.
Anderson, John E. 1990. “Tax Increment Financing: Municipal Adoption and Growth.”
  National Tax Journal, 43(2): 155–63.
Arauzo-Carod, Josep-Maria, Daniel Liviano-Solis, and Miguel Manjón-Antolı́n.
  2010. “Empirical studies in industrial location: An assessment of their methods and re-
  sults.” Journal of Regional Science, 50(3): 685–711.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1985. “Business Location Decisions in the United States: Estimates
  of the Effects of Unionization, Taxes, and Other Characteristics of States.” Journal of
  Business & Economic Statistics, 3(1): 14–22.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1989. “Small business start-ups in the United States: Estimates of the
  effects of characteristics of states.” Southern Economic Journal, 55(4): 1004–1018.
Bartik, Timothy J. 2017. “A new panel database on business incentives for economic
  development offered by state and local governments in the United States.” W.E. Upjohn
  Institute for Employment Research Report #225.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much
  Should We Trust Differences-In-Differences Estimates?” The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 119(1): 249–275.
Besley, T, and a Case. 2000. “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of
  Endogenous Policies.” The Economic Journal, 110(467): F672–F694.
Blair, John P., and Robert Premus. 1987. “Major factors in industrial location: A
  review.” Economic Development Quarterly, 1(1): 72–85.



                                              45
Bondonio, Daniele, and John Engberg. 2000. “Enterprise Zones and Local Employment:
  Evidence from the States’ Programs.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 30(5): 519–
  49.
Briant, Anthony, Miren Lafourcade, and Benoı̂t Schmutz. 2015. “Can Tax Breaks
  Beat Geography? Lessons from the French Enterprise Zone Experience.” American Eco-
  nomic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(2): 88–124.
Burbidge, John B, Lonnie Magee, and a Leslie Robb. 1988. “Alternative Transfor-
  mations to Handle Extreme Values of the Dependent Variable.” Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 83(401): 123–127.
Buss, Terry F. 2001. “The effect of state tax incentives on economic growth and firm
  location decisions: An overview of the literature.” Economic Development Quarterly,
  15(1): 90–105.
Button, Patrick. 2018a. “Can tax incentives create a local film industry? Evidence from
  Louisiana and New Mexico.” Forthcoming in the Journal of Urban Affairs, 1–27.
Button, Patrick. 2018b. “Expanding Disability Discrimination Protections for Individuals
  with Disabilities: Evidence from California.” ILR Review, 71(2): 365–93.
Carlton, Dennis W. 1983. “The location and employment choices of new firms: an econo-
  metric model with discrete and continuous endogenous variables.” The Review of Eco-
  nomics and Statistics, 65(3): 440–449.
Chirinko, Robert S, and Daniel J. Wilson. 2010. “Job Creation Tax Credits and Job
  Growth: Whether, When and Where?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working
  Paper 2010-25.
Christopherson, Susan, and Ned Rightor. 2010. “The Creative Economy as “Big Busi-
  ness”: Evaluating State Strategies to Lure Filmmakers.” Journal of Planning Education
  and Research, 29(3): 336–352.
Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton, Laurent Gobillon, and Sébastien
  Roux. 2010. “Estimating agglomeration economies with history, geology, and worker ef-
  fects.” In The economics of agglomeration. Chapter 1, 15–65. Cambridge, MA:National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Conley, Timothy G., and Christopher R. Taber. 2011. “Inference with Difference in
  Differences with a Small Number of Policy Changes.” Review of Economics and Statistics,
  93(1): 113–125.
Dabney, Dan Y. 1991. “Do Enterprise Zone Incentives Affect Business Location Deci-
  sions?” Economic Development Quarterly, 5(4): 325–334.
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. “Minimum Wage Ef-
  fects Across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics
  and Statistics, 92(4): 945–964.
Dye, Richard F, and David F Merriman. 2000. “The Effects of Tax Increment Financing
  on Economic Development.” Journal of Urban Economics, 47: 306–328.
Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser. 1999. “The geographic concentration of in-
  dustry: Does natural advantage explain agglomeration?” American Economic Review,
  89(2): 311–327.
Feldman, Maryann P. 1999. “The New Economics of Innovation, Spillovers And Agglom-
  eration: A Review of Empirical Studies.” Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
  8(June 2013): 5–25.

                                           46
Fletcher, Jason M, and Matthew N Murray. 2006. “Competition over the tax base in
  the state sales tax.” Public Finance Review, 34(3): 258–281.
Florida, Richard, Charlotta Mellander, and Kevin Stolarick. 2011. “Geographies of
  scope: An empirical analysis of entertainment, 1970-2000.” Journal of Economic Geogra-
  phy, 12(1): 1–22.
Freedman, Matthew. 2013. “Targeted Business Incentives and Local Labor Markets.”
  Journal of Human Resources, 48(2): 311–344.
Freedman, Matthew. 2015. “Place-based programs and the geographic dispersion of em-
  ployment.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 53(1): 1–19.
Gerring, John. 2012. Social Science Methodology: A Unified Framework. . 2nd ed., Cam-
  bridge, UK:Cambridge University Press.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Bryce A. Ward. 2009. “The causes and consequences of land
  use regulation: Evidence from Greater Boston.” Journal of Urban Economics, 65: 265–278.
Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti. 2010. “Identifying
  Agglomeration Spillovers: Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings.”
  Journal of Political Economy, 118(3): 536–598.
Hanson, Andrew. 2009. “Local employment, poverty, and property value effects of
  geographically-targeted tax incentives: An instrumental variables approach.” Regional
  Science and Urban Economics, 39(6): 721–731.
Hanson, Andrew, and Shawn Rohlin. 2013. “Do spatially targeted redevelopment pro-
  grams spillover?” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 43(1): 86–100.
Heyndels, Bruno, and Jef Vuchelen. 1998. “Tax mimicking among Belgian municipali-
  ties.” National Tax Journal, 51(1): 89–101.
He, Z., and M. Romanos. 2015. “Spatial agglomeration and location determinants: Ev-
  idence from the US communications equipment manufacturing industry.” Urban Studies,
  1–21.
Horowitz, Joel L. 2001. “The Bootstrap.” In Handbook of Econometrics. Vol. 5, , ed.
  James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, 3159–3228. Elsevier B.V.
Internal Revenue Service. 2012. “Independent Contractor or Employee? (Publication
  1779 (Rev. 3-2012) Catalog Number 16134L).” Department of the Treasury, Washington,
  DC.
Internal Revenue Service. 2018a. “Publication 15-A Cat. No. 21453T Employer’s Sup-
  plemental Tax Guide (Supplement to Pub. 15, Employer’s Tax Guide).” Department of
  the Treasury, Washington, DC.
Internal Revenue Service. 2018b. “Publication 15 Cat. No. 10000W (Circular E), Em-
  ployer’s Tax Guide.” Department of the Treasury, Washington, DC.
Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. “Local Economic Development, Agglomer-
  ation Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennesse Valley
  Authority.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 275–331.
Krupka, Douglas J., and Douglas S. Noonan. 2009. “Empowerment Zones, neigh-
  borhood change and owner-occupied housing.” Regional Science and Urban Economics,
  39(4): 386–396.
Ladd, Helen F. 1992. “Mimicking of Local Tax Burdens Among Neighboring Counties.”
  Public Finance Quarterly, 20(4): 450–467.


                                           47
Lee, Yoonsoo. 2008. “Geographic redistribution of US manufacturing and the role of state
  development policy.” Journal of Urban Economics, 64: 436–450.
Leiser, Stephanie. 2017. “The Diffusion of State Film Incentives: A Mixed-Methods Case
  Study.” Economic Development Quarterly, 31(3): 255–267.
Lester, John. 2013. “Tax credits for foreign location shooting of films: No net benefit for
  Canada.” Canadian Public Policy, 39(3): 451–472.
Luther, William. 2010. “Movie production incentives: Blockbuster support for lackluster
  policy.” Tax Foundation Special Report No. 173.
MacKinnon, James G. 2002. “Bootstrap inference in econometrics.” Canadian Journal
  of Economics, 35: 615–645.
Mackinnon, James G., and Lonnie Magee. 1990. “Transforming the Dependent Vari-
  able in Regression Models.” International Economic Review, 31(2): 315–339.
Mattera, Philip, Thomas Cafcas, Leigh McIlvaine, Andrew Seifter, and Kasia
  Tarczynska. 2011. “Money for Something: Job Creation and Job Quality Standards in
  State Economic Development Subsidy Programs.” Good Jobs First, Washington, DC.
Meer, Jonathan, and Jeremy West. 2016. “Effects of the minimum wage on employment
  dynamics.” Journal of Human Resources, 51(2): 500–522.
Mora, Ricardo, and Iliana Reggio. 2017. “Alternative diff-in-diffs estimators with several
  pretreatment periods.” Forthcoming in Econometric Reviews, 1–22.
Moretti, Enrico, and Daniel J. Wilson. 2014. “State incentives for innovation, star
  scientists and jobs: Evidence from biotech.” Journal of Urban Economics, 79: 20–38.
Neumark, David, and Diego Grijalva. 2017. “The Employment Effects of State Hiring
  Credits During and After the Great Recession.” ILR Review, 70(5): 1111–1145.
Neumark, David, and Jed Kolko. 2010. “Do enterprise zones create jobs? Evidence
  from California’s enterprise zone program.” Journal of Urban Economics, 68: 1–19.
Papke, Leslie E. 1991. “Interstate business tax differentials and new firm location.” Journal
  of Public Economics, 45(1): 47–68.
Plaut, Thomas R., and Joseph E. Pluta. 1983. “Business climate, taxes and expen-
  ditures, and state industrial growth in the United States.” Southern Economic Journal,
  50(1): 99–119.
Popp, Anthony, and James Peach. 2008. “The Film Industry in New Mexico and the
  Provision of Tax Incentives: A Report Submitted to the Legislative Finance Committee
  of the State of New Mexico.” Las Cruces, NM: Arrowhead Center, New Mexico State
  University.
Porter, M. E. 2000. “Location, Competition, and Economic Development: Local Clusters
  in a Global Economy.” Economic Development Quarterly, 14(1): 15–34.
Reber, Sarah J. 2005. “Court-ordered desegregation - Successes and failures integrating
  American schools since Brown versus Board of Education.” Journal of Human Resources,
  40(3): 559–590.
Rogers, Cynthia L., and Chen Wu. 2012. “Employment by foreign firms in the U.S.:
  Do state incentives matter?” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 42(4): 664–680.
Rohlin, Shawn M., and Jeffrey P. Thompson. 2018. “Local sales taxes, employment,
  and tax competition.” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 70(October 2017): 373–383.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange. 2003. “Geography, industrial organi-
  zation, and agglomeration.” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2): 377–393.

                                             48
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange. 2004. “Evidence on the nature and
  sources of agglomeration economies.” Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics - Vol
  4, 4(04): 2120–2167.
Rubin, Donald B. 1980. “Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data: The Fisher Ran-
  domization Test Comment.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 75(371): 591.
Schmenner, Roger W. 1982. Making Business Location Decisions. Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
  Hall Englewood.
Schmenner, Roger W., Joel C. Huber, and Randall L. Cook. 1987. “Geographic
  differences and the location of new manufacturing facilities.” Journal of Urban Economics,
  21(1): 83–104.
Shipan, Charles R., and Craig Volden. 2008. “The Mechanisms of Policy Diffusion.”
  American Journal of Political Science, 52(4): 840–857.
Shipan, Charles R, and Craig Volden. 2012. “Policy diffusion: Seven lessons for scholars
  and practitioners.” Public Administration Review, 72(6): 788–796.
Squire, Peverill. 1992. “Legislative Professionalization and Membership Diversity In State
  Legislatures.” Legislative Studies Quarterly, 17(1): 69–79.
Squire, Peverill. 2007. “Measuring State Legislative Professionalism: The Squire Indix
  Revisited.” State Politics and Policy Quarterly, 7(2): 211–227.
Squire, Peverill. 2012. The Evolution of American Legislatures: Colonies, Territories and
  States, 1619-2009. Ann Arbor, MI:University of Michigan Press.
Squire, Peverill. 2017. “A Squire Index Update.” State Politics and Policy Quarterly,
  17(4): 361–371.
Storper, Michael, and Susan Christopherson. 1987. “Flexible specialization and re-
  gional industrial agglomerations: the case of the US motion picture industry.” Annals of
  the Association of American Geographers, 77(1): 104–117.
Strauss-Kahn, Vanessa, and Xavier Vives. 2009. “Why and where do headquarters
  move?” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 39(2): 168–186.
Swenson, Charles W. 2017. “Preliminary Evidence on Film Production and State Incen-
  tives.” Economic Development Quarterly, 31(1): 65–80.
Tannenwald, Robert. 2010. “State Film Subsidies: Not Much Bang for too Many Bucks.”
  Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
Thom, Michael. 2018a. “Lights, Camera, but No Action? Tax and Economic Development
  Lessons From State Motion Picture Incentive Programs.” The American Review of Public
  Administration, 48(1): 33–51.
Thom, Michael. 2018b. “Time to Yell “Cut?” An Evaluation of the California Film and
  Production Tax Credit for the Motion Picture Industry.” California Journal of Politics
  and Policy, 10(1): 1–20.
Thom, Michael, and Brian An. 2017. “Fade to Black? Exploring Policy Enactment and
  Termination Through the Rise and Fall of State Tax Incentives for the Motion Picture
  Industry.” American Politics Research, 45(1): 85–108.
Volden, Craig, Michael M. Ting, and Daniel P. Carpenter. 2008. “A Formal Model
  of Learning and Policy Diffusion.” American Political Science Review, 102(3): 319–332.
Walker, Jack L. 1969. “The Diffusion of Innovations among the American States.” Amer-
  ican Political Science Review, 63(3): 880–899.


                                            49
Walker, Robert, and David Greenstreet. 1991. “The Effect of Government Incen-
  tives and Assistance on Location and Job Growth in Manufacturing.” Regional Studies,
  25(1): 13–30.
Wasylenko, Michael J. 1999. “Taxation and Economic Development: the State of the
  Economic Literature.” Public Administration and Public Policy, 72: 309–328.
Weinstein, Russell. 2018. “Dynamic Responses to Labor Demand Shocks: Evidence from
  the Financial Industry in Delaware.” Journal of Urban Economics, 106: 27–45.
Wilson, Daniel J. 2009. “Beggar Thy Neighbor? The In-State, Out-of-State, and Aggre-
  gate Effects of R&D Tax Credits.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(2): 431–436.
Wu, Yonghong. 2008. “State R & D Tax Credits and High-Technology.” Economic Devel-
  opment Quarterly, 22(2): 136–148.
Zin, David. 2010. “Film Incentives in Michigan.” Lansing, MI: State Fiscal Agency.




                                          50
  Figure 1: Number of U.S. States with an Active or Repealed State Film Incentive (SFI)



                   50
                   40
           Number of States
             20    10
                   0  30




                              1975   1980   1985   1990    1995   2000     2005    2010   2015
                                                             Year

                                                   Active SFI            Repealed SFI

Notes: SFIs include only cash rebates, grants, refundable tax credits, or transferable tax credits for motion
picture production, and do not include states with only sales tax exemptions or other small incentives. A
state has an active SFI if an SFI exists in the state and is accepting applicants. A state has a repealed SFI
if the state previously had an active SFI, but no longer has one, or if the state has suspended its SFI, either
temporarily or permanently.




                                                            51
Figure 2: Median Subsidy Rates of SFIs over Time, by Categories of Qualified Expenditures



                  25
                  20
           Subsidy Rate (%)
             10   5
                  0   15




                              1975   1980   1985    1990   1995   2000   2005    2010     2015
                                                             Year

                                       Resident Labor       Non-Resident Labor          Non-Labor

Notes: See the notes to Figure 1. Resident (non-resident) labor includes payroll for (non-) state residents
and non-labor includes non-payroll expenditures. See Appendix A and Online Appendix C for additional
details. Medians are calculated only over the set of states with SFIs. States with an SFI that does not
cover a particular type of qualified expenditure (typically non-resident labor) are included as a zero in the
calculation.




                                                           52
                                                                         Figure 3: Filming by Year
                                        (a) TV Series (IMDb)                                            (b) TV Series (Studio System)




                                                                                         400
                1500
                1250




                                                                                         300
                1000




                                                                                         200
                750
                500




                                                                                         100
                250
                0




                                                                                         0
                       1976   1981   1986   1991   1996    2001   2006     2011   2016         1985   1990   1995    2000     2005    2010    2015
                                                    Year                                                              Year
53




                                      (c) Feature Films (IMDb)                                        (d) Feature Films (Studio System)
                4000




                                                                                         80
                3000




                                                                                         60
                2000




                                                                                         40
                1000




                                                                                         20
                0




                                                                                         0




                       1976   1981   1986   1991   1996    2001   2006     2011   2016         1985   1990   1995   2000     2005    2010    2015
                                                    Year                                                              Year




     Notes: The IMDb sample includes 16,362 TV Series and 59,652 feature films from 1976 to 2017. The Studio System sample includes 1,563 TV series
     and 8,968 feature films from 1984 to 2017. Each series is an annual (or monthly, for Studio System feature films) sum of all productions in that year
     across all states that list at least one state of filming.
                                                         Figure 4: Event Study Estimates of the Effects of SFIs on the Filming of TV Series and Feature Films
                                                                                     (a) TV Series (IMDb)                                                                                                            (b) TV Series (Studio System)

                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                                         Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                                                 1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                      0.5




                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                             0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                -0.5




                                                                                                                                                         -0.5
                                   -1.0




                                                                                                                                                                            -1.0
                                                         <-15 -15   -13   -11   -9    -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1    3     5   7   9   11   13   15   >15                                            <-15 -15   -13     -11    -9    -7    -5     -3    -1 0 1    3     5   7       9       11    13        15   >15
                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                      Year Since SFI Adoption
54




                                                                                (c) Feature Films (IMDb)                                                                                                       (d) Feature Films (Studio System)
                                   1.5




                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                                         Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                                                 1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                      0.5




                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                             0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                -0.5




                                                                                                                                                         -0.5
                                   -1.0




                                                                                                                                                                            -1.0




                                                         <-15 -15   -13   -11   -9    -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1    3     5   7   9   11   13   15   >15                                            <-15   -13       -11     -9    -7    -5      -3    -1 0 1     3    5       7       9    11        13        >15
                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                      Year Since SFI Adoption




     Notes: See the notes to Table 1. These regressions are based on 2,142 state-year observations (IMDb) from 1976 to 2017, 1,734 state-year observations
     (Studio System TV series) from 1984 to 2017, and 20,808 state-month observations (Studio System feature films) from 1984 to 2017. These series are
     the 95% confidence intervals for the βt estimates from Equation 2. The effect at time t = −1 is normalized to zero so that all other points in time are
     relative to t = −1. Positive values indicate that filming was higher in states with SFIs than in states without them, relative to at time t = −1. All
     sub-figures use the same y-axis range to allow for an easier comparison across outcomes. This estimation does not include any parametric time trend
     controls, instead it presents the results for each point in time non-parametrically so that any possible pre-trends and dynamic treatment effects can
     be clearly seen.
     Figure 5: Event Study Estimates of the Effects of SFIs on Employment and Establishments in the Motion Picture Production
     Industry
                                                                                (a) Employment (QCEW)                                                                                                                        (b) Employment (CBP)
                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                       .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                  .1 .2 .3 .4
                Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                                            Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                 -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                                             -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                                   -.4




                                                                                                                                                                               -.4
                                   -.5




                                                                                                                                                                               -.5
                                                         < -15   -13    -11    -9    -7    -5     -3    -1 0 1     3      5   7       9    11    13   >15                                            <-15 -15   -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1    3     5   7   9   11   13   15   >15
                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                    Year Since SFI Adoption
55




                                                                               (c) Establishments (QCEW)                                                                                                                    (d) Establishments (CBP)
                                   .5




                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                       .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1 .2 .3 .4
                Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                                            Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                 -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                                             -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                                   -.4




                                                                                                                                                                               -.4
                                   -.5




                                                                                                                                                                               -.5




                                                         <-15     -13    -11    -9    -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5     7   9       11    13    >15                                            <-15 -15   -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1    3     5   7   9   11   13   15   >15
                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                    Year Since SFI Adoption




     Notes: See the notes to Figure 4 and Table 1. These regressions using QCEW data are based on 20,508 state-month observations for employment,
     or 7,413 state-quarter observations for establishments, both from 1978 to 2017. For the CBP data, this is 1,523 state-year observations from 1986 to
     2016. All sub-figures in the figures using QCEW and CBP data (Figures 5 to B4 use the same y-axis range (except for Figures B1a and B1b) to allow
     for an easier comparison across variables, data sources, and industries.
Figure 6: Event Study Estimates of the Effects of SFIs on Average Weekly Wages and Total
Wages in the Motion Picture Production Industry
                                                                                        (a) Average Weekly Wages




                                                  .5
                                                 .1 .2 .3 .4
                          Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                           -.3 -.2 -.1 0          -.4
                                                  -.5




                                                                   <-15    -13    -11    -9    -7    -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5      7   9   11   13   >15
                                                                                                          Year Since SFI Adoption




                                                                                                    (b) Total Wages
                                         .5  .1 .2 .3 .4
                      Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                       -.3 -.2 -.1 0     -.4
                                         -.5




                                                               < -15      -13    -11    -9    -7    -5     -3     -1 0 1        3    5   7   9   11   13   15+
                                                                                                           Year Since SFI Adoption




Notes: See the notes to Figures 4 and 5 and Table 1. This wage data comes from the QCEW as there no
wage data in the CBP. These regressions are based on 7,397 state-quarter observations from 1978 to 2017.




                                                                                                                56
                            Figure 7: 95% Confidence Intervals Testing Robustness to Different Linear Trends
                             (a) IMDb TV Series                                                                        (b) Studio S. TV Series                                                                           (c) IMDb Feature Films
-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                           -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
                        1     2            3                   4       5       6       7                           1       2       3     4       5                           6           7                           1        2       3       4       5   6   7



                        (d) Studio S. Feature Films                                                                    (e) QCEW Employment                                                                           (f) QCEW Establishments
-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                           -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
                        1     2            3                   4       5       6       7                           1       2       3     4       5                           6           7                           1        2       3       4       5   6   7



                                                              (g) QCEW Ave. Wages                                                                                            (h) QCEW Total Wages
                                  -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                          1        2       3       4       5                           6       7                                         1           2                3                   4       5       6       7



                                                                                                                   (i) Legend
                                                                                                                                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7
                                                               Geographical Basis for Trends:
                                                                  Census Region                                                          x                               x
                                                                  Census Division                                                            x                                   x
                                                                  State                                                                          x                                       x
                                                               Trends Estimated Over:
                                                                  Pre-Treatment Period Only                                              x   x   x
                                                                  Entire Span of Data                                                                                    x       x       x



Notes: See the notes to Table 1. Estimates #1 and #4 are from the main tables. Estimates #2 to #4
include state-specific linear time trends that are estimated over the pre-period only, as in the main tables.
Estimates #5 to #7 include state-specific linear time trends that are estimated over the entire span of the
data. All figures use the same y-axis range to allow for easy comparisons across variables.




                                                                                                                                        57
Figure 8: 95% Confidence Intervals Testing Robustness to Controls and Sample Restrictions
                            (a) IMDb TV Series                                                                       (b) Studio S. TV Series                                                                      (c) IMDb Feature Films
-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                         -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                      -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
                        1   2   3   4                       5    6   7   8   9 10 11                             1    2   3    4   5    6   7      8                        9 10 11                           1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11



                        (d) Studio S. Feature Films                                                                  (e) QCEW Employment                                                                      (f) QCEW Establishments
-.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                         -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                                                      -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
                        1   2   3   4                       5    6   7   8   9 10 11                             1    2   3    4   5    6   7      8                        9 10 11                           1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11



                                                                (g) QCEW Ave. Wages                                                                                         (h) QCEW Total Wages
                                    -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                                                                                                -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                            1   2    3   4   5   6   7      8                        9 10 11                                            1    2   3    4                       5    6   7   8   9 10 11



                                                                                                                       (i) Legend
                                                                                                                                   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
                                    Unemployment Rate                                                                              x   x x x x x   x x x
                                    Census Division by Time Fixed Effects                                                              x
                                    Per Capita Gross State Product (GSP)                                                                 x         x
                                    GSP in Motion Picture Production                                                                     x         x
                                    Legislative Professionalism                                                                            x          x
                                    Excludes California and New York                                                                         x           x
                                    State-Specific Linear Pre-Trends                                                                           x x x x x


Notes: See the notes to Table 1. Estimates #1 and #7 are from the main tables. State-specific linear time
trends are estimated over the pre-period only, as in the main tables. All figures use the same y-axis range
to allow for easy comparisons across variables.




                                                                                                                                       58
Table 1: Summary Statistics for the Main Data: SFI Database, IMDb and Studio System
Filming Data, and QCEW and CBP Data for the Motion Picture Production Industry

              Variable       Years       Freq.     Mean       Median      Std. Dev.      Min      Max          N
                                                       (a) State Film Incentives
                 SFI 1976-2017             M        0.23       0        0.42              0         1       25,704
             Repealed 1976-2017            M        0.03       0        0.18              0         1       25,704

                                                                  (b) IMDb
       # TV Series 1976-2017               A        7.7           1       36.5            0       588.4      2,142
    # Feature Films 1976-2017              A        28.7         6.8      94.0            0      1,246.9     2,142

                                                            (c) Studio System
       # TV Series 1984-2017               A         3.2         0       18.5             0       216.0     1,734
    # Feature Films 1984-2017              M         0.4         0        1.6             0       32.3      20,808

                                                 (d) QCEW Motion Picture Production
       Employment 1978-2017                M        3,299   611     14,503     0                 145,897 20,508
     Establishments 1978-2017              Q          289    91      890       0                 10,579 7,413
 Ave. Weekly Wages 1978-2017               Q         $730  $529      $934     $16                $15,051 7,397
       Total Wages 1978-2017               Q       $18.3m $2.30m    $118m    $715                $2.87b 7,397

                                                  (e) CBP Motion Picture Production
        Employment 1986-2016               A        2,248   334      11,759      9               175,756     1,523
      Establishments 1986-2016             A         209    67         608       2                5,726      1,523
   Notes: See Appendix A and Online Appendix C for additional details on SFI characteristics. A = annual
   frequency, Q = quarterly frequency, and M = monthly frequency. The variable SF I equals one for states
   that have an SFI program that is a refundable or transferable tax credit, a grant, or a cash rebate. The variable
   Repealed equals one if the state formerly had an SFI but it is no longer active, either temporarily or permanently.
   The IMDb sample includes 16,362 TV Series and 59,652 feature films. The Studio System sample includes 1,563
   TV series and 8,968 feature films. The QCEW data is a combination of “Motion picture and video production”
   (NAICS code 512110) from 1990 to 2017, “Motion picture and video production” (SIC code 7812) from 1988 to
   1989, and the sum of “Motion picture production, except TV” (SIC 7813) with “Motion picture production for
   TV” (SIC 7814), from 1978 to 1987. The CBP data uses the NAICS industry classification (“Motion picture
   and video production”, NAICS 512110) from 1998 to 2016 and the SIC industry classification (“Motion picture
   and video production”, SIC 7812) from 1986 to 1997.




                                                    59
         Table 2: Summary Statistics for Related Industries, from QCEW Data

            Variable       Years       Mean      Median     Std. Dev.     Min       Max          N
                           (a)         Independent artists, writers, and performers
      Employment 1978-2017              896     373        2,118        0    21,753           22,239
    Establishments 1978-2017            730     529         934        16    15,051           7,397
Ave. Weekly Wages 1978-2017            $730    $529        $934       $16 $15,051             7,397

                                                   (b) Payroll services
      Employment 1978-2017             2,586      791       4,825        0        58,840 20,937
    Establishments 1978-2017            113        70        134         0         1,402  6,979
Ave. Weekly Wages 1978-2017            $787       $704      $475        $18       $11,526 6,935

                                                       (c) Caterers
      Employment 1990-2017             4,027      2,279     5,071           0      30,510     13,026
    Establishments 1990-2017            285        181       333            6       2,450      4,342
Ave. Weekly Wages 1990-2017            $288       $280       $108          $81     $3,049     4,342

                             (d) Hotels and motels, except casino hotels
      Employment 1976-2017 26,739 17,200         31,189     1,203 215,854                     25,038
    Establishments 1976-2017   876      646        848        60    5,578                     8,346
Ave. Weekly Wages 1976-2017 $291        $263      $154       $63    $1,055                    8,346

                                          (e) Formal wear and costume rental
      Employment 1990-2017               326      203       368      4       2,334            14,088
    Establishments 1990-2017             48       31        54       3        528             4,696
Ave. Weekly Wages 1990-2017             $344     $324      $127     $53    $1,639             4,696

                                        (f) Lessors of non-residential buildings
      Employment 1990-2017             2,951    1,469       4,455       98    26,701          17,076
    Establishments 1990-2017            479      285         673        29     4,451          5,692
Ave. Weekly Wages 1990-2017            $754      $655       $410       $169 $4,892            5,692

                             (g) Truck, trailer, and RV rental and leasing
      Employment 1978-2017 1,175         708        1,226      6      7,722                   22,653
    Establishments 1978-2017    99        67          95       3       557                    7,551
Ave. Weekly Wages 1978-2017 $591         $576       $218     $115 $1,682                      7,551
  Notes: The employment data is at a monthly frequency and the establishment and average weekly
  wage data is at a quarterly frequency. Specific NAICS/SIC codes used are as follows: (a) “Independent
  artists, writers, and performers” (NAICS 711510)/“Entertainers and entertainment groups” (SIC 7929),
  (b) “Payroll services” (NAICS 541214)/“Services allied to motion picture production” (SIC 7819), (c)
  “Caterers” (NAICS 722320, no corresponding SIC data), (d) “Hotels and motels, except casino hotels”
  (NAICS 721110)/“Hotels and Motels” (SIC 7011 from 1978 to 1989, SIC 7010 from 1976 to 1977),
  (e) “Formal wear and costume rental” (NAICS 532220, no corresponding SIC data), (f) “Lessors of
  non-residential buildings” (NAICS 531120, no corresponding SIC data), and (g) “Truck, trailer and RV
  rental and leasing” (NAICS 532120)/“Truck rental and leasing, no drivers” (SIC 7513).
                                                 60
                             Table 3: Effects of SFIs on Filming

                                        IMDb                               Studio System
                                (1)                   (2)               (3)             (4)
                                                      (a) TV Series
                 SFI        0.292***              0.062         0.441***                 0.320***
                         (0.102, 0.483)      (-0.071, 0.189) (0.225, 0.658)           (0.178, 0.486)

                                                    (b) Feature Films
                 SFI         -0.028               -0.027         0.076***                 0.053*
                        (-0.123, 0.067)      (-0.209, 0.104) (0.026, 0.127)          (-0.013, 0.121)
     State-Specific
Linear Pre-Trends:              No                  Yes                 No                  Yes
 Notes: See the notes to Tables 1. These regressions are based on 2,142 state-year observations
 (IMDb) from 1976 to 2017, 1,734 state-year observations (Studio System TV series) from 1984 to
 2017, and 20,808 state-month observations (Studio System feature films) from 1984 to 2017. Esti-
 mates come from Equation 1. 95% confidence intervals are presented in parentheses. Odd columns
 do not include state-specific trends and are estimated using standard errors that are clustered on
 state. State-specific linear time trends are included in even columns and are estimated off of pre-
 trends only. This requires a state-clustered bootstrap of bias-corrected confidence intervals, hence
 presenting confidence intervals instead of standard errors. *, **, and *** indicate statistical signifi-
 cance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                 61
Table 4: Effects of SFIs on Employment, Establishments and Wages in the Motion Picture
Production Industry

                                        QCEW                                     CBP
                                 (1)                   (2)               (3)                (4)
                                                      (a) Employment
                   SFI          -0.017            0.081**         -0.034*                 -0.041
                           (-0.113, 0.078)     (0.005, 0.167) (-0.072, 0.005)        (-0.103, 0.033)

                                                    (b) Establishments
                   SFI          -0.029             0.051           -0.010                 -0.012
                           (-0.085, 0.027)    (-0.033, 0.173) (-0.047, 0.028)        (-0.060, 0.034)

                                                (c) Average Weekly Wages
                   SFI         -0.048*             0.027           ...                       ...
                           (-0.098, 0.001)    (-0.037, 0.141)

                                                      (d) Total Wages
                   SFI        -0.085**             0.083             ...                     ...
                          (-0.151, -0.019)    (-0.011, 0.267)
       State-Specific
  Linear Pre-Trends:             No                  Yes                 No                 Yes
    Notes: See the notes to Tables 1 and 3. These regressions using QCEW data are based on 20,508 state-
    month observations for employment, or 7,413 state-quarter observations for establishments (7,397 for
    average weekly wages and total wages), all from 1978 to 2017. For the CBP data, this is 1,523 state-
    year observations from 1986 to 2016. There is no wage data in the CBP. *, **, and *** indicate
    statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                  62
                                               Table 5: Effects of SFIs on Related Industries

                                         Employment                          Establishments                      Average Weekly Wages
                                   (1)                  (2)                (3)            (4)                     (5)            (6)
                                                         (a) Independent artists, writers, and performers
                     SFI         -0.082*            0.082**          -0.029            0.051           -0.036                        -0.010
                             (-0.169, 0.004)     (0.003, 0.214) (-0.085, 0.027) (-0.033, 0.173) (-0.084, 0.011)                 (-0.043, 0.023)

                                                                           (b) Payroll services
                     SFI        -0.124**              0.027              -0.051            0.039                -0.091**             0.072
                            (-0.230, -0.018)     (-0.073, 0.152)    (-0.134, 0.031) (-0.052, 0.161)         (-0.175, -0.007)    (-0.043, 0.247)

                                                                              (c) Caterers
                     SFI        -0.028**              -0.076             -0.016          -0.001                -0.022***             0.002
                            (-0.053, -0.003)     (-0.423, 0.124)    (-0.043, 0.011) (-0.033, 0.053)         (-0.038, -0.006)    (-0.025, 0.061)
63




                                                             (d) Hotels and motels, except casino hotels
                     SFI          0.009               -0.005            0.013          -0.001            0.004                      -0.008*
                             (-0.018, 0.036)     (-0.020, 0.006) (-0.010, 0.036) (-0.012, 0.011) (-0.003, 0.011)                (-0.020, 0.001)

                                                                (e) Formal wear and costume rental
                     SFI          -0.003              -0.001           -0.015         -0.024          0.013                          0.010
                             (-0.067, 0.061)     (-0.057, 0.040) (-0.090, 0.061) (-0.096, 0.046) (-0.003, 0.030)                (-0.009, 0.029)

                                                               (f) Lessors of non-residential buildings
                     SFI          0.005               -0.006           -0.005           -0.005          0.001                        -0.013
                             (-0.016, 0.027)     (-0.023, 0.009) (-0.024, 0.015) (-0.020, 0.010) (-0.016, 0.018)                (-0.033, 0.004)

                                                           (g) Truck, trailer, and RV rental and leasing
                     SFI          0.008             0.032**           0.007            0.006             0.002                       -0.007
                             (-0.042, 0.057)     (0.002, 0.070) (-0.028, 0.043) (-0.022, 0.032) (-0.013, 0.017)                 (-0.025, 0.007)
          State-Specific
     Linear Pre-Trends:             No                 Yes                 No                  Yes                 No                  Yes
      Notes. See the notes to Tables 2 for information on the years of each data source and Figure 3 for details on the methodology. *, **, and ***
      indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
              Table 6: Effects of SFIs on Filming, by Nearby State SFIs

                                      IMDb                              Studio System
                              (1)                (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                           (a) TV             Series
             SFI     0.183**          -0.014                       0.208              0.004
                 (0.032, 0.334) (-0.349, 0.191)               (-0.194, 0.610)    (-0.236, 0.196)
      Nearby SFI     0.694**           0.206                       0.696              0.708
                 (0.028, 1.361) (-0.620, 1.258)               (-0.468, 1.860)    (-0.331, 1.980)
SFI x Nearby SFI      0.146            0.089                       0.484            0.618***
                 (-0.140, 0.431) (-0.271, 0.577)              (-0.214, 1.181)    (0.171, 1.056)

                                                   (b) Feature Films
                SFI      -0.028                 0.013             0.005               -0.041
                    (-0.155, 0.099)        (-0.174, 0.136) (-0.071, 0.080)       (-0.130, 0.028)
       Nearby SFI        0.156                  -0.340           -0.018                0.044
                    (-0.361, 0.674)        (-0.785, 0.181) (-0.396, 0.359)       (-0.367, 0.512)
 SFI x Nearby SFI        -0.011                 0.090           0.150**              0.184**
                    (-0.270, 0.248)        (-0.165, 0.400) (0.013, 0.288)        (0.010, 0.385)
     State-Specific
Linear Pre-Trends:         No                    Yes                 No                 Yes
 Notes: See the notes to Tables 1 and 3. Estimates come from Equation 3. N earbySF I is a variable
 ranging from 0 to 1 that captures the proportion of nearby states, weighted by distance, that have
 SFIs. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                               64
Table 7: Effects of SFIs on QCEW Employment, Establishments, and Wages, by Nearby
State SFIs

                                                (1)                  (2)
                                           (a) Employment
                              SFI      0.000            0.093
                                  (-0.064, 0.064) (-0.064, 0.308)
                       Nearby SFI      0.105           -0.125
                                  (-0.293, 0.503) (-0.793, 0.361)
                 SFI x Nearby SFI      -0.037          -0.024
                                  (-0.230, 0.156) (-0.418, 0.262)

                                          (b) Establishments
                              SFI      -0.033           -0.024
                                  (-0.128, 0.063) (-0.113, 0.037)
                       Nearby SFI      -0.141            0.050
                                  (-0.462, 0.180) (-0.488, 0.588)
                 SFI x Nearby SFI       0.006            0.160
                                  (-0.144, 0.156) (-0.083, 0.521)

                                     (c) Average Weekly Wages
                              SFI     -0.027*         -0.094**
                                  (-0.056, 0.003) (-0.322, -0.005)
                       Nearby SFI      0.062            -0.014
                                  (-0.180, 0.305) (-0.473, 0.392)
                 SFI x Nearby SFI      -0.046          0.262**
                                  (-0.165, 0.072) (0.023, 0.813)

                                              (d) Total Wages
                               SFI        -0.051          -0.058
                                     (-0.136, 0.035) (-0.326, 0.012)
                        Nearby SFI        0.045            0.003
                                     (-0.250, 0.341) (-0.723, 0.594)
                  SFI x Nearby SFI        -0.076           0.305
                                     (-0.234, 0.083) (-0.021, 1.012)
                      State-Specific
                 Linear Pre-Trends:         No              Yes
                  Notes: See the notes to Tables 1, 3, and 6. *, **, and ***
                  indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
                  respectively.




                                              65
            Table 8: Effects of SFIs on Filming, by Existing Industry Size

                                      IMDb                               Studio System
                              (1)                 (2)                 (3)             (4)
                                          (a) TV               Series
     SFI × Small      0.139         0.308***                        0.005               0.169
                 (-0.094, 0.372) (0.046, 0.551)                (-0.341, 0.350)     (-0.119, 0.515)
   SFI × Medium     0.331***          0.045                       0.433***            0.467***
                 (0.141, 0.521) (-0.112, 0.242)                (0.126, 0.739)      (0.204, 0.760)
     SFI × Large     0.236**         -0.116                       0.675***             0.254**
                 (0.042, 0.430) (-0.329, 0.112)                (0.358, 0.991)      (0.020, 0.549)

                                            (b) Feature Films
      SFI × Small        0.078           -0.010           -0.010         0.026
                    (-0.064, 0.221) (-0.161, 0.147) (-0.073, 0.053) (-0.069, 0.108)
   SFI × Medium          -0.040         0.132**           0.109*         0.069*
                    (-0.160, 0.081) (0.002, 0.259) (-0.007, 0.225) (-0.004, 0.153)
      SFI × Large        -0.085          0.024            0.090*         0.032
                    (-0.219, 0.049) (-0.073, 0.138) (-0.003, 0.183) (-0.050, 0.119)
     State-Specific
Linear Pre-Trends:         No             Yes               No            Yes
 Notes: See the notes to Tables 1 and 3. The 17 states in Small, in increasing order of size, are: WV,
 ND, SD, DE, ID, WY, AK, RI, NH, VT, ME, AL, MT, AR, NE, SC, MS. The 17 states in M edium,
 in increasing order of size, are: OK, IA, KS, KY, LA, NM, OR, NV, WI, NC, CT, HI, WA, AZ, CO,
 IN, and UT. The 17 states in Large, in increasing order of size, are: MD, VA, NJ, DC, MN, MI, GA,
 MO, OH, TN, MA, PA, FL, TX, IL, NY, and CA. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at
 the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                66
Table 9: Effects of SFIs on QCEW Employment, Establishments, and Wages, by Existing
Industry Size

                                                  (1)                  (2)
                                            (a) Employment
                       SFI × Small       0.052          -0.113
                                   (-0.104, 0.208) (-0.415, 0.038)
                     SFI × Medium        0.039          0.115
                                   (-0.074, 0.151) (-0.013, 0.255)
                       SFI × Large     -0.104**          0.141
                                   (-0.205, -0.004) (0.048, 0.258)

                                                  (b) Establishments
                        SFI × Small             0.040           -0.001
                                           (-0.067, 0.148) (-0.164, 0.188)
                     SFI × Medium               -0.024           0.083
                                           (-0.109, 0.061) (-0.075, 0.277)
                        SFI × Large            -0.064*           0.042
                                           (-0.130, 0.002) (-0.053, 0.169)

                                      (c) Average Weekly Wages
                       SFI × Small      -0.034           0.010
                                   (-0.112, 0.043) (-0.149, 0.209)
                     SFI × Medium       -0.031           0.061
                                   (-0.089, 0.026) (-0.038, 0.196)
                       SFI × Large     -0.071**          0.000
                                   (-0.126, -0.016) (-0.080, 0.120)

                                              (d) Total Wages
                       SFI × Small        -0.012           -0.004
                                     (-0.101, 0.078) (-0.272, 0.301)
                    SFI × Medium         -0.092**          0.130
                                     (-0.175, -0.008) (-0.007, 0.357)
                       SFI × Large      -0.111***           0.075
                                     (-0.180, -0.043) (-0.031, 0.269)
                      State-Specific
                 Linear Pre-Trends:         No               Yes
                   Notes: See the notes to Tables 1, 3, and 8. *, **, and ***
                   indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
                   respectively.




                                               67
Table 10: Effects of Repealed SFIs, Relative to States without SFIs

                                                (1)                   (2)
                  IMDb TV Series    0.242*           0.261*
                               (-0.005, 0.489) (-0.004, 0.509)
    Studio System TV Series         -0.008           -0.008
                               (-0.318, 0.303) (-0.287, 0.258)
         IMDb Feature Films         -0.036           -0.127
                               (-0.196, 0.123) (-0.561, 0.137)
 Studio System Feature Films        -0.017           -0.015
                               (-0.112, 0.079) (-0.154, 0.078)
         QCEW Employment           -0.128**          0.038
                               (-0.252, -0.004) (-0.100, 0.188)
      QCEW Establishments           -0.039           -0.070
                               (-0.133, 0.058) (-0.248, 0.091)
QCEW Average Weekly Wages           -0.058         -0.099**
                               (-0.145, 0.029) (-0.162, -0.046)
         QCEW Total Wages          -0.118**          -0.118
                               (-0.227, -0.008) (-0.294, 0.092)
                State-Specific
           Linear Pre-Trends:         No              Yes
  Notes: See the notes to Tables 1 and 3. These are the estimates for Repealed
  from Equation 1. Positive (negative) estimates show a positive (negative)
  effect relative to states that have not adopted SFIs, controlling for states that
  already have SFIs. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
  5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                       68
Appendix A: SFI Characteristics

   The primary way that SFIs differ from each other is in their subsidy rates for three
types of expenditures on filming: the payroll of state residents (Resident), the payroll of
non-state residents (N on-Resident), and non-labor expenditures (N on-Labor). SFIs also
differ in strength if they are transferable tax credits, which are less desirable, rather than
refundable tax credits, grants, or cash rebates. In order to get the benefit from a transferable
tax credit, the excess tax credits not applied to state taxes (which is the bulk of the tax
credit) must be sold on financial markets. This leads to brokers taking a cut of 20 to 30%
of the tax credit (Luther 2010; Christopherson and Rightor 2010). For the refundable tax
credits, grants, and cash rebates, the filmmaker can just get cash and can avoid these broker
fees. This makes transferable tax credits 20 to 30% less lucerative compared to all other
SFIs.
   Appendix Table A1 presents additional summary statistics for the SFI database and Fig-
ure 2 shows how these subsidy rates have increased over time. Of state-month observations
with an SFI, 70.8% of these observations are for “Refundable” SFIs (cash rebates, grants,
and refundable tax credits) while 23.4% are tax credits that are transferable only, and the
rest are tax credits that are neither refundable nor transferable (6.7%). All SFIs subsidize
the wages or salaries of workers who are state residents, almost all subsidize non-labor ex-
penditure (94.7%), but only 65.1% subsidize non-resident labor. The average subsidy rates
are between 18% and 20% and these have increased over time (Figure 2).
   I estimate the effects of SFIs, by these characteristics, in the following regression:


  IHS(Yst ) = β1 Residentst × Ref undst + β2 N on-Residentst × Ref undst

                                 + β3 N on-Laborst × Ref undst + Xst Φ + δs ϕ + µt τ + st (4)


where Residentst is the subsidy rate for the payroll of state residents, N on-Residentst is
the subsidy rate for payroll of non-state residents, N on-Laborst is the subsidy rate for non-

                                              A1
labor expenditure, and Ref undst is 0.75 for transferable tax credits (to reflect the cut that
brokers take) and equals one for all other SFIs (since no cut is taken). All subsidy rates are
multiplied by 100 to range from 1 to 100. Thus, the coefficient on β1 captures the effect of
increasing the subsidy rate for the payroll of state residents by one percentage point (or 1.33
percentage points for tranferable tax credits).

                       Table A1: Summary Statistics for SFI Features

                                        Variable     Mean    Std. Dev.    Min    Max     Obs
                                 Refundable          0.75      0.43        0      1     5,829
            Only Resident Labor Subsidized           0.011     0.102       0       1    5,769
               Both Labor Types Subsidized           0.021     0.144       0      1     5,769
         Resident and Non-Labor Subsidized           0.282     0.450       0       1    5,769
                       All Three Subsidized          0.686     0.464       0       1    5,769
         Resident Labor Rate (if subsidized)         21.08     10.19       4      50    5,769
     Non-Resident Labor Rate (if subsidized)         20.62      8.87       4      50    4,082
             Non-Labor Rate (if subsidized)          20.49      9.91       4      50    5,586
       Notes: See the notes to Table 1. This sample is states with an SFI (SF I = 1). See Online
       Appendix C for additional details on specific SFI characteristics.




                                                A2
                               Table A2: Effects of SFIs on Filming, by SFI Subsidy Rates

                                                    IMDb                                       Studio System
                                          (1)                    (2)                     (3)                    (4)
                                                                      (a) TV    Series
         Resident × Refund       -0.00453                     -0.00463                0.00464                 0.01209
                           (-0.02377, 0.01472)          (-0.02005, 0.03967)     (-0.01304, 0.02232)    (-0.00615, 0.05267)
     Non-Resident × Refund       0.00638                      0.00583                 0.00189                 0.00530
                           (-0.00302, 0.01578)          (-0.00321, 0.01792)     (-0.02032, 0.02410)    (-0.02097, 0.02484)
       Non-Labor × Refund        0.00603                      -0.00278                0.00599                -0.01205
                           (-0.01209, 0.02415)          (-0.04384, 0.01266)     (-0.00927, 0.02124)    (-0.04097, 0.01839)

                                                                    (b) Feature Films
         Resident × Refund         0.00337                    0.00491               0.00543                 0.01023**
                             (-0.00339, 0.01012)        (-0.00226, 0.02282) (-0.00168, 0.01254)        (0.00295, 0.03502)
     Non-Resident × Refund         -0.00201                  -0.00721*              0.00123                  -0.00475
A3




                             (-0.00812, 0.00409)        (-0.01478, 0.00169) (-0.00591, 0.00838)        (-0.01506, 0.00493)
       Non-Labor × Refund          -0.00479                   0.00107              -0.00220                  -0.00425
                             (-0.01319, 0.00360)        (-0.01308, 0.01327) (-0.00988, 0.00547)        (-0.02247, 0.00881)
              State-Specific
         Linear Pre-Trends:           No                         Yes                     No                     Yes
      Notes: See the notes to Tables 1, 3, and Appendix Table A1. These estimates are from Equation 4. *, **, and *** indicate
      statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Table A3: Effects of SFIs on QCEW Employment, Establishments, and Wages, by SFI
Subsidy Rates

                                                  (1)                       (2)
                                             (a) Employment
              Resident × Refund      0.00547*              0.00194
                                (-0.00095, 0.01190) (-0.00690, 0.01083)
          Non-Resident × Refund       -0.00207            -0.00016
                                (-0.00780, 0.00366) (-0.00816, 0.00826)
            Non-Labor × Refund        -0.00449            0.00255
                                (-0.01139, 0.00240) (-0.00495, 0.01042)

                                            (b) Establishments
              Resident × Refund       0.00031              -0.00271
                                (-0.00347, 0.00410) (-0.01914, 0.00469)
          Non-Resident × Refund       -0.00050            0.01139**
                                (-0.00438, 0.00338) (0.00336, 0.02089)
            Non-Labor × Refund        -0.00042             -0.00101
                                (-0.00420, 0.00336) (-0.01000, 0.01134)

                                        (c) Average Weekly Wages
              Resident × Refund       -0.00034            -0.00004
                                (-0.00315, 0.00246) (-0.00711, 0.00809 )
          Non-Resident × Refund       0.00072              0.00557
                                (-0.00121, 0.00265) (-0.00135, 0.01452)
            Non-Labor × Refund        -0.00058            -0.00049
                                (-0.00334, 0.00218) (-0.00646, 0.00655)

                                               (d) Total Wages
              Resident × Refund         -0.00120             -0.00167
                                  (-0.00361, 0.00122) (-0.01471, 0.00523)
          Non-Resident × Refund         0.00092             0.00979**
                                  (-0.00185, 0.00369) (0.00153, 0.02249)
            Non-Labor × Refund          -0.00147             0.00135
                                  (-0.00388, 0.00094) (-0.00978, 0.01073)
                   State-Specific
              Linear Pre-Trends:           No                   Yes
           Notes: See the notes to Tables 1, 3, and Appendix Tables A1. These estimates
           are from Equation 4. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%,
           5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                               A4
Appendix B: Additional Results

Figure B1: Event Study Estimates of the Effects of SFIs on the Independent Artists, Writers,
and Performers and Payroll Services Industries
                                                    (a) Employment, Independent Artists                                                                                                                 (b) Employment, Payroll Services
                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                       1
                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                      .2 .4 .6 .8
         Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                               Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
 -.6 -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                -.6 -.4 -.2 0          -.8
                                                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                    <-15 -13    -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13   >15                                                            <-15 -13     -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13   >15
                                                                                     Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                        Year Since SFI Adoption




                                                  (c) Establishments, Independent Artists                                                                                                              (d) Establishments, Payroll Services
                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                                                                                                       .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                                       Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                                                                                                                                               -.6 -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0          -.4
                         -.5




                                                  <-15    -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15                                                         <-15     -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15
                                                                                     Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                        Year Since SFI Adoption




(e) Average Weekly Wages, Independent Artists                                                                                                           (f) Average Weekly Wages, Payroll Services
                         .5




                                                                                                                                                                       .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                                      .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                               Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                                -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                         -.4




                                                                                                                                                                       -.4
                         -.5




                                                                                                                                                                       -.5




                                                  <-15    -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15                                                         <-15     -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15
                                                                                     Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                        Year Since SFI Adoption




Notes: See the notes to Figures 4 and 5 and Table 2. All data spans the years 1978 to 2017.




                                                                                                                                          B1
Figure B2: Event Study Estimates of the Effects of SFIs on the Caterers and Hotels and
Motels Industries
                                                         (a) Employment, Caterers                                                                                                       (b) Employment, Hotels and Motels
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                        Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                         -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -.5
                                            <-15 -13    -11    -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13   >15                                                    <-15 -13     -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13   >15
                                                                              Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption




                                                        (c) Establishments, Caterers                                                                                              (d) Establishments, Hotels and Motels
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                        Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                         -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -.5




                                          <-15    -13    -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15                                                 <-15     -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15
                                                                              Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption




                                             (e) Average Weekly Wages, Caterers                                                         (f) Average Weekly Wages, Hotels and Motels
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                        Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                         -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -.5




                                          <-15    -13    -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15                                                 <-15     -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15
                                                                              Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption




Notes: See the notes to Figures 4 and 5 and Table 2. The data on the caterers industry is only available
from 1990 to 2017, while the data on the hotels and motels industry is available from 1976 to 2017.




                                                                                                                                   B2
Figure B3: Event Study Estimates of the Effects of SFIs on the Costume Rental and Non-
Residential Building Industries
                                                 (a) Employment, Costume Rental                                                                (b) Employment, Non-Residential Buildings
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                        Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                         -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -.5
                                            <-15 -13    -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13   >15                                                     <-15 -13    -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13   >15
                                                                             Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption




                                             (c) Establishments, Costume Rental                                                        (d) Establishments, Non-Residential Buildings
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                        Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                         -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -.5




                                          <-15    -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15                                                  <-15    -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15
                                                                             Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                Year Since SFI Adoption




                                                                                                                                       (f) Average Weekly Wages, Non-Residential
     (e) Average Weekly Wages, Costume Rental
                                                                                                                                       Buildings
                    .5




                                                                                                                                                           .5
                        .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                               .1 .2 .3 .4
 Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                        Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
  -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                         -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                    -.4




                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                    -.5




                                                                                                                                                           -.5




                                          <-15    -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15
                                                                             Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                             <-15    -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13    >15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Year Since SFI Adoption




Notes: See the notes to Figures 4 and 5 and Table 2. The data on both industries is only available from
1990 to 2017.




                                                                                                                                  B3
Figure B4: Event Study Estimates of the Effects of SFIs on the Transportation Rental
Industry
                                                                 (a) Employment                                                                                                                                                                                (b) Establishments
                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                         .5
                         .1 .2 .3 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .1 .2 .3 .4
  Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1




                                                                                                                                                                                      Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
   -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                                                                                       -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                     -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                     -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.5
                                           <-15 -13   -11   -9   -7   -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5                                        7         9        11    13    >15                                                 <-15   -13       -11       -9        -7        -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5   7   9   11   13   >15
                                                                           Year Since SFI Adoption                                                                                                                                                                                 Year Since SFI Adoption




                                                                                                                                            (c) Average Weekly Wages
                                                                                                         .5  .1 .2 .3 .4
                                                                                      Coefficient Difference Relative to t-1
                                                                                       -.3 -.2 -.1 0     -.4
                                                                                                         -.5




                                                                                                                               <-15   -13       -11       -9    -7    -5     -3    -1 0 1     3    5                                        7         9        11        13          >15
                                                                                                                                                                           Year Since SFI Adoption




Notes: See the notes to Figures 4 and 5 and Table 2. The data spans the years 1978 to 2017.




                                                                                                                                                                                 B4
                  Table B1: Effects of SFIs on Filming, by SFI Timing

                                       IMDb                               Studio System
                               (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)
                                              (a) TV Series
                SFI    0.248***          0.031         0.424***                        0.289***
                    (0.083, 0.414) (-0.109, 0.164) (0.201, 0.646)                   (0.130, 0.482)
SFI x (Year - 2005)      -0.056          -0.030          -0.211                       -0.338***
                    (-0.171, 0.059) (-0.248, 0.167) (-0.525, 0.104)                (-0.606, -0.085)

                                                    (b) Feature Films
                 SFI      -0.030                 0.055          0.074***                 0.051
                     (-0.134, 0.073)        (-0.033, 0.159) (0.024, 0.123)          (-0.013, 0.120)
SFI x (Year - 2005)        0.038                 -0.047          -0.033                  -0.022
                     (-0.056, 0.131)        (-0.158, 0.064) (-0.117, 0.050)         (-0.153, 0.088)
      State-Specific
 Linear Pre-Trends:         No                    Yes                 No                  Yes
 Notes: See the notes to Tables 1 and 3. Y ear is a variable equal to the year that the SFI was first
 adopted. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                B5
Table B2: Effects of SFIs on QCEW Employment, Establishments, and Wages, by SFI
Timing

                                                (1)                 (2)
                                                  (a) Employment
                                 SFI          -0.029          0.084
                                         (-0.121, 0.063) (-0.004, 0.199)
               SFI x (Year - 2005)           -0.046*          0.010
                                         (-0.096, 0.004) (-0.182, 0.113)

                                                 (b) Establishments
                                 SFI          -0.028            0.021
                                         (-0.078, 0.022) (-0.052, 0.140)
               SFI x (Year - 2005)             0.004           -0.111
                                         (-0.042, 0.051) (-0.284, 0.010)

                                      (c) Average Weekly Wages
                               SFI     -0.050**          0.003
                                   (-0.100, -0.001) (-0.081, 0.120)
               SFI x (Year - 2005)      -0.007          0.087**
                                   (-0.037, 0.023) (-0.221, -0.007)

                                             (d) Total Wages
                               SFI     -0.083***          0.052
                                    (-0.146, -0.021) (-0.042, 0.231)
               SFI x (Year - 2005)       0.008            -0.113
                                    (-0.030, 0.045) (-0.267, 0.007)
                     State-Specific
                Linear Pre-Trends:         No              Yes
                 Notes: See the notes to Tables 1 and 3. Y ear is a variable
                 equal to the year that the SFI was first adopted. *, **, and ***
                 indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
                 respectively.




                                             B6
