NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPLICATIONS OF INCREASING COLLEGE ATTAINMENT FOR AGING IN GENERAL
EQUILIBRIUM
Juan Carlos Conesa
Timothy J. Kehoe
Vegard M. Nygaard
Gajendran Raveendranathan
Working Paper 26000
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26000

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2019, Revised January 2020

This project was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH Grant No.
5R01AG048037-02). We thank Daniela Costa, Parisa Kamali, and Akshar Saxena for their help
during an early stage of the paper. We thank seminar participants at the Barcelona GSE Summer
Forum, the Bellaterra Macroeconomics Winter Workshop, the Institute for Fiscal Studies,
McMaster University, the NBER Summer Institute, SAEe, Santa Barbara, SED, and Universidad
Torcuto di Tella for helpful discussions and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Juan Carlos Conesa, Timothy J. Kehoe, Vegard M. Nygaard, and Gajendran
Raveendranathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Implications of Increasing College Attainment for Aging in General Equilibrium
Juan Carlos Conesa, Timothy J. Kehoe, Vegard M. Nygaard, and Gajendran Raveendranathan
NBER Working Paper No. 26000
June 2019, Revised January 2020
JEL No. H20,H51,H55,I13,J11
ABSTRACT
We develop an overlapping generations general equilibrium model of the U.S. economy with
heterogeneous consumers who face idiosyncratic earnings and health risk to study the
implications of increasing college attainment, decreasing fertility, and increasing longevity
(2005–2100). While all three trends contribute to a higher old age dependency ratio, increasing
college attainment has different implications because it increases labor productivity. Decreasing
fertility and increasing longevity require the government to increase the average labor tax rate
from 33.5 to 47.1 percent. Increasing college attainment lowers the required tax increase by 12.0
percentage points. The labor tax rate required to balance the government budget is higher under
general equilibrium than in a small open economy with a constant interest rate, because the
reduction in the interest rate lowers capital income tax revenues.
Juan Carlos Conesa
Department of Economics
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794-4384
juan.conesa@stonybrook.edu
Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
tkehoe@umn.edu

Vegard M. Nygaard
Department of Economics
University of Houston
3623 Cullen Boulevard
Houston, TX 77204
United States
vmnygaard@uh.edu
Gajendran Raveendranathan
Department of Economics
MacMaster University
1280 Main Street West
Hamilton Ontario L8S 4M4
Canada
raveeg1@mcmaster.ca

1

Introduction

The ratio of the population 65 and older to the population that is 20 to 64 years old (that is, the old
age dependency ratio) in the United States is projected to increase from about 20 percent in 2005 to more
than 50 percent by 2100 according to estimates by the United Nations. The literature has used overlapping
generations models with heterogeneous consumers to analyze the implications of the projected increase in the
old age dependency ratio due to decreasing fertility rates and increasing longevity. Attanasio et al. (2010), for
example, have argued that the U.S. government will have to increase the labor tax rate by 12.7 percentage
points by 2080 to finance the increase in Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security spending. Our paper
extends this literature by introducing increasing college attainment into the model. We argue that increasing
college attainment—which accounts for some of the increase in the old age dependency ratio because collegeeducated individuals have higher life expectancy—has diﬀerent macroeconomic implications than decreasing
fertility and increasing longevity, because higher college attainment leads to a more productive labor force.
Following Conesa et al. (2018), we develop an overlapping generations general equilibrium model with
heterogeneous consumers who face idiosyncratic earnings and health risk. Consumers are ex-ante heterogeneous in education. In particular, some are college educated and some are not. Consistent with the data,
college-educated consumers in the model have both higher life expectancy and higher labor productivity.
Consumers in our model can save in non-state-contingent bonds and partially insure against health risk
through employer-provided insurance or by purchasing private insurance. Furthermore, the model incorporates the key social insurance programs in the United States: Medicare; Medicaid; Social Security; and a
welfare program that combines institutional features of food stamps, disability insurance, and medical relief
for the poor (for brevity, referred to as Emergency Relief ). The government finances its spending on consumption, interest payments on debt, Medicare, Medicaid, Emergency Relief, and Social Security by levying
consumption taxes, capital income taxes, and labor income taxes. We assume that the consumption and
capital income tax rates are fixed and that the government balances its budget each period by adjusting the
labor tax rate.
After calibrating the model to match key features of the U.S. economy in 2005, we use the model
to study the macroeconomic implications of the three channels that contribute to an increase in the old
age dependency ratio mentioned above: increasing college attainment, decreasing fertility, and increasing
longevity (for brevity, we refer to the three channels that lead to an increase in the old age dependency ratio
as the three channels of aging). In particular, we change the mass of 20-year-olds entering the economy with
a college degree, the growth rate of the population of 20-year-olds, and the age-specific survival probabilities
to match relevant projections for 2100. Increasing college attainment increases the old age dependency

1

ratio because college graduates have higher life expectancy than non-college graduates. Decreasing fertility
increases the old age dependency ratio because it leads to relatively fewer young consumers. Lastly, increasing
longevity increases the old age dependency ratio because it leads to relatively more older consumers.
We start by studying the individual fiscal implications of the three channels of aging. Our results show
that decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require the government to increase the labor tax rate,
whereas increasing college attainment allows the government to reduce the labor tax rate. There are a
number of reasons for this result. First, and most importantly, an increase in college attainment leads
to an economy with more productive workers and therefore higher labor earnings, which in turn leads to
higher labor tax revenues. Second, hours worked per capita and labor force participation rates among both
workers between the ages of 20 and 64 and those aged 65 and older are higher in the economy with higher
college attainment, thereby expanding the labor tax base. Third, college graduates are less likely to enroll
in Medicaid and Emergency Relief. Higher college attainment thus reduces government spending on these
programs. Fourth, there are general equilibrium eﬀects. Higher college attainment leads to higher capital
accumulation, which in turn leads to lower interest rates and higher wages. Lower interest rates reduce
interest payments on government debt per capita, thereby lowering government spending. Higher wages lead
to a further increase in labor tax revenues, not only because of the direct eﬀect of higher wages on earnings
but also because higher wages induce consumers to work more. Finally, higher college attainment leads to
higher consumption tax revenues per capita and higher capital income tax revenues per capita. This follows
because college graduates both consume and save more than non-college graduates. College graduates save
more since they have higher labor earnings, higher life expectancy, and a stronger precautionary savings
motive because they are less likely to enroll in Medicaid and Emergency Relief.
The forces that we have mentioned so far contribute to lower labor taxes, but there are forces that move in
the opposite direction. In particular, an increase in college attainment leads to higher spending on Medicare
and Social Security. This result follows because college-educated consumers have higher life expectancy
than non-college-educated consumers and because college-educated consumers claim higher Social Security
benefits owing to higher lifetime labor earnings.
We then study the joint fiscal implications of the three channels of aging. In particular, we use the 2100
projections for fertility and longevity but vary the increase in college attainment from 0 to 100 percent of
its projected increase. We find that decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require the government to
increase the average labor tax rate from 33.5 to 47.1 percent by 2100. Adding increasing college attainment
to this model lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate by 12.0 percentage points if college attainment
increases to 100 percent of its projected value in 2100. Consequently, we find that all three channels of aging
require the government to increase the average labor tax rate from 33.5 to 35.1 percent by 2100.
2

Next, to identify the general equilibrium eﬀects in our results, we compare the results from the benchmark
closed economy with those of a small open economy in which the real interest rate is constant and exogenous.
By construction, the wage rate in the detrended balanced growth economy is also constant in the small open
economy. We find that the capital stock increases in both the general equilibrium model and the small open
economy model. In the general equilibrium model, however, the increase in the capital stock also leads to
higher wages and lower interest rates. Lower interest rates reduce government revenues from capital income
taxation. Consequently, we find that the three channels of aging reduce capital income tax revenues per
capita by 13.1 percent in the general equilibrium model but increase capital income tax revenues per capita
by 89.4 percent in the small open economy model. As a result, we find that the labor tax rate required
to balance the government budget is higher under general equilibrium. Whereas higher college attainment
lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate due to decreased fertility and increased longevity by 12.0
percentage points under general equilibrium, we find that the three channels of aging allows the government
to reduce the labor tax rate by 6.0 percentage points in the small open economy model.
Finally, we study the welfare implications of increasing college attainment. To do this, we first compute
two demographic transitions: one where we introduce all three channels of aging, and another where we only
decrease fertility and increase longevity. We then quantify the welfare implications of increasing college attainment by comparing the welfare results between these two demographic transitions. We start by studying
the welfare implications for consumers under the veil of ignorance. By “veil of ignorance”, we mean that
we focus on 20-year-old consumers with zero assets for whom the education type (college or non-college),
but not the stochastic components of productivity and health, has been revealed. We report the welfare
results from the productivity-detrended models. We find that non-college-educated consumers who enter
the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity in 2010 require a one-time transfer equal to
2.0 percent of GDP per capita to be indiﬀerent between the two transitions. The corresponding transfer
for college-educated consumers is 0.6 percent of GDP per capita. Hence, higher college attainment leads to
welfare gains for consumers under the veil of ignorance. Moreover, these welfare gains are increasing over the
transition. Accordingly, we find that non-college graduates who enter the transition with decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity in 2100 require a transfer of 160.0 percent of GDP per capita to be indiﬀerent
between the two transitions, whereas a transfer of 18.1 percent of GDP per capita is required to equalize
welfare for college-educated consumers. Lastly, we study the welfare implications for the current cohort.
We find that higher college attainment increases average welfare of the current cohort but that the welfare
gains are heterogeneous across both age groups and educational types. In particular, we find that 25-yearold college graduates in the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require a one-time
transfer of 4.6 percent of GDP per capita to be indiﬀerent between that transition and the transition with
3

all three channels of aging. The corresponding transfer for 25-year-old non-college graduates is 2.8 percent
of GDP per capita. Similarly, we find that the current old consumers generally benefit from higher college
attainment but that their welfare gains are smaller compared to the younger population.
Our paper is related to the literature that develops general equilibrium overlapping generations models
to study the implications of decreasing fertility and increasing longevity. These demographic trends will lead
to a large increase in government spending on Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security over the next century.
De Nardi et al. (1999), Kotlikoﬀ et al. (2007), and Attanasio et al. (2010) study the macroeconomic and
welfare implications of various fiscal policy reforms that have been proposed to finance government spending
on social insurance programs in the future, such as increasing payroll taxes, increasing the eligibility age
for benefits, or reducing the generosity of benefits. In a recent paper, Jung et al. (2017) develop a general
equilibrium overlapping generations model with endogenous health to study the implications of aging for
health care spending and health insurance coverage. They use the model to study how the implications of
aging are aﬀected by the introduction of the Patient Protection and Aﬀordable Care Act (ACA). Unlike
our paper, these papers do not focus on increasing college attainment. While increasing college attainment,
decreasing fertility, and increasing longevity all contribute to an increase in the old age dependency ratio, we
show that increasing college attainment has diﬀerent fiscal and welfare implications than decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity, because increasing college attainment leads to a more productive labor force.
The model we use in the paper builds on the model used by Conesa and Krueger (1999) to study Social
Security reforms and the models used by Pashchenko and Porapakkarm (2013) and Jung and Tran (2016) to
examine the implications of the ACA. It also builds on the model used by Hubbard et al. (1994), Palumbo
(1999), De Nardi et al. (2010), and Kopecky and Koreshkova (2014) to examine how medical expenditure
risk aﬀects the savings of the elderly. The model is most closely related to the model in Conesa et al (2018).
The main diﬀerence between the model in this paper and the model in Conesa et al. (2018) is in how
we model the fiscal system. Whereas Conesa et al. (2018) allow only for labor taxes, the present model
includes capital, consumption, and labor taxes. Moreover, we include government consumption, government
debt, and taxes on Social Security benefits. We also consider an alternative tax system where we allow for
progressive income taxes as part of our sensitivity analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the benchmark model used in the paper.
After calibrating the model in Section 3, we study the fiscal and welfare implications of increasing college
attainment, decreasing fertility, and increasing longevity in Section 4. Lastly, Section 5 concludes and gives
directions for future research.

4

2

Model

The following subsections present the benchmark model used in the analysis. The model is a discrete time,
general equilibrium overlapping generations model with heterogeneous consumers. As noted earlier, the
model builds on that in Conesa et al. (2018).

2.1

Firms

Firms hire labor at wage wt and rent capital at rate rt from consumers to produce goods. We assume that
the technology at time t can be represented by a constant returns to scale Cobb-Douglas production function:
Ŷt = K̂t↵ (Zt Nt )

1 ↵

(1)

,

where K̂t is the aggregate capital stock, Zt denotes labor-augmenting technological progress, Nt denotes
t

eﬀective labor supply, and ↵ is capital’s share of income. Technological progress is given by Zt = ✓ (1 + gz ) ,
where gz denotes the growth rate of technology. Similarly, gn denotes the growth rate of 20-year-old consumers, which is the age at which consumers enter the economy.
Output is used for private consumption, Ĉt ; government consumption, Ĝc,t ; investment, K̂t+1 (1
and purchase of health care services, M̂t , where

denotes the rate of capital depreciation. Let xt ⌘

) K̂t ;
x̂t
(1+gz )t

denote productivity-detrended variables. The productivity- and population-growth detrended resource constraint in the balanced growth path is
Ct + Gc,t + Mt + (1 + gz ) (1 + gn ) Kt+1 = Kt↵ (✓Nt )

1 ↵

+ (1

)Kt .

(2)

For the remainder of the paper, we drop time subscripts and use 0 to denote next-period variables.

2.2

Consumers

The economy is populated by a continuum of ex-ante and ex-post heterogeneous consumers. Consumers are
indexed by type s = (j, e, h, ⌘, a, i), where j is age, e is educational level, h is health status, ⌘ is the stochastic
component of labor productivity, a is assets, and i is the consumer’s health insurance status. We let

(s)

denote the measure of consumers of type s.
The consumer’s educational level is permanent over her lifetime and can take two values: college or noncollege. Health status is stochastic and is a function of the consumer’s current age, education, and health.

5

It follows a finite-state Markov process with stationary transitions over time:
Qj,e (h, H) = P rob (h0 2 H : (h, j, e)) ,

(3)

where Qj,e (h, H) denotes the probability of the next period’s health conditional on current health, age,
and education. The stochastic component of labor productivity is given by a stationary finite-state Markov
process:
Q (⌘, E) = P rob (⌘ 0 2 E : ⌘) ,

(4)

where Q (⌘, E) denotes the probability of next period’s stochastic labor productivity conditional on current
stochastic labor productivity. Lastly, the consumer’s health insurance status, i, specifies whether she is
uninsured, iS ; has private health insurance, iP ; or has employer-provided health insurance, iE .
Consumers are endowed with one unit of time in every period that can be allocated between work and
leisure. The period-by-period utility function is given by

U (c, `, e, iCAID ) =

h
c (1

`
1

fe ) 1

i1

IiCAID =1 ,

(5)

where c denotes consumption and ` denotes labor supply. We assume that labor supply is indivisible,
` 2 {0, `p , . . . , `e }, where `p and `e refer to part-time and extra time, respectively. We capture some of the
costs of going to college by means of a time cost, fe . In particular, we assume that consumers with a college
degree spend part of their first 4 years in college. Their total time endowment available for work and leisure
in the first 4 years is thus given by 1

fe . Consumers that qualify for Medicaid in the model choose whether

to enroll in the program, iCAID 2 {0, 1}. Eligible consumers that choose to enroll suﬀer a utility cost, .
This utility cost enables us to account for the observation that a large percentage of individuals that qualify
for Medicaid in the United States do not enroll in the program. The consumer’s labor earnings depend
on her labor supply, `; stochastic labor productivity, ⌘; health status, ⇠h ; and deterministic life cycle labor
productivity, ✏je , the last of which varies with the consumer’s age and educational level. Starting at age jr ,
all consumers receive health insurance from the government in the form of Medicare. They also receive Social
Security benefits, SSje , which depend on their cohort and education. Lastly, consumers face a conditional
survival probability,

jeh ,

which depends on their age, education, and health. The maximum life span of

consumers is J. In the event of death, the consumers’s assets are distributed across the population. We
assume that these accidental bequests, Bj , are uniformly distributed across 50- to 60-year-olds in the model.

6

2.3

Health insurance and welfare programs

This section presents the diﬀerent types of health insurance in the economy. As noted earlier, health insurance
is available in the form of private health insurance and employer-provided health insurance. In addition,
the government provides health insurance through Medicare and Medicaid. Health insurance is used to
cover non-discretionary health care expenses, mjh , which vary with the consumer’s age and health status.
Throughout, we let

P,

E,

CARE ,

and

CAID

denote the coinsurance rate for private health insurance,

employer-provided health insurance, Medicare, and Medicaid, respectively. To illustrate, a value of 0.229
for

P

means that the consumer covers 22.9 percent of the health care expenses, and that private health

insurance covers the remaining 77.1 percent of the health care expenses.
Medicaid

Medicaid is a means-tested program that provides health insurance to income- and asset-poor

consumers. Consistent with the U.S. eligibility criteria, we model two ways to qualify for Medicaid. First,
consumers qualify under the categorical criterion if the sum of their gross income and interest earnings is
below a threshold, y CAT . Second, consumers qualify under the medically needy criterion if the sum of their
gross income and interest earnings net of out-of-pocket medical expenses is below a threshold, y M N , and
their assets are less than a threshold, aM N . As noted earlier, consumers who qualify for Medicaid in the
model choose whether to enroll in the program. Eligible consumers that choose to enroll, iCAID = 1, suﬀer
a utility cost .
Medicare

The government also provides health insurance in the form of Medicare. Unlike Medicaid,

Medicare is not a means-tested program, but covers a share 1

CARE

of health care expenses of all

consumers aged jr and older. Since Medicare has a positive coinsurance rate,

CARE

> 0, old consumers

can purchase private health insurance to further lower their out-of-pocket medical expenditure risk.
Emergency relief

The government runs a welfare program that combines institutional features of food

stamps, disability insurance, and medical relief for the poor (for brevity, referred to as Emergency Relief ).
To qualify for this program in the model, consumers have to forfeit all assets and work zero hours. In return,
the government covers all health care costs and guarantees a minimum consumption level, c. We assume
that consumers who choose to go on Emergency Relief suﬀer the same utility cost as those who enroll in
Medicaid, .
Private health insurance

Consumers can purchase private health insurance for the following period.

We assume that the premium for private health insurance is actuarially fair for each insurance pool, where

7

the insurance pool is given by consumers with the same age, education, and health (j, e, h). This gives the
following expression for the detrended private health insurance premium:

⇡jeh =

8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<

jeh (1

P )(1+gz )

R

1+r

mj 0 h0 Qj,e (h,dh0 )

if j < jr

1
(6)

>
>
>
>
>
>
:

jeh (1

P ) CARE (1+gz )

1+r

R

mj 0 h0 Qj,e (h,dh0 )

if j

jr

1,

where ⇡jeh is the expected medical expense for the insurance company, discounted by the interest rate.
Employer-provided health insurance

We assume that a fraction of consumers who are younger than

age jr work for an employer that provides health insurance. In that case, i = iE . The employer pools the
health care expenses of all their employees who do not choose to go on Emergency Relief. These costs are
then split evenly across the employees. That is, we model employer-provided health insurance as a pay-asyou-go system where current contributors pay for the health care expenses of current receivers. This gives
the following expression for the detrended employer-provided health insurance premium:

⇡E =

(1

E)

R

R

1F =0 mjh ({1, . . . , jr 1} ⇥ de ⇥ dh ⇥ d⌘ ⇥ da ⇥ {iE })
,
1`>0 ({1, . . . , jr 1} ⇥ de ⇥ dh ⇥ d⌘ ⇥ da ⇥ {iE })

(7)

where the indicator function 1F =0 in the numerator equals one for all consumers who do not choose to go on
Emergency Relief. We assume that consumers are not allowed to have both employer-provided and private
health insurance. Moreover, to alleviate the adverse selection problem associated with group insurance plans,
we assume that consumers who work for an employer that provides health insurance are not allowed to opt
out of employer-provided insurance. Lastly, motivated by the low take-up rate of employer-provided health
insurance among individuals who are older than 65 in the United States, we assume that consumers aged jr
and older do not receive employer-provided insurance in the model.

2.4

Government

The government is engaged in five activities in the model. First, as already noted, it provides public
health insurance in the form of Medicare and Medicaid. Second, it runs a welfare program that covers all
health care costs and guarantees a minimum consumption level. Third, it consumes goods. We assume that
government consumption per capita, ĝc , grows at the rate of technological progress. Hence, total government
R
consumption is given by Ĝc = ĝc
(ds). We include government consumption in the model to equalize the
size of the government sector in the model and the data, thereby ensuring that the tax burden in the model

8

is consistent with the data. Fourth, it supplies one-period risk-free debt, D̂, which by no arbitrage carries
the same return as physical capital in equilibrium. We assume that government debt grows at the rate
of technological progress. Lastly, it runs a Social Security program. In the United States, Social Security
payments are tied to an individual’s earnings history. To reduce computational costs, we abstract from this
in the model and assume that benefits depend only on the consumer’s education and cohort. In particular,
we assume that a cohort’s Social Security benefits depend on the wage rates that existed in the economy
during the last 35 years before that cohort reached retirement age. Let be denote the education-specific
Social Security replacement rate. Detrended Social Security benefits are given by

SSej =

be
35

jX
r 1

k=jr 35

wk

j
.
j k

(1 + gz )

(8)

This functional form implies that younger cohorts will receive higher Social Security benefits than older
cohorts because of productivity-induced wage growth. Note that the dependence on education enables us to
partially account for the fact that college-educated consumers claim higher Social Security benefits due to
higher lifetime labor earnings.
The government finances its expenditures on consumption, interest payments on debt, Medicare, Medicaid, Emergency Relief, and Social Security by means of three taxes: a consumption tax, ⌧c ; a capital income
tax on the net return on wealth, ⌧k ; and a proportional labor tax, ⌧` . Let GM denote total productivitydetrended government spending on Medicare, Medicaid, and Emergency Relief. We assume that consumers
on Emergency Relief do not pay taxes on their consumption. Moreover, we assume that the consumption
and capital income tax rates stay fixed and that the government balances its budget every period by means
of the labor tax. The labor tax rate then has to satisfy
⌧` wN + ⌧c

R

1F =0 c (s)

= GM + gc

R

R

(ds) + (1 + gz ) (1 + gn ) D0
R
(ds) + (1 + r) D + SSej
(ds|j jr ) ,

(ds) + ⌧k r

(a (s) + Bj )

(9)

where the indicator function 1F =0 equals one for all consumers who do not choose to go on Emergency Relief,
and where by

(ds|j

jr ) =

({jr , . . . , J} ⇥ de ⇥ dh ⇥ d⌘ ⇥ da ⇥ di) it is understood that the integral is

over all types s but restricted to agents of age j

2.5

jr .

Consumer problem

The consumer’s choice set depends on her current age and health insurance status. Throughout, we use the
word young to denote consumers less than age jr and old to denote consumers that are at least jr years old.
We start by presenting the problem of young consumers with private health insurance. This subsection also
9

defines the value of going on Emergency Relief. Next, we set up the problem faced by young consumers with
employer-provided health insurance. Lastly, we discuss the problem of old consumers.
2.5.1

Young consumers without employer-provided health insurance

Recall that a consumer’s type is given by s = (j, e, h, ⌘, a, i) , where j is age, e is educational level, h is
health status, ⌘ is the stochastic component of labor productivity, a is assets, and i is the consumer’s
health insurance status. Let V N E (s) denote the value of young consumers without employer-provided health
insurance. Similarly, let V F (s) denote the value of going on Emergency Relief. Young consumers without
employer insurance then solve the following problem:

V (s) = max

V N E (s) , V F (s) ,

(10)

where V N E (s) is given by
V N E (s)

=

s.t.

max

c,a0 ,`,i0 ,iCAID

U (c, `, e, iCAID ) +

jeh E⌘ 0 |⌘ Eh0 |jeh V

(1 + ⌧c ) c + (1 + gz ) a0 + mop + 1i0 =iP ⇡jeh = w (1

mop =

8
>
>
<1i=iP
>
>
:1i=iP

P mjh
P

+ (1

CAID mjh

(s0 )

⌧` ) ⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + (1 + r (1

if 1CAID (s, `) = 0

1i=iP ) mjh
+ (1

1i=iP )

⌧k )) (a + Bj )

CAID mjh

if 1CAID (s, `) = 1

` 2 {0, `p , . . . , `e }
c, a0

0

i0 2 {iP , iS }
iCAID 2 {0, 1} .

(11)

Consumers without employer-provided insurance choose how much to consume, c; how much to save, a0 ; how
many hours to work, `; and whether to purchase private health insurance for the following period, i0 . In
addition, consumers who qualify for Medicaid, 1CAID (s, `) = 1, choose whether to enroll in the program,
iCAID . As noted earlier, eligible consumers who choose to enroll, iCAID = 1, suﬀer a utility cost, . In
the event that a qualified consumer chooses to enroll in Medicaid, Medicaid will cover a share 1

CAID

of

the consumer’s out-of-pocket medical expenses, mop , which are given by mjh for self-insured consumers and
P mjh

for consumers who purchased private health insurance in the preceding period.
10

Consumers that choose to go on Emergency Relief have to forfeit all assets and work zero hours. In return,
the government covers all out-of-pocket health care expenses and provides the consumer with a minimum
consumption level, c. Recall that consumers who choose to go on Emergency Relief suﬀer the same utility
cost as those that enroll in Medicaid. The value of going on Emergency Relief is then given by
V F (s)

=

U (c, 0, e, 1)

s.t.

+

jeh E⌘ 0 |⌘ Eh0 |jeh V

(s0 )
(12)

a0 = 0
i 0 = iS .

2.5.2

Young consumers with employer-provided health insurance

Let V E (s) denote the value of being on employer-provided health insurance. Young consumers with employer
insurance solve the same problem as young consumers without employer insurance, with the exception that
the former group is not allowed to purchase private health insurance. Young consumers with employer
insurance solve the following problem:

V (s) = max

V E (s) , V F (s) ,

11

(13)

where for simplicity we have used the same notation as in Equation (10), even though the two V (s) are not
the same. The value of being on employer-provided health insurance, V E (s), is given by
V E (s)

=

s.t.

max

c,a0 ,`,iCAID

jeh E⌘ 0 |⌘ Eh0 |jeh V

U (c, `, e, iCAID ) +

(1 + ⌧c ) c + (1 + gz ) a0 + mop + 1`>0 ⇡E = w (1

mop =

`2

8
>
>
<
>
>
:

CAID mjh

8
>
>
<0, `p , . . . , `e
>
>
: `p , . . . , ` e

c, a0

⌧` ) ⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + (1 + r (1

⌧k )) (a + Bj )

if 1CAID (s, `) = 0

E mjh
E

(s0 )

if 1CAID (s, `) = 1

if sick
if healthy

0

i 0 = iE
iCAID 2 {0, 1} .

(14)

Out-of-pocket health care expenses are given by

E mjh

for consumers on employer insurance. All consumers

on employer insurance who work must pay a premium ⇡E . We assume that healthy consumers on employer
insurance have to supply a minimum of `p > 0 hours. Sick consumers, on the other hand, are free to
choose zero hours. In the model, consumers are considered sick if they have a catastrophic health state (see
Subsection 3.1.8 for details). Finally, the value of going on Emergency Relief is the same as above, with the
exception that consumers continue to be eligible for employer-provided insurance in the following period,
i 0 = iE .
2.5.3

Old consumers

Let V R (s) denote the value of an old consumer of type s. Old consumers solve the same problem as young
consumers without employer-provided health insurance:

V (s) = max

V R (s) , V F (s) ,

12

(15)

where V R (s) is given by
V R (s)

=

s.t.

max

c,a0 ,`,i0 ,iCAID

U (c, `, e, iCAID ) +

jeh E⌘ 0 |⌘ Eh0 |jeh V

(s0 )

c ej + w (1
(1 + ⌧c ) c + (1 + gz ) a0 + mop + 1i0 =iP ⇡jeh = SS
mop =

c ej
SS

8
>
>
<1i=iP
>
>
:1i=iP

P

CARE mjh

P

CARE

8
>
>
>
SSej
>
>
>
<
= SSej (1
>
>
>
>
>
>
:SSej (1

+ (1

CAID mjh

1i=iP )
+ (1

⌧` ) ⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + (1 + r (1

if 1CAID (s, `) = 0

CARE mjh

1i=iP )

⌧k )) a

CARE

CAID mjh

if 1CAID (s, `) = 1

if 0.5SSej + w⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + ra < y1
0.5⌧` )

if y1  0.5SSej + w⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + ra < y2

0.85⌧` )

if 0.5SSej + w⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + ra

y2

` 2 {0, `p , . . . , `e }
c, a0

0

i0 2 {iP , iS }
iCAID 2 {0, 1} .

(16)

Note that old consumers are allowed to work in the model. This is motivated by the observation that nearly
20 percent of individuals aged 65 and older still participate in the workforce. Old consumers receive transfers
c ej . To account for the fact that up to 50 percent
from the government in the form of Social Security, SS

of Social Security benefits are taxable if the individual’s income exceeds $25,000 and up to 85 percent of
benefits are taxable if the individual’s income exceeds $34,000 (see Social Security Administration, 2019), we
c ej . We let SS
c ej be equal to SSej if total income,
use the following formula for Social Security benefits, SS
c ej = SSej (1
0.5SSej + w⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + ra, is less than a threshold y1 ; SS

0.5⌧` ) if total income lies between

c ej = SSej (1
y1 and y2 ; and SS

0.85⌧` ) if total income exceeds y2 , where y1 and y2 correspond to $25,000

expenses are given by

for self-insured consumers and

and $34,000. Finally, old consumers are covered by Medicare. Accordingly, their out-of-pocket health care
CARE mjh

CARE

P mjh

for consumers that purchased

private health insurance in the preceding period. In addition, if the consumer is eligible for Medicaid and
chooses to enroll, a share 1

CAID

of her out-of-pocket health care expenses will be covered by Medicaid.

13

2.6

Definition of equilibrium

Given a consumption tax rate, ⌧c ; capital income tax rate, ⌧k ; government consumption, Gc ; government
debt, D; coinsurance rates
of types

1;

P,

E,

CARE ,

and

and initial conditions for capital K1 and the measure

CAID ;

an equilibrium in our model is a sequence of model variables such that:

1. Given prices, insurance premia, government policies, and accidental bequests, consumers maximize
utility subject to their constraints.
2. Factor prices satisfy marginal product pricing conditions:

r=✓

1 ↵

w = ✓1

↵

↵

✓

(1

N
K

◆1

↵)

✓

↵

K
N

◆↵

.

3. Goods, capital, and labor market clearing conditions are met:
C + Gc + M + (1 + gz ) (1 + gn ) K 0 = K ↵ (✓N )

1 ↵

+ (1

)K

R
Ii0 (s)=iP ⇡jeh (ds)
a0 (s) (ds)
K +D =
+
(1 + gn )
(1 + gz ) (1 + gn )
Z
N = ⌘✏je ⇠h ` (s) (ds) .
0

R

0

4. Accidental bequests are given by
Bj0

=

R

jeh ) a

0

(s) (ds)
,
(ds|j 2 {j1 , . . . , j2 })

(1
R
(1 + gn )

where j1 and j2 refer to 50- and 60-year-old consumers.
5. Insurance market clearing conditions are met.
6. Government policies satisfy the government budget constraint.
7. The aggregate law of motion for

is induced by the policy functions and the exogenous stochastic

processes for idiosyncratic risk.

14

3

Calibration

We calibrate the model in two steps. In the first step, we calibrate a set of parameters outside the model
equilibrium. In the second step, we assume that the initial balanced growth economy is 2005 and jointly
calibrate the remaining parameters to match moments in the U.S. economy in that year.

3.1

Parameters determined outside the model equilibrium

The following subsections discuss the parameters that are determined outside the model equilibrium. These
parameters are presented in Table 1.
3.1.1

Life cycle

A period in the model is 1 year. In our model, consumers enter the economy at age 20. We set the retirement
age, jr , to 46, implying that consumers start receiving Medicare and Social Security benefits at age 65. The
maximum life span, J, is set to 81, such that consumers live at most 100 years.
3.1.2

Risk aversion and indivisible labor

We set the risk aversion parameter, , to 3.964, which, together with the calibrated value for
3.2 below), implies an intertemporal elasticity of substitution,

uc
ucc c

=

(1

1
) 1,

(see Subsection

of 0.5. The discrete grid for

labor supply is ` 2 {0, `p , . . . , `f , . . . , `e }, where `p , `f , and `e refer to part-time, full-time, and extra time,
respectively. We set `f to 0.333 (that is, 37.3 hours per week given a time endowment of 112 hours per
week), `p to 50 percent of full-time, and `e to 150 percent of full-time. We use 5 equally spaced grid points
between `p and `e .
3.1.3

Cost of going to college

We capture some of the costs of going to college by means of a time cost, fe . Given that we define collegeeducated individuals in the data as individuals with at least a bachelor’s degree or a minimum of 4 years of
college, we assume that college-educated consumers in the model spend 4 years in college. In particular, we
assume that 20- to 23-year-olds with a college degree spend 50 percent of their time endowment each year
in college, which corresponds to a time cost of 0.500 in each of the first 4 years given our assumption of a
unit time endowment.

15

3.1.4

Technology

We set the growth rate of labor-augmenting technological progress, gz , to 0.020 to match average technology
growth over the post-war period. The capital share, ↵, is set to 0.360. Lastly, we set the depreciation rate,
, to 0.059, as in Castañeda et al (2003).
3.1.5

Idiosyncratic labor productivity

The idiosyncratic labor productivity in the model comprises the stochastic component, ⌘, the health-specific
stochastic component, ⇠h , and the age- and education-specific deterministic component, ✏je . The parameters
of the idiosyncratic stochastic process are calibrated jointly in equilibrium, as will be discussed in Subsection
3.2. For the health-specific stochastic component, we set ⇠h to 1 for consumers with low and high health
care expenses and to 0 for consumers with catastrophic expenses (see Subsection 3.1.8 for details about the
health care expenditure states). For the age- and education-specific deterministic component, we use the
estimates in Conesa et al (2018) (see the supplementary appendix for details).
3.1.6

Taxes

We compute eﬀective tax rates for consumption and capital income using OECD data on national accounts
and tax revenues, following the methodology pioneered by Mendoza et al (1994). We use the average value
between 2005 and 2009, which results in a consumption tax rate, ⌧c , of 4.7 percent and a capital income tax
rate, ⌧k , of 32.1 percent. As noted in Section 2.4, the labor tax rate, ⌧` , is set to balance the government
budget every period and hence is determined endogenously in equilibrium.
3.1.7

Health insurance

We use the following approach to compute the coinsurance rates for private insurance, employer-provided
insurance, and Medicaid. Using data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS), we first derive
each individual’s primary insurance provider, defined as the insurer that pays for the largest share of the
individual’s health care expenses. To illustrate, if Medicaid and private health insurance both cover a share
of the individual’s health care expenses, but Medicaid covers the largest share, then we let Medicaid be
defined as this individual’s primary insurance provider. Next, we pool all the individuals in the MEPS with
the same primary insurance provider and compute the average share of expenses paid by this insurance
provider. Let these values be denoted by ˜P , ˜E , and ˜CAID for individuals with private health insurance,
employer-provided health insurance, and Medicaid as their primary insurance provider, respectively. We
then let the coinsurance rate for private insurance, employer-provided insurance, and Medicaid be given by

16

P

=1

CARE ,

˜P ,

E

=1

˜E , and

CAID

=1

˜CAID . Finally, we set the coinsurance rate on Medicare,

to match the observation that about 50 percent of the elderly’s total health care expenses are covered

by Medicare in the United States.
We use the following approach to compute the Medicaid eligibility criteria. We first get data on statespecific Medicaid eligibility criteria from the Kaiser Family Foundation. This data is reported in the Online
Appendix. We then set the categorical income limit, y CAT , the medically needy income limit, y M N , and
the medically needy asset limit, aM N , to match the corresponding weighted average limits in the data, with
weights given by each state’s share of total health care expenses. To ensure a balanced growth path, we
assume that the Medicaid income and asset thresholds grow at the rate of technological progress, gz .
3.1.8

Health care expenses and transition probabilities

We split health care expenses into three categories: low, high, and catastrophic. To identify these expenses
in the MEPS, we first pool all health care expenses for each age and educational group (college and noncollege) and compute the 60th and 99.9th percentile. We then identify age- and education-specific low, high,
and catastrophic health care expenses as the average value between the 0 and 60th percentile, the 60th and
99.9th percentile, and the 99.9th and 100th percentile, respectively. Since the MEPS top-codes age at age
85, we extrapolate health care expenses for consumers aged 85 to 100 using a log-linear trend. Finally, for
each age group, we use the average value of health care expenses between college and non-college-educated
individuals.
The health transition matrix must guarantee that, for each age and educational group, 60.0, 39.9, and
0.1 percent of consumers have low, high, and catastrophic health care expenses, respectively. The following
discussion explains how we adjust the health transition probabilities. Using our MEPS sample, we first
estimate age-, health-, and education-specific health transition probabilities by running an ordered probit
regression of the next period’s health on current age, age-squared, education, health, and interaction terms.
Next, we iterate on the transition matrix until the probabilities guarantee that, for each age and educational
group, the correct percentage of consumers transition to each health state. That is, we iterate on the transition matrix, Qj,e (h, H), until xT Qj,e (h, H) = xT , where xT = [0.600, 0.399, 0.001] denotes the probability
distribution of consumers across health states. Note that this is an augmented version of the RAS method,
which is a method used to generate matrices that satisfy pre-specified row and column sum constraints.
3.1.9

Survival probabilities

In the model, survival probabilities vary with age, education, and health,

jeh .

These probabilities cannot be

derived directly from the MEPS, because the MEPS does not sample institutionalized individuals. Survival
17

probabilities estimated from the MEPS will therefore be upwardly biased. Moreover, the estimates are
not guaranteed to match the education survival premium, defined as the diﬀerence in age-specific survival
probabilities between college and non-college-educated individuals. Building on Attanasio et al. (2010), we
therefore adjust the estimated survival probabilities to match both the age-specific survival probabilities in
the data and the education survival premium. Details about how we adjust the survival probabilities are
given in the Online Appendix.
3.1.10

College attainment and growth rate of 20-year-old population

For college attainment, we use data from the U.S. Census Bureau. For the initial balanced growth economy,
we use the average value of the percentage of college graduates in the population aged 25 and older from
2005–2009. To compute the growth rate of the population of 20-year-olds, we use population estimates from
the United Nations’ World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision. This data set provides population
estimates for 5-year age groups (20–24, 25–29, etc.). We compute gn,t as the number of individuals aged
20–24 in period t divided by the number of individuals aged 20–24 in period t

1 and convert the 5-year

estimates to annual estimates. For the initial balanced growth economy, we use the average gn,t from 1980
to 2005.

3.2

Parameters determined jointly in equilibrium

Table 2 reports the parameters that are determined jointly in equilibrium. The parameters are calibrated
jointly to match key moments of the U.S. economy during the period 2005–2009 (for simplicity, we refer to
the period 2005–2009 as 2005 below).
We normalize ✓ such that GDP per capita is equal to 1 in 2005. The discount factor is calibrated to match
a capital-to-output ratio of 3, which is a common value used in the literature. We calibrate the consumption
share in the utility function, , such that average hours worked per employee are equal to full-time, 0.333.
We calibrate the Social Security replacement rates, be , to match average Social Security benefits across
individuals with and without a college degree. We calibrate the percentage of 20-year-olds that qualify
for employer-provided insurance to match the percentage of the working-age population with employerprovided insurance in the data. We calibrate government consumption, Gc , and government debt, D, to
match government consumption-to-output and government debt-to-output, respectively. We scale health
care expenditures to match a health care expenditure-to-GDP ratio of 15.2 percent. The consumption floor,
c, is calibrated to match the average annual Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits reported by
the United States Department of Agriculture. The utility cost of going on Medicaid and Emergency Relief,

18

, is calibrated such that the model matches the percentage of health care expenses covered by Medicaid.
To ensure a balanced growth path, we assume that the minimum consumption level and the utility cost of
going on Medicaid and Emergency Relief grow at the rate of technological progress.
Finally, we follow Castañeda et al. (2003) and calibrate the parameters of the stochastic labor productivity process to match the empirical earnings distribution in the United States. We choose a right-skewed
productivity shock process to match the top decile of the earnings distribution and calibrate the variance of
the process to match the dispersion observed in the data.

3.3

Comparing the Frisch elasticity in the model and the data

The extent to which the government has to increase the labor tax rate to finance the costs of an aging
population depends critically on the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. This follows because a higher labor
tax rate reduces incentives to work. The Frisch elasticity determines the responsiveness of hours worked to
changes in the post-tax wage rate—holding constant the marginal utility of wealth—and hence determines
how much consumers will reduce their labor supply in the event of a tax increase. We end this section by
comparing the Frisch elasticity of labor supply in the model with estimates from the literature.
We estimate the micro Frisch elasticity of labor supply for each consumer in the initial balanced growth
economy by computing the responsiveness of hours worked to a 5-percent transitory increase and to a 5percent transitory decrease in hourly earnings. We focus on responses to transitory shocks to minimize the
wealth eﬀects of the shocks. Moreover, we focus solely on changes along the intensive margin by excluding
consumers who do not work with or without the transitory shocks. The average Frisch elasticity for 20- to
64-year-old consumers in the model is 0.725 for the positive shock and 1.157 for the negative shock, both of
which are somewhat higher than the value of 0.5 commonly used in the literature (see, for example, Blundell
and MaCurdy 1999, Chetty et al. 2011, and Keane 2011 for reviews of this literature).
Figure 1 plots the estimated micro Frisch elasticities across all 20- to 64-year-old consumers in the model.
The solid black line plots the elasticities for the positive earnings shock, and the dotted red line plots the
elasticities for the negative shock. As illustrated in the graph, 85.4 percent of the consumers do not adjust
their hours worked in response to a 5-percent transitory increase in hourly earnings, because labor supply
is indivisible in the model. For 8.2 percent of the consumers, the elasticity is greater than 0 but no greater
than 4. This is due to the substitution eﬀect given our assumption about preferences (see Equation 5)
combined with the indivisibility of labor supply. Note that 0.8 percent of consumers respond to the positive
earnings shock by reducing hours worked, thereby leading to negative Frisch elasticities for these consumers.
This follows because some consumers reduce their hours worked in response to the positive earnings shock

19

to maintain eligibility for Medicaid. The positive earnings shock can also make consumers ineligible for
Medicaid even if they choose to work the minimum number of hours (part-time). These consumers may
respond to the positive earnings shock by significantly increasing their hours worked, thereby leading to high
positive Frisch elasticities. Accordingly, for 5.8 percent of the consumers, the elasticity is greater than 4.

4

Comparative statics: College attainment, fertility, and longevity

In this section, we perform comparative statics exercises with balanced growth paths for three channels that
contribute to an increase in the old age dependency ratio: increasing college attainment, decreasing fertility,
and increasing longevity. We assume that the initial balanced growth economy is 2005. For the comparative
statics, we use projections for the year 2100, discussed in the next subsection.

4.1

Projections of college attainment, fertility, and longevity for 2100

College attainment, as measured by the percentage of people 25 years and older with a college degree, has
increased continuously in the United States since 1960. This can be seen from the left panel of Figure 2,
which shows that the share of the population 25 years and older with a college degree increased from 9
to 31 percent between 1960 and 2010. Given this observation, we project college attainment for 2100 by
first estimating a linear trend for the percentage of the population aged 25 and older with a college degree
from 1960 to 2010. We then extrapolate this trend to 2100 and assume that it stays fixed in the balanced
growth path after that. The comparison between the data and the regression line between 1960 and 2010
and the extrapolated trend until 2100 is illustrated in the left panel of Figure 2. As illustrated in the graph,
if the trend in college attainment continues, then the percentage of the population with a college degree will
increase from 29 percent in 2005 to 70 percent in 2100. We view the 2100 projection for college attainment
as an upper bound and perform comparative statics for diﬀerent levels of college attainment. Although our
projections are likely to provide an upper bound, they are consistent with recent trends in college enrollment
rates, especially among women. In particular, our projected trend for college attainment implies that 41
percent of 20-year-old consumers in the model will be enrolled in college in 2015. This is consistent with
recent data from the National Center for Education Statistics, which show that more than 40 percent of 18to 24-year-olds, and approximately 45 percent of 18- to 24-year-old women, are currently enrolled in college.
Our projection that college attainment will continue to increase in the United States is also consistent with
Eckstein et al (2019). They develop a life cycle model to decompose how much of the increase in female
college attainment—from less than 10 percent in 1960 to almost 40 percent in 2010, see the right panel of
Figure 2—can be explained by changing labor and marriage market conditions versus changing preferences.
20

They find that a large share of the increase in female college attainment is generated by women whose
mothers went to college, which gives them an enhanced taste for college. Accordingly, they argue that it
is likely that future cohorts of women will continue to have higher college attendance rates simply because
their mothers were more educated.
In our model, changes in fertility rates are captured through changes in the population growth rate of
20-year-olds. To obtain estimates for the population growth rate of 20-year-olds in 2100, we use population
forecasts for the years 2095 and 2100 from the United Nations’ World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision, the same data set used for the 2005 estimate. The U.N. forecasts are given for alternative simulations
based on diﬀerent assumptions about fertility, mortality, and migration. We use the median forecasts for
fertility and mortality. Furthermore, because our model does not feature migration, we use the forecasts that
are based on the assumption of zero migration. Table 3, which reports the value for college attainment and
fertility in the initial balanced growth path and the corresponding projected values for 2100, shows that the
population growth rate of 20-year-olds is projected to decrease from 0.30 percent to -0.05 percent by 2100.
In our model, increased longevity is captured through increasing age-specific survival probabilities. For
2005, we use the age-, education-, and health-specific survival probabilities discussed in Subsection 3.1.9.
For the 2100 projection, we first compute age-specific survival probabilities for the years 2005 and 2100
using the U.N. data. We then calculate the factor by which we need to increase the age-specific survival
probabilities in 2005 to match the corresponding estimates in 2100. Finally, we scale the age-, education-,
and health-specific 2005 survival probabilities by our scaling factor. Note that our approach relies on the
assumption that, for each age, the health and education survival premia discussed in Subsection 3.1.9 are
the same in 2100 as in 2005. The derived survival probabilities are depicted in Figure 3. The left panel of
Figure 3 plots the age- and health-specific survival probabilities in 2005 (solid lines) and 2100 (dashed lines)
for non-college-educated consumers, and the right panel of Figure 3 plots the corresponding probabilities
for college-educated consumers. Here, low, high, and catastrophic refer to consumers with low, high, and
catastrophic health care expenses, as discussed in Subsection 3.1.8.

4.2

Individual implications of college attainment, fertility, and longevity

We perform comparative statics exercises for diﬀerent levels of the 2100 projections for college attainment,
fertility, and longevity. To illustrate, a value of 0 for fertility refers to the case of gn = gn,2005 , a value of
0.5 refers to the case of gn = 0.5gn,2005 + 0.5gn,2100 , and a value of 1 refers to the case of gn = gn,2100 . In
the tables, the three cases are referred to as increased college attainment, decreased fertility, and increased
longevity.

21

We start by studying the implications for the old age dependency ratio. Table 4 shows that all three
channels lead to a higher old age dependency ratio. Increasing college attainment increases the old age
dependency ratio by 3.5 percentage points because college graduates have higher life expectancy than noncollege graduates. Decreasing fertility increases the old age dependency ratio by 4.6 percentage points because
it leads to relatively fewer young consumers. Lastly, increasing longevity increases the old age dependency
ratio by 16.2 percentage points because it leads to relatively more older consumers.
Although all three channels contribute to a higher old age dependency ratio, they have diﬀerent fiscal
implications. In particular, as shown in Table 4, we find that increasing college attainment allows the
government to reduce the labor tax rate by 7.1 percentage points, whereas decreasing fertility and increasing
longevity require the government to increase the labor tax rate by 3.6 and 6.1 percentage points, respectively.
Increasing college attainment allows the government to reduce the labor tax rate for several reasons. First,
and most importantly, since college-educated consumers have higher labor productivity than non-collegeeducated consumers, an increase in college attainment leads to an economy with more productive workers.
Second, hours worked per capita and labor force participation rates among both workers between the ages
of 20 and 64 and those aged 65 and older are higher in the economy with higher college attainment. As
reported in Table 4, these eﬀects contribute to an increase in eﬀective labor per capita. Higher eﬀective
labor per capita, in turn, leads to higher government revenues from labor taxation, thereby allowing the
government to reduce the labor tax rate.
Third, college graduates are less likely to enroll in Medicaid and Emergency Relief. Increasing college
attainment thus lowers government spending on these programs, thereby contributing to a lower labor tax
rate. This can be seen from Table 5, which shows how the health care expenditure distribution by insurance
provider changes as we increase college attainment, decrease fertility, and increase longevity. In particular, the
table shows that increasing college attainment lowers the share of health care expenses covered by Medicaid
from 15.4 to 11.2 percent and lowers the share of health care expenses covered by Emergency Relief from
1.9 to 1.6 percent. This is because college graduates, on average, have both higher earnings and wealth.
Hence, in the model, enrolling in Medicaid and Emergency Relief is more costly for them. Table 6 shows that
the reduction in government spending on Medicaid and Emergency Relief following the increase in college
attainment contributes to lower public health care spending per capita. In contrast, decreasing fertility and
increasing longevity lead to higher spending on Medicaid and Emergency Relief, thereby increasing public
health care spending per capita.
A fourth reason why higher college attainment allows the government to reduce the labor tax rate is that
higher college attainment leads to higher wages, thereby further increasing government revenues from labor
taxation. This is reported in Table 6. The wage rate goes up because the increase in college attainment
22

leads to more capital per capita relative to eﬀective labor per capita. This outcome is driven by the fact
that college-educated consumers save more than non-college-educated consumers. College graduates save
more because they have higher labor earnings, higher life expectancy, and a stronger precautionary savings
motive, because enrolling in Medicaid and Emergency Relief is more costly for them.
Fifth, the increase in capital accumulation due to higher college attainment leads to a 1.3 percentage
point reduction in the interest rate. Lower interest rates reduce interest payments on government debt,
which accounts for 6.8 percent of total government spending in the initial balanced growth economy. As
shown in Table 6, we find that higher college attainment reduces interest payments on government debt per
capita by 36.9 percent.
Finally, as shown in Table 6, higher college attainment leads to both higher consumption tax revenues
per capita and higher capital income tax revenues per capita. This follows because college graduates both
consume and save more than non-college graduates. In contrast, decreasing fertility and increasing longevity
lead to lower government revenues from consumption and capital income taxation.
The forces that we have mentioned so far contribute to lower labor taxes, but there are forces that move
in the opposite direction. In particular, increasing college attainment leads to higher spending on Medicare.
This follows because higher college attainment increases average life expectancy in the population. As
reported in Table 5, we find that higher college attainment increases the share of total health care expenses
covered by Medicare from 25.0 to 26.4 percent. By comparison, we find that the projected increase in
longevity increases the share of total health care expenses covered by Medicare from 25.0 to 30.7 percent.
Moreover, as reported in Table 6, we find that higher college attainment increases Social Security spending
per capita by 23.5 percent. This follows because college-educated consumers have higher life expectancy than
non-college-educated consumers and because college graduates claim higher Social Security benefits due to
higher lifetime labor earnings. Consequently, higher spending on Medicare and Social Security partially
oﬀset the reduction in the labor tax rate brought about by higher college attainment.
The Online Appendix reports the results from an alternative exercise where we change the projection for
fertility to match the projected increase in the old age dependency ratio due to increasing college attainment
(from 35.3 to 38.8 percent). Similarly, we change the projection for longevity to match the projected increase
in the old age dependency ratio due to increasing college attainment. This exercise allows us to compare
the implications of the three channels of aging when all channels lead to the same increase in the old
age dependency ratio. In this case, we find that decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require the
government to increase the labor tax rate by 2.7 and 1.2 percentage points, respectively. Further details are
given in the Online Appendix.

23

4.3

Joint implications of college attainment, fertility, and longevity

We now study the joint implications of increasing college attainment, decreasing fertility, and increasing
longevity. In particular, we use the 2100 projections for fertility and longevity but vary the increase in
college attainment from 0 to 100 percent of its projected increase. The results are reported in Table 7.
The first column reports the results when we only decrease fertility and increase longevity (that is, we set
college attainment equal to its value in 2005). The last two columns report the results when we increase
college attainment to 50 percent and 100 percent of its projected increase, respectively. To illustrate, Table
7 shows that the combination of decreasing fertility and increasing longevity leads to an increase in the old
age dependency ratio from 35.3 to 58.7 percent. The final column of Table 7 shows that all three channels
of aging lead to an increase in the old age dependency ratio from 35.3 to 64.0 percent if college attainment
increases to its projected value in 2100 (that is, if the percentage of the population aged 25 and older with
a college degree increases to 70 percent).
The first part of Table 7, which reports the old age dependency ratio, shows that the joint eﬀect of
college attainment, fertility, and longevity is greater than the sum of the individual eﬀects (64.0

35.3 =

28.7 > 24.3 = 3.5 + 4.6 + 16.2). Hence, higher college attainment not only increases the old age dependency
ratio but also amplifies the increase in the old age dependency ratio brought about by decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity. To understand this amplification eﬀect, consider the following example. Let
c

and

nc

denote the survival probability of college-educated and non-college-educated consumers, and

let !c denote the mass of college-educated consumers. The average survival probability is then given by
!c

c

+ (1

!c )

nc .

Next, let ⇤ denote the factor by which we increase survival probabilities to account

for increased longevity, and let ⇤col denote the corresponding factor by which we increase the share of
college-educated consumers to account for increased college attainment. The average survival probability
in the economy after we account for increased longevity and increased college attainment is then given by
⇤ (⇤col !c

c

+ (1

⇤col !c )

nc ) .

Here, ⇤

> 1 leads mechanically to a higher old age dependency ratio

because it increases life expectancy, thereby leading to relatively more old consumers. Similarly, ⇤col > 1
leads mechanically to a higher old age dependency ratio because college-educated consumers have higher life
expectancy than non-college educated consumers,

c

>

nc .

Moreover, the interaction between increased

college attainment and increased longevity further increases the old age dependency ratio. This follows from
the interaction between ⇤

and ⇤col in the expression for the average survival probability, which implies

that the increase in the average survival probability—and therefore the increase in the old age dependency
ratio—due to increased longevity, ⇤ , will be higher the higher the increase in college attainment, ⇤col .
We then study the implications for prices. We find that higher college attainment not only reduces the

24

interest rate but also amplifies the reduction in the interest rate due to decreasing fertility and increasing
longevity. Analogously, higher college attainment amplifies the increase in the wage rate brought about
by the other channels. These interaction eﬀects have implications for government spending. Recall from
Table 6 that the three channels lead to a combined increase in Social Security spending per capita of 59.7
percent. Table 7 shows that the interaction eﬀects between the three channels of aging lead to an additional
9.5 percentage point increase in Social Security spending per capita. This is partially due to the amplified
increase in the wage rate. Table 7 also shows that the reduction in the interest rate due to higher college
attainment and increased longevity leads to a 62.8 percent reduction in interest payments on government
debt per capita.
Next, we study the implications for consumption tax revenues per capita and capital income tax revenues
per capita. Table 7 shows that consumption tax revenues per capita are higher in the model with all
three channels of aging when college attainment is equal to its 2100 projected value. This shows that
the increase in consumption tax revenues due to higher college attainment more than oﬀsets the reduction
in consumption tax revenues caused by decreasing fertility and increasing longevity. Recall from Table 6
that higher college attainment increases capital income tax revenues per capita, whereas decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity reduce capital income tax revenues per capita. Our results show that adding
higher college attainment to the model with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity leads to a further
reduction in capital income tax revenues per capita. This follows because higher college attainment amplifies
the reduction in the interest rate caused by decreasing fertility and increasing longevity, which in turn lowers
government revenues from capital income taxation.
We find that decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require the government to increase the average
labor tax rate from 33.5 to 47.1 percent. As shown in Table 7, adding increasing college attainment to this
model lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate by 12.0 percentage points. Consequently, we find
that all three channels of aging require the government to increase the average labor tax rate from 33.5 to
35.1 percent if college attainment increases to its projected value in 2100.

4.4

General equilibrium eﬀects of college attainment, fertility, and longevity

Next, we compare the results from the benchmark closed economy with the corresponding results from a
small open economy with a constant and exogenous interest rate. By construction, the detrended wage rate
is also constant in the small open economy. All other variables, such as the labor tax rate and the employerprovided insurance premium, are determined endogenously in equilibrium. We do this not because we think
the United States is well modeled as a small open economy, but because it enables us to quantify the general

25

equilibrium eﬀects of higher wages and lower interest rates brought about by higher capital accumulation.
We study the tax implications of introducing higher college attainment into two diﬀerent versions of the
model with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity: one, our benchmark general equilibrium model; and
the other, the small open economy model with constant wages and interest rate. We continue to use the
2100 projections for fertility and longevity but vary the increase in college attainment from 0 to 100 percent
of its projected increase. We compare the change in tax revenues and the resulting change in the labor tax
rate required to balance the government budget. These results are reported in Table 8.
We find that the capital stock increases in both the general equilibrium model and the small open
economy model. In the general equilibrium model, however, the increase in the capital stock also leads to
higher wages and lower interest rates. Higher wages lead to higher earnings, not only because of the direct
eﬀect of higher wages but also because higher wages induce consumers to work more. Consequently, we find
that eﬀective labor per capita increases by 8.0 percent when we introduce all three channels of aging in the
general equilibrium model but increases by 4.7 percent in the small open economy model. Higher wages and
higher eﬀective labor per capita contribute to higher labor income tax revenues.
Higher wages, however, also lead to higher Social Security benefits and therefore higher government
expenditures. More importantly, the reduction in the interest rate in the general equilibrium model lowers
government revenues from capital income taxation. Accordingly, we find that the three channels of aging
reduce capital income tax revenues per capita by 13.1 percent in the general equilibrium model but increase
capital income tax revenues per capita by 89.4 percent in the small open economy model. As a result, we find
that the labor tax rate required to balance the government budget is higher under general equilibrium. In
particular, we find that the three channels of aging require the government to increase the average labor tax
rate by 1.6 percentage points in the general equilibrium model if college attainment increases to its projected
value in 2100. In contrast, we find that the three channels of aging allow the government to reduce the
average labor tax rate by 6.0 percentage points in the small open economy model. Note that the reduction
in the labor tax rate in the small open economy model is partially due to higher consumption tax revenues
per capita in the small open economy model than in the general equilibrium model. This follows because
lower labor tax rates in the small open economy model facilitate higher consumption, thereby leading to
higher consumption tax revenues per capita.

4.5

Implications for welfare

Lastly, we study the welfare implications of increasing college attainment. To do this, we first solve for
two demographic transitions: one transition where we decrease fertility and increase longevity, and another

26

transition where we introduce all three channels of aging. We then quantify how much better oﬀ consumers
are in the demographic transition with increasing college attainment by comparing the welfare implications
of these two transitions. We use the 2100 projections for college attainment, fertility, and longevity that
were discussed in Subsection 4.1 and interpolate to obtain values between 2005 and 2100. Although we
assume that college attainment, fertility, and longevity do not change after 2100, the economy will not be
on a balanced growth path in 2100. We therefore solve for a transition that lasts until 2210.
Let Vtf +l (s) denote the value of a consumer of type s that enters the transition with decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity in period t of the transition. Similarly, let Vtall (s) denote the value of a consumer
of type s that enters the transition with all three channels of aging in period t of the transition. Following
Conesa et al. (2018), we quantify the welfare implications of increasing college attainment by means of wealth
equivalent variation (WEV). To do this, we first compute the dollar value of how much wealth must change
in the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity to make the consumer weakly better oﬀ in
this transition than in the transition with all three channels of aging. Given that consumers are not allowed
to borrow, there exists a lower bound for this change in wealth. For each type s, we therefore compute the
minimum change in wealth, W EV (s), that satisfies the following constraints:
min

W EV (s)

s.t.

Vtf +l (j, e, h, ⌘, a + W EV (s) , i)
a + W EV (s)

Vtall (j, e, h, ⌘, a, i)

(17)

0.

We then compute the average welfare eﬀect of increasing college attainment by integrating across consumers:

W EV =

Z

W EV (s)

(ds) .

(18)

A key advantage of WEV compared with the more commonly used consumption equivalent variation (CEV)
is that the former allows for aggregation across consumers, which in turn enables us to compute the average
welfare implications of increasing college attainment. Moreover, unlike CEV, WEV takes into account that
consumers re-optimize their decisions following the wealth transfer.
We start by studying the welfare implications for 20-year-old consumers under the veil of ignorance
who enter the economy in period t of the transition. By “veil of ignorance”, we mean that we focus on
consumers who have zero assets and for whom the education type (college or non-college), but not the
stochastic components of productivity and health, have been revealed. For simplicity, we refer to the welfare
implications for 20-year-old consumers under the veil of ignorance as the ex-ante welfare implications. We
report the welfare results from the productivity-detrended models. Figure 4 plots the one-time transfer
27

required to make the consumer who enters the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity
in year t indiﬀerent between entering that transition and entering the transition with all three channels
of aging. We find that non-college-educated consumers who enter the transition with decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity in 2010 require a one-time transfer equivalent to 2.0 percent of GDP per capita to
be indiﬀerent between the two transitions. The corresponding transfer required to make college-educated
consumers indiﬀerent between the two transitions is 0.6 percent of GDP per capita. This shows that higher
college attainment increases welfare for both college and non-college educated consumers. Moreover, the
welfare gains from increasing college attainment further increase over the transition. To illustrate, we
find that non-college-educated consumers who enter the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing
longevity in 2100 require a one-time transfer equivalent to 160.0 percent of GDP per capita to be indiﬀerent
between the two transitions, whereas a transfer of 18.1 percent of GDP per capita is required to make
college-educated consumers indiﬀerent between the two transitions.
So far we have examined the welfare implications of increasing college attainment for unborn consumers
under the veil of ignorance. Next, we study the welfare implications for the current cohort, which we refer to
as the ex-post welfare implications of increasing college attainment. In particular, we compute the one-time
transfer required to make a consumer of type s in the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing
longevity indiﬀerent between that transition and the transition with all three channels of aging. Figure 5
plots the ex-post welfare implications by age and type of college. We find that higher college attainment
increases average welfare of the current cohort but that the welfare gains are heterogeneous across both
age groups and educational types. As illustrated in Figure 5, we find that 25-year-old college graduates in
the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require a one-time transfer equivalent to 4.6
percent of GDP per capita to be indiﬀerent between that transition and the transition with all three channels
of aging. The corresponding transfer required to make 25-year-old non-college graduates indiﬀerent between
the two transitions is 2.8 percent of GDP per capita. The increase in average welfare due to higher college
attainment is decreasing with age. This follows because older consumers are less aﬀected by the reduction in
the labor tax rate brought about by higher college attainment because of their lower labor force participation
rate compared to younger consumers. Moreover, it takes time for interest rates and wage rates to adjust (see
the Online Appendix for details). As a result, older consumers are less aﬀected by the general equilibrium
eﬀects brought about by increasing college attainment. Consequently, we find that consumers aged 65 and
older in the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require a one-time transfer of less
than 1 percent of GDP per capita to be indiﬀerent between the two transitions.

28

4.6

Sensitivity analysis

We have conducted a wide range of sensitivity analyses and we find that our main results are robust. That
is, the findings that higher college attainment lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate due to
decreasing fertility and increasing longevity, and that the fiscal implications of higher college attainment
depend critically on general equilibrium eﬀects, are robust to alternative parameterizations of the model.
We limit our discussion here to three robustness checks. First, we study the eﬀects of adding a labor force
participation cost to better match the observed labor force participation rates in the data. Then we study
the eﬀects of removing government debt in the model. Finally, we study the eﬀects of introducing progressive
income taxes in the model. In all cases, we recalibrate the model to match the same targets as described in
Section 3. Table 9 summarizes the implications of introducing decreasing fertility and increasing longevity
(f+l) and of introducing all three channels of aging (all) under diﬀerent parameterizations of the model. We
use the 2100 projection for college attainment in the model with all three channels of aging.
Labor force participation cost

The benchmark model overestimates the age-specific labor force par-

ticipation rates in the data. Data from the Current Population Survey show that 79 percent of 20- to
64-year-olds and 16 percent of individuals aged 65 and older participated in the labor force between 2005
and 2009. The corresponding labor force participation rates in the benchmark model are 90 and 35 percent.
This is partially because the model abstracts from the fixed time costs of working and the time loss due to
sickness, both of which have been shown to aﬀect labor force participation decisions. By overestimating the
number of workers who contribute by paying labor taxes, the model underestimates the labor tax burden
in the economy. To address this, we add a utility cost of working in the model. All consumers who choose
to participate in the labor force suﬀer a utility cost. We calibrate this cost to match average labor force
participation rates for workers aged 20 and older between 2005 and 2009. To ensure a balanced growth path,
we assume that the utility cost grows at the rate of technological progress. A comparison of the labor force
participation rate in the model and the data is given in Figure 6. As illustrated in the graph, the model
closely matches the observed labor force participation rates of 40+ year-olds but continues to overestimate
the labor force participation rates of younger consumers. This is partially because of the assumption that
consumers enter the economy with zero assets.
Table 9 shows that the three channels of aging lead to similar changes in Social Security spending per
capita, public health care spending per capita, and interest payments on government debt per capita in the
model with and without labor force participation costs. Moreover, we find that the three channels of aging
lead to higher eﬀective labor per capita and higher capital per capita in both models, although the increase is
higher in the benchmark model. Our results show that the increase in consumption tax revenues per capita
29

is 5.4 percentage points higher in the benchmark model. Both models, however, have similar implications for
capital income tax revenues per capita. Finally, we find that both models have comparable implications for
the labor tax rate. In particular, increasing college attainment lowers the required increase in the labor tax
rate due to decreasing fertility and increasing longevity from 13.6 to 1.6 percentage points in the benchmark
model and from 13.3 to 3.5 percentage points in the model with labor force participation costs.
No government debt Recall that interest payments on government debt account for 6.8 percent of total
government spending in the initial balanced growth path of the benchmark model and that the reduction in
the interest rate due to the three channels of aging leads to a 62.8 percent reduction in interest payments
on government debt per capita. Lower interest payments on government debt thus partially mitigate the
negative fiscal implications of aging. To better understand how government debt aﬀects the fiscal implications
of aging, we next study an alternative parameterization of the model with no government debt.
The reduction in government spending caused by lower interest payments on government debt per capita
lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate due to decreasing fertility and increasing longevity. Table
9 shows that the government has to increase the labor tax rate by 13.6 percentage points in the benchmark
model with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity but by 14.5 percentage points in the model with
no government debt. Moreover, the reduction in the labor tax rate due to increasing college attainment
is larger in the benchmark model. We find that increasing college attainment lowers the required increase
in the labor tax rate due to decreasing fertility and increasing longevity by 12.0 percentage points in the
benchmark model and by 8.8 percentage points in the model with no government debt. The higher increase
in the labor tax rate in the model with no government debt reduces incentives to work. Consequently, we
find that the three channels of aging lead to an additional 3.3 percentage point increase in eﬀective labor
per capita in the benchmark model compared with the model with no government debt. Similarly, we find
that the three channels of aging lead to an additional 18.3 percentage point increase in capital per capita
in the benchmark model. The relatively higher increase in capital per capita compared with eﬀective labor
per capita leads to an additional 3.7 percentage point increase in the wage rate and to an additional 0.5
percentage point reduction in the interest rate in the benchmark model compared with the model with no
government debt. These price eﬀects have implications for government tax revenues. On the one hand,
the higher increase in the wage rate in the benchmark model leads to a larger increase in consumption and
therefore a higher increase in consumption tax revenues per capita. On the other hand, the larger reduction
in the interest rate in the benchmark model has negative implications for capital income tax revenues per
capita, which decline by 13.1 percent in the benchmark model when we introduce all three channels of aging
but decline by 2.3 percent in the model with no government debt.
30

Progressive income taxes The benchmark model allows for linear capital income taxes, linear consumption taxes, and linear labor income taxes. This subsection instead considers an alternative tax system with
linear consumption taxes and progressive income taxes. In particular, we use the tax function studied by
Heathcote et al. (2017):
T (y) = y

y1

⌧

,

(19)

where y = SSej + w⌘⇠ h ✏je ` + ra is income, ⌧ determines the degree of progressivity of the tax system, and
determines the average level of taxation in the economy. Heathcote et al. (2017) show that a value of 0.181
for ⌧ closely matches the actual tax and transfer system in the United States. We use their value for ⌧ and
adjust

each period to balance the government budget.

We find that the increase in Social Security spending per capita due to the three channels of aging
is comparable in the benchmark model and the model with progressive income taxes. Moreover, in both
models, we find that the three channels of aging lead to lower public health care spending per capita and
lower interest payments on government debt per capita, although the reductions are larger in the benchmark
model. Similarly, we find that eﬀective labor per capita and capital per capita increase in both models but
that the increase is lower in the model with progressive income taxes. The increase in the wage rate and the
reduction in the interest rate due to the three channels of aging is therefore higher in the benchmark model.
Lastly, we find that decreasing fertility and increasing longevity increase the average income tax rate from
31.0 to 35.0 percent in the model with progressive income taxes. Introducing higher college attainment in
this model allows the government to reduce the average income tax rate in the economy by 0.2 percentage
points if college attainment increases to its projected value in 2100. Consequently, whereas higher college
attainment lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate in the benchmark model, we find that it more
than oﬀsets the negative fiscal implications of decreasing fertility and increasing longevity in the model with
progressive income taxes.

5

Conclusion

The old age dependency ratio will increase over the course of the 21st century because of decreasing fertility
rates and increasing longevity. We have shown that increasing college attainment is another important driver
of the increase in the old age dependency ratio because college graduates have higher life expectancy than noncollege graduates. Using a general equilibrium overlapping generations model with heterogeneous consumers,
we have shown that the macroeconomic implications of increasing college attainment are diﬀerent from those
of decreasing fertility and increasing longevity. Most importantly, decreasing fertility and increasing longevity

31

require the government to increase labor taxes, whereas increasing college attainment allows the government
to reduce labor taxes. This follows because increasing college attainment leads to a more productive labor
force, lower government spending on Medicaid and Emergency Relief, higher revenues from consumption
taxation, capital income taxation, and labor income taxation, and lower interest payments on government
debt per capita.
We have also studied the joint fiscal implications of the three channels of aging. In particular, we studied
the fiscal implications of introducing increasing college attainment into the model with decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity. We showed that decreasing fertility and increasing longevity require the government
to increase the average labor tax rate from 33.5 to 47.1 percent by 2100. Adding increasing college attainment
to this model lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate by 12.0 percentage points if college attainment
increases to its projected value in 2100. Consequently, we have shown that all three channels of aging require
the government to increase the average labor tax rate from 33.5 to 35.1 percent.
We have also shown that the fiscal implications of aging depend critically on general equilibrium eﬀects.
We have shown that the reduction in the interest rate under general equilibrium reduces capital income tax
revenues per capita. Consequently, the labor tax rate required to balance the government budget is higher
under general equilibrium than in a small open economy model with a constant interest rate. In particular,
whereas higher college attainment lowers the required increase in the labor tax rate due to decreasing fertility
and increasing longevity by 12.0 percentage points under general equilibrium, we find that the three channels
of aging allow the government to reduce the labor tax rate by 6.0 percentage points in the small open economy
model.
Finally, we have studied the implications for welfare by comparing the results from two demographic
transitions: one where we only decrease fertility and increase longevity; and another where we introduce
all three channels of aging. We have shown that higher college attainment leads to welfare gains for both
current and future cohorts and that the welfare gains are increasing over time.
We think a worthwhile extension of our analysis would be to incorporate tuition costs and student debt in
the model and to endogenize college attainment. Introducing student debt in the model is not simple because
student loans are a form of debt that cannot be defaulted on in the United States. With idiosyncratic risk,
consumers in the model might either choose to or be forced to default on student debt. This implies that
student debt would have a diﬀerent interest rate than other borrowing or lending in the model and that we
would have to add an additional state variable for college-educated consumers (that is, their student debt).
A complete analysis of educational choice would also involve benevolent parents and inter vivos bequests.
We think this is a promising direction for future research.

32

References
Attanasio, O., S. Kitao, and G. L. Violante (2010), “Financing Medicare: A general equilibrium analysis,”
in J. B. Shoven (ed.), Demography and the Economy (333–366), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blundell, R., and T. MaCurdy (1999), “Labor supply: A review of alternative approaches,” in O. Ashenfelter
and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics (1559–1695), Volume 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Castañeda, A., J. Díaz-Giménez, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull (2003), “Accounting for the U.S. earnings and wealth
inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 111: 818–857.
Chetty, R., A. Guren, D. Manoli, and A. Weber (2011), “Are micro and macro labor supply elasticities
consistent? A review of evidence on the intensive and extensive margins,” American Economic Review:
Papers & Proceedings, 101: 471–475.
Conesa, J. C., D. Costa, P. Kamali, T. J. Kehoe, V. M. Nygaard, G. Raveendranathan, and A. Saxena
(2018), “Macroeconomic eﬀects of Medicare,” Journal of the Economics of Ageing, 11: 27–40.
Conesa, J. C., and D. Krueger (1999), “Social Security reform with heterogeneous agents,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2: 757–795.
De Nardi, M., E. French, and J. B. Jones (2010), “Why do the elderly save? The role of medical expenses,”
Journal of Political Economy, 118: 39–75.
De Nardi, M., S. İmrohoroğlu, and T. J. Sargent (1999), “Projected U.S. demographics and Social Security,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 2: 575–615.
Eckstein, Z., M. Keane, and O. Lifshitz (2019), “Career and family decisions: Cohorts born 1935–1975,”
Econometrica, 87: 217–253.
Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2017), “Optimal tax progressivity: An analytical framework” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132: 1693–1754.
Hubbard, R. G., J. Skinner, and S. P. Zeldes (1994), “The importance of precautionary motives in explaining
individual and aggregate saving,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 40: 59–125.
Jung, J., and C. Tran (2016), “Market ineﬃciency, insurance mandate and welfare: U.S. health care reform
2010,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 20: 132–159.
Jung, J., C. Tran, and M. Chambers (2017), “Aging and health financing in the U.S.: A general equilibrium
analysis,” European Economic Review, 100: 428–462.
Keane, M. P. (2011), “Labor supply and taxes: A survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49: 961–1075.
33

Kopecky, K. A., and T. Koreshkova (2014), “The impact of medical and nursing home expenses on savings,”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6: 29–72.
Kotlikoﬀ, L. J., K. Smetters, and J. Walliser (2007), “Mitigating America’s demographic dilemma by prefunding social security,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54: 247–266.
Mendoza, E. G., A. Razin, and L. L. Tesar (1994), “Eﬀective tax rates in macroeconomics: Cross-country
estimates of tax rates on factor incomes and consumption,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 34: 297–323.
Palumbo, M. G. (1999), “Uncertain medical expenses and precautionary saving near the end of the life cycle,”
Review of Economic Studies, 66: 395–421.
Pashchenko, S., and P. Porapakkarm (2013), “Quantitative analysis of health insurance reform: Separating
regulation from redistribution,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 16: 383–404.
Social Security Administration (2019), “Retirement benefits,” Social Security Administration, Publication
No. 05-10035.

34

Table 1: Parameters determined outside the model equilibrium
Parameter
Life cycle
J
jr

Description

Maximum life span
Retirement age

100 years
65 years

Preferences, indivisible labor, and cost of going to college
Risk aversion parameter
`p , . . . , `f , . . . , `e Indivisible labor supply grid
fe
Time cost of going to college
Technology
gz
↵

IES = 0.5
Hours (% of time endow.)
Hours (% of time endow.)

Productivity growth rate
Capital income share
Capital depreciation rate

Value

81
46

3.964
0.167,. . . , 0.333,. . . , 0.500
0.500

0.020
0.360
0.059

Idiosyncratic labor productivity
⇠1 , ⇠2 , ⇠3
Health-specific productivity
✏je
Age- and education-specific productivity

Conesa et al. (2018)
Conesa et al. (2018)

Health insurance
Private insurance coinsurance rate
P
Employer insurance coinsurance rate
E
Medicare coinsurance rate
CARE
Medicaid coinsurance rate
CAID
y CAT
Categorical income limit
yM N
Medically needy income limit
aM N
Medically needy asset limit

MEPS
MEPS
MEPS
MEPS
Kaiser Family Foundation
Kaiser Family Foundation
Kaiser Family Foundation

Health care expenses and health transition probabilities
mje
Health care expenses
Qj,e (h, h0 )
Health transition probabilities

MEPS
MEPS

Supplementary appendix
Supplementary appendix

Survival probabilities
Age-, educ.-, and health-specific surv. prob.
jeh

MEPS

Supplementary appendix

College attainment and 20-year-old population growth rate
Perc. of population with college degree
Census (average 2005–2009)
gn,2005
Population growth rate of 20-year-olds
U.N. (average 1980–2005)

Taxes
⌧c
⌧k

Consumption tax rate
Capital income tax rate

OECD (average 2005–2009)
OECD (average 2005–2009)

35

1,1,0
Supplementary appendix

0.229
0.229
0.500
0.138
0.196
0.091
0.041

0.2862
0.0030

0.047
0.321

Table 2: Parameters determined jointly in equilibrium
Parameter

Description

Target (year = 2005–2009)

Value

✓

Choice of units for output
Discount factor
Consumption share in utility
SS college replacement rate
SS non-college replacement rate
Consumption floor
Utility cost of Medicaid
Government consumption per capita
Government debt
Eligible for employer insurance
Scale for health care costs

GDP per capita = 1
Capital to output = 3
Average hours worked per employee = 0.333
Average SS benefits college ⇡ $13,800
Average SS benefits non-college⇡ $11,500
Average food stamps ⇡ $1,200
Medicaid exp. to total health exp. = 0.155
Government consumption to output = 0.156
Government debt to output = 0.547
Working-age share with employer ins. = 0.480
Health care expenditure to GDP = 0.152

0.887
1.028
0.337
0.510
0.417
0.026
0.166
0.156
30.199
0.500
1.461

Variance
Productivity at the top
Probability at the top
Persistence
Persistence at the top

Labor earnings Gini = 0.630
Labor earnings top 1 percent = 0.148
Labor earnings top 10 percent = 0.435
2-year persistence: Bottom 80 percent = 0.941
2-year persistence: Top 1 percent = 0.580

2.045
10.940
0.004
0.904
0.807

⌘

⌘top
⇡top
⇢n
⇢top

Figure 1: Micro Frisch elasticity
30
20
-5 percent shock
10

elasticity

bc
bnc
c

gc
D

0
-10
+5 percent shock
-20
-30
0

20

40
60
80
percentile of working-age population

36

100

Table 3: Values in 2005 and projections for 2100 for college attainment and fertility
Parameter
Fraction of college graduates 25+
Annual population growth rate of 20-year-olds: gn

2005

2100 (projection)

0.2862
0.0030

0.7048
-0.0005

70

70
percent of 25- to 34-year-olds
with college degree

percent of population aged 25 and older
with college degree

Figure 2: College attainment

60
50
trend

40
30
20
10
0
1960

data
1980

2000

2020 2040
year

2060

2080

60
50
40

women

30
men
20
10
0
1960

2100

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

year

Figure 3: Survival probabilities by age, medical spending, and education in 2005 (solid) and 2100 (dashed)
college-educated consumers

non-college educated consumers
100

100

low

80

low

90
percent

percent

high

high

90

catastrophic

70
60

catastrophic

80
70
60

50

50
20

30

40

50

60
age

70

80

90

100

20

37

30

40

50

60
age

70

80

90

100

Table 4: Individual implications: old age dependency ratio, labor tax rate, capital, labor supply,
and output
Percent of 2100 projection

0

50

100

Ratio population 65+/(20–64) (percent)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

35.3
35.3
35.3

37.1
37.5
42.1

38.8
39.9
51.5

Labor tax rate (percent)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

33.5
33.5
33.5

29.2
35.2
35.9

26.4
37.1
39.6

Capital, labor supply, and output
Capital per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

100.0
100.0
100.0

119.9
98.3
104.8

138.1
95.9
108.4

Eﬀective labor per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

100.0
100.0
100.0

108.0
98.7
98.5

115.4
97.1
96.4

Hours worked per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

100.0
100.0
100.0

101.3
97.9
98.3

101.8
95.4
95.6

Labor force participation rate 20–64 (percent)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

90.3
90.3
90.3

91.8
89.7
90.9

92.7
88.8
90.8

Labor force participation rate 65+ (percent)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

34.9
34.9
34.9

37.4
34.1
33.3

39.4
33.3
30.8

100.0
100.0
100.0

112.1
98.5
100.7

123.1
96.7
100.6

Output per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

38

Table 5: Individual implications: health care expenditure distribution by provider (percent)
Percent of 2100 projection
Increased college attainment

Private insurance
Employer insurance
Medicare
Medicaid
Out-of-pocket
Emergency relief
Decreased fertility

Private insurance
Employer insurance
Medicare
Medicaid
Out-of-pocket
Emergency relief
Increased longevity

Private insurance
Employer insurance
Medicare
Medicaid
Out-of-pocket
Emergency relief

39

0

50

100

15.2
18.6
25.0
15.4
23.8
1.9

16.8
18.2
25.7
13.0
24.5
1.7

18.2
17.8
26.4
11.2
24.8
1.6

15.2
18.6
25.0
15.4
23.8
1.9

14.9
17.9
25.7
16.0
23.3
2.1

14.6
17.2
26.4
16.7
22.7
2.3

15.2
18.6
25.0
15.4
23.8
1.9

15.1
16.5
27.7
15.5
23.3
1.9

14.5
14.0
30.7
16.3
22.4
2.1

Table 6: Individual implications: prices, government expenditures, and government revenues
Percent of 2100 projection

0

50

100

100.0
100.0
100.0

103.8
99.9
102.3

106.7
99.5
104.3

6.1
6.1
6.1

5.3
6.1
5.6

4.8
6.2
5.2

100.0
100.0
100.0

96.0
104.8
113.6

93.7
110.3
132.0

100.0
100.0
100.0

78.0
100.0
82.4

63.1
100.5
67.1

Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

100.0
100.0
100.0

112.2
104.1
112.9

123.5
108.1
128.1

Government revenues
Consumption tax revenues per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

100.0
100.0
100.0

115.7
98.1
96.4

129.7
95.6
90.5

Capital income tax revenues per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

100.0
100.0
100.0

101.7
98.2
95.2

103.6
96.4
90.1

Prices
Wage rate (index, 2005 = 100)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity
Interest rate (percent)
Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity
Government expenditures

Public health care spending per capita (index, 2005 = 100)

Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

Interest payments on government debt per capita (index, 2005 = 100)

Increased college attainment
Decreased fertility
Increased longevity

Social Security spending per capita (index, 2005 = 100)

40

Table 7: Joint implications of increased college attainment, decreased fertility, and increased
longevity
Percent of projected increase in college attainment
(fertility and longevity equal to their 2100 projections)

0

50

100

58.7

61.4

64.0

101.2
5.9

108.0
4.6

112.4
3.9

134.2
150.0
79.3

153.4
141.1
52.1

169.2
135.4
37.2

Taxation
Labor tax rate (percent)
Capital income tax revenues per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Consumption tax revenues per capita (index, 2005 = 100)

47.1
87.4
79.4

39.5
87.0
98.8

35.1
86.9
114.4

Capital, labor supply, and output
Capital per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Eﬀective labor per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Hours worked per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Labor force participation rate 20–64 (percent)
Labor force participation rate 65+ (percent)
Output per capita (index, 2005 = 100)

93.9
90.9
87.9
88.3
26.8
92.0

123.8
100.0
91.8
91.2
29.9
108.0

149.2
108.0
93.9
92.8
32.3
121.3

Population
Ratio population 65+/(20–64) (percent)
Prices
Wage rate (index, 2005 = 100)
Interest rate (percent)
Government expenditures

Social Security spending per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Public health care spending per capita (index, 2005 = 100)
Interest payments on government debt per capita (index, 2005 = 100)

Table 8: Tax implications of increased college attainment, decreased fertility, and increased
longevity: general equilibrium versus small open economy
General equilibrium
Percent of projected increase in college attainment
(fertility and longevity equal to their 2100 projections)
Labor tax rate (p.p., 2005 = 0)
Consumption tax revenues per capita (percent, 2005 = 0)
Capital income tax revenues per capita (percent, 2005 = 0)

41

Small open economy

0

50

100

0

50

100

13.6
-20.6
-12.6

6.0
-1.2
-13.0

1.6
14.4
-13.1

13.7
-20.8
-7.6

1.8
6.9
45.2

-6.0
30.2
89.4

Table 9: Robustness
Benchmark

f+l

all

Lab. part. cost

f+l

all

No gov. debt

f+l

all

Prog. inc. tax

f+l

all

34.2
50.0
-20.7
-9.1
-6.1
1.2
-20.6
-12.6

69.2
35.4
-62.8
8.0
49.2
12.4
14.4
-13.1

34.6
51.7
-22.3
-8.9
-4.9
1.5
-19.8
-12.8

67.6
41.5
-59.4
5.7
42.1
11.2
9.8
-12.8

31.1
51.3
n/a
-9.4
-10.3
-0.3
-22.2
-9.6

60.0
40.7
n/a
4.4
26.7
7.2
5.1
-2.3

43.7
40.0
-44.8
-2.9
18.4
7.4
-5.5
n/a

72.8
36.2
-67.8
9.7
58.1
14.1
18.4
n/a

-0.2
13.6
n/a

-2.2
1.6
n/a

-0.3
13.3
n/a

-2.1
3.5
n/a

0.1
14.5
n/a

-1.4
5.7
n/a

-1.4
n/a
4.0

-2.5
n/a
-0.2

Variable (percent, 2005 = 0)

Social Security exp. per capita
Public health care exp. per capita
Int. pay on gov. debt per capita
Eﬀective labor per capita
Capital per capita
Wage rate
Cons. tax revenues per capita
Cap. inc. tax revenues per capita
Variable (p.p., 2005 = 0)

Interest rate
Labor tax rate
Average income tax rate

Figure 4: Ex-ante welfare implications by type of college for consumers who enter the economy in year t of
the transition: one-time transfer required to make the consumer who enters the transition with decreasing
fertility and increasing longevity indiﬀerent between entering that transition and entering the transition with
all three channels of aging
250

non-college

percent of GDP per capita

200

150

100

50

0
2010

college

2050

2090

2130
year

42

2170

2210

Figure 5: Ex-post welfare implications by age and type of college: one-time transfer required to make
the consumer in the transition with decreasing fertility and increasing longevity indiﬀerent between that
transition and the transition with all three channels of aging

percent of 2010 GDP per capita

5
college

4
3
2

non-college
1
0
-1
20

30

40

50

60
age

70

80

90

Figure 6: Robustness: model with labor force participation cost
100

percent of population

80

data
model with utility
cost of working

60

40

20

0
20

30

40

50
age

43

60

70

80

