NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

An Economic Analysis of the Market
for Law School Students

Ronald C. Ehrenberg

Working Paper No. 2602

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
May 1988

Irving M. Ives, Professor of Industrial and Labor Relations and Economics,
Cornell University, and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic
Research. I am most grateful to Oscar Chase, John Kramer, Jane Thieberger,
and Marilyn Norton for providing me with background information, to Constance
Terry for her research assistance, and to a number of colleagues at Cornell
and elsewhere for their comments. An earlier version was presented at the
New York University "Symposium on Law Student Debt, the 'Salary Cap' and
Implications for Legal Education", April 15, 1988, and I am also grateful to
participants at the Symposium for their comments. The research supported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expresaed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2602
May 1988

An Economic Analysis of the Market for

Law School Students

ABSTRACT

This
lawyers'

study utilizes data from a number

of

sources to estimate how

starting salaries relate to their ability1 the quality of law

school they attended, and whether the law school was a private

Institution. Based upon this analysis, a benefit—cost analysis is
conducted of the value of attending a high—quality private institution.

Analyses are also done of how

the

financial attractiveness of law vls—a—

vis other careers has changed in recent years and a conceptual framework
discussed for law schools to use In allocating their financial aid
resources.

Ronald G. Ehrenberg
School of Industrial and
Labor Relations
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14851-0952

I. Introduction
Rapid increases in law school tuition costs and the increasingly
large debt burdens incurred by law school students have led to numerous
economic issues being raised relative to the "market" for law school

students. Will future law school tuition increases be inhibited by
potential students' ability and willingness to pay? Will increasing debt
burdens skew law students' career choices towards higher paying

specialties? Will enrollment in law schools and/or the quality of law
school applicants decline and will any such declines be widespread or

concentrated in a few lower quality law schools? Given all of the above
questions, what criteria should law schools use to allocate the limited

financial aid resources they have available? These are but a few of the
economic issues relating to the law student market that law schools must
confront.

Prior research by academic economists and lawyers provide some useful
insights into the workings of the market for law students. First, studies
by economists of the labor market for lawyers suggest that it is dangerous

to project trends. Whether one uses a simple "cobweb model" or a more
sophisticated "rational expectations model", one observes that the number
of law school applicants is sensitive to earnings levels in the

profession.' Moreover, studies that utilize both U.S. and Canadian data
suggest that, other things equal (including demand), an increased supply
of graduates from law schools inevitably leads to lower real earnings of
new entrants in the profession.2
Second, increasing law school costs and/or decreasing real earnings
of lawyers may well lead to a decline in the number and quality of

applicants to law schools.3 Recent empirical evidence suggests this has

2

happened; since the early 1980s the quality of law school applicants (as
measured by LSAT scores, grade point averages, or the fraction of
applicants coming from the most prestigious undergraduate institutions)

has dropped and the number of applicants fell between 1982 and l985.
Third, even after one controls for individual lawyers' personal
characteristics such as age, experience, race, region of residence and
sex, lawyers' earnings systematically vary with the type of law they are
practicing (e.g., private practice, corporate, judicial clerkship,

government, public interest).5 Moreover, it appears that individual
lawyers' occupational decisions, in particular the decision whether to
enter private or public interest law practices, depend on differences in
their expected earnings in the two types of practices, as well as their
underlying political and social attitudes.6

Fourth, there is some evidence that a law student's class rank and
the quality of the law school he or she attended influence the probability

that he or she will initially be employed by a large law firm.7 As is
well known, larger law firms tend to offer higher starting salaries.8
Finally, recent work by economists on college student debt in general
and law student debt in particular suggests that the debt is manageable,

in the sense that viewed as a long-term investment that yields higher
future earnings it makes sense for students to undertake the

indebtedness.9 The real policy issues are whether annual and/or lifetime
borrowing limits under federal programs will be increased often enough to
permit continual increases in law schools' tuition levels and whether
repayment periods will-be sufficiently lengthened to reduce the impact of

3
high annual

repayment

levels on the decision to enter law school and law

students' choice of careers)°
Much of the prior research, especially that done by lawyers, quite
reasonably treats law schools as part of a single group and seeks

cooperative solutions to the problems that the group faces. Yet it is
quite clear that law schools by necessity compete with each other on a
number of dimensions including the recruitment of students, the
recruitment of faculty, the placement of graduates, and the attraction of

gifts and endowments. As such, it makes sense when addressing some
problems to view law schools as competitors and this is the approach that
I take in much of what follows.

I begin in the next section by presenting an empirical analysis of

how the market for law school students functions at a point in time. In
particular I conduct an econometric analysis of the interrelationships
between law school tuition levels, law school quality, law faculty

salaries, and the starting salaries of law school graduates. The
estimates I obtain suggest that the market for law school students
"behaves" in a manner that economists would consider quite rational, from
the perspective of the participants.

I turn in section III to an examination of recent data on law school
graduates' salaries, earnings in alternative occupations and law school

tuitions. These data suggest that while tuition increases have outpaced
starting salaries for lawyers, law school attendance, on average, still
appears to be a worthwhile investment.
Of course to say, on average, law school is a worthwhile investment
does not imply it will be equally profitable for all individuals nor that

4
the costs will not influence career choices. High tuition and subsequent
high debt levels may discourage students from low-income families from

entering law school. High debt levels may also discourage law students
from entering low paying fields of practice (e.g., public interest law)
and many people may judge it to be socially desirable to expand employment

in these areas. This leads naturally to a discussion of how law schools
should allocate the limited financial aid resources they have and whether
these funds should be allocated in the form of loans or scholarships.

Section IV discusses these questions, borrowing heavily from earlier work

of mine.11 A brief final section then provides some concluding remarks.

II. The Market for Law School Students
Given the general market conditions that influence lawyers' salaries,
what factors might be expected to influence the starting salaries that

graduates of a law school receive? Other things equal, one would suspect
that the "better" the students and the "better" the law school the higher

starting salaries will be. The racial and gender mix of a school's
graduates may also influence starting salaries if discrimination or
affirmative action pressures are present in the legal labor market, or if
he "types" of law that graduates practice are influenced by their gender

and race. Finally, other things equal, starting salaries may differ for
graduates from public and private law schools because of differences in
the "types" of law that students from each tend to enter and/or due to
differences in placement efforts and recruitment networks that exist
between the two categories of schools.12

5

Table 1 presents the results of my efforts to test some of these

hypotheses using data from Barron's Guide to Law Schools. Every few years
Barron's surveys the Deans of Admissions at American law schools to obtain

information for Barron's Guide to Law Schools. Among the questions asked
is the average starting salary of graduates of the prior years academic
class. Understandably, not all law schools wish to reveal this
information; however information for 99 of the 174 ABA accredited law
schools was reported in Barron's seventh edition, which was published in

1986. These data, which pertain to average starting salaries for
graduates of the law school class of 1985, are the salary data used in my
analyses.

Since these data come from admissions offices, not necessarily from
detailed records of placement offices, it is not obvious how accurate they

are. The National Association for Law Placement (NALP) annually collects
data on salaries of graduates of each law school, however the NALP data

for each individual law school j strictly confidential and could not be
used in this study.

To get a feel for the accuracy of the Barron's data, I provided a
representative of NALP with the Barron's salary data for three public and
three private law schools and asked her to compare them to the similar

data obtained by NALP in their survey of the class of 1985.13 She
reported that while Barron's average reported starting salary for the six
schools was $31,517, the comparable average in the NALP data was $32,997,

almost 4.7 percent, or $1,500, larger. In one case the NALP figure was
over $3,000 higher, while in another case it was almost $2,500 lower.

Reassuringly, though, the simple correlation of the Barron's and NALP

figures across the six schools was .951. Taken together, these results
suggest that the Barron's data are sufficiently accurate for my purposes

and they are used in Table 1.14
In this table, average starting salaries are specified to be a
function of the median LSAT score of enrolled students in the school (a
measure of student ability), the "Courman Score" of the law school in the
latest ranking (a measure of one observer's perceptions of the school's
"quality"), whether the school is a public institution, and the percentage
of the school's students that are females and minorities (column l).15
Equations are estimated using both the level and logarithm of average

salaries as dependent variables. Finally, some specifications (column 2)
include the percentage of the school's graduates placed in public sector
(government, military, or judicial clerkships), public service, and public

interest positions as an additional explanatory variable. While this
variable helps control for the "occupational distribution" of the school's
graduates, one must caution that it may well be determined by other
included variables in the model.

Focusing initially on the specification that ignores this last
variable (col. 1), as expected better students, as measured by LSAT

scores, received higher salaries. A one point increase in the average
LSAT score of students in a school was associated with about a $750 higher
average starting salary in 1985 in the level specification and a 2.5
percent higher stArting salary in the logarithmic specification.
Similarly, students from higher ranked (by Courman) schools received
higher salaries. So, for example, an increase in the Gournian ranking from
300 to 400 (the cutoff points for his "acceptable plus" and "strong"

7

categories) was associated with a $1,500 higher 1985 average starting
salary in the level specification and about a 6 percent higher starting

salary in the logarithmic specification. Finally, other things equal,
graduates of public law schools' starting salaries were some $2,400, or
close to 9 percent lower in 1985 than graduates of private law schools and
the race and gender composition of a school's student body was unrelated
to its graduates' starting salaries.

Once one controls for the percentage of the law school's graduates
placed in public sector, public service or public interest positions (col.

2). the magnitude of these differentials changes somewhat. The salary
increase associated with a 100 point increase in the Gourman Score falls
to about $1,100 or 4 percent, while the public/private salary differential

falls to about $1,200, or 4.3 percent. Both of these reductions occur
because, other things equal, students from higher ranked law schools are
less likely, and students from public law schools are more likely to be
employed in public sector, public service, or public interest positions
(Table 2, panel A, col. l)).6

While the above results suggest that there are obvious economic
benefits (at least in terms of starting salaries) associated with
attending better rated law schools and private law schools, other things

equal, there are also obvious costs. These are documented in Table 3
where results are reported of estimating equations in which a law school's
1985-86 tuition and fees level for full-time students was specified to be
a function only of its Gourman Score and whether it is a public
institution.

8
Focusing on the results for all schools (the top panel) a 100 point
increase in an institution's Gourman Score is associated with roughly a

$1,140 to $1,367 increase, or about a 20 percent higher tuition. Holding
school rating constant, tuition and fees average roughly $2,900 (for outof-state students) to $5,600 (for in-state students) lower at public that

private law schools, or 30.5 to 75.1 percent lower)-7 In fact, the same
percentage relationship between tuition and school rating is estimated
when analyses are done separately for private and public law schools (the

bottom two panels). Given this tuition/school rating relationships, it is
not surprising that there is also some evidence (Table 2, panel B) that
higher tuition levels reduce the proportion of students entering public
sector, public service and public interest law careers.

Why do the better rated law schools charge more? While one could
answer this question from the perspective of both the demand and cost

sides of the market. I focus initially on the cost side here. Analyses
are reported in Table 4 in which a law school's tuition and fees is
specified to be a function of the median base salary and fringe benefits
of its full-time faculty, the total number of volumes in its library per
first year student, the student-faculty ratio, and whether the school is

public. Presumably, one would expect that higher faculty salaries, a
higher library volume-student ratio, and a lower student-faculty ratio
should all be associated, other things equal, with higher tuition and fee

levels. In fact, of these three variables, only the faculty compensation
level seems to matter. In the logarithmic specification that uses out-ofstate tuition levels for public law schools, this variable's estimated

elasticity is not significantly different from unity. That is, across law

9
schools at a point in time, as faculty compensation increases by a given
percentage, tuition and fees increase by roughly the same percentage.
Of course, from the perspective of the demand side of the market,
there may be a limit to what any law school can charge at a point in time;
raising tuition too far above one's competitors may lead to a decline in

applicants and/or acceptances from admitted applicants. Some evidence to
support this hypothesis, at least for private law schools is found in
Table 5 which presents the results of estimating equations in which a
school's acceDted apolicant yield (enrolled first-year students-accepted
applicants) and its aoolicant yield (enrolled first-year students-total
applicants) are specified to be functions of the Gourman Score of the
school and the logarithm of its tuition and fees for full-time students.
The coefficients of the latter variable can be interpreted as measuring
the effect of a one percent increase in a school's tuition and fees on the
two yield rates, school quality held equal.

Quite strikingly, higher tuition rates are associated with both lower

accepted applicant and lover applicant yield rates. When the analyses are
redone (middle panel) using only the sample of private schools, a ten
percent increase is a school's tuition is seen to reduce the school's
accepted applicant yield by about 2.3 percentage points and its applicant

yield by 1.4 percentage points. Not surprisingly, higher rated private
schools have higher accepted applicant yields (fewer accepted applicants
turn them down), but lower applicant yields (they have the luxury of
rejecting more applicants.)18
What emerges from these tables is a rather consistent pattern of

results. There are financial benefits, in the form of higher starting

10

salaries to attending higher rated law schools and, other things equal,

private law schools (Table 1). Because of this, higher rated law schools
and private law schools are able to charge higher tuitions (Table 3).
These higher tuitions allow them to pay higher faculty salaries (Table 4),
which presumably are used to attract and retain higher-quality faculty.
Given the rating of a law school, however, there is a limit to how high it
can raise its tuition, as higher tuition levels are associated with lower

accepted applicant yield rates (Table 5). Since the rating of a law
school surely depends heavily on the quality of its faculty, what emerges
from all this is a set of starting salary, law school rating.

public/private dichotomy-tuition-faculty salary relationships across law
schools that intuitively seems to make sense)-9
What has not yet been shown is, given the magnitudes of these
relationships, if law students appear on average to have made wise choices

in the law schools they attended. If on average, for a given Gourman
rating for a law school, graduates earned starting salaries that were
roughly $1,200 to $2,400 higher in 1985 if the law school was private
(Table 1), did it make sense for them to pay tuition and fees in the
private sector that were some $2,900 to $5,600 (Table 3) higher than

tuitions in public sector schools in 1985-86? If, other things equal, a
100 point increase in a law school's Gourman Score was associated with
increased starting salaries of 1,100 to $1,500, but increased tuition of
$1,140 to $1,370, did it make sense for them to try to attend the higher-

rated schools. The discussion that follows helps provide the answers.
Let T represent the tuition cost of attending a law school, C
represent other law school costs (including books and additional living

11

costs), A represent the opportunity cost of attending law school (the
earnings foregone), and S represent the earnings expected upon graduation

from law school. All these figures are expressed in annual terms and, for
expositional convenience I will ignore inflation, discounting, and growth
in any of these variables over time or over the life cycle here (these

restrictions are relaxed in section III).20 If the time it takes to
complete law school is L years and a law school graduate expects to
practice law for N years then it is straightforward to show that under
these assumptions the expected present value (PV) of the financial gain
-

from attending law school is

(1)

PV — N(S

-

A)

-

L(T +

+

C

A)

Now suppose that we consider two law schools, i and j, and that the
only elements in the above expression that differ between them are their

tuition levels and the expected earnings levels of their graduates. Then
the difference between the expected present values of financial gains from
attending the two

schools

is

(2) PVi - PVj — N(Sj

-

Sj)

-

L(Tj

-

Tj)

Suppose law school i's tuition is higher, as is the expected
earnings levels of its graduates. If individuals choose law schools based
on the expected financial gains they offer, school i will be preferred to

school J as long as PVj

(3)

(Si -

Sj)

PVj, which occurs if and only if

(L/N)(Tj-Tj)

12

Typically, completion of law school for full-time students requires
three years (L — 3) and it is not unreasonable to assume that a person who
graduates from law school plans to spend at least 15 years in the
profession (N -

15).

Thus, it makes sense for the typical student to try

to attend the high tuition level law school as long as the annual earnings
advantage of its graduates over the graduates of the low tuition level
school (Si -

59

is at least 20 percent (3/15) of its annual tuicion cost

disadvantage (T -

Tj).

Given this relationship, it is clear the potential law school
students had an incentive (at least in 1985) to get to the highest rated

school they could. The marginal annual tuition cost of attending a higher
rated school was roughly of the same order of magnitude as the marginal

gain in annual earnings the higher rated school provided. Similarly,
potential law school students on average had an incentive to attend
private sector law schools rather than public law schools of equal rating;

the lower estimate of the estimated annual salary gain from doing so
($1,200) exceeds 20 percent of our estimate of the average tuition
differential for in-state students of doing so ($5,600).

Of course to say that it made sense on average for students to try to
attend highly rated private law schools in 1985-86 doesn't imply that it

made sense for all individuals to try to do so. Individuals who expected
to practice law only for a relatively short period of time obviously would
find the net financial advantage from public law schools higher.

Individuals who expected little financial gain from attending higher rated
private law schools (such as those interested in public interest law)

would obviously not have sought to do so. It is thus not surprising that

13

I found graduates from higher rated law schools and private law schools
were less likely to be employed in public sector, public service, or
public interest positions (Table 2).

Given the financial incentives prospective students faced in 1985-86.
it is also not surprising that the decline in the number and quality of
law school applicants observed in the 1980s has been felt primarily by the

lower ranked law schools.21 In a sense, the higher ranked private schools
had a "captive" audience. One may wonder then, why these schools did not
try to "confiscate" some of the benefits students received from attending

them by increasing tuitions above their then-current levels. Part of the
answer is that annual and/or lifetime borrowing limits that students faced
under federal programs may have limited the schools' ability to do so.22
One should also note that, other things held constant, equal percentage
tuition increases at higher rated and lower rated private institutions, or
at private and public schools over time, would widen the absolute tuition

level differential between the two groups of institutions. Unless the
absolute earnings advantage the higher tuition schools provided their
students also widened, they would find fewer students willing to enroll in

them. Highly rated private schools are not immune to market pressures.

III. Has Law School Attendance Become Less Attractive Financially in
Recent Years?
The previous section addressed issues relating to the market for law
students at a point in time; here I consider what has happened to that

market over time. In particular, I examine whether rising law school
tuition levels, coupled with changing earnings levels in law and other

14

occupations, have decreased the relative financial attractiveness of law
as a career.

Historical data on the salaries earned by new lawyers are hard to

come by. For the last 13 years, however, Student Lawyer has published
starting salaries for lawyers in law firms and corporations in a number of

cities; the 1987 survey covered 18 cities.23 The Student Lawyer salary
data are easily accessible and because they go back to the mid-70s I use
them in my analyses below, focusing on the salaries paid by nonpatent law
firms.

Although law firms are the major employers of new lawyers, a
substantial minority of lawyers enter corporate practice, government
careers, judicial clerkships, public interest practices, or academic

careers. Starting salaries in the latter four categories tend to be lower
than those for law firms. For example, while the average starting salary
of graduates of the law school class of 1986 was $32,752 nationwide, the
average starting salary for lawyers entering private practice was $36,050,

for lawyers in business and industry $34,512, for government lawyers
$26,659, for lawyers in judicial clerkships $24,416, for lawyers in public

interest practices $21,792. and for academic lawyers $28,852.24 Thus the
use of law firm salary figures will overstate the average starting

salaries of all new lawyers at a point in time. On the other hand, over
the 1974-86 period, the percentage of law school graduates entering
private practice has risen from 52.2 to 61.6 and the percentage entering
government (including military) judicial clerkships, public interest, and

academic law has fallen from 35.5 to 30.7.25 Focusing on the salaries of
lawyers entering private practice may thus well understate the trend

15

increase in the average law school graduate starting salary over the
period.

Table 6 takes the Student Lawyer starting salary data for seven
cities for whom data has been published continuously since 1976 and asks
how these salary figures for each city compare to the tuition and fees

charged by a law school in the same city. Of course, not all graduates of
a law school practice law in the city in which the school is located nor
do all new lawyers in a city come from law schools in that city.

Nonetheless, these data provide initial suggestive evidence on the

financial benefits and costs of attending law schools. In the main, the
law schools I have chosen for each city are relatively high-priced private
law schools, although one public institution is included.

Panel A presents the ratio of each law school's tuition in a year to
the average annual starting salary of starting lawyers in nonpatent law

firms in the city during the 1975-76 to 1985-86 period. Harvard's tuition
is used for Boston and during the period the ratio in Boston rose from .22

to .34; a 50 percent increase. Increases of similar magnitudes were
observed for NYU (New York). Georgetown (Washington) and Pennsylvania
(Philadelphia). Somewhat smaller increases were recorded for Chicago
(Chicago) and Marquette (Milwaukee), while nonresident law school tuition

in the one public university in the sample. UCLA, actually remained
relatively stable, as a fraction of starting salaries in the city (Los
Angeles), during the period.

To the casual observer, the rapid rise in these ratios for the elite
private law schools may suggest they are in danger of pricing themselves
"out of the market". However, as should be clear from equation (1),

16
ratios can be deceiving. What is relevant is not the ratio of tuition and
fees to starting salaries but rather the difference between the two

variables in

terms. That is, after controlling for changes in the

price level, what is relevant is how the difference between annual
starting salaries and annual law school tuition and fees has moved.

Panel B of Table 6 presents the answer to this question. For some
law schools (Chicago and UCLA), the difference has actually increased.

For the others, the difference has decreased. However, save for
Georgetown, the decrease was relatively small (less than 10%), so the
decline in the attractiveness of attendance at law schools (if it occurred
at all) was not as large as the ratio comparisons in panel A suggest.
In fact, even the comparisons in panel B are misleading and do not
give the reader an accurate picture of the changes that have occurred in
the financial attractiveness of pursuing a career in law. To see this,
refer to equation (1), which showed the expected present value of the

financial gain from attending law school. If one first differences this
equation one obtains

(4) PV—N(S-A) -L(T+C+M).
where the symbol

a variable in

indicates the change that occurs between two years in

terms (holding prices constant). The change in

expected present value is seen in (4) to depend on the change in lawyers'

starting sa1aries (AS), the change in starting salaries in other
occupations (LA), the change in law school tuition and fees (AT), and the

change in other law school costs (AC). This equation makes clear that the
calculations in Table 6 ignore what is happening to earnings in other

17

occupations law students might enter. It also implies that equal dollar
increases in starting lawyer salaries and in law school tuition and fees
actually increase the relative financial attractiveness of entering the

legal profession. The latter occurs because the number of years
individuals plan on practicing law (N) is considerably longer than the
length of time it takes to complete law school (L).

If one is willing to assume that changes in other law school costs
(books and additional living costs) have been small in real terms, one can
ignore them and compute whether the financial attractiveness of attending
law school has changed during a time period from

(5) PV — N(S

-

A)

-

L(T

+ M)

If the expression in (5) is positive, the financial attractiveness has
increased during the period, while if the expression is negative,
attractiveness has declined.

To make such computations requires one to have data on expected
earnings in law, on expected earnings in alternative occupations, and on

law school tuition costs. Some illustrative data that can be used at the
national level are found in Table 7 for the 1974-75 to 1986-87 period.

For lawyers' expected earnings (LSAL), I have constructed an
unweighted average (across the seven cities listed in Table 6) of the
starting salaries of lawyers in nonpatent law firms from the annual

Student Lawyer surveys. While the focus on lawyers in private practice
(see footnote 24) and limitation to lawyers employed in large cities may
cause this average to overstate the true average starting salary of

18
lawyers,for the two years that NALP has published average nationwide
starting salary data from their annual survey, their averages and mine are
not too far off.26
Data on annual starting salaries in other occupations prospective law

students might enter come from the College Placement Council.27 One
option prospective law students have is to attend business school, the
relevant comparison salaries I have used to capture this option are the
average annual starting salaries of MBA graduates who had nontechnical

(ASAL1) and technical (ASAL5) undergraduate degrees. Another option is to
find employment directly Out of college; the comparison salaries I have

used for this are those for college graduates who majored in the
humanities

(ASAL2), other social sciences (ASAL3), and economics (ASAL4).

Finally, the table reports average private and public law school tuitions

(TPRV, TPUB) and the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The calculations that
follow all set the price index in 1975 equal to 1.00 and deflate the
dollar values of all variables in each subsequent year by the relative
price index in that year so that all variables are expressed in real
terms.

While one

cannot derive conclusions about the expected financial gain

from attending law school simply by focusing on the starting salaries of
lawyers relative to the salaries in the alternative occupations
prospective lawyers might enter, such comparisons are instructive and are
found

to

in

Table 8.28 Although lawyers' starting salaries declined relative

those of MBA students between the class of 1975 and the class of 1983,

from 1983 to 1987, the relative starting salary of lawyers rose by over 20

percent (Ri, P5). Similarly, while substantial declines occurred in the

19

starting salaries of lawyers vis-a-vis college graduates with humanities
CR2), other social sciences CR3) and economics (R4) degrees through 1983.

by 1987, lawyers' relative starting salaries had returned to their 1975

levels. At least in recent years, lawyers' earnings have grown at higher
rates than earnings in alternative occupations that prospective law
students might enter.

More formal calculations about how the expected present value of a
law school degree has changed relative to the expected present value of

alternative degrees are presented in Table 9. These calculations use
equation (5) and make use of the average private law school tuition,

rather than the average public law school tuition. Since changes in the
former have been much greater (in real terms), this will bias the findings

against finding law school attendance increasing in attractiveness. They
also assume an expected work life (N) of 15 years (to be conservative) and
that law school completion (L) takes an extra three years when the
comparison group is college graduates, but only an extra one year when the
alternative is getting an MBA degree.29
Table 9 suggests that while the financial attractiveness of a law
degree fell relative to that of an MBA degree throughout most of the 197576 to 1982-83 period, it actually has risen in more recent years.

Moreover, throughout the 1975-76 to 1986-87 period, the financial
attractiveness of a law degree has risen relative to the financial
attractiveness of entering the labor market directly upon college

completion. Taken at face value, these results suggest that the practice
of law remains, and probably is becoming increasingly, a financially
attractive career and they may help to explain the slight increase in law

20

school applicants observed in 1986-87 and the dramatic increase observed
in the 1987-88 academic year.3°

Of course, these conclusions all are derived from expected present
value calculations that made a number of very stringent simplifying

assumptions. In particular, they ignore inflation, discounting (or the
costs of borrowing funds), and real growth in lawyers, earnings and the

earnings in other occupations over individuals' life cycles. While it is
difficult to obtain occupation specific life-cycle earnings growth figures
based upon longitudinal data, the limited data that are available for
lawyers suggests that lawyers' earnings grow at least initially at rates
that far exceed likely rates of discount.

To illustrate this, Table 10 presents average salary data for lawyers

employed in nonpatent law firms for eight cities for five years. These
data, which come from Student Lawyers annual salary surveys, allow us to
trace the earnings of young lawyers during the early years of their

careers. So for example, the average starting salary for lawyers in
Boston in 1982 was $24,000. With a year's experience in 1983, these
lawyers would be earning $27,000 on average and a year later, with two

year's experience they would be earning $34,000 on average. More
generally, to trace the earnings history of a typical lawyer employed by
these firms over time, one moves diagonally downward to the right in the
table.

Focusing on workers who were first employed in 1982 in each city, I
have underlined in the table the salaries they earned on average each year

through 1986. Quite strikingly, over the five-year period, their nominal
salaries at least doubled in four of the six cities and in the other two.

21
Atlanta and Washington, their earnings increased by over 80 percent. For
earnings in 1986 discounted back to 1982

to be worth more in real

terms than earnings in 1982, the discount rate would have to be at least
15.8 percent for the latter two cities and over 18.9 percent for all the

other cities.31 Given the rate of inflation that prevailed during the
period, it is highly unlikely that discount rates could be that high. The
rates of interest charged on federal educational loans were much lower
during the period.32
Of course, not all lawyers who start in average paying firms maintain

their employment in these firms for four years. Of those who do, some
fail to make partnerships after six years and many of these wind up in

lower paying positions or in self-employment. On the other hand, those
who do reach partner status do appreciably better financially. For
example, across the 18 cities that Student Lawyer surveyed in 1986 the
average salaries of partners in nonpatent law firms was 465 percent of the

average starting salaries of new lawyers in these same firms.33 While in
the absence of data on life-cycle earnings growth rates in other
occupations one cannot draw definitive conclusions, in recent years

entering law school, on average, still seems like a good investment. As
emphasized by Kramer, the real issue is whether limitations on the annual
and total amounts of funds prospective law students can borrow, and
restrictions on the length of the period over which they must repay the
loans, will constrain students borrowing and hence law schools' future
ability to raise tuitions.34

22

IV. Optimal

Financial Aid Policies for Selective Law Schools

To say that on average law school is a worthwhile investment, is not
to say that the investment will be equally profitable for all individuals
nor is it to say that law school costs will not influence individuals'

career choices. High tuition levels and subsequent high debt levels may
discourage students from low-income families from entering law schools.
High debt levels, along with growing differentials between high-paying
(e.g. private practice) and low-paying (e.g. ,

public

interest) fields of

law may discourage students from entering the latter.35
Of course, both law schools and applicants to law schools behave

selectively. Law schools select who they will admit; in a recent year
over half of ABA-accredited law schools reported admitting less than 50
percent of their applicants, while almost one-tenth reported admitting

less than 25 percent of their applicants.36 Accepted applicants in turn
select from the schools at which they have been admitted,arid decide

whether and where to enroll. Indeed, the fraction of accepted applicants
who actually enroll is less than 50 percent in over three quarters of all
ABA-accredited law schools.37
Law schools obviously believe that targeting financial aid to bright,
needy, or minority students will influence these students' decisions to
enroll, as substantial resources are devoted to "merit", "needs-based", or

"minority" scholarships.38 Similarly, law schools obviously believe that
"loan-forgiveness" programs for law students who enter "low-income"
careers (such as public interest law) can either help them attract
students with such interests and/or influence existing students career

choices.39 Do such strategies make sense? More generally, if a law

23

school wants to optimally allocate its financial aid resources, what
strategies should it pursue?
To answer such questions requires one to be a bit more precise about
what law schools are trying to accomplish and to specify the constraints

that they face. Elsewhere, I have formally addressed the issue of
"optimal financial aid policies" for selective undergraduate colleges and
I adapt my previous discussion to law school financial aid policies

below.40 As I shall show, the design of financial aid policies is not as
simple as one might think.

Suppose that a selective law school faces K different categories of

applicants. These categories may depend upon applicants' minority status,
their socioeconomic backgrounds, their academic abilities, whether their
parents are alumni, the types of law the applicants claim to be interested

in pursuing or any other attributes the law school cares about. To take
an example, if the law school cares only about its applicants' minority
status, whether they came from low-income families, or whether they scored
above a certain threshold on the LSAT exam, there would be eight
categories of applicants (yes/yes/yes, yes/yes,no, yes/no/no, ...).

Xj

Let

denote the number of applicants from category i that a school admits.
Suppose next that the law school establishes a tuition and fees level

that does not vary across categories of students but that it varies its
financial aid policy so that the share of tuition and fees subsidized in

the form of financial aid (ar) varies across groups. Determining how this
share should vary is our objective.

Given the school's tuition and fees level, the proportion of accepted
applicants from each category that actually enroll (Ft), its acceDted

24

applicant yield, is inversely related to the share of the category's
tuition and fees that is subsidized

(6) Fi—Fi(ai)
Increased financial aid increases the likelihood that accepted applicants

will enroll. Quite crucially, the sensitivity of applicants, enrollment

decisions to financial aid may well ygy across groups. Note also that it
is assumed that when aid is zero, some fraction (poasibly zero) of

accepted applicants from a group will enroll. This fraction, the group's
propensity to enroll, may also differ across groups.

Why

does

a law school care about its accepted applicant yield? The

product of the number of admitted applicants in a group and the group's

yield is the number of students from the group who actually enroll. If
the yield falls, a law school could always admit more applicants from the

group to get the same number of enrolled students. The cost of doing
this, however, is that the "deeper" the school dips into a group's
applicant pool, the lower the average quality (as measured say by LSAT

scores) of enrolled students in the group (q) is likely to be

(7) q —

qj(X).

Crucially, how sensitive applicant quality is to the number of applicants

admitted may also differ across groups. For example, the average quality
of minority applicants may fall off much more rapidly with the number
admitted than does the average quality of white male applicants.
Suppose the law school values the total "quality units" of students
who actually enroll in each category (Ei —

F(aj)q(X)X)

and that the

25

weights it places on attracting students from different categories can be
summarized by a utility or welfare function of the form

(8) U - U(E1,E2,

...

E).

Note that this formulation distinguishes between the objective
academic aualitv of applicants and their subjective relative

attractiveness to the law school. The former depends on measurable
academic attributes. The latter, however, depends on the law school's
subjective valuations of applicant characteristics (such as minority
status and family socioeconomic background) that are summarized by

equation (8). Category i applicants are defined as being relatively
attractive to the law school than category j applicants if, when the
school has enrolled the same number of quality units of applicants from
both categories, it would get greater marginal utility from enrolling an
additional quality unit of students from category i than from category j.

Given a fixed budget that the law school wants to commit to financial
aid, suppose that it seeks to maximize its utility function subject to the
constraints imposed by its accepted applicant yield and average quality

functions. Under suitable assumptions about the shapes of the various
functions, one can show that its financial aid policies should depend upon
four factors.4'
First, other things equal, applicant groups that are relatively more

attractive should receive more aid. Second, other things equal, groups
with lower propensities to enroll if admitted should receive more aid,
there is no reason to subsidize groups that would enroll even in the

absence of aid. Third, other things equal, the more sensitive a group's

26

enrollment decisions are to financial aid, the more aid they should

receive. Finally, other things equal, the more sensitive a category's
average quality is to the number of applicants admitted, the greater the

aid that category should receive.42 While the relative attractiveness
of different categories of applicants must be subjectively determined by a
law school, the other "parameters" it needs to know (groups' propensities
to enroll, sensitivities of yield to financial aid, sensitivities of
average qualities to numbers admitted) are all objectively determined and
can be estimated by institutionally-based empirical studies.43
These findings have a number of implications for the financial aid

policies law schools should pursue. Law schools may want to attract the
brightest possible students to help increase their perceived ratings.44
They may also feel it socially desirable to increase the number of lawyers

coming from low-income and minority backgrounds. Other things equal,
groups that are relatively more attractive optimally should receive more
aid; this seems to argue in favor of financial aid being merit-based.

need-based, and more generous for minorities. However, other things are
necessarily equal, propensities to enroll, sensitivities of yield to
aid, and sensitivities of enrolled student quality to the number admitted

may also differ across groups. While sometimes these other factors may
reenforce aid decisions based solely on the "relative attractiveness"
criteria, they need not always and these other factors should enter into
aid decisions.45
Law schools may also want to influence the distribution of their

graduating students across types of practices. In particular, they may
want to encourage people to enter public interest law or to practice law

27

in low-income areas where legal representation is scarce. Other things
equal, to the extent that they judge students interested in these types of
practice relatively more attractive, such students should receive higher
aid levels.

Of course, announced intent to pursue a certain type of legal career
does not mean students will actually wind up in such a career. Hence,
contingent loan forgiveness programs that are announced prior to students
enrolling in law school appear to make more sense than does direct

scholarship aid for these students. Decisions about allocation of
resources to grant aid and to loan forgiveness programs must therefore be

made together. Shifting up front scholarship money into loan forgiveness
programs, as some have people have suggested, may well make sense.
Eligibility for existing loan forgiveness programs at some law

schools is based on law school graduates' earnings after they leave law

school, as well as on the type of law practices they enter. However, in
other schools, eligibility is based solely on the graduates' earnings.46
The latter type of programs provide a form of insurance for those people
who enter types of practice that, on average, are lucrative but who fail
to do well financially. It is not obvious that law schools should provide
this type of insurance for their students.

V.

Concluding Remarks

This paper has consisted of four interrelated sections. The first
summarized the lessons we have learned from prior empirical research about

the market for law students. The second conducted an empirical analysis
of how this market functions at a point in time, using law schools as the

28

units of analysis, and concluded that it behaves in a manner that

economists would consider quite rational. The third examined recent data
on law school tuition levels, starting lawyers' earnings, and earnings in
other occupations and concluded that, on average, law school still appears

to be a worthwhile investment. The last sketched a model of how law
schools should allocate their limited financial aid resources, indicated
the types of information law schools need to intelligently make such

decisions, and traced the implications of the model for financial aid
policies.

Together, these sections should stress to the reader how useful
rather simple economic models and empirical analyses can be in improving
our understanding of how the market for law students operates. Moreover,

empirical analyses of this market have only begun. If ways could be found
to grant researchers access to the annual NALP surveys of salaries of law
school graduates for individual law school's, the analyses I presented in

section II could be considerably expanded and improved upon. For example,
studies could be done of the determinants of starting salaries that more
fully control for the race and gender composition of a school's graduates,

as well as the types of practices they enter and the geographic areas in
which they reside.

One could also analyze the extent to which starting salaries of
graduates vary for each jaw school and then study whether such variability

influences law school applicants' decisions. One reasonable conjecture is
that potential students will be more attracted to law schools that offer

them (upon graduation) hjg expected starting salaries

offer them a greater certainty (that is J

variability

to those that
of starting

29

salaries) of what they will likely face at the end of their studies. It
may well be the case that the better law schools offer potential students
both higher expected starting salaries and greater certainty.47
While we can infer something about age-earnings profiles for lawyers

who

remain

with the same law firm

over

time (Table 10), we actually have

very little information on the career earnings profiles of most lawyers in

the United States. Serious longitudinal data collection efforts by NALP
or some other organization that follow a cohort of lawyers over time,

would clearly also be worthwhile. Finally, if law schools are to
"optimally" allocate financial aid among categories of recipients, section
IV indicates that they must conduct institutionally-based empirical
studies to ascertain the magnitudes of various parameters.

30

References
Barron's Educational Services, Inc. ,

Barron's

Guide to Law Schools:

Seventh Edition (Hauppage, NY: 1986).
College Placement Council, Inc., Inflation and the College Graduate: An
Uodate (Bethlehem, PA, 1985).
College Placement Council, Inc., CPC Salary Survey (Bethlehem, PA, July
1986 and July 1987).

Barbara Curran, "American Lawyers in the 1980s: A Profession in
Transition", Law and Society Review 20 (1986): 19-52.

Ronald Ehrenberg and Daniel Sherman, "Optimal Financial Aid Policies for a
Selective University", Journal of Human Resources 19 (Spring 1984):
202-230.

Richard Freeman, "Legal Cobwebs: A Recursive Model of the Market for New
Lawyers", Review of Economics and Statistics 57 (May 1975): 171-179.

John H. Goddeeris, "Compensating Differentials and Self-Selection: An
Application to Lawyers", Journal of Political Economy 96 (April
1988): 411-429.

Janet Hansen, "Student Loans: Are They Overburdening A Generation",
Chronicle of Hiaher Education (January 7, 1987): 18-25.
W. Lee Hansen and Marilyn S. Rhodes, "Manageability of Student Debt:
Before and After Reauthorization" (mimeo, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, June 1987).

V. Lee Hansen and Marilyn Rhodes, "Student Debt Crisis: Are Students
Incurring Excessive Debt?", Economics of Education Review
(forthcoming).

31

Terry Hartle and Richard Wabick, The Educational Indebtedness of Graduate

and Professional Students (Washington. DC: Educational Testing
Service, 1983).

Stephen Hoenack, "The Efficient Allocation of Subsidies to Higher
Education", American Economic Review 61 (June 1971): 302-211.

Stephen Hoenack and William Weiler, "The Demand for Higher Education and
Institutional Enrollment Forecasting", Economic Incuiry 17 (January
1979): 89-113.

John R. Kramer, "Will Legal Education Remain Affordable, By Whom and
How?", Duke Law Journal (April 1987): 240-275.
Law School Admissions Service, The Official Guide to U.S. Law Schools.

Prelaw Handbook: 1987-88 Edition (Newton, PA, 1987).
"Law School Applications Up Sharply", New York Times, April 1, 1988.
Tamar Lewin, "Increasingly, Pro Cash Beats Pro Bono", New York Times
Sunday, March 22, 1987.

Michael McPherson and Mary S. Skinner, "Paying for College: A Lifetime
Proposition", The Brookinas Review (Fall 1986): 29-36.
Lynn Miller, "Debt Trap", Student Lawyer (September 1987): 22-29.

National Association for Law Placement, Class of 1986 Emolovment Retort
and Salary Survey (Washington, DC: 1987) (l987a).

National Association for Law Placement, "Employment of Recent Law School

Graduates Report" (Washington, DC: November 20, 1987) (l987b).
National Association for Law Placement, Class of 1985 Emolovment Reoort

and Salan Survey (Washington, DC: May 17, 1987) (1987c).

32

P. Peter Pashigian, "The Market for Lawyers: The Determinants of the
Demand for and Supply of Lawyers", Journal of Law

and

Economics

(April 1977): 53-81.

A. Kenneth Pyle, "Legal Education in an Era of Change: The Challenge",
Duke Law Journal (April 1987): 191-203.

A. Kenneth Pyle and John R. Kramer, "Solvency and Survival After the Boom

A Different Perspective". Journal of Legal Education 34 (1984): 437461.

Aloysius Siow, "Occupational Choice Under Uncertainty", Econometrica 52
(May 1984): 631-647.

Lewis Solomon, "The Definition and Impact of College Quality" in Lewis
-Solomon and Paul Taubman-, eds., Does College Matter (New York, NY:

Academic Press, 1973).
Stephen Spurr, "How the Market Solves an Assignment Problem: The Matching
of Lawyers with Legal Claims", Journal of Labor Economics 5 (October
1987): 502-531.

David Stager and David Foot, "Changes in Lawyers' Earnings: The Impact of
Differentiation and Growth in the Canadian Legal Profession",
American Bar Foundation Research Journal (forthcoming).

David Stager and David Foot, "Lawyers' Earnings Under Market
Differentiation and Rapid Supply Expansion, 1970-80", University of
Toronto Institute for Policy Analysis Working Paper No. 8704
(February 1987) (l987a).

David Stager and David Foot, "Earnings and Employment of Female Lawyers"
(mimeo, University of Toronto, October 1987) (l987b).

33

David A. Stager, "Private/Public Sector Earnings Differentials: The Case
of Lawyers", Relations Industrielles (forthcoming).

Abbie Willard Thorner, "Legal Education in the Recruitment Marketplace:
Decades of Change", Duke Law Journal (April 1987): 276-291.

David H. Vernon and Bruce I. Zimmer, "The Size and Quality of the Law

School Applicant Pool: 1982-86 and Beyond", Duke Law Journal (April
1987): 204-238.

David Webster, "Who is Jack Gourman and Why is He Saying All Those Things
About My College?", Change (November/December 1984): 14-19, 45-55.

James White, "Legal Education in the Era of Change: Law School Autonomy",
Duke Law Journal (April 1987): 292-305.

Burton Weisbrod, "Nonprofit and Proprietary Sector Behavior: Wage
Differentials Among Lawyers", Journal of Labor Economics 1 (July
1983): 146-263.

Gary Zarkin, "Occupational Choice: An Application to the Market for
Public School Teachers", Ouarterlv Journal of Economics (May 1985):
411-446.

Bruce Zimmer, "Survival After the Boom: Managing Legal Education for
Solvency and Productivity", Journal of Legal Education 34 (1984):
462-478.

34

Footnotes

1. See, for example, Richard Freeman (1975), Peter Pashigian (1977)
and Aloysius Siow (1984).

2. For the U.S. studies, see footnote 1. The studies that use
Canadian data include David Stager and David Foot (1987a) (1987b) (forthcoming

3. See Pashigian (1977).

4. See David Vernon and Bruce Zimmer (1987). There was a slight
upturn in the number of applicants in 1986 and then a much larger increase
in 1987.

5. See, for example, David Stager (forthcoming), Stager and Foot
(1987a) (l987b) (forthcoming), and Burton Weisbrod (1983).

6. See Burton Weisbrod (1983). John Goddeeris (1988) has recently
reanalyzed the data Weisbrod used and found that once one accounts for
several statistical problems (more formally, self-selection bias and
choice-based sampling), one fails to find that public interest lawyers are

earning substantially less than they would have earned in alternative
types of practices.

7. See Stephen Spurr (1987).
8. See Spurr (1987) and National Association for Law

Placement

(l987a).

9. For studies of undergraduate student debt, see Janet Hansen

(1987). W. Lee

Hansen

and Marilyn Rhodes (1987) (forthcoming) and Michael

McPherson and Mary S. Skinner (1986). For studies of law, graduate and
professional student debt, see Terry Hartle and Richard Wabick (1983) and
John Kramer (1987).

10. See Kramer (1987).

35

11. See Ronald Ehrenberg and Daniel Sherman (1984). A related piece
is Stephen Hoenack (1971).

12. There are, of course, many other factors that influence a
school's starting salaries, including the specific geographic areas in

which the school's graduates tend to be employed. In the absence of such
data, I ignore these other factors here.

13. I appreciate the assistance of Jane Thieberger, Chair of the
NALP

Research

Committee, in making these calculations.

14. Since the NALP

data

contain a host of other information,

including (see footnote 12) detailed area of employment information, it
clearly would have been preferable to use them.

15. The Gourman Score comes from The Gourtugn Reoort which is claimed
by the author to be an objective evaluation based on a wide number of

criteria. No details are provided by Gourman on precisely how these
scores are calculated. Many people connected with legal education have
questioned Courman's methods and consider his ratings to be unreliable.

David Webster (1984) details similar concerns about Gourman's analogous
rankings of undergraduate colleges.

Since other rankings do not always agree with Gourman, it would be

desirable to redo the analysis below using other rankings. It is
interesting to note, however, that the correlation between the rankings of
the top 20 law schools ranked by Deans of law schools in a recent iLL.
News and World ReDort article and the rankings of the same scores in the

Opurman ReDort is about .85. Hence, the Gourman Scores may be
sufficiently accurate for my purposes. (An earlier study of college
graduates (Lewis Solomon (1973)) found that their earnings were

36

significantly related to the analogous Gourman rankings of their
undergraduate institutions.)
The actual Gourman Scores of accredited law schools in the Gourman

Reoort range from 2.10 to 4.95. I ignored the decimal points in my
analyses and thus will act as if the scores range from 210 to 495.
Finally, it is worth stressing that the Gourman and other rankings of
law schools would find it near impossible to get sufficient information to
actually measure the quality of legal education that any law school

provides. At best what they measure is the quality of inputs used in the
educational process (e.g., student quality, faculty quality, library size)

or subjective impressions of a law school's reputation. My goal is to see
if the legal labor market appears to reward attendance at "high quality"
institutions, as measured by such rankings.

16. Note that once public sector, public service, and public
interest law employment is controlled for, minorities are seen to receive
significantly higher job offers than nonminorities (some $11,000 or 30

percent higher). Thus, affirmative action pressures do seem important in
the legal labor market.

17. These are computed, respectively, by ((exp(- .50l))-1)*lOO and
((exp(_l.390))_l)*100.

18. As the bottom panel of Table 5 indicates, no such relationships
are found when the analyses are restricted to public law schools.

19. What is missing from this "picture" is an explanation of why
some law schools locate at the high rating-high cost end and others at the

low rating-low cost end of the market. Is it due to differences in law
school endowments, to the general status of the university a law school is

37

attached to, or to unique historical factors? An analysis of this issue
is far beyond the scope of this paper.

20. Implicitly, I am assuming here that starting salary
differentials across schools persist over graduates' lifetimes. If
earnings of graduates from higher rated schools tend to grow at a more
rapid (slower) rate, this will increase (decrease) the financial

attractiveness of attendance at these schools. Some evidence suggesting
that such differentials may decrease over time, as the 'true ability" of
individual lawyers is observed, is presented in Spurr (1987).

21. Vernon and Zimmer (1987).

22. Kramer (1987).
23. The 1987 survey, covering the class of 1987, was conducted by
the Chicago-based legal placement firm David J. White and Associates (as
were many of the earlier surveys) during the March to May 1987 period.

The published results were based on a survey of 8,000 law firms (with a
27.5% response rate) and on salary information from positions listed with
David J. White and Associates.

24. NALP (l987a).
25. NALP (1987b).
26. Average starting salaries of NALP respondents in their surveys
of the classes of 1985 and 1986 were 29,124 and 32,757 respectively (see

NALP (1987c) (1987a). If we take these figures as the "true" averages,
the computed LSAL variable is off by 11.4% for the class of 1985 and 4.4%

for the class of 1986. Prior to 1985, NALP did not report national
average salary information. While such figures could be calculated in
principle from the detailed data they report, such an effort is beyond the

38

scope

of this paper.

Typically starting lawyers in the federal government are hired at the
CS-li

grade.

In the fall of 1975 this grade's salary level was slightly

greater than the 1975 estimated LSAL value of $15,688. By the fall of
1987, the CS-Il salary had grown to slightly over $27,000 but LSAL had

risen to almost $37,000. This dramatic decline in the ratio of government
to private sector starting lawyers. salaries undoubtedly helps to explain
the declining proportion of new lawyers entering government service.

27. College Placement Council (1985) (1986) (1987).
28. I must again caution that equations (1) and (5) indicate that
the differences in salaries, not the ratios, are what determines expected
financial gain.

29. A hidden assumption in the comparison of law schools and
business schools is that tuition levels for given quality schools of each
type are equal.

30. Vernon and Zimmer (1987), Table 1 and New York Times (1988).

31. The discount rates reported in the text are the solutions to the
equations (1.8) —

(1-fr)4

and (2.0) —

(l+r)4.

32. See Pyle and Kramer (1984) and Kramer (1987).
33.

Law School Admission Service (1987), pp. 25-31. On the other

hand, these rates did tend to increase over the period and such increases
would, other things held constant, tend to decrease the financial return
from investing in a legal education.

34. See Kramer (1987).
35.

See

Tamar Lewin (1987).

36.

See

Baron's (1986).

39
37. See Barron's (1986).
38. In academic year 1986-87 private law schools' grants to students
averaged 10.5 percent of tuition and fees, while public law schools'

grants averaged 17.4 percent (ABA Memorandum QS8687-37, "Overview of
Scholarship Programs for 174 ABA-Approved Law Schools", March 17, 1987).

39. See Lynn

Miller

(1987). As of the fall of 1987, 13 of the 175

ABA-accredited law schools had some form of loan forgiveness program.

Annual income eligibility cut-offs for these programs ranged from $26,000
(at Pennsylvania) to $40,000 (at Yale) and eligibility under these

programs began as early as the first year after law school (Harvard) and
as late as six years after (Cornell).

40. See Ehrenberg and Sherman (1984).
41. See Ehrenberg and Sherman (1984) for formal proofs.
42. More formally, sensitivity is defined here as the percentage
decline in applicant quality that occurs in response to a given percentage
increase in the number of applicants. The intuition behind this last

result can be illustrated by an example. Suppose that the quality of
minority applicants to a law school falls off rapidly with the number
admitted but that it has a large number of fairly indistinguishable white

male applicants. It should, other things equal. give more aid to the
former as keeping their yield high will avoid the need to admit

substantially less qualified applicants. While it is true that giving
less aid to the latter will decrease their yield, admitting more of them
will not substantially reduce the average quality of enrollees from the
group.

43. See F.hrenberg and Sherman (1984) for details.

40
44. Recall from section II that higher rated schools can charge
higher tuition levels.

45. Ehrenberg and Sherman (1984) examined data on undergraduates at
one selective university and showed that all of the factors argued in
favor of an undergraduate financial aid policy at that university that
provided larger scholarships for minorities and high-ability students.

46. These statements are based on Miller (1987) and conversations
with administrators at a number of law schools. Several of the latter
were kind enough to provide me with copies of their school's formal
program documents.

47. I am grateful to Dean Peter Martin of the Cornell Law School for
suggesting this point to me.

Table 1
Average Starting Salary Equations: Law School's Class of 1985
(absolute value t statistics)
LSAL

SAL

LSAT

736.289 (4.9)*

(1)

(2)

(1)

576.871 (4.4)*

.0259 ( 4.3)*

(2)

.0201 ( 3.9)*

GOR

15.027 (2.1)*

11.404 (2.0)*

.0006 ( 2.1)*

.0004 C 1.8)

PUB

—2399.517 (3.5)5

—1178.186 (2.0)

—.0867 ( 3.3)

—.0435 ( 1.9)

791

—62.913 (0.9)

—27.879 (0.5)

MIN

68.789 (1.6)

111.630 (3.1)

—.0004 C 0.2)
.0014 ( 0.9)

Constant

—1895.394 (0.4)

8812.298 (2.4)

.0031 C 2.2)*

—.0086 ( 5•9)*

—230.675 (6.2)*

PS

.0007 ( 0.2)

9.1236 (59.8)

9.5054 (66.2)

2

.483

.605

.449

.572

n

99

98

99

98

*Coefficient is statistically significantly different from zero at
two—tail test.

the .05 level;

where SAL — average starting salary of graduates of the law school
LSAL — logarithm of average starting salary of graduates of the law school

LSAT — median LSAT score of enrolled students in the law school
GOR — "Gourman Score" of law school in latest ranking multiplied by 100
(range goes from 210 to 495)
PUB — 1—public institution 0—private institution
FEN — percentage of school's students that are females
MIN — percentage of school's students that are minorities
PS — percentage of achool's graduates placed in public Sector (government,
military or judicial clerkships), public service and public
interest positions

Source: 1) Barron's Guide to Law Schools: Seventh Edition (Hauppage, NY:
Barron's Educational Series, Inc., 1986) — SAL, LSAL, LSAT, PEN,
Ilin. PS.

2) The Gourman Report: A Rating of Graduate and Professional Programs
in Anerican and International Universities, Third Edition Revised
(Los Angeles, CA: National Education Standards, 1983) — GOR.
3) Meerican Bar Association, Memorandum QS8687—37, March 17, 1987 — PUB.

Table 2
Percentage of Students Entering Public Sector.
Public Service, and Public Interest Law
(absolute value t statistic)

Public

All Law Schools

A.

(1)

LSAT

.097 (0.3)

Private

(3)

(4)

.186 (0.6)

.270 (0.6)

—.009 (0.0)

—.030 (2.0)*

—.043 (2.1)*

—.013 (0.6)

(2)

GOP.

—.027 (1.9)

F(

.177 (1.3)

.145 (1.0)

.116 (0.5)

.235 (1.3)

MIN

.183 (2.0)*

.193 (2.1)*

.016 (0.1)

.258 (2.2)*

PUB

3.244 (2.2)*

Constant 21.490 (2.6)*

2

21.749 (2.6)*

28.226 (2.4)*

17.430 (1.5)

.080

.055

.037

.084

147

147

64

83

n

B.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

YEM

.052 (0.4)

.062 (0.4)

—.214 (1.0)

.236 (1.4)

MIN

.310 (3.9)*

.309 (3.9)*

0

—.001 (1.8)

PUB

1.176 (0.6)

Constant 25.265 (0.6)

2

.348 (3.0)*

.255 (2.3)

—.001 (2.9)*

—.000 (1.0)

—.001 (1.2)

26.578 (5.3)*

36.636 (4.7)*

17.404 (2.4)*

.137

.141

.132

.098

153

153

67

86

n

*Coefficient is statistically significantly different from zero at the .05
level, two—tail test.

where

o — Tuition

and fees for full—time students, out—of—state students' figures
used for public schools.

Table 3
The Relationship Between 1985—86 Law School Tuition and Fees
and the Gourman Score of the School
(absolute value t

statistics)

Logarithm of
i.ition and Fees

Tuition and Fees
(0)

(I)

(0)

(I)

All Schools (n..172)

GOR

13.673 (l0.5)*

11.411 (10.5)*

.002 ( 8.7)*

.002 ( 5.9)*

PUB

—2892.148 (14.0)*

—5606.822 (29.6)*

—.501 (13.0)*

—1.390 (29.0)*

2981.088 ( 6.4)*

3751.106 ( 8.8)*

8.186 (94.5)*

8.298 (77.0)*

Constant

.643

.850

.589

.836

Private Schools (n—99)

GOR
Constant

16.848 (10.6)*

.002 C 8.6)*

3•4)*

8.185 (94.8)*

1901.042 (
.530

.196

Public Schools (n.73)

GOR
Constant

8.915 ( 4.3)

3.259 ( 2.5)*

.002 ( 4.0)*

.001 C 2.0)*

1701.256 C 2.3)*

906.121 C 2.0)*

7.868 (46.3)*

7.076 (31.5)*

.193

.065

.206

.041

*Coefficient statistically significant from zero at .05 level, two—tail test.

where 0 —

Tuition

I —

Tuition

and Fees, for full—time students, out—of—state students'
figures used for public law schools
and Fees for full—time students, in—state students' figures
used for public law schools

Source: Barron's Guide to Law Schools: Seventh Edition (Hauppage, NY:
Barron's Educational Series, Inc., 1986) — 0, I.

Table 4
1985—86 Law School Tuition and Fee
(absolute value t

Equations

statistics)

Logarithm of
Tuition and Fees

Tuition and Fees

.-

(o

All Schools

(n..158)

.086

COMP
LIBSTU
STUFAC

PUB

(10.6)*

—218.010 (

—34.410 (

1.2)
1.3)

.066

—21.584
—44.912

( 8.8)*
( 0.1)
( 1.9)

—3005.827 (14.1)* —5738.228 (28.9)*

—.069
—.003

2639.019 (

3.6)

3990.174

( 5.8)*

.867

.689

( 1.9)
( 0.6)

—.511 (12.2)*
1.025

LCOMP
Constant

(I)

(0)

(I)

—2.347

( 9.0)
( 1.9)

—.042

—.008

( 0.8)
( 1.2)

—1.422 (25.7)*
.647
1.915

( 4•3)*
( 1.2)

.830

.627

Private Schools (n86)

COMP

.108 (1O.5)*

LIBSTU

—233.298 C

STUFAC

—4.057 (

1.0)
0.1)

LCOMP
Constant

635.695 (

0.6)

—.058

( 1.5)

.000

C 0.0)

.986

( 8.1)*

—1.984

C 1.5)

.442

.592

Public Schools (n72)
COMP

.055 (

3.9)*

LIBSTU —385.678 C 1.4)
STUPAC

—19.783 (0.4)

.007

—139.591

( 0.9)
( 0.7)

—.972 (0.0)

1713.129 (
.178

* Coefficient
level;

1.6)

1655.337

—.023

( 2.4)

C 1.1)

—.008 (0.8)
1.120

LCOMP
Constant

—.076

—3.833

( 5.0)
( 1.6)

.254

is statistic.Ily significantly different from zero

two—tail

—.055

( 0.6)

—.008 (0.6)
.284

4.545

( 0.9)
( 1.3)

—.027
at the

.05

test.

where COMP — median base salary and fringe benefits of law school's full—time
faculty in 1986—87
LCOMP — logarithm of COMP
LIBSTU — total number of volumes (in 000's) in the law school's library/
number of first—year students
STUTAC — student/faculty ratio in the school
-

Source: 1) Barron's Guide to Law School's: Seventh Edition (Mauppage. NT:
Barron's Educational Services. Inc., 1986) — LIBST1J, STUFAC.
2) American Bar Association, Memorandum QS8687—3, November 11, 1987— COMP.

Table 5

1985—86 Law School Applicant and Accepted
Applicant Yield Equations
(absolute value t statistics)

Accepted Applicant Yield (AAY)

(
(1)

All Schools

.0000

GOR

tO

(1)

— .385/n — 155)
—.001 (1.1)

(0.4)

—.1423 (5.2)*

(2)

.198/n — 165)

—.0001 (0.6)

—.0659 (5.2)*

Constant

1.6068 (7.3)*
.165

• .348/n

Private Schools

.0004

GOR

—.0002 (1.5)

—.0839 (2.5)*

LI

tO

Applicant Yield (AY)

(2)

—.0299 (1.9)*

.9802 (9.3)*

.9577 (3.5)

.5173 (3.9)*

.163

.044

.029

— 86)

(AY —

.170/n

=

95)

—.0002 (2.O)*

(1.7)

—.2294 (3.6)*

—.1375 (4.1)*

2.2693 (4.4)*

1.4683 (5.3)*

LI
Constant

.123

.371

Public Schools ( — .431/n
GOR

—.0003 (1.5)

tO

—.0599 (1.3)

LI
Constant

(V — .228/n

69)

—.0004 (1.9)

.0001 (0.3)

1.0392 (2.8)*

— 70)
.0000 (0.1)

—.0124 (0.1)
—.0632 (1.9)

.064

*

—

1.031 (4.1)*
.089

.0727 (1.1)

.2864 (0.4)

—.028

—.3323 (0.7)

—.009

Coefficient

is statistically significantly different from zero at the .05
level; two—tail test.
*Applicant yield equals enrolled first—year students/applicants; accepted
applicant yield equals enrolled first—year students/accepted applicants.

and

LO —

logarithm

LI —

logarithm

of tuition and fees for full—tine students, out of state
students figures used for public law schools.
of tuition and fees for full—time students, in—state students
figures used for public law schools.

Table 6

Comparison of Law School Tuition and Law Scho1
Graduates' Starting Salaries in Seven Cities

Year/City Boston Chicago Los Angeles Philadelphia Milwaukee New York Washington
A) Ratio of Law School Tuition to Starting Salary
.27

.20

.20

.19

.19

.29

.19

.20

.19

.31

.15

.32

.20

.20

.21

.32

.17

.32

.19

.26

.21

.27

.33

.15

.32

.18

.27

.23

1981

.29

.34

.17

.33

.19

.29

.25

1982

.32

.37

.19

.35

.23

.33

.28

1983

.36

.40

.19

.39

.23

.35

.31

1984

.32

.32

.15

.37

.22

.28

.29

1985

.34

.31

.15

.37

.22

.28

.29

1986

.34

.32

—

.37

.24

.30

.32

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

.22
.22
.25
.25

.26
.26

.16

B) Difference Between Starting Salary and Tuition in Real Terms
$10,362

$11,059

$13,230

$12,943

9,810

11,565

13,947

13,717

12,869

8,890

10,701

14,892

12,479

8,987

11,958

9.036

11,663

11,810

13.137

9,352

8,622

12,068

9,307

12,589

11,176

12,358

1981

8,881

8,704

11,217

8,830

11,095

10,248

11,230

1982

8,274

8,055

10,081

8,464

10,003

9.041

9.944

1983

7,532

7,393

10,314

7,441

9.880

8,787

9,293

1984

9,560

10,725

13,886

8,523

10,553

12,770

11,119

1985

9,467

11,595

8,710

10,136

13,435

10,967

1986

10,023

11,748

14,147
—

9.514

10.071

12,744

10,658

1976
1977
1978
1979

1980

$11,073 $11,046
11,491
10.416
10,143

10.865
9,004

$13,000
13,050

5Average starting salaries in the city are for the class of (year) in nonpatent law
firms in the city. Tuition and fees data for full—time students are for Harvard
(Boston), Chicago (Chicago , UCLA—out—of—state (Los Angeles), Pennsylvania (Philadelphia), Marquette (Milwaukee), NYU (New York City) and Georgetown (Washington, DC).

Sources: Student Lawyer's "Annual Salary Survey" (various issues, November 1976 to
November 1986) — salary.
Anerican Bar Association Memoranda QS8586—53 (July 28, 1986) and QS868748
(December 3, 1986) — tuition and fee..
1987 Economic Report of the President (Washington, DC: U.S. Government
Printing Office, January 1987), Table B55 — consumer price index.

16.920

21,560

24.000

31.524

to do the

17.688

17.813

I9,063

20.819

22.688

23.938

24.938

30.688

32.438

34.188

36.873

available

1971

1918

)97

I980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1983

1986

1987

—

—

—

—

TPIV

TPUI

C?!

7

30.348

28.584

28.500

26,580

25.620

I9,332

21,876

19.980

18.540

17,424

15,840

•

23,640

22.404

20,748

19.980

19,080

18.316

16,440

15.024

13,476

a
a

a
a

ASAI&

in

34,248

32,388

30,444

30,492

30,288

27.76g

26,268

23,652

20,976

19.428

18,036

15,888
16.620

ASAIS

8.286

7,326

6,898

6,266

5,617

4.926

4.316

3,805

3.457

2,856
3,148

2.500

2.305

?PSV

2.135

2,006

1,803

1.668

1.490

1.308

1,143

1.030

964

883

863

180

716

ThIS
CPT

328.4

322.2

311.1

298.4

289.1

272.4

246.8

217.4

195.4

181.5

110.5

161.2

147.7

Th. College Placesent Council, inflation end the College Graduste: An Update 1962—1985, and
the College Placesent Council Salary Survey (July 1986, July 1987) — ASALI.ASAL2. ASAL3.
ASMA. ASALS; Student Lawyer's "Annual Salary Survey" (various issues. Ilovesber 1975 to
Nove.ber 1987) — LSAL; AlA Ne.oranda C8687—48 (Dece.ber 3. 1986). QS8586—53 (July 23. 1986)
and QS8384—42 (I4arch 19, 1984) — TPRV. TPU8; 1987 Econo.tc Report of the President
(Washington, DC: U.S. Govern.ent Printing 0111cc, January 1987). Table 855 — CU.

of

calculation..

20.256

19,296

17.932

16.560
17.724

15.432

15,992

14,448
15.396

12.864

11,664

10,716

10,356

9,840

9,240

ASALI

12.888

11,796

10.452

9.720

9,300

8,676

ASM.2

Average annual starting
salary of lawyer, entering nonpatent law firas acrosa 8 cities (Atlanta,
baton. Chicigo, Los Angeles. Philadelphia.Nilwaukee, New Tork City, and Washington. DC).
This
avsrage doe. not weight each city's
figure by the nu.ber of lawyers raployed in the city.
Average annual starting
salary of NSA graduates who had nontechnicalundergraduate degrees.
Average annual starting salary of college bradustee who .ajored in the bu.anities.
Average annual starting salary of college graduates
who uajored in the social sciences
(including econo.ics until 1978—79).
Averags annuat atarting aslary
colisge graduates who .ajored
econo.ics.
Average annual starting salary of NSA graduates who had technical undergraduets degrees.
Average private law school tuition in the previous scadesic year (e.g., 1981 figursa refer to
the 1986—87 acade.ic year).
Average public law school resident student tuition in the previoua acade.ic year.
Consuser Price Index in tha previous year (1967
100).

burc.ai

—

ASAL5

—

—

—

—

ASAIA

ASALI
ASAL2
ASAL3

wher.
LSAL

15.876

16.188

1976

are not

15,000

17.976

ASALI

LtAL

15,688

.1

1975

Cl...

Table

Average Annual Starting Salaries of Law School Graduates in Ilonpatent Law Fir..,
Average Annual Starting Salaries of Individuela With Other Degree.. Average
Law School Tuition, in the Acedenic Year, and the Consu..r Price index

Table 8

Ratio

of the Average Starting Salaries of Lawyers in
Nonpatent Law Firms to the Average Starting Salaries
of Graduates With Other Degrees

Classof

Ri

P.2

P.3

P.4

KS

1975

1.046

1.808

1.698

a

0.987

1976

1.020

1.741

1.645

a

0.974

1977

1.045

1.820

1.708

a

0.981

1978

0.991

1.704

1.662

a

0.917

1979

0.986

1.616

1.634

1.414

0.909

1980

0.969

1.620

1.623

1.389

0.883

1981

0.945

1.570

1.621

1.388

0.863

1982

0.934

1.555

1.551

1.292

0.862

1983

0.938

1.506

1.574

1.307

0.823

1984

1.077

1.731

1.761

1.536

1.006

1985

1.135

1.850

1.750

1.563

1.065

1986

1.127

1.771

1.711

1.525

1.056

1987

1.170

1.820

1.685

1.560

1.077

aData are not available to do the calculations

where

Ri — LSALIASAL1
9.2 - LSAL/ASAL2

P.3 — LSAL/ASAL3

P.S -

R4 - LSAL/ASAL4

See Table 7 for variable definitions and for sources of the data.

LSAL/ASALS

Table 9
Estimated Change in the Present Value of a Law School
Degree Relative to the Present Value of
Alternative Degrees*

Time Period

(2)

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)

—

* —1,398

1975—76 From 1974—75

S —2,462

$ 13,275

$ 12,971

1976—77

1975—76

10,963

30,122

28,834

—

4,295

1977—78

1976—77

—13,174

4,296

9,214

—

—20,118

1978—79

1977—78

1,856

18,925

24,913

—

—3,612

1979—80

1978—79

—2.177

45,317

43,645

34,260

—15,249

1980—81

1979—80

—8,201

50,536

59,255

48,321

—17,736

1981—82

1980—81

—4,630

48,143

38,202

19,035

—7,035

1982—83

1981—82

5,006

27,457

45,165

37,316

—41,142

1983—84

1982—83

121,733

162,067

152,429

166,563

167,000

1984—85

1983—84

59,955

87,045

54,294

60,452

61,449

1985—86

1984—85

11,770

37,506

45,079

37,433

4,316

1986—87

1985—86

58,722

81,841

56,523

72,912

36,232

Author's
TPRV and
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
See

$

calculations using data from Table 7 and equation (5) in the text.
CPI are used in all columns while column
uses LSAL and ASAL1
uses LSAL and ASAL2
uses LSAL and ASAL3
uses LSAL and ASAL4
uses LSAL and ASAL5

Table

7 for variable definitions.

*

A positive number implies law degree was becoming relatively more attractive
as compared to the alternative. A negative number implies the opposite.

Table 10

Average Salaries for Young Lawyers in Nonpatent
Law Firms, By Experience: 1982—1986

Atlanta

ilL
1982

24.0

QL
26.0

25.0

L
28.0

Q
Boston

29.0

(S)

ilL

22.5

24.0

25.5

27.0

28.5

26.8

29.0

31.0

1983

25.5

27.0

28.5

30.0

31.0

23.0

1984

29.5

i

32.0

34.0

37.0

39.5

28.5

31.0 2.2

37.5

40.0

33.0

37.5

42.0

30.0

32.5

37.5

39.0

43.0

33.0

36.5

39.0

41.5

45.0

(S)

(1)

(2)

(3)
28.0

1985
1986

1982

1983
1984

29.0

31.0

23.5

24.5

25.5

!

27.0

28.5

23.0

25.0

26.5

24.0

25.5

27.0

28.5

29.5

25.0

27.0

29.5

31.0

37.5

39.5

33.0

34.0

36.0

38.0
.t9..9

41.5

30.5

32.0

32.0

34.5
Chicago

.W !L
36.0

33.5

38.0

43.5

Los Angeles

1985

35.5

36.5

38.0

42.5

47.0

35.0

36.5

37.0

1986

37.5

38.0

39.0

43.0

48.0

36.5

38.0

39.0

(S)

(1)

1982

(S)
25.0

Washington, DC

New York

ilL

ilL

(2)

(3)

27.0

29.0

31.0

32.5

25.5

27.0

28.5

30.0

36.5

26.5

LQ

29.5

31.0

33.0

38.0

41.0

33.5

39.5

34.5

40.0

(3)

1983

26.5

29.0

31.5

34.0

1984

36.0
39.0
40.0

37.5

40.0
43.0

1e3.5

46.0

46.0

48.5

31.5
33.0

45.0

48.0

50.0

34.0

1985

1986

41.0
43.0

30.0
33.0
46.5
47.0
47.5

45.0

32.0
33.0
45.0
46.5
48.0

where
(S) —

starting

(1) —

salary with
salary with
salary with
salary with

(2) —
(3) —
(4) —

salary
one year's experience
two yeaxs' experience
three years'experience

four years' experience

Source: Student Lawyer's "Annual Salary Surveys" (November 1982, 1983, 1984,
1985, 1986 issues).

