NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS GREAT INFORMATION GOOD ENOUGH? EVIDENCE FROM PHYSICIANS
AS PATIENTS
Michael D. Frakes
Jonathan Gruber
Anupam Jena
Working Paper 26038
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26038

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2019

We are grateful to the Military Health Agency for providing the data used in this project, to the
NIA for funding, and to Ian Calaway and Tim Simmons for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Michael D. Frakes, Jonathan Gruber, and Anupam Jena. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is Great Information Good Enough? Evidence from Physicians as Patients
Michael D. Frakes, Jonathan Gruber, and Anupam Jena
NBER Working Paper No. 26038
July 2019
JEL No. H51,I11
ABSTRACT
Stemming from the belief that the key barrier to achieving high-quality and low-cost health care
is the deficiency of information and medical knowledge among patients, an enormous number of
health policies are focused on patient education. In this paper, we attempt to place an upper
bound on the improvements to health care quality that may emanate from such information
campaigns. To do so, we compare the care received by a group of patients that should have the
best possible information on health care service efficacy—i.e., physicians as patients—with a
comparable group of non-physician patients, taking various steps to account for unobservable
differences between the two groups. Our results suggest that physicians do only slightly better in
adhering to both low- and high-value care guidelines than non-physicians – but not by much and
not always.
Michael D. Frakes
Duke University
School of Law
210 Science Drive
Box 90362
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
Michael.frakes@law.duke.edu

Anupam Jena
Department of Health Care Policy
Harvard Medical School
180 Longwood Avenue, Door A
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
jena@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics, E52-434
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26038

I.

INTRODUCTION
There is widespread belief in health care that the deficiency in information and medical

knowledge among consumers is the key barrier to achieving high-quality health outcomes and
lower costs of care. An enormous number of health policies follow from this assumption, including
efforts to educate patients about health, both at a population level through large-scale public health
campaigns (e.g., campaigns to encourage exercise and healthier diets) and at an individual level
through provider-led patient education (e.g., education of patients about the inappropriateness of
antibiotics for the common cold, the importance of vaccination, etc.), decision-making support,
and so on. In addition to information-based policies intended to improve health, other important
demand-side approaches intended to improve the efficiency of health care (e.g., high-deductible
health plans) focus on increasing direct consumer engagement in the purchase of health care,
relying heavily on the notion that informing patients about the costs and benefits of health care
services can steer patients towards higher-quality, more efficient care.
The widely prevailing view that information scarcity is a key obstacle to achieving high
quality health outcomes raises the basic question: is it simply inadequate medical knowledge and
information among patients that has limited the utility of various demand-side approaches to health
improvement? If so, it remains possible that improvements could be made along both cost and
quality lines should policymakers and providers encourage even greater levels of information
disclosure to patients, a point not only stressed by patient-centered health care enthusiasts
promoting shared decision-making models, but also intrinsic to the many public health efforts that
aim to use patient education as a primary way to improve health. In this paper, we attempt to shed
light on whether eliminating the scarcity of information in medical knowledge – an extreme form

2

of information disclosure – could plausibly lead to the delivery and receipt of higher value patient
care.
A natural way to explore the importance of scarcity of medical knowledge and information
is to look at the care received by a group of patients that should have the best possible information
on health care service efficacy: physicians. The decisions of physicians about which type of health
care to receive would likely place an upper bound on how well non-physicians could do in selecting
their health care treatments if fully informed about the costs and benefits of different types of
health care interventions. With the exception of Johnson and Rehavi (2016), who focused on a
single health care service – cesarean sections – there is no work which has been able to study the
role of physicians as patients.
We are able to address this shortfall by using a source of data previously unexploited in
economics research: data on physicians in the Military Health System (MHS). The MHS provides
health insurance for all active duty military, their dependents, and retirees. Care is provided both
directly on military bases and purchased from an off-base network of contracted providers. The
MHS is one of the largest sources of health care spending in the U.S., with spending of over $50
billion per year. We have gathered data on the complete claims records for all MHS enrollees over
a ten-year period. Importantly, this includes the claims data for MHS physicians when they are
treated as patients themselves (drawing from records of over nearly 35,000 military physicians).
The ability to observe physicians as patients provides us with a unique and powerful opportunity
to answer the question: do especially well informed patients elect to receive higher value medical
services?
For these purposes, we evaluate the quality of health care services received by physicians
and non-physicians, focusing on a set of services for which objective, evidence-based standards

3

exist. In particular, we assess whether physicians receive more services deemed “high value” by
the relevant medical literature and fewer services deemed “low-value,” in each case relative to the
less-informed comparison group of similar non-physician patients. An example of low value care
is a chest x-ray before eye surgery, a very low risk procedure for which pre-operative diagnostic
testing is not recommended. An example of high value care would be statin therapy for patients
with cardiovascular disease. If deficiency of medical knowledge and information is an important
reason why demand-side interventions to improve patient health have met with limited success,
we should expect that physicians as patients would exhibit markedly higher levels of adherence to
high-value health care services and lower levels of low-value care compared to otherwise similar
non-physician patients.
One concern with this analysis, of course, is that physicians may be of different health
statuses and have different tastes for medical interventions than non-physicians. We address this
concern in five ways. First, we choose conditions and health care treatments over which there is
widespread agreement in the medical community about how care should be provided; e.g., it is
widely understood that little pre-operative care is needed for benign surgeries like eye surgery, a
medical recommendation that does not depend on underlying health risks of individuals. By
limiting our focus to specific care recommendations that are agreed to apply to all patients, we
diminish concerns that the observed levels of services received by a given patient may be driven
by variation in unobservable health status and expected benefits specific to that patient. Second,
by examining both low- and high-value care, we can rule out one-sided bias; e.g., if physicians are
unobservably healthy, they will get less low-value care but also less high-value care. Third, we
control for a rich set of health indicators, including prior year medical spending, that correlate with
any underlying health differences across groups. Fourth, we compare physicians to other military

4

officers, to control for underlying tastes. Finally, we compare dependents of physicians with
dependents of military officers, two groups that are likely even more similar along unobservables,
but who should still benefit from the informational advantages of their physician family member.
Our results suggest that physicians do only slightly better than non-physicians – but not by
much and not always. Across most of our low-value settings, physicians receive less low-value
care than do non-physicians, but the differences are modest, and generally amount to less than onefifth of the gap between what is received by non-physicians and recommended guidelines. The
results are slightly more mixed in the case of the high-value care analysis, with some evidence
suggesting that physicians appear to receive high-value care at roughly the same rate received by
non-physicians and some evidence suggesting that physicians do slightly better than nonphysicians. These results provide a rough boundary on the extent to which additional information
disclosure (beyond prevailing levels) can be expected to improve the delivery of health care in the
U.S. Relatedly, these findings suggest that, despite the threat to the optimality of the health care
system posed by information asymmetries between physicians and patients (Arrow 1963), most of
the explanation behind the over- and under-utilization of low- and high-value services likely arises
from factors other than informational deficiencies of patients.
Moreover, in the case of low-value care—where we do find modest physician effects—we
attempt to shed light on the mechanisms underlying any information channel. We do not find
consistent evidence to suggest that the observed average physician effects arise from the patient’s
choice of a low-intensity physician or from a reduced scope for physician induced demand. Given
these findings, it is likely that some of the modest physician effects we estimate arise simply from
informed patients making higher quality choices at the moment of the care decision itself.

5

Our paper proceeds as follows. Part II reviews the existing literature on the impacts of
health care information initiatives and provides a conceptual overview behind our approach of
observing physicians as patients as a means of exploring the bounds of the quality gains that may
arise from greater information disclosure. Part III provides a background on the Military Health
System and discusses our data and empirical methodology. Part IV presents the results of our
analysis and Part V concludes.

II.

LITERATURE REVIEW AND CONCEPTUAL OVERVIEW

II.A. Previous Literature on Information-Sharing Policies
An essential component to most modern proposals for a consumer-driven, patient-centered
approach to health care is the provision of sufficient information to patients to facilitate their
informed medical decisions. The question is whether there is a way to transmit sufficient
information, and whether that is enough to create informed medical decisions.
A number of studies show that patients typically enter their treatment regimens with
relatively little information on their treatment options. Several studies survey patients with
particular conditions or undergoing particular procedures and “quiz” them on their knowledge of
the relevant options, generally documenting very low levels of understanding (Pope 2017). For
instance, Weeks et al. (2012) found that only 19% of patients with colorectal cancer understood
that chemotherapy was not likely to cure their cancer. Similarly, Kureshi et al. (2014) found that
only 3% of patients scheduled for percutaneous coronary intervention understood that procedure.
A range of similar studies have endeavored to explore the capacity of patients to understand
their scenarios in the first place. A representative study of this latter nature can be found in Herz
et al. (1992), in which the researchers provided pre-treatment teaching sessions by a neurosurgeon

6

to a group of 106 patients receiving either anterior cervical fusion or lumbar laminectomy.
Immediately after the session, patients were given a basic written test and, on average, scored only
43.5 percent. Given the simplicity of the questions, the authors concluded that greater information
disclosure to patients cannot necessarily ensure accurate comprehension. 1
Another relevant empirical literature examines a set of policy initiatives that are aimed at
facilitating patient / consumer choice of hospitals and physicians. Among these market-based
policies are those that require hospitals (and, sometimes, physicians) to publicly report on various
specified outcomes, whether at the state level (e.g., CABG report card programs in New York and
Pennsylvania) or at the federal level (e.g., Medicare Hospital Compare program). Studies suggest,
however, that the vast majority of patients do not even access this public information in the first
place (Kaiser Family Foundation 2008; Associated Press—NORC Center for Public Affairs
Research 2014). Moreover, even when patients are aware of the disclosed information, it is unclear
whether it affects their decisions. 2 A number of studies have evaluated the effect of provider report
cards on provider market shares, generally finding mixed results (with most such studies focusing
on the context of cardiac surgery). Among those studies finding some impact of report cards on
provider choice include Bundorf et al. (2009), Wang et al. (2011), and Cutler et al. (2004). Among
those studies finding either no impact or only minor impacts include Kolstad (2013), Romano and
Zhou (2004), Mukamel et al. (2010), Schneider and Epstein (1998). Even in those studies
documenting report card effects, however, such responses need not necessarily emanate from
individual patient choice itself but may instead reflect either employer or managed-care responses.

1
2

Meisel and Roth (1983) survey additional early studies on the degree to which patients understand disclosures by their physicians.
See Madison (2017) for a recent discussion of information forcing initiatives at the state and federal level.

7

II.B.

Overview of Physicians-as-Patients Approach to Exploring Impacts of Information

Disclosure
Even with strong physician disclosure of information, patients may face inherent
limitations in their ability to process this information—e.g., due, in some cases, to the lack of
intellectual capacity or educational background. or due to the fact that patients are often in diseased
states during the time of disclosure, impeding their ability to absorb this information. In our
analysis, we look to the decisions of a set of patients—e.g., physicians as patients themselves—
that are less likely to suffer from these particular limitations. As such, our approach is designed
to provide an upper bound on the gains that may arise from providing patients with greater sources
of information at the clinical decision-making stage.
This bounding approach is similar to two relatively recent studies on the impacts of medical
expertise, beginning with Bronnenberg et al.’s (2015) analysis of consumer behavior using scanner
data. Bronnenerg et al. compare the use of store brand versus generic products—e.g., over-thecounter medications, pantry supplies, etc.—in the case of expert versus non-expert shoppers. Of
closest relevance to our piece is their finding that pharmacists are substantially more likely to
choose generic headache medicines (roughly 91% of the time) compared with the average
consumer (choosing generic headache medicines roughly 74% of the time).
Johnson and Rehavi (2013) perform a similar informed-consumer analysis, though one that
focuses more on an actual patient-physician encounter. They explore cesarean section delivery.
Using vital statistics data from California matched with licensure information from physicians,
they find that informed patients—i.e., physician mothers—are roughly 10 percent (relative to the
mean) less likely to deliver children via cesarean section in comparison with non-physician
mothers. Johnson and Rehavi’s focus is on the implications of their findings for physician induced
8

demand, arguing that their findings provide evidence that excess care is provided. Another
interpretation of their results, however, is as a bound on the effects of a perfectly informed
consumer. Estimates typically suggest that cesarean sections are widely over used, so that a 10%
relative reduction is fairly modest if this is the full information benchmark.
There are limitations, however, in using their study as a measure of the bounded effects of
information (which should not be taken as a criticism of their study, since this was not the intended
purpose). First, they are unable to address the general concern that physicians may generally have
tastes for less intensive care (which would overstate the information effects) or more intensive care
(which means that they understate the effect of being a more informed consumer). Second, they
only examine one clinical setting—i.e., cesarean section delivery—implicating generalizability
concerns.
In our analysis to follow, we likewise explore whether patients with superior medical
knowledge and information—physician patients—ultimately receive more appropriate medical
care.

But we do so across a much broader array of clinical settings that comprise both “high-

value” and “low-value” medical care, drawing on the medical literature for guidance in selecting
the appropriate high- and low-value care medical guidelines. As we discuss below, focusing on
both ends of the quality spectrum in this manner allows us to separate the impacts of differential
knowledge between physician patients and non-physician patients from the impacts arising from
any underlying health differences (or health care preferences) between these two groups. In the
next section, we provide a background on the Military Health System and summarize our data and
methodological approaches; in this process, we describe in detail, the particular clinical contexts
and health care choices that drive this investigation.

9

Of course, our approach has limitations as well. In particular, this is only a partial
equilibrium analysis that examines the treatment of particularly well-informed patients, as opposed
to a general equilibrium change in the entire informational environment. If treatment decisions
are driven primarily by medical providers, and those providers have established patterns of
treatment, then there may be no change in treatment between more and less informed patients. A
broader and effective information intervention could change treatment patterns more broadly.
However, we are unaware of any examples of successful interventions of this broader type.
III.

BACKGROUND ON MILITARY HEALTH SYSTEM, DATA AND METHODOLOGY

III.A. Background on Military Health System
The Military Health System (MHS) is the primary payer of health care services for all
active duty military, their dependents and retirees through the TriCare program. TriCare is not
involved in health care delivery in combat zones and operates separately from the Department of
Veterans Affairs’ Veterans Health Administration health service delivery system (Schoenfeld et
al. 2016). The MHS actually consists of two systems. For some beneficiaries, the MHS directly
delivers health care at Military Treatment Facilities (MTF) on military bases (i.e., the “Direct
Care” system). For other beneficiaries, the MHS purchases care from private providers who are
within a contracting administrator’s network (i.e., the “Purchased Care” system), similar to most
privately insured in the U.S. Whether MHS beneficiaries receive care on the base or off the base
is largely a function of where they live. Those living close to the MTFs are expected to receive

10

care from the MTF and those living farther away are expected to go to civilian providers off the
base. 3
While all military members, families and retirees face coverage under the MHS, the system
does offer alternative insurance plans with different cost-sharing and other terms. All active-duty
personnel are required to enroll in TRICARE Prime plans. While facing other alternatives, nearly
90% of the non-active duty in our records likewise choose to enroll in TRICARE Prime.
TRICARE Prime beneficiaries who are active duty or dependents of active duty face no out-ofpocket costs whether they go on the base for care (Direct Care) or off the base for care (Purchased
Care). 4
III.B. Data
The data for our analysis come from the Military Health System Data Repository (MDR),
which is the main database of health records maintained by the MHS.

Broadly, it provides

incident-level claims data across a range of clinical settings and contexts, with data on inpatient
stays, outpatient stays, pharmaceutical records, and radiological and laboratory testing, in all cases
for both the Direct Care and Purchased Care settings. Each record provides details regarding the
encounter—primarily the diagnosis and procedure codes associated with the event and various
other utilization metrics. Furthermore, the MDR database also contains separate files with
coverage, demographic, geographic and other information on each MHS beneficiary, which we
link to the claims records.

3

In principle, enrollees who live within the “catchment area” of an MTF hospital or the “prism” area of an MTF clinic are supposed to go to the
MTF for care. These area, respectively, were defined as 40 miles and 20 miles originally, although the military has shifted to time-based boundaries
over time. But our data show clearly that this rule is not rigorously enforced during our sample period. As is clear from the data, those who live
closer to an MTF are much more likely to go there, but with a more gradual fall off rather than a strong distance discontinuity.
4
Matters are slightly different for prescription cost-sharing, however. Active duty patients have no co-payments regardless of their care location.
Non-active-duty patients likewise pay no co-payments when filling their prescriptions at MTF pharmacy facilities, though they do pay small copayments when filling prescriptions via mail order ($7 for generics) or at civilian retail pharmacies ($11 for generics).

11

Critically, these data provide Department-of-Defense-specific identifiers for each MHS
beneficiary. The Direct Care records use those same identifiers to acknowledge the identity of the
provider in charge of the care represented in those records. The fact that these same identifiers are
used to identify both patients and providers presents us with a unique opportunity—that is, the
ability to observe active-duty MHS physicians as patients themselves. Large-scale health care
claims databases of this sort rarely provide information on the profession of the patient, let alone
with enough specificity to identify those patients who are also physicians. As will be discussed
further below, the key methodological thrust of our paper is to take advantage of this opportunity
and to compare the care received by physicians as patients with the care received by otherwise
similar non-physicians in an effort to elucidate the role that information plays in encouraging more
high-value care and less low-value care.
One of the empirical challenges in this exercise is to ensure that the physician and nonphysician comparison groups are otherwise equal, such that the differences that we observe
between these groups can be attributed to the informational advantages of the physician-as-patients
group. Non-comparability concerns arise in at least two key dimensions. First, physician patients
and non-physician patients may need health care services to different degrees given differences in
underlying health statuses. Second, even aside from need, physician patients and non-physician
patients may prefer health care services to different degrees—e.g., perhaps physicians have
especially little time to seek care for their own maladies. We take a number of approaches to
address this concern throughout the analysis below.
At the outset, we emphasize several sample selection choices that are helpful in addressing
comparability concerns between physician and non-physician patients. First, in most of the
contexts we explore, we focus on environments in which the medical community has reached an

12

evidence-based consensus that certain specified actions should be taken or should not be taken for
nearly all patients. With this degree of clinical clarity, should a patient’s care deviate from this
medical guidance, that deviation is less likely to be driven by unobservable features of the health
status of the patient in question. Second, we remove any differences in financial incentives by
limiting the analysis to those beneficiaries with TRICARE Prime coverage.
Finally, in each clinical context that we explore, we attempt to construct comparison groups
among MHS beneficiaries that are similar to active-duty physicians in terms of socio-economic
status and of the demands of their time, both of which may bear on a patient’s inclination to receive
particular forms of medical care. For these purposes, we limit our attention to non-physician
military officers. In alternative specifications, we alter the composition of both our treatment and
control groups to focus on dependents—that is, we compare dependents of physicians with
dependents of officers. This approach is premised on the idea that dependents of active duty
physicians may benefit from the knowledge of their physician family members, to the extent the
physician family members are involved in the clinical decision-making for the affected patients.
One benefit that this approach has over comparing physicians to non-physician officers is that the
dependents on both sides may be otherwise more similar to each other—especially in terms of the
demands on their time—relative to the similarity between active duty physicians and officers. As
discussed further below, it is true in the case of observable patient characteristics that the treatmentcontrol differential is generally smaller in the case of the dependents sample relative to the
sponsors sample.
To proceed further, we provide more specifics on the first of these key sample selection
strategies—that is, identifying certain clinical contexts in which medical guidelines setting forth
low- and high-value care are clearly established. In the Online Appendix, we provide much of the

13

specifics regarding the construction of the relevant low- and high-value care samples. In the text
to follow, we very briefly summarize the samples and outcome measures explore.
III.C

Low vs. High Value Care
In order to assess the role of informed consumers in making medical decisions, we contrast

the treatment of physicians to non-physician patients when receiving care that is, by medical
consensus, either low or high value care. Services receiving the label of “high value” can be
thought of as those with clinical benefits that more than justify the costs and harms of those
services, while low value is the opposite.
Low-Value Care: Labor and Delivery
The first instance of low-value care that we consider is cesarean delivery. The low-value
label applied by the health care community in this context is not premised on the idea that cesareans
should never be performed, but rather that they should be performed at less the half of the rates
that currently prevail (World Health Organization, 2015). To explore the potential impact of
greater information disclosure to patients on cesarean rates, we compare cesarean use between
physician and non-physician mothers using the sub-sample of deliveries in the MDR (on and off
the base). We consider the incidence of any cesarean delivery, along with the incidence of a
“primary” cesarean delivery, the latter of which removes from the relevant delivery sample breech
deliveries, multiple deliveries (e.g., twins) and previous cesarean deliveries—i.e., types of
deliveries of which physicians have less discretion in the cesarean decision.
Low Value Care: Pre-operative care for low-risk surgeries
While cesareans are low-value in the sense of being over-used, other forms of health care
are “low value” in the sense that the relevant medical guidelines recommend that such services not
be performed at all. We next consider a low-value measure of this nature: pre-operative diagnostic

14

testing prior to low-risk surgeries. For these purposes, we consider the sample of low-risk
surgeries specified by Schwartz et al. (2012)—e.g., cataract removal and hernia repair—and
thereafter flag the incidence of the following unnecessary tests prior to—i.e., within 30 days of—
the relevant low-risk surgery: chest radiography, complete blood count, coagulation panel or
comprehensive metabolic panel. We estimate specifications that consider these tests individually,
while also estimating specifications that pool them.
As a robustness exercise, we also consider an alternative to the Schwartz et al. list of lowrisk surgeries. We use the inpatient and outpatient MDR records to identify a set of surgeries with
low mortality rates (mortality of less than 1 per 1,000 surgeries within 30 days following the
surgery/procedure). Once again, preoperative testing for these very low risk surgeries is deemed
low value care.
High-Value Care: Diabetes
In our first high-value care analysis, we focus on a sample of patients with diabetes and
follow them throughout the course of the relevant sample year to determine if they received
“Comprehensive Diabetes Care” (CDC), as that term is specified by the Healthcare Effectiveness
Data and Information Set (HEDIS). To better ensure comparability in health status across patients,
we limit the sample to those who have had a diabetes diagnosis flagged in their medical records
for at least two years prior to the relevant observation year. We identify compliance with CDC by
receipt of all of the following: (1) hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) testing, (2) retinal eye exam, and (3)
medical attention for nephropathy. Following HEDIS, we also assess whether the focal diabetes
patient receives statin therapy over the observation year (subject to certain additional sample
restrictions).
High-Value Care: Cardiovascular Care

15

In our next high-value care analysis, we assess whether patients comply with the HEDIS
protocols for cardiovascular care, focusing on the subsample of patients with a previous
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease diagnosis (CD sample). Within this sub-sample, we follow
patients over a year-long observation period and identify high value care by observing (a) whether
the affected patient received statin therapy (of high or moderate intensity) at least once over this
period or, alternatively, (b) the number of days over the year in which patients filled a prescription
for statin therapy, in addition to an indicator, following HEDIS guidelines, for whether they
received statin therapy for at least 80% of the observation year.
High-Value Care: Medication Adherence
Inspired by drug adherence investigations from the medical literature, we next explore the
degree to which patients adhere to a medication protocol during the first year in which the patient
was prescribed the indicated therapy, focusing on two sub-samples: (1) patients with a new
diagnosis for hypertension and (2) patients with a new diagnosis of hypercholesterolemia. In both
cases, we follow the affected patient over the first year following the diagnosis of this new
condition and determine the patient’s Medication Possession Ratio, which equals the total number
of medication supply days divided by the total number of days indicated for that year.
High-Value Care: Vaccination / Immunization
In a final high value care analysis, we explore the extent to which children of physicians
receive by 2 years of age the following vaccinations (and does frequencies) recommended by
HEDIS: (1) four vaccines for diphtheria, tetanus and acellular pertussis (DTaP), (2) three polio
vaccines (IPV), (3) one measles, mumps and rubella (MMR), (4) three vaccines for haemophilus
influenza type B (HiB), (5) one vaccine for hepatitis A, (6) three vaccines for hepatitis B, (7) one

16

vaccine for chicken pox, (8) four vaccines for pneumococcal conjugate (PCV), and (9) two or three
vaccines for rotavirus. 5
III.C. Methodology
To assess whether greater patient information is likely to lead to less low-value care and
more high-value care, we estimate the following specification for each of the samples identified in
sub-section III.B above:
(1) Yite = α + θPHYSICIANit + δXite + µjtl + ε
Where i denotes the individual patent, j denotes the patient’s assigned military base and t
denotes the relevant observation year. The care location—either on-base at an MTF or off-base at
a civilian facility—is captured by l (discussed further below). The encounter or episode over which
we are evaluating the care provided to the patient is captured by e. In the case of the cesarean
analysis, e represents the individual delivery. For the pre-operative care analysis, e represents the
30-day period prior to an individual low-risk surgery. For the HEDIS diabetes and cardiovascular
disease samples, e represents the full sample year over which we observe the care provided to the
relevant patient (that is, each observation is a given person-year cell). For the first-year drug
adherence analyses, e similarly represents the full sample year over which we observe the care
provided to the affected patients. For the immunization analysis, e represents the first two years
of the relevant child’s life.
Yite represents the relevant outcome variable for the particular sample at issue—e.g., the
incidence of cesarean delivery, the receipt of a chest radiography in the 30 days prior to a low-risk
surgery, etc. PHYSICIANit is an indicator for whether the patient in question is an active-duty

5

One concern with this analysis respects possible under-reporting / recording of vaccinations in the MDR database. We address this concern in
the Online Appendix along with our associated response.

17

physician in year t. This indicator equals 0 for our key control group—i.e, non-physician military
officers. By focusing on officers, we aim to select a control group that is otherwise similar in
terms of pay-scale within the military and in terms of the workday demands of the individual
patient, both of which may bear on a patient’s health status and on their tastes and inclinations for
medical service. In separate specifications, as discussed above, we focus on an analysis of
dependents only—e.g., dependents of active duty physicians (PHYSICIANit = 1) compared with
dependents of non-physician military officers (PHYSICIANit = 0).
We also attempt to control for other differences between physicians and non-physicians by
including a rich set of control variables, Xite, which includes patient age-by-sex dummies, patient
race dummies (white, black, and other), and pay-grade level dummies for the relevant patient’s
sponsor (junior officer and senior officer). Xite also includes four additional metrics reflective of
the health status of the relevant patient (in an effort to ensure comparability between the physician
patient and the non-physician counterpart). Three are measures of patient ex-ante resource
utilization: (1) the number of inpatient bed-days over the preceding year, (2) the patient’s aggregate
“Relative Value Units” (RVU) for the previous calendar year, 6 and (3) the patient’s aggregate
“Relative Weighted Product” for the previous calendar year; the latter is an MHS-created measure
which captures the overall intensity of patient treatment in inpatient settings for the preceding year
(Frakes and Gruber 2018). The fourth is a direct measure of patient health, the Charlson
comorbidity score. 7

Some of the specifications include additional controls (as identified

specifically below). For instance, in the pre-operative testing analysis where we pool across

6

Developed for use with Medicare’s reimbursement system, RVUs are a measure specified on a common scale across health care services that are
meant to be reflective of the resources used in providing the relevant service, where resources accounted for reflect (1) physician work efforts
involved (time, technical skill, mental effort, etc. involved in providing the service), (2) practice expenses involved (accounting for the nonphysician
clinical and nonclinical labor of the practice, in addition to other office expenses) and (3) medical liability expenses. For an overview of RVUs,
see https://www.cms.gov/apps/physician-fee-schedule/overview.aspx.
7
The Charslon score is a weighted index of 17 comorbidity conditions (Deyo et al. 1992).

18

different types of low-risk surgeries, we include fixed effects for the given surgeries comprising
this sample. 8
Further, in specification (1), we include a rich set of fixed effects for military base-by-yearby-care-location groups, µjtl. Care location controls—i.e., flagging on-base versus off-base care—
are important to the extent that physician patients are more or less likely to receive care on the
base versus off the base and to the extent that the nature of health care services differs at MTFs
versus civilian facilities. With this rich set of effects, we effectively compare physician patients
and non-physician patients in their receipt of high- and low-value medical services within a given
base, within a given year, and within a given on-base-versus-off-base cite—e.g., within Evans
Army Community Hospital in Fort Carson, Colorado in 2009. Since patient locational choices are
potentially endogenous, we also estimate models excluding these care-location controls, and the
results are virtually unchanged. 9
For some of the clinical settings—e.g., in the case of labor and delivery—it is
straightforward to assign the on-base indicator variable. For other settings—e.g., drug adherence
over the observation year—it is less straightforward in that patients may receive medical services
both on the base and off the base over the observation year. In these latter instances, we determine
for each patient, the share of the RVUs associated with their medical care that is rendered on the
base and set an indicator variable for the receipt of on-base care equal to “1” for above-median onbase RVU shares (and 0 for below-median on-base RVU shares). 10

8

For those specifications, where it is possible for there to be repeat observations over time for the same patient—i.e. for all specifications other
than the first year- drug adherence and childhood immunization analysis—we cluster standard errors at the patient level.
9
Given that the choice of on-base versus off-base care is largely driven by geography (Frakes and Gruber 2018), we treat those specifications that
drop care-location variation as specification checks only.
10
The results presented below are nearly identical when including base-by-year fixed effects and when simply controlling for this on-base RVU
share. For the pharmaceutical-use specifications, care-location measures capture their choice of on-base versus off-base care in the sense of what
medical providers they visit, not what type of pharmacy they visit—MTF pharmacy versus retail pharmacy. As discussed above, this pharmacylocation distinction is potentially relevant for the dependents sample given that dependents face higher co-payments for prescriptions filled outside
of MTF pharmacies. This creates a potential concern for the dependents sample to the extent the physician group differentially uses MTF
pharmacies. While the vast majority of prescriptions are nonetheless filled at MTFs, we include an additional control for the dependents sample
(in the pharmaceutical specifications) for the location of the pharmacy (on base versus off).

19

Table 1 shows the sample balance. Since we have many different samples corresponding
to our different high/low value analyses and many different covariates along which to assess
balance, we evaluate, for each sample, the balance of predicted outcomes. That is, we form
predictions for the key outcome variables—e.g., predicted cesarean delivery—based on the
relevant set of covariates and thereafter test for balance in these predicted treatment measures
between the physician and non-physician groups. This omnibus approach provides us with a
means of exploring the degree of covariate imbalance in a collective sense.

In the Online

Appendix, we show a comparison of individual covariates one by one.
Generally, with the sponsors comparison, we find modest imbalance across individual
covariates, but with no particular pattern – and therefore there are only small differences in the
predicted outcomes summary measure.

For example, we find that physician sponsors are

predicted, based on their covariates, to deliver via cesarean section at a roughly 1 percentage-point
lower rate relative to non-physician officers. In each sample, the degree to which these predictions
differ between physicians and non-physicians is small in magnitude, generally between 0 and 2
percentage points but upwards of 4 percentage points in the case of predicted comprehensive
diabetes care. Moreover, across most of these samples, the covariate imbalance appears to shrink
when comparing dependents of physicians with dependents of non-physician officers, consistent
with our expectations that the treatment and control groups in the dependents sample are likely to
be more similar. In the childhood immunization analyses, naturally, we show imbalance only for
the dependents sample. The evidence suggests at most only a minor degree of imbalance between
the physician and non-physician group in the immunization sample.
As one final methodological note on patient comparability, we highlight the importance of
the fact that, in some contexts, we are testing for high value care, whereas in other contexts, we

20

are testing for low-value care. If there is any bias in our approach created by unobservable
differences in health status or tastes for receiving medical interventions between our treatment and
control groups, one would expect that bias to work in one consistent direction—e.g., physician
patients should consistently receive less care low- and high-value care than their non-physician
counterparts. If any such bias would indeed be one-sided in nature (if it exists at all) and if the
findings happen to demonstrate small physician effects in both the high- and low-value care
settings, then one might confidently infer that the information level of patients plays a small role
in determining the use of high- and low-value services. 11
IV.

RESULTS

IV.A. Low-Value Care Analysis
In Table A2 of the Online Appendix, we show uncontrolled differences between
physicians and non-physicians in the means of our various outcome measures. In this section we
turn to regression estimation to assess how these physician / non-physician comparisons hold up
to controlling for various measures that may also differ between these groups.
Cesarean Delivery
We begin in Table 2 by presenting the results from our first low-value care analysis, where
we explore whether physicians as patients receive fewer cesarean deliveries relative to military
officers. In Panel A, we focus on the sponsors comparison (physicians versus non-physician
officers), whereas in Panel B, we focus on the dependents comparison (dependents of physicians

11
That is, if information does substantially alter compliance with guidelines and if physicians are of weaker health—which may hypothetically
explain small physician effects in low value-care—then one would tend to expect large positive physician effects in the case of the high-value care
analysis (since both information and unobservable health status would elevate physician’s receipt of treatment). In this case, if we observe modest
physician effects in the high-value care setting, this would tend to suggest a small, if any, degree of bias and a small information effect.

21

versus dependents of non-physician officers). Given the gender differences between the sponsor
and dependent samples, we have a notably larger sample size in the dependents analysis presented
in Panel B. We present results separately for specifications that evaluate the incidence of any
cesarean delivery among all deliveries and that evaluate the incidence of “primary” cesareans
among a more restricted set of deliveries (subject to the above stated exclusions).
Each row in Table 2 represents a different regression using the indicated dependent variable
(in the specified sample). Point estimates and standard errors for the estimated physician effect
coefficient are provided in Columns 4 and 5. To help place the magnitudes of the physician effects
in perspective, we indicate in Column 3 the baseline mean rate for the relevant cesarean rate. For
conciseness purposes, we follow this format throughout when presenting results across our various
clinical contexts given the large number of resulting specifications estimated.
For physician mothers themselves, we find that there is an insignificant effect on the odds
of having any cesarean – but for the more discretionary set of “primary” cesareans, there is a
significant 2.9 percentage-point reduction, which is about 15 percent of the mean. For dependents
of physicians, a much larger sample, we find significant reductions in the incidence of any
cesarean—at an amount equal to roughly 6 percent of the mean cesarean rate—but not in the case
of the incidence of a primary cesarean delivery. 12
Though the findings vary across samples and across cesarean measures, the magnitude of
the estimated physician effect—in those specifications with significant effects—corresponds
somewhat closely with the roughly 10-percent effect (relative to the mean) found in Johnson and
Rehavi (2016). Johnson and Rehavi’s analysis uses vital statistics data from California, limiting

12
We also considered specifications where we separately estimate the specific effects of obstetricians / gynecologists (OBGYNS) and nonOBGYNs, as opposed to treating all physicians alike. The point estimate for a physician effect is indeed larger when treating physicians more
specifically—i.e., focusing on OBGYNs in this cesarean analysis—however, there are only 116 deliveries by dependents of active duty OBGYNs
in our analysis and we simply do not have enough power to detect a difference in physician effects depending on the degree of specificity in the
physician indicator.

22

their ability to consider the full set of clinical contexts explored in our analysis.

The

correspondence in our findings, however, perhaps provides some support for the generalizability
of our findings—including our non-cesarean-related findings—to individuals beyond the
beneficiaries of the military health system.
Even in those specifications with significant effects, this cesarean finding is arguably still
a modest effect. The World Health Organization (WHO 2015) suggests that the overall cesarean
rate should be 10-15 percent, a relative reduction of more than 50 percent in light of the nearly 30
percent prevailing rate of cesarean deliveries. By these standards, our results demonstrate a fairly
modest difference between physicians and non-physicians—i.e., a reduction of 6-15 percent of the
mean among physicians compared to the 50-percent-plus reduction called for by the WHO. These
results therefore suggest that, at most, we may only observe a minor improvement in outcomes—
defined here as greater adherence to the established ideal—when providing patients with
substantially greater sources of information (especially when bearing in mind that physician
patients are a particularly well informed group). Stated differently, our results suggest that factors
other than inadequate patient information are likely to explain the majority of the disparity between
the ideal cesarean rate and the observed cesarean rate that has animated the WHO.
Low-Risk Surgeries
While cesarean section rates are a useful case for comparison to previous work, it has the
weakness that there is still a significant optimal use rate. To strengthen our conclusions, we turn
to services which have a clearly recommended optimal use rate of zero. Schwartz et al. (2014)
present a set of diagnostic tests delivered prior to a set of specified low risk surgeries which, by
strong medical consensus, have no reason to be used. Tests such as chest radiography or a
complete blood panel are never recommended before procedures such as cataract surgery, yet they

23

occur with either modest or alarming frequency. Of course, the definition of “low risk” used by
Schwartz et al. is a subjectively chosen one, so we further confirm these findings by using our data
to empirically identify very low risk surgeries.
Table 3 shows the results for the use of low-value diagnostic tests prior to low-risk
surgeries, with Panel A focusing on the sponsors comparison (physician patients versus nonphysician officers) and with Panel B focusing on the dependents comparison. As above, each row
in this table reflects a different specification, where the columns provide information on the point
estimates and standard errors of the estimated physician effects, along with the total number of
observations and number of physician observations.
In the sponsors sample, we find a smaller rate of pre-operative chest radiography for
physicians—at a roughly 2 percentage-point lower level in the case of the Schwartz et al. sample
(relative to a mean rate of 10 percent) and at a roughly 0.3 percentage-point lower level in the case
of the derived low-risk sample (relative to a mean rate of 4.8 percent). However, in the case of
each of the other pre-operative measures in the sponsors sample—and in the case of the aggregate
any-preoperative testing measure—we estimate near-zero point estimates for the physician effects
(each statistically indistinguishable from zero). For instance, in the sponsors derived-low-risk
sample, we estimate a 95-percent confidence interval for the estimated physician effect of the anypreoperative-testing specification that spans -0.4 to 0.5 percentage-points, or roughly -2.4 to 2.6
percent relative to the mean rate of any pre-operative testing (we find a similar range in the case
of the Schwartz et al. sample). Accordingly, based on the results of the sponsors sample, we can
rule out a large physician impact and thus a large influence of superior patient information in the
choice to receive low-value testing prior to low-risk surgeries.

24

In the case of the dependents sample, we generally find evidence of modestly lower use of
pre-operative testing for the physician group. For instance, with respect to the Schwartz et al.
(2014) list of surgeries, we find a 1.7 percentage-point lower use of chest radiography prior to low
risk surgeries and a roughly 1.0 percentage-point lower rate of coagulation panels. With respect
to any preoperative testing, however, our findings are small and indistinguishable from zero,
largely due to the lack of a difference in complete blood count testing between physicians and nonphysicians. When drawing on the low-risk surgery sample derived from the MDR records, we
find more consistent evidence of a negative physician effect across the different types of
preoperative tests. In the case of any preoperative test within this sample, we find that physician
patients receive such tests at a roughly 1.2 percentage-point lower rate, amounting to a 5.4 percent
effect relative to the mean testing rate of 21.9 percent. Importantly, however, even in this case,
physician patients receive unnecessary preoperative testing close to 20 percent of the time prior to
low-risk surgeries. Accordingly, even when taking results from this pre-operative testing analysis
that suggest the strongest physician effect, our findings imply that the upper bounds of information
disclosure are not likely to close the considerable gap between prevailing rates of care and ideal
rates.
Interpretation
We find that even the best informed patients do not make any less use of low-value health
services. Of course, our results do not necessarily suggest that patient information is universally
of minor relevance in the selection of low-value medical services, such that if we unraveled all of
the existing sources of information dissemination to patients, we would observe no meaningful
consequences in the observed rates of use of low-value care.

Rather, our results more

conservatively imply that if we were to provide additional information to patients on top of the

25

current information-revelation mechanisms in place, we may only observe minor additional
improvements in the case of low-value care utilization.
As discussed in Part III, we acknowledge the possibility that these modest findings may be
attributable to omitted-variables bias. That is, there could indeed be a large information effect that
drives down the use of low-value services. However, masking this information effect could be
unobservable factors that drive physicians to receive more care and that thus partially wash out
this hypothetically strong information effect. For instance, perhaps physicians are in unobservably
weaker states of health relative to non-physician military officers, a possibility which may
necessitate more care and testing. Alternatively, perhaps physician patients simply prefer more
intensive practice styles, health status aside.
Mediating against the health-status concern, of course, is our choice of medical
guidelines—i.e., preoperative testing prior to the indicated surgeries is identified to be low-value
for nearly all patients receiving such surgeries. Further mediating is our findings not only for
physicians themselves but also for their dependents. Nonetheless, to help further rule out this
omitted variables concern, we now invert our focus and explore the role of information in the
utilization of high-value medical services.
IV.B. High-Value Care Analysis
There are a variety of medical interventions which are unambiguously recommended for
patients, such as low cost maintenance interventions for those with diabetes or cardiac disease. In
this section, we assess differential use rates by physicians and non-physicians in these high value
contexts. In Table A2 of the Online Appendix, we show uncontrolled differences between
physicians and non-physicians for high-value care. In Table 4, we use our regression approach to
control for observable differences between physicians and non-physicians.
26

Diabetes care
We start this analysis by exploring adherence by diabetes patients to HEDIS guidelines for
Comprehensive Diabetes Care (CDC) within the relevant year, where each observation is a patientby-year cell. We also show physician effects for compliance with each of the components of
comprehensive diabetes care. Separately, we also test for physician effects in the receipt of
recommended statin therapy for diabetes patients.
As above, each row in Table 4 represents a different regression with the indicated
dependent variable. In the case of both the dependents analysis and the sponsors analysis, we do
not find evidence that physicians are more likely to follow the CDC guidelines than non-physicians
or more likely to receive statin therapy. For instance, in the case of compliance with CDC care for
sponsors, the 95-percent confidence interval for the physician effect spans from -3.8 to 5.0
percentage points or from roughly -6.5 to 8.6 percent relative to the mean CDC rate. As such,
even if we focus on the end of this interval, these results would still suggest that physician patients
fail to receive CDC over 30 percent of the time. The statin therapy results imply a similar
conclusion. Accordingly, these results suggest only modest potential impacts, at best, resulting
from greater information disclosure to diabetes patients.
Cardiovascular Care
Table 4 also explores the role of information in the receipt of recommended care for
cardiovascular disease. In one specification, the dependent variable captures the receipt of the
indicated therapy at all over the annual observation period. In another specification, we specify a
dependent variable indicative of adherence to the relevant medication over the observation period,
either based on the days supplied over the observation year or the incidence of meeting at least
80% adherence over the year.

27

Both in the case of the sponsors sample and the dependents sample, we estimate a physician
effect that is indistinguishable from zero. For instance, in the sponsors sample, the 95-percent
confidence interval for the physician effect on the incidence of at least 80-percent adherence to
statin therapy throughout the year (i.e, the adherence threshold recommended by HEDIS) spans
from a -6.2 to 2.8 percentage-point change, or from roughly -13.3 to 6.0 percent relative to the
mean. We find similar effects for the dependents analysis. Thus, even if the true effect were at
the upper range of the confidence interval—where physicians attain 80-percent adherence at only
a 2.8 percentage-point higher rate than non-physicians—only 49.5 percent of physicians would
themselves receive recommended care.
Other Medication Adherence Analysis
In Table 5, we estimate the physician effect on adherence to medication within the first
year following a new diagnosis for hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. We find modest,
mixed effects of a physician effect in this adherence context. For the sponsors sample, we estimate
a 1.9 percentage-point physician effect on the Medication Possession Ratio (MPR) for
hypertensive therapy (which equals the number of days supplied over the observation year divided
by the number of days in the observation year; the absolute effect corresponds to a 2.6 percent
increase relative to a baseline rate of adherence of 72.3 percent). The point estimate for this effect
in the dependents sample is similar, though the standard errors rise slightly such that the
dependents effect is not distinguishable from zero.
For the case of adherence to medication after a new diagnosis of hypercholesterolemia, we
now find a stronger physician effect in the case of the dependents sample than the sponsors sample.
In the dependents sample, we estimate a 2.2 percentage-point (or 3 percent relative to a baseline
rate of 63.8%) physician effect on the MPR for hypercholesterolemia therapy (though only

28

marginally significant). This estimate is closer to and indistinguishable from zero in the sponsors
sample.
The conclusion from this adherence analysis is much the same as in the settings above.
While the evidence is as such that it is possible that physicians receive more appropriate care than
non-physicians, the results suggest that physicians nonetheless continue to fall far short in
receiving recommended levels of care. For instance, physicians fall to adhere to hypertension
medication roughly 26 percent of the time and to hypercholesterolemia medication over 30 percent
of the time.
Vaccination / Immunization Analysis
In Table 6, we present estimated physician effects in the case of the childhood
immunization analysis, for the physician dependent sample. Across many of the individual
measures—e.g., chicken pox, pneumococcal conjugate

(PCV), rotavirus, and haemophilus

influenza type B (HiB)—we estimate statistically significant physician effects suggestive of small
improvements in compliance with recommended HEDIS guidelines for dependents of physicians
relative to dependents of physician officers. We find marginally significant effects in the case of
inactivated poliovirus (IPV) and measles/mumps/rubella (MMR) immunizations.

With the

remainder of measures—diptheria/tetanus/pertussis (DTaP), hepatitis A, and hepatitis B—we
estimate insignificant physician effects that are relatively tightly bound around zero. 13
To summarize, across the various high-value-care metrics that we explore, we only find
that physicians receive more high-value care than non-physicians in select cases—e.g., medication
adherence for new diagnoses of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia and with respect to various

13
In the Online Appendix, we present results where we include all bases, even those that report very low rates of immunizations. The conclusion
is similar—if anything, the physician group receives slightly more immunizations, but in many case, there is no discernable difference between the
physician and non-physician group.

29

of the childhood immunizations. Even in these instances, however, the magnitudes of the
physician effect are modest. In the remainder of the high-value care specifications that we
estimate, we find little to no difference in the care received by physician patients and non-physician
patients.

IV.C. Proportion of Over-or Under-utilization of Care Explained by Information Effect
In the above analysis, we have interpreted the physician / non-physician difference as an
upper bound of the marginal change in the relevant outcome measure that may arise from greater
information disclosure to patients. Critical to our assessment thus far, however, has not simply
been a comparison between physicians and non-physicians. Of relevance is also a simple
comparison between the rate by which physicians adhere to the respective guideline and the ideal
adherence rate implicated by the relevant guideline, a comparison that is incidentally less subject
to concerns over omitted variables biases. As discussed above, even in those situations where we
do estimate a difference between the physician and non-physician group, the gap between the
physician’s treatment rate and the ideal rate is still considerable. These findings suggest that much
of the explanation behind the over- and under-utilization of low- and high-value services likely
arises from factors other than informational deficiencies of patients.
In Figures 1 and 2, we attempt to graphically demonstrate both of these forms of
comparisons—that is, comparisons of physicians and non-physicians and comparisons against the
ideal. In Figure 1, we focus on the sponsors samples, while in Figure 2, we focus on the dependents
samples. In each figure, we depict a series of bar graphs for a select group of our key outcome
measures, the heights of each bar reflecting the full degree of over- or under-utilization of the
respective measure—relative to the ideal rate—by an uninformed patient. For the purposes of

30

brevity and so as to not crowd this figure, we show this for just one representative measure across
each of our classes of samples. For instance, in the case of cesarean delivery, the bar height reflects
the difference between the non-physician cesarean rate and 15% (a conservative take on the WHO
ideal rate). The ideal rates used for pre-operative testing and for each of the high-value-care
measures are 0% and 100%, respectively. Within each bar graph, we also show the fraction of this
over- or under-utilization that our analysis suggests can be explained by the inferior information
of this non-physician patient group, using our estimated physician effects for these purposes
(focusing on the point estimates from the above tables and ignoring standard errors for these
purposes). The consistent implication arising from each of the bar graphs across these two figures
is that the share of inappropriate treatment that can be explained by information relative to other
factors is small in some cases and negligible in others.

IV.D. Mechanism Analysis
To the extent that better information does cause patients to adhere to medical guidelines at
higher rates, one might wonder whether this is due to (1) informed patients making better care
choices at the time of care selection itself, (2) informed patients choosing better treating physicians
or (3) informed patients negating the ability of financially-motivated physicians from inducing
demand. In a final empirical exercise, we attempt to shed light on these mechanism questions.
We largely focus this analysis on the cesarean decision and on the choice of chest radiography
testing prior to low-risk surgeries, as these are settings in which we find some evidence suggestive
of a physician effect on care choice. Moreover, these low-value-care settings are suitable for this
analysis in that an induced demand mechanism is more relevant for low-value as opposed to highvalue care.

31

Physician Selection Mechanism
In Table 7, we present results from an exercise in which we first assign each delivery in
our obstetrics sample (or each surgery in our preoperative testing sample) a mean cesarean rate (or
mean preoperative chest radiography rate) for the physician associated with the encounter and in
which we exclude the focal patient from the mean physician care-rate calculation. We then regress
this mean physician care-rate on an indicator for whether or not the associated patient is a
physician, while also controlling for all of the variables included in the primary specifications
above. We do the same for the dependents sample. 14 The purpose of this analysis is to assess
whether physicians as patients choose physicians with lower rates of low-value care, a relationship
that might be expected if physicians use their medical knowledge to obtain treatment by other
physicians whose practice patterns are most consistent with evidence based standards of care.
Even though the results from Table 2 demonstrate that physician mothers deliver at slightly
lower cesarean rates relative to non-physician mothers (more so in the case of dependents), the
results from Table 7 do not suggest that this arises from physician mothers choosing lower
cesarean-rate physicians. To the contrary, the results suggest that physician mothers choose higher
cesarean rate physicians, controlling for several factors that might make cesarean delivery more
likely and appropriate (e.g., older maternal age). This pattern of results may be consistent with a
story in which physician mothers unsure of whether they will need a cesarean delivery ex ante
prefer to be treated by a physician with higher cesarean volume and thus potentially greater
cesarean expertise. Nonetheless, physician mothers may still deliver at lower rates of cesarean
section given their involvement in the cesarean decision at the time of labor and delivery itself, as
distinct from their involvement in the decision over which physician to see.

14
Moreover, we weight the regression by the treating-physician-delivery count used as the denominator in the dependent variable and cluster the
standard errors at the treating physician level.

32

With respect to pre-operative chest radiography, our findings are somewhat mixed. When
employing the Schwartz et al. sample of low-risk surgeries, we do find evidence suggesting that
some portion of the chest-radiography physician effects from Table 3 may arise from provider
choice. The findings from the sample of low-risk surgeries derived from the MDR records,
however, suggest otherwise. In the dependents sample from this alternative low-risk surgery set,
we find no relationship between physician patients and the preoperative chest radiography rate of
the selected provider. In the sponsors sample, we actually find a small positive relationship.
Induced Demand Mechanism
Health economists have long theorized that physicians may take advantage of their
informational advantages over their patients to induce patient demand for clinically unnecessary
services in order to achieve certain gains—e.g., higher reimbursement (McGuire 2000). Under
this theory, physicians will naturally be better able to induce demand for uninformed relative to
informed patients. With this in mind, some of the physician effects that we document in the lowvalue care analysis may arise from a weaker ability to induce demand on physician patients.
To test this, we estimate the same specification above but add an interaction between the
physician indicator and an indicator for whether the care occurs on the base versus off (along with
the relevant constitutive terms). 15 Military physicians are compensated on a salaried basis, while
providers off the base—at least to a greater degree relative to military physicians—continue to be
reimbursed on a largely fee-for-service basis. Accordingly, off-base encounters likely entail a
greater scope for induced-demand behaviors. If we find stronger physician effects off the base
relative to on the base, this may be suggestive of a role for induced demand in explaining some of
the modest physician effects in low-value-care documented above. That is, if informed patients

15
When doing so, the indicator for on-base care is dropped due to the inclusion of base-by-year-by-care-location fixed effects. The results
presented are nearly unchanged when only including base-by-year fixed effects.

33

were able to combat induced demand in low-value-care, one would expect a weaker such physician
effect in the case of on-base care, in which case one would expect a positive coefficient for the
interaction term.
As demonstrated by Table 8, we fail to find a pattern of coefficients of this nature in the
case of the labor and delivery sample and the low-risk surgery sample, generally finding
insignificant interaction coefficients. If anything, the sponsors cesarean sample may suggest a
stronger negative physician effect on the base. Overall, we do not find compelling evidence
suggestive of an information effect in low-value care that is especially strong in settings where
physicians are theoretically incentivized to induce demand.
Mechanism Summary
Taken together, in the case of cesarean delivery and preoperative chest radiography where
we do find modest physician effects, this additional analysis does not support a robust physicianselection or induced-demand explanation for the observed effects. While it is difficult to conclude
with certainty, this analysis lends support to a story in which informed patients simply make better
clinical choices at the time of care delivery.
V.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We attempted to explore the upper bounds of the gains that may ensue from consumerdriven health care approaches that draw upon greater information-disclosure to patients by
exploring the care choices of physicians when acting as patients themselves relative to the clinical
choices of non-physician patients. In an attempt to isolate the information-component to the
differences between these two groups of patients, we took various approaches to ensure
comparability between physician and non-physician groups. Our results consistently suggest that,
at most, superior patient knowledge is associated with only modest improvements in the quality of
34

care selected during medical encounters. Perhaps one interpretation of these findings is that
patients remain generally deferential to the care recommendations of their treating physicians, even
in the case of near fully-informed patients. This interpretation would be consistent with other
recent findings in the health economics literature, including recent research by Chernew et al.
(2018) showing that referring physicians are dramatically stronger determinants of where patients
receive MRIs relative to patient cost-sharing factors. Should concerns over the quality of care
received by patients remain—as is suggested by the large gaps demonstrated between prevailing
rates of adherence to high- and low-value care guidelines and recommended rates of adherence—
our results are informative on the limitations that may come with information-focused, demandside solutions.
Despite our efforts to ensure comparability across our treatment and control groups,
concerns may remain over the generalizability of our findings. In particular, among other external
validity issues, some may be concerned that we tested for the impacts of information in an
environment characterized by very low levels of cost-sharing. The influence of information,
however, may interact with financial considerations of this nature. Consider, for instance, preoperative testing and assume, as is the case with the Military Health System beneficiaries, that copayments for these diagnostic procedures are negligible. Even though such tests may render
insufficient benefits to justify their full social costs and even if patients are aware of this, informed
patients may nonetheless undertake the tests anyway given the negligible financial implications.
In contrast, informed patients may decide to forego these tests when cost-sharing is more
substantial.
This consideration does not necessarily threaten the external validity of our low-value care
findings—at least not overly so—in light of the fact that the costs to undergoing low-value care

35

extend beyond just direct financial outlays. For instance, in the case of pre-operative testing by
the patients in our sample, we demonstrate in the Online Appendix that much or most of these
instances of pre-operative testing necessitate an entirely separate visit to a medical provider on a
separate day, an outcome that likely imposes costs and inconveniences of another nature on the
affected patient. Accordingly, if we still estimate modest physician effects in the face of low-value
care decisions that carry potentially significant non-cost-sharing consequences, such modest
findings may indeed generalize to populations facing higher levels of cost-sharing.
Further reinforcing this point, the costs associated with receiving low-value care may
extend beyond cost-sharing dollars in light of the possibility of physical harms and discomfort
associated with the care itself. This is very likely true with the case of cesarean delivery, especially
considering the recovery period involved. These physical consequences are, of course, likely to
be far less significant in the preoperative testing setting, especially in the case of blood draws. 16
Finally, it is important to note that this particular generalizability concern does not extend
to the high-value care analysis. If anything, the fact that cost-sharing is lower in the MHS should
only elevate the role of information in encouraging greater guideline adherence. In this light, our
finding of little to no improvements in high-value-care adherence in fully-informed patients is
likely to generalize to settings with higher levels of cost-sharing.

16
Though, in the case of chest radiography, there are known minor carcinogenic risks associated with exposure to chest x-rays. This consideration
may explain why our estimated physician effects are of greater magnitudes (relative to the respective baseline mean) in the case of chest radiography
relative to blood testing, an implication which may further support an information interpretation of our pattern of findings.

36

REFERENCES
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. “Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care,” American
Economic Review 53(5): 941-73.
Associated Press and NORC. 2017. Finding Quality Doctors: How Americans Evaluate Provider
Quality in the United States, July 2017.
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dube, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse Shapiro. 2015. “Do
Pharmacists Buy Bayer? Informed Shoppers and the Brand Premium,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics: 1669-1726.
Bundorf, M. Kate, Natalie Chun, Goda Gopi, and Daniel Kessler. 2009. “Do Markets Respond to
Quality Information? The Case of Fertility Clinics,” Journal of Health Economics
28:718–27
Chernew, Michael, Zach Cooper, Eugene Larsen-Hallock, and Fiona Scott Morton. 2018. “Are
Health Care Services Shoppable? Evidence from the Consumption of Lower-Limb MRI
Scans,” NBER Working Paper No. 24869.
Cutler, David, Robert Huckman, and Mary Beth Landrum. 2004. “The role of information in
medical markets: An analysis of publicly reported outcomes in cardiac surgery,”
American Economic Review 94:342–346.
Deyo, Richard, Daniel Cherkin, and Marcia Ciol. 1992. “Adapting a clinical comorbidity index
for use with ICD-9-CM administrative databases.” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology
45:613–19.
Frakes, Michael, and Jonathan Gruber. 2018. “Defensive Medicine: Evidence from Military
Immunity,” NBER Working Paper No. 24846.
Herz, David A., Jan E. Looman, and Sharon K. Lewis. 1992. “Informed consent: Is it a myth?,”
Neurosurgery 30(3):453-8.
Johnson, Erin M., and M. Marit Rehavi. 2016. “Physicians Treating Physicians: Information and
Incentives in Childbirth,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8(1): 115-41
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2008. 2008 Update on Consumers' Views of Patient Safety and
Quality Information.
Kolstad, Jonathan. 2013. “Information and Quality When Motivation Is Intrinsic: Evidence from
Surgeon Report Cards,” American Economic Review 103(7): 2875-2910.

37

Kureshi, Faraz, Philip G Jones, Donna M Buchanan, Mouin S Abdallah, and John A Spertus.
2014. “Variation in patients’ perceptions of elective percutaneous coronary intervention
in stable coronary artery disease: cross sectional study,” BMJ 349: 1-12.
Madison, Kristin. 2017. “Legal & Policy Issues in Measuring and Improving Quality,” in THE
OXFORD HANDBOOK OF U.S. HEALTHCARE LAW (I. Glenn Cohen, Allison K. Hoffman &
William M. Sage eds.).
McGuire, Thomas. 2000. “Physician agency,” in THE HANDBOOK OF HEALTH ECONOMICS, VOL. 1
(Anthony Culyer and Joseph Newhouse, eds.), pp. 462–536.
Meisel, Alan, and Loren H. Roth. 1983. “Toward an informed discussion of informed consent: a
review and critique of the empirical studies,” Arizona Law Review 25: 265-346.
Mukamel, Dana, William Spector, Zinn Jacqueline, David Weimer, and Richard Ahn. “Changes
in Clinical and Hotel Expenditures Following Publication of the Nursing Home Compare
Report Card” Medical Care. 2010;48(10):869–74
Pope, Thaddeus Mason Pope. 2017. “Certified Patient Decision Aids: Solving Persistent
Problems with Informed Consent Law,” Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics 45: 12-40.
Patrick S. Romano, and Hong Zhou. 2004. “Do well-publicized risk-adjusted outcomes reports
affect hospital volume?,” Medical Care, 42(4):367-77.
Schneider, Eric, and Arnold Epstein. 1998. “Use of public performance reports: a survey of
patients undergoing cardiac surgery,” JAMA 27: 1638-42.
Schoenfeld, Andrew J., Wei Jiang, Mitchell B. Harris, Zara Cooper, Tracey Koehlmoos, Peter A.
Learn, Joel S. Weissman, and Adil H. Haider. 2017. “Association Between Race and
Postoperative Outcomes in a Universally Insured Population Versus Patients in the State
of California,” Annals of Surgery 266(2): 267-73.
Schwartz, Aaron L., Bruce E. Landon, and Adam G. Elshaug. 2014. “Measuring Low-Value
Care in Medicare,” JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(7):1067-1076.
Wang Justin, Jason Hockenberry, Shin Yi Chou , and Muzhe Yang. 2011. “Do bad report cards
have consequences? Impacts of publicly reported provider quality information on the
CABG market in Pennsylvania,” Journal of Health Economics 30(2): 392–407.
Weeks, Jane C., Paul J. Catalano, Angel Cronin, Matthew D. Finkelman, Jennifer W. Mack,
Nancy L. Keating, and Deborah Schrag. 2012. “Patients' Expectations about Effects of
Chemotherapy for Advanced Cancer,” New England Journal of Medicine 367: 1616-25
World Health Organization. 2015. WHO Statement on Caesarean Section Rates.

38

FIGURE 1
Degree of Over- or Under-utilization of Various Measures explained by Physician Effect—i.e.,
Information Effect—and by Other Factors (Sponsors Samples)
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Cesarean Rate

Preoperative Comprehensive Statin Therapy
Testing Rate
Diabetes Care
Rate (for CD)
(Schwartz et al.)
Rate
Other Factors

MPR for
Hypertension

Physician Effect

Notes: data from the Military Health System Data Repository. The height of each bar represents the degree of over-utilization (for the case of
cesarean delivery and preoperative testing prior to low-risk surgeries) and under-utilization (for the case of diabetes and cardiovascular care
adherence and medication adherence for hypertension) represented in the respective samples, assessed with reference to non-physician patients.
The black portion of this bar represents the degree of this over- or under-utilization that can be explained by the weaker information state of the
non-physician patients. The height of the black portion is derived from the estimated physician effects from Tables 2-5.

39

FIGURE 2
Degree of Over- or Under-utilization of Various Measures explained by Physician Effect—i.e.,
Information Effect—and by Other Factors (Dependents Samples)
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Cesarean Rate Preoperative Comprehensive Statin Therapy
MPR for
Testing Rate Diabetes Care Rate (for CD) Hypertension
(Schwartz et
Rate
al.)
Other Factors

Chicken Pox
Vaccine Rate

Physician Effect

Notes: data from the Military Health System Data Repository. The height of each bar represents the degree of over-utilization (for the case of
cesarean delivery and preoperative testing prior to low-risk surgeries) and under-utilization (for the case of diabetes and cardiovascular care
adherence and medication adherence for hypertension) represented in the respective samples, assessed with reference to non-physician patients.
The black portion of this bar represents the degree of this over- or under-utilization that can be explained by the weaker information state of the
non-physician patients. The height of the black portion is derived from the estimated physician effects from Tables 2-6.

40

TABLE 1
Covariate Balance between Treatment and Control Groups
(2)
OFFICERS

(3)
DIFFERENCE

(4)
DEPENDENTS
OF PHYSICIANS

(5)
DEPENDENTS
OF OFFICERS

(6)
DIFFERENCE

Predicted Incidence of
Cesarean Delivery

(1)
PHYSICIANS
(AS
PATIENTS)
0.300
(0.148)

0.312
(0.165)

-0.0148**
(0.0034)

0.266
(0.093)

0.272
(0.099)

-0.006***
(0.001)

Predicted Incidence of
Preoperative Testing

0.1835
(0.1045)

0.1785
(0.1107)

0.0051***
(0.0010)

0.2214
(0.1306)

0.2187
(0.1288)

0.0027
(0.0018)

Predicted Incidence of
Comprehensive Diabetes
Care

0.616
(0.214)

0.577
(0.190)

0.039***
(0.010)

0.517
(0.204)

0.538
(0.189)

-0.020***
(0.008)

Predicted Incidence of Statin
Use

0.758
(0.142)

0.757
(0.126)

0.002
(0.008)

0.608
(0.214)

0.581
(0.194)

0.028
(0.018)

Predicted Medication
Possession Ratio for
Hypertension

0.713
(0.091)

0.723
(0.095)

-0.011***
(0.003)

0.685
(0.120)

0.687
(0.129)

-0.002
(0.0050)

Predicted Medication
Possession Ratio for
hypercholesterolemia,

0.621
(0.089)

0.642
(0.104)

-0.022***
(0.0025)

0.632
(0.112)

0.638
(0.115)

-0.006
(0.0042)

Predicted Incidence of DTaP
Immunization Compliance

-

-

-

0.658
(0.119)

0.648
(0.126)

0.011***
(0.003)

Predicted Incidence of IPV
Immunization Compliance

-

-

-

0.627
(0.113)

0.631
(0.121)

-0.004
(0.003)

Predicted Incidence of HiB
Immunization Compliance

-

-

-

0.687
(0.153)

0.695
(0.156)

-0.008**
(0.004)

Predicted Incidence of
Hepatitis A Immunization
Compliance

-

-

-

0.862
(0.100)

0.865
(0.103)

-0.003
(0.002)

Predicted Incidence of
Hepatitis B Immunization
Compliance

-

-

-

0.739
(0.112)

0.740
(0.122)

0.001
(0.003)

Predicted Incidence of
Chicken Pox Immunization
Compliance

-

-

-

0.783
(0.096)

0.795
(0.100)

-0.012***
(0.002)

Predicted Incidence of PCV
Immunization Compliance

-

-

-

0.787
(0.112)

0.801
(0.115)

-0.014***
(0.003)

0.317
0.317
0.000
Predicted Incidence of
(0.209)
(0.209)
(0.004)
Rotavirus Immunization
Compliance
Notes: standard deviations are reported in Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5. Standard errors are reported in the differencing columns
(Columns 3 and 6) and are clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Predicted values of the indicated outcome variables are
from regressions of the indicated measure (within the relevant sample) on the key covariates employed in the analysis: patient
age-by-sex dummies, patient race dummies, patient pay-grade dummies, previous year RVU, previous year RWP, previous year
inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-by-year-by-care-location fixed effects. Data are from the Military Health
System Data Repository, 2003-2013. *** Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant at
the 10 percent level.

41

TABLE 2
Estimated Physician Effects in Cesarean Utilization
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

N: TOTAL

N: PHYSICIANS

BASELINE RATE

PHYSICIAN
COEFFICIENT

STANDARD
ERROR

Panel A. Sponsors Analysis: Comparison of Physician Patients with Non-Physician Military Officers
Cesarean Incidence (among all deliveries)
Primary Cesarean Incidence (among
restricted delivery sample)

18,092

2,395

0.3100

-0.0172

0.0127

13,859

1,784

0.1844

-0.0288***

0.0108

Panel B. Dependents Analysis: Comparison of Dependents of Physician Patients with Dependents of NonPhysician Military Officers
Cesarean Incidence (within all deliveries)

96,436

5,421

Primary Cesarean Incidence (among

0.2716

-0.0173**

0.0075

73,106
4,078
0.1251
-0.0080
0.0055
restricted delivery sample)
Notes: standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Each row represents
results from a different specification using the specified dependent variable and the specified sample. Primary cesarean
specifications exclude multiple births, breech presentations and previous cesarean deliveries from the sample. All
specifications control for patient age dummies, patient race dummies, patient pay-grade dummies, previous year RVU,
previous year RWP, previous year inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-by-year-by-care-location fixed
effects. Data are from the Military Health System Data Repository, 2003-2013. *** Significant at the 1 percent level;
** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant at the 10 percent level.

42

TABLE 3
Estimated Physician Effects on Preoperative Testing Prior to Low-Risk Surgeries
(1)

(2)
N:

N: TOTAL

PHYSICIANS

(3)
BASELINE
RATE

(4)
PHYSICIAN
COEFFICIENT

Panel A. Sponsors Analysis: Comparison of Physician Patients with Non-Physician Military Officers
Schwartz et al
88,560
4,813
0.0959
-0.0215***
Chest Radiography
Sample
Complete Blood
88,560
4,813
0.3068
-0.0007
Count
Comprehensive
88,560
4,813
0.0940
0.0010
Metabolic Panel
88,560
4,813
0.1041
-0.0076
Coagulation Panel
88,560
4,813
0.3506
-0.0054
Any Preoperative Care
Derived LowRisk Sample

(5)
STANDARD
ERROR
0.0039
0.0073
0.0038
0.0065
0.0075

1,313,701

48,963

0.0452

-0.0025**

0.0012

Complete Blood
Count
Comprehensive
Metabolic Panel
Coagulation Panel

1,313,701

48,963

0.1386

0.0017

0.0020

1,313,701

48,963

0.0608

0.0023

0.0012

1,313,701

48,963

0.0241

-0.0008

0.0009

Any Preoperative Care

1,313,701

48,963

0.1786

0.0002

0.0022

Chest Radiography

Panel B. Dependents Analysis: Comparison of Dependents of Physician Patients with Dependents of NonPhysician Military Officers
Schwartz et al
99,994
4,614
0.0591
-0.0165***
0.0029
Chest Radiography
Sample
Complete Blood
99,994
4,614
0.3470
0.0004
0.0077
Count
Comprehensive
99,994
4,614
0.0857
-0.0052
0.0038
Metabolic Panel
99,994
4,614
0.0668
-0.0104***
0.0055
Coagulation Panel
99,994
4,614
0.3762
-0.0024
0.0078
Any Preoperative Care
Derived LowRisk Sample

609,011

18,980

0.0416

-0.0062***

0.0018

Complete Blood
Count
Comprehensive
Metabolic Panel
Coagulation Panel

609,011

18,980

0.1764

-0.0070**

0.0036

609,011

18,980

0.0878

-0.0060**

0.0025

609,011

18,980

0.0351

-0.0032*

0.0020

Any Preoperative Care

609,011

18,980

0.2188

-0.0124***

0.0040

Chest Radiography

Notes: standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Each row represents
results from a different specification using the specified dependent variable and the specified sample. All specifications
control for patient age-by-sex dummies, patient race dummies, patient pay-grade dummies, previous year RVU,
previous year RWP, previous year inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-by-year-by-care-location fixed
effects, along with fixed effects indicating the relevant surgery within the respective sample of low-risk surgeries. Data
are from the Military Health System Data Repository, 2003-2013. *** Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant
at the 5 percent level; * Significant at the 10 percent level.

43

TABLE 4
Estimated Physician Effect on High-Value Diabetic and Cardiovascular Care
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

N: TOTAL

N: PHYSICIANS

BASELINE
RATE

PHYSICIAN
COEFFICIENT

STANDARD
ERROR

Panel A. Sponsors Analysis: Comparison of Physician Patients with Non-Physician Military Officers
HEDIS Diabetes Measures
hbA1c
69,343
1,095
0.7631
0.0002
0.0180
Testing
Eye
69,343
1,095
0.7855
-0.0155
0.0190
Exam
Attention to Nephropathy
69,343
1,095
0.8550
0.0125
0.0152
Comprehensive Diabetes
69,343
1,095
0.5778
0.0061
0.0218
Care
Statin
38,623
623
0.7084
0.0469
0.0346
Therapy
HEDIS Cardio Measures
Any Statin Therapy
62,838
1,217
0.7565
0.0228
0.0220
Days Supplied of Statin
62,838
1,217
225.4458
2.1289
7.5821
Therapy
Incidence of at least 80%
62,838
1,217
0.4666
-0.0170
0.0225
Adherence
Panel B. Dependents Analysis: Comparison of Dependents of Physician Patients with Dependents of
Non-Physician Military Officers
HEDIS Diabetes Measures
hbA1c Testing
73,122
1,592
0.7310
-0.0022
0.0185
Eye Exam
73,122
1,592
0.7862
0.0148
0.0173
Attention to Nephropathy
73,122
1,592
0.8048
-0.0106
0.0163
Comprehensive Diabetes
73,122
1,592
0.5380
0.0064
0.0197
Care
Statin Therapy
32,677
658
0.6121
0.0224
0.0363
HEDIS Cardio Measures
Any
Statin
26,099
503
0.5814
0.0017
0.0408
Therapy
Days Supplied of Statin
26,099
503
163.2406
-1.9929
12.9882
Therapy
Incidence of at least 80%
26,099
503
0.3193
-0.0141
0.0324
Adherence
Notes: standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Each row
represents results from a different specification using the specified dependent variable and the specified sample.
All specifications control for patient age-by-sex dummies, patient race dummies, patient pay-grade dummies,
previous year RVU, previous year RWP, previous year inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-byyear-by-care-location fixed effects. Data are from the Military Health System Data Repository, 2003-2013. ***
Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant at the 10 percent level.

44

TABLE 5
Estimated Physician Effect on Medication Adherence during First Year of Diagnosis for
Hypertension and Hypercholesterolemia
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

N: TOTAL

N: PHYSICIANS

BASELINE
RATE

PHYSICIAN
COEFFICIENT

STANDARD
ERROR

Panel A. Sponsors Analysis: Comparison of Physician Patients with Non-Physician Military Officers
Medication Possession
39,435
1,018
0.7229
0.0191**
0.0093
Ratio: Hypertension
Medication Possession
Ratio:
52,017
1,322
0.6423
0.0030
0.0084
Hypercholesterolemia
Panel B. Dependents Analysis: Comparison of Dependents of Physician Patients with Dependents of
Non-Physician Military Officers
Medication Possession
23,856
595
0.6868
0.0040
0.0137
Ratio: Hypertension
Medication Possession
Ratio:
30,014
719
0.6381
0.0218*
0.0120
Hypercholesterolemia
Notes: standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Each row
represents results from a different specification using the specified dependent variable and the specified sample.
All specifications control for patient age-by-sex dummies, patient race dummies, patient pay-grade dummies,
previous year RVU, previous year RWP, previous year inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-byyear-by-care-location fixed effects. Data are from the Military Health System Data Repository, 2003-2013. ***
Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant at the 10 percent level.

45

TABLE 6
Estimated Physician Effect on Childhood Immunization Rates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

N: TOTAL

N: PHYSICIANS

BASELINE
RATE

PHYSICIAN
COEFFICIENT

STANDARD
ERROR

DTaP

34556

2030

0.67

-0.0109

0.0109

IPV

34556

2030

0.64

0.0201*

0.0110

MMR

34556

2030

0.80

0.0165*

0.0088

HiB

34556

2030

0.70

0.0211**

0.0100

Hepatitis A

34556

2030

0.85

0.0104

0.0075

Hepatitis B

34556

2030

0.59

0.01156

0.0096

Chicken Pox

34556

2030

0.79

0.0209**

0.0091

PCV

34556

2030

0.80

0.0194**

0.0088

Rotavirus

34556

2030

0.29

0.0269***

0.0097

Notes: standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Each row
represents results from a different specification using the specified dependent variable and the specified sample.
All specifications control for patient age-by-sex dummies, patient race dummies, patient pay-grade dummies,
previous year RVU, previous year RWP, previous year inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-byyear-by-care-location fixed effects. Data are from the Military Health System Data Repository, 2003-2013. ***
Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant at the 10 percent level.

46

TABLE 7
Relationship between Physician Patient Status and Mean Low-Value Care Rate of Treating
Physician (for Direct-Care Encounters)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

N: TOTAL

N: PHYSICIANS

BASELINE
RATE

PHYSICIAN
COEFFICIENT

STANDARD
ERROR

Panel A. Sponsors Analysis: Comparison of Physician Patients with Non-Physician Military Officers
Mean Cesarean Rate of
11,148
1,835
0.2801
0.0127***
0.0034
Treating Physician
Mean Rate of Treating
Surgeon of Preoperative
52,024
3,934
0.0879
-0.0056***
0.0020
Chest Radiography
(Schwartz et al.)
Mean Rate of Treating
Surgeon of any
910,938
42,339
0.0451
0.0037**
0.0017
Preoperative Care
(Derived Low-Risk
Sample)
Panel B. Dependents Analysis: Comparison of Dependents of Physician Patients with Dependents of
Non-Physician Military Officers
Mean Cesarean Rate of
43,749
4013
0.2703
0.0123***
0.0029
Treating Physician
Mean Rate of Treating
Surgeon of Preoperative
55,698
3,660
0.0412
-0.0034**
0.0014
Chest Radiography
(Schwartz et al.)
Mean Rate of Treating
Surgeon of any
213,961
11,385
0.0450
-0.0013
0.0008
Preoperative Care
(Derived Low-Risk
Sample)
Notes: standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Each row
represents results from a different specification using the specified dependent variable and the specified sample.
All specifications control for patient age-by-sex dummies, patient race dummies, patient pay-grade dummies,
previous year RVU, previous year RWP, previous year inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-byyear-by-care-location fixed effects. Data are from the Military Health System Data Repository, 2003-2013. ***
Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant at the 10 percent level.

47

TABLE 8
Estimated Physician Effect on Low-Value Care, Interacted with On-Base Treatment Indicator
(1)

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
PREOPERATIVE
PREOPERATIVE
PREOPERATIVE
PREOPERATIVE
CHEST
CHEST
CHEST
CHEST
CESAREAN:
CESAREAN:
RADIOGRAPHY:
RADIOGRAPHY :
RADIOGRAPHY :
RADIOGRAPHY:
SPONSORS
DEPENDENTS
SPONSORS
DEPENDENTS
DEPENDENTS
SPONSORS (DERIVED
(SCHWARTZ ET AL.
(SCHWARTZ ET AL.
(DERIVED LOW-RISK
LOW-RISK SAMPLE)
SAMPLE)
SAMPLE)
SAMPLE)
0.021
-0.007
-0.018
-0.019**
-0.000
-0.004
Physician
(0.025)
(0.013)
(0.012)
(0.009)
(0.005)
(0.003)
Physician X
-0.050*
-0.015
-0.005
0.004
-0.003
-0.004
On-Base
(0.028)
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.009)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Notes: standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the individual beneficiary level. Each column represents results from a different
specification using the specified dependent variable and the specified sample. All specifications control for patient age-by-sex dummies, patient race
dummies, patient pay-grade dummies, previous year RVU, previous year RWP, previous year inpatient days, Charlson combordity index, and base-byyear-by-care-location fixed effects. The on-base indicator is dropped from the regression due to the inclusion of the latter set of fixed effects. Columns 36 also include fixed effects for the relevant surgery in the low-risk surgery sample. Data are from the Military Health System Data Repository, 2003-2013.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level; ** Significant at the 5 percent level; * Significant at the 10 percent level.

48

