                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

               PRIVATE VS. PUBLIC PROVISION OF SOCIAL INSURANCE:
                            EVIDENCE FROM MEDICAID

                                         Timothy J. Layton
                                          Nicole Maestas
                                           Daniel Prinz
                                           Boris Vabson

                                       Working Paper 26042
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26042

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF EONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2019

We thank Kate Bundorf, Heinrich Kögel, Jessica Van Parys, and Matt Rutledge for serving as
discussants for the paper as well as seminar participants at Harvard Medical School, the Leonard
David Institute at the University of Pennsylvania, the NBER Spring Aging Meeting, ASHEcon,
the American-European Health Economics Study Group, the Disability Research Consortium
Annual Meeting, the University of Minnesota, the Schaeffer Center at the University of Southern
California, the Institute on Health Economics, Health Behaviors, and Disparities at Cornell
University, Harvard University, the APPAM Annual Fall Research Conference, Yale School of
Public Health, and RAND for useful comments. We thank Mike Geruso, Jon Kolstad, Jenn
Kowalski, Chris Ody, Bastian Ravesteijn, Mark Shepard, Amanda Starc, and Jacob Wallace for
helpful conversations about earlier drafts of this paper. Special thanks to Francoise Becker at the
Social Security Administration (SSA) for data analysis support with the Disability Analysis File.
Julia Yates provided excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, the Social Security Administration through grant #5
DRC12000002-06 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Disability
Research Consortium, the National Institute on Aging (P30-AG012810), and the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (K01-HS25786-01). The findings and conclusions expressed are
solely those of the authors and do not represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the
Federal Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26042.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2019 by Timothy J. Layton, Nicole Maestas, Daniel Prinz, and Boris Vabson. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Private vs. Public Provision of Social Insurance: Evidence from Medicaid
Timothy J. Layton, Nicole Maestas, Daniel Prinz, and Boris Vabson
NBER Working Paper No. 26042
July 2019
JEL No. H51,H53,H75,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Public health insurance benefits in the U.S. are increasingly provided by private firms, despite
mixed evidence on welfare effects. We investigate the impact of privatization in Medicaid by
exploiting the staggered introduction of county-level mandates in Texas that required disabled
beneficiaries to switch from public to private plans. Compared to the public program, which used
blunt rationing to control costs, we find privatization led to improvements in healthcare—
including increased consumption of high-value drug treatments and fewer avoidable
hospitalizations—but also higher Medicaid spending. We conclude that private provision can be
beneficial when constraints in the public setting limit efficiency.

Timothy J. Layton                              Daniel Prinz
Harvard Medical School                         Harvard University
Department of Health Care Policy               dprinz@g.harvard.edu
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115                               Boris Vabson
and NBER                                       Harvard Medical School
layton@hcp.med.harvard.edu                     Department of Health Care Policy
                                               180 Longwood Avenue
Nicole Maestas                                 Boston, MA 02115
Harvard Medical School                         vabson@hcp.med.harvard.edu
Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
maestas@hcp.med.harvard.edu
1    Introduction
The question of whether private firms can provide public services more efficiently than gov-
ernment is fundamental to public policy and economics. Nowhere is the public versus private
question more controversial—and perhaps more consequential—than with respect to public
health insurance programs in the United States (Gruber, 2017). In Medicaid, the program that
provides health insurance coverage to low-income Americans, including people with disabil-
ities, the proportion of beneficiaries receiving their benefits through a private health plan in-
creased from 60% in 1999 to over 80% in 2012 (Congressional Budget Office, 2018). In Medicare,
the program providing health insurance coverage to disabled workers and the elderly, about
19 million people (33% of beneficiaries) are enrolled in a private medical plan, while all Medi-
care beneficiaries who elect Part D prescription drug coverage obtain it through private plans
(Kaiser Family Foundation, 2017b). The use of private plans to provide public health insurance
benefits is also widespread in several European countries, including the Netherlands, Switzer-
land, and Germany (McGuire and Van Kleef, 2018).
     Prior work on the private provision of public health insurance benefits has produced mixed
findings. In theory, competing private plans are incentivized to use the technologies available
to them (some of which may not be available to a public program) to efficiently ration access
to healthcare services. Profit-maximizing plans desire to keep spending low because they are
often the residual claimants on any savings generated, while the combination of competition
for enrollees and regulatory action by government prevents them from rationing “too much.”
In some contexts, there is empirical evidence supporting this theory (Newhouse and McGuire,
2014; Dranove, Ody and Starc, 2017; Curto et al., 2019). However, when competition is weak
and regulatory supervision is lax, the potential gains from private provision may not be real-
ized (Curto et al., 2014; Duggan, Starc and Vabson, 2016; Cabral, Geruso and Mahoney, 2018).
Indeed, there is evidence of private provision in some settings costing governments at least as
much as public provision (Duggan and Hayford, 2013) while also resulting in reduced quality
of care (Aizer, Currie and Moretti, 2007). Additionally, when coupled with adverse selection,
competition may produce harmful instead of beneficial outcomes (Geruso and Layton, 2017;
Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater, 2018).
     In this paper, we investigate the effects of shifting Medicaid coverage from public to pri-
vate provision in Texas, the second largest American state by population. During the period
we study, Texas had the third largest number of Medicaid enrollees in the U.S., with over 4.2
million enrollees or a full 7.5% of national Medicaid enrollment, making it important to the
Medicaid program in particular and the U.S. safety net more generally. There are several ad-
vantages to using the Medicaid setting to study the more general question of private vs. public
provision of health insurance. First, Medicaid is the setting where this question is most policy
relevant: Over 43 million Medicaid beneficiaries receive their health insurance benefits from a


                                               1
private health plan, with $162 billion paid to these plans each year (Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, 2016). Second, credible identification is possible in this setting due to fre-
quent use of mandates to shift targeted groups of Medicaid beneficiaries from public to private
plans. Third, unlike Medicare, Medicaid healthcare utilization data is often available for both
public and private plan enrollees, enabling a detailed examination of how these two forms of
coverage differ.
    To leverage these advantages, we make use of a natural experiment in Texas in the mid-
2000s, when the state transitioned adults with disabilities—most of whom qualified for Medi-
caid due to their enrollment in the federal Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program—from
the state-run public insurance plan to private Medicaid plans. The transition was mandatory
and abrupt; private enrollment among adults with disabilities rose from around 10% to almost
80% instantaneously. Moreover, Texas implemented this coverage change in only a subset of
counties, providing a clean natural experiment that we exploit in a difference-in-differences de-
sign. We use this setting to estimate how a variety of relevant outcomes changed differentially
in counties where private provision was implemented, relative to similar, contiguous counties
that maintained the publicly managed, fee-for-service (FFS) Medicaid program.
    Our focus on the disabled Medicaid population is novel and important. In 2014, Medicaid
spending for this population amounted to almost $187 billion or 40% of total Medicaid spend-
ing, even though individuals with disabilities make up only 13.5% of total Medicaid enrollment
(Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014a,b). While most states have already shifted healthier Medicaid
populations to private plans, the transition of individuals with disabilities to private plans is
either recent, ongoing, or currently under consideration. Despite this, we know relatively little
about the effects of private provision on this population.1
    We find clear evidence that private plans rationed healthcare services to a lesser degree than
the public fee-for-service Medicaid program. Specifically, private provision increased outpa-
tient medical spending and prescription drug spending. The increase in outpatient spending
comes partly from increased outpatient utilization (8% increase in outpatient services), and
partly from private plans paying higher prices (8% higher on average). This suggests the sup-
ply curve for outpatient services in Medicaid is upward-sloping, consistent with previous evi-
dence from Medicaid (Chen, 2017) and Medicare (Clemens and Gottlieb, 2014), and that private
plans relax rationing of access to care by paying providers higher rates for the same services.
    The mechanism behind the increase in prescription drug spending was different. We find
that blunt rationing in Texas’s public program was responsible for the increased spending un-
der private provision. Prior to privatization, the state imposed strict rationing of drugs among
public plan enrollees through a monthly limit of three prescriptions, while not imposing this
   1 Priorwork on private provision in Medicaid has largely focused on infants and non-disabled adults and
children. Exceptions are Vabson (2017) and an earlier version of this paper (Layton et al., 2019), both of which
analyze a similar natural experiment in New York.


                                                       2
limit on private plan enrollees and instead allowing the private plans to use their own utiliza-
tion management methods.2 Although not widely known, strict rationing of prescription drugs
using ad hoc quantity controls is a common feature of public Medicaid plans (Council of State
Governments Midwest, 2013). Importantly, these limits appear to be binding for a meaningful
share of disabled beneficiaries. Indeed, they appear to prevent disabled Medicaid beneficiaries
from taking a variety of drugs used to treat the chronic conditions most prevalent in this popu-
lation. For example, we find strong extensive margin responses to the removal of the drug cap
under private provision for insulins, anti-psychotics, anti-depressants, and statins, as well as
drugs used to treat asthma and pain. These responses suggest that the drug cap’s removal may
have led to fairly large improvements in quality of life for many Medicaid beneficiaries. The
relaxation of this limit and the subsequent increase in drug utilization thus represent a second
instance of relaxed rationing of access to healthcare services under private vs. public provision.
    As rationing was relaxed for drugs and outpatient care in Texas, we find clear evidence
that inpatient spending decreased by at least 8%, consistent with other work on private provi-
sion in Medicaid and elsewhere (Van Parys, 2015; Vabson, 2017). Importantly, this reduction is
concentrated in inpatient admissions related to mental illness, diabetes, and respiratory condi-
tions (such as asthma and COPD). While we cannot rule out increased rationing of inpatient
services by private plans (i.e., “stinting”), there was little direct incentive for plans to stint since
plans were not liable for these services; somewhat uniquely, inpatient care for the disabled pop-
ulation was “carved out” of private plan contracts and directly financed by the state. Because
these types of admissions (for mental illness, diabetes, asthma, and COPD) are often consid-
ered “avoidable” given appropriate disease management, these reductions are likely a direct
product of actions by plans to manage their enrollees’ conditions in order to limit costly in-
patient events. Further, we find strong evidence that the decreases in inpatient admissions are
related to increased access to prescription drugs. Indeed, we find that the drugs with the largest
increases in utilization under private provision tend to treat the conditions associated with the
largest concurrent decreases in inpatient admissions. Additionally, we find that the groups of
beneficiaries that see the largest increases in drug utilization also have the largest reductions in
inpatient spending. Taken together, these results suggest that the reduction in inpatient spend-
ing under private provision reflects an improvement in the quality of healthcare received by
   2 Under  Texas’s private Medicaid program drug plans were not financially responsible for drug spending, as
it was “carved out” of the private plan contracts. With no direct financial incentives to limit drug consumption,
one might argue that comparing consumption under the strict drug limit imposed in the public plan to the un-
constrained consumption allowed under the private plan (but financed by the state) provides few lessons for
differences between public and private rationing of prescription drugs. However, in a later year, Texas “carved
in” drugs to the private plan contracts. In Section 7, we show that there was no effect of the carve-in on drug uti-
lization, indicating that the degree to which private plans ration drugs is invariant to whether drugs are carved-in
or carved-out of the contract, consistent with recent evidence from Dranove, Ody and Starc (2017). This suggests
that even though drugs were carved-out at the time of the transition, the shift in drug utilization under private
provision reflects differences in public vs. private rationing of drugs rather than in financial incentives.



                                                         3
Medicaid beneficiaries—as well as their actual health—rather than stinting by private health
plans. Complementary analyses of the effects of private provision on other outcomes such as
mortality, employment, and exit from the SSI program also suggest improvements in health
and functional capacity, although the associated results are not statistically significant.
     Finally, we show that the reduced rationing and improved quality under private provision
in Texas came at a cost: Fiscal (i.e., program) spending increased by 12% under private provi-
sion. This increase was mostly due to the fact that capitation payments to private plans were
set higher than the counterfactual (fee-for-service) cost of plan-covered services under public
provision, and not by the private plans driving up spending on uncovered services that contin-
ued to be paid on a fee-for-service basis, even for those enrolled in private plans (i.e., drugs).
Importantly, however, these spending increases were accompanied by increases in healthcare
utilization. Indeed, we find that in Texas the vast majority (80%) of this spending increase was
passed-through to providers/beneficiaries in the form of additional healthcare services.
     To summarize, we find that private provision leads to higher spending for the state and
weaker rationing of healthcare services in Texas. These results are contrary to the conventional
wisdom among policymakers that private provision saves money (Lewin Group, 2004), though
they are in line with previous findings of cost increases in the economics literature (Duggan
and Hayford, 2013). Furthermore, our strong evidence that Medicaid enrollees in Texas were
better off in private plans, is contrary to the conventional wisdom among economists that pri-
vate provision typically leads to worse outcomes in Medicaid (Aizer, Currie and Moretti, 2007;
Kuziemko, Meckel and Rossin-Slater, 2018).
     Our findings make an important contribution to the literature on private vs. public pro-
vision of social health insurance benefits (see Sparer, 2012, for a comprehensive review of this
literature). First, our analysis unpacks the “black box” of managed care by revealing mech-
anisms behind the estimated increases in drug and outpatient spending and the decrease in
inpatient utilization in Texas. Specifically, we provide evidence that the relaxation of a public
plan drug cap and increases in payments to providers led to increases in drug and outpatient
utilization, which in turn decreased inpatient admissions. Second, our results suggest that the
impacts of private provision are more nuanced than previously recognized. At a minimum,
our findings suggest that private provision does not cause adverse outcomes in all settings.
Furthermore, a comparison of our results from Texas to results from our work on the roll-out of
private provision in New York (Vabson, 2017; Layton et al., 2019) is suggestive of when private
provision might be more vs. less beneficial: The shift to private provision led to a much more
pronounced relaxation of rationing (along with a corresponding greater increase in Medicaid
spending) in Texas than in New York. This suggests that the shift to private provision may be
more consequential in states with stingier public plans (Texas) than in states with more gen-
erous public plans (New York). In other words, the design of both the private and the public
programs matters for determining the effects of public vs. private provision. We interpret this

                                                4
finding as an outcome of a political economy problem where conservative state legislatures are
willing to loosen constraints (budgetary and otherwise) on the state Medicaid program if the
state moves to private provision, under the assumption that marginal (as well as inframarginal)
dollars will be spent more efficiently by private plans.3 An implication of this is that while one
might argue that the state could have achieved similar improvements by weakening rationing
in the public plan (by relaxing the drug cap), political constraints may have made such mod-
ifications to the public plan infeasible; i.e., there may not have been a realistic counterfactual
world where Texas relaxed the drug cap without enrolling beneficiaries in private plans.
     These findings have important implications not only within social health insurance pro-
grams but also for other government services where private provision is common, includ-
ing education (Epple, Romano and Urquiola, 2017), incarceration (Mumford, Schanzenbach
and Nunn, 2016) and defense procurement (Rogerson, 1994), or where it has been considered,
including Social Security (Feldstein, 1998), disability insurance (Autor, Duggan and Gruber,
2014), and infrastructure (Winston and Yan, 2011). Indeed, in the last section of the paper, we
relate our results to the economics literature on government contracting with private firms. We
focus our attention on two tools available to states when contracting with private Medicaid
insurers: exclusion and payment. Most state Medicaid programs (including Texas) divorce
plan selection and plan payment by setting payments administratively rather than requesting
that insurers “bid” for contracts. Payments are then set to evolve according to the evolution of
costs across all insurers chosen to participate in the program. This results in a payment system
that is a hybrid of “cost-plus” payment (Bajari and Tadelis, 2001) and “yardstick competition”
(Shleifer, 1985). We discuss how such a system may lead to weak incentives for insurers to
reduce healthcare spending, but may also protect the state against the possibility of insurer exit
or ex-post payments or contract renegotiation (Decarolis, 2014). We conclude that while this
procurement system may in some cases lead to higher levels of healthcare and fiscal spending
(which we observe in Texas), it may also be the optimal system in this complex contracting
environment.
     Lastly, our findings make an important contribution to the literature on disability insur-
ance. Most of the literature on federal disability insurance programs, including the Social Secu-
rity Disability Insurance (SSDI) program and the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program,
has focused on the impact of these programs on employment, earnings, and other economic
outcomes. The lack of work on this population’s medical outcomes is surprising, given that
its Medicaid expenditures ($187 billion in 2014) dwarf expenditures on cash transfers ($48.2
billion). Moreover, the quality of care received through Medicaid by SSI beneficiaries has clear
spillover effects on economic outcomes such as employment and earnings, through impacts on
health, functioning, and quality of life. In sum, this paper represents an important contribution
  3 This interpretation is supported by interviews with current and former Medicaid officials in Texas, North
Carolina, and Massachusetts.


                                                     5
to the literature on disability insurance because it examines an aspect of disability policy that
has been overlooked and because it finds that private provision of Medicaid services ultimately
likely benefits adults with disabilities in some settings.


2     Background

2.1    Rationing in Public and Private Medicaid
Unlike most health insurance programs, Medicaid does not employ demand-side cost sharing
as a tool for reducing healthcare utilization. There is no deductible, no coinsurance, and typ-
ically no copayments for services or drugs.4 Despite this, Medicaid is widely perceived as a
relatively low-cost form of health insurance coverage (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2016). How
can this be?
    Medicaid instead employs non-cost-sharing tools for rationing access to healthcare. With
respect to medical services, Medicaid’s primary rationing tool is the level of the fees it pays to
providers of healthcare services. Most state Medicaid programs pay notoriously low fees to
providers, with only two states (Alaska and Montana) paying more than Medicare and over 30
states paying less than 80% of Medicare fees (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018). Low prices di-
rectly reduce Medicaid spending. They also indirectly reduce spending by lowering the supply
of care—fewer providers are willing to treat Medicaid patients compared to those with other
forms of coverage, and even participating Medicaid providers may treat Medicaid patients less
intensively than others (Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, 2019). A sim-
ple economic model would suggest that, conditional on consumers facing zero prices, lower
provider prices would lead to supply “shortages” in places where consumers demand more
care than what is available at the price paid by the Medicaid program. As a consequence, state
Medicaid programs effectively outsource the rationing of healthcare services to providers, who
must choose which (if any) of the many Medicaid enrollees demanding their services they will
treat. Providers appear to be responsive to Medicaid payments on various margins, including
appointment availability (Polsky et al., 2015), waiting times (Oostrom, Einav and Finkelstein,
2017), and other measures of access (Alexander and Schnell, 2017; Chen, 2017). Low fees may
also cause providers to offer lower-quality care (Hackmann, 2019). Texas pays particularly low
fees, ranked 37th among states in terms of how their Medicaid fees compare to Medicare fees
(Kaiser Family Foundation, 2018).
    With respect to prescription drugs, Medicaid has even fewer rationing tools available. The
prices paid by Medicaid programs for drugs are generally determined by external formulas
    4 Nominal cost-sharing is permitted for some services and drugs, with cost-sharing limits varying by income
category. For those below 100% of FPL, the maximum copay ranges between $4 to $8 for most medical and drug
services (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2017a).


                                                      6
(see Alpert, Duggan and Hellerstein, 2013, for a comprehensive review). Rebates from drug
manufacturers are also largely determined by formula. States can negotiate supplemental re-
bates, but state Medicaid formularies must include all FDA-approved drugs and can only limit
utilization of specific drugs through prior authorization requirements. This greatly reduces
states’ bargaining power with manufacturers and the rebates they can obtain. Thus, in order to
limit utilization of prescription drugs, states have opted for a more draconian and ad hoc (but
legal) tool: quantity limits.
     The number of states imposing some form of prescription drug cap in their Medicaid pro-
grams increased from 12 in 2001 to 20 in 2010 (Lieberman et al., 2016). The caps vary in their
scope, from general ones that apply to nearly all drugs and nearly all populations to highly tar-
geted caps that do not apply to sicker populations, to generic drugs, or to drugs used to treat
chronic conditions such as AIDS or diabetes (Council of State Governments Midwest, 2013).
They also vary in their stringency, from strict caps of as low as 3 prescription fills up to rel-
atively generous caps of as many as 8 fills, with the modal cap being 4 fills. Texas imposes
a particularly restrictive cap of 3 drug fills per person per month, which applies to nearly all
Medicaid enrollees, including enrollees with multiple chronic conditions.5
     An alternative cost-containment method for state Medicaid programs is to outsource ra-
tioning of healthcare services to private health plans. Under private provision (also known as
Medicaid managed care, or MMC), states pay private health plans fixed per-person, per-month
fees to provide all or some of the healthcare services covered by the Medicaid program. Pri-
vate plans can then impose their own rationing tools, which are often much more expansive
(though not necessarily more restrictive) than those available to public Medicaid programs.
On the medical side, private plans can construct customized provider networks that can in-
clude providers participating in the public program as well as providers not accepting public
Medicaid. Private plans can independently negotiate payment rates with these providers and
sometimes impose additional prior authorization requirements on certain services or on cer-
tain higher-cost doctors. In addition, private plans often use care managers to ensure that
patients get needed treatment in order to prevent potentially costly complications or hospi-
talizations. With respect to drugs, private plans may have more scope to ration care than the
public program, such as by instituting prior authorization requirements for very expensive
drugs or drugs with cheaper substitutes. Moreover, unlike the public program, private plans
could exclude some drugs from coverage entirely through the use of closed formularies (Man-
   5 InTexas, “[a]dults enrolled in traditional fee-for-service (FFS) Medicaid are limited to three prescriptions per
month. All other Medicaid-eligible individuals are allowed an unlimited amount of prescriptions.” (Texas Health
and Human Services Commission, 2017) Those exempted from the Medicaid three-prescription limit are children
under the age of 21, people enrolled in private Medicaid plans, and people enrolled in eligibility waiver programs.
“Drugs and products that are not counted towards the three-prescription limit include family planning drugs,
diabetic supplies, smoking cessation products, home health supplies, and mosquito repellent.” (Texas Health and
Human Services Commission, 2018)



                                                         7
att, 2016). For both medical services and prescription drugs, private plans are able to pass
financial risk on to providers, rewarding providers who limit spending (via fewer referrals to
specialists and lower utilization of tests, labs, etc.) and penalizing providers whose patients’
spending levels are unreasonably high.
     The greater availability of these tools to private plans, combined with the sharper incentives
private plans have for applying them, can potentially allow the plans to provide higher-quality
care than the public program or to provide care of similar quality at a lower price. However,
this is far from guaranteed. The outcomes under private provision depend critically on the
design of the program. Particularly important are the roles of regulatory supervision, compe-
tition for enrollees, and the structure of payments to private plans. Indeed, in Section 7.4 we
characterize the state’s objective function and draw on the economics literature on government
procurement of services from private firms to discuss how different procurement options may
or may not result in the state meeting its objectives related to state spending and the quality of
care provided to Medicaid beneficiaries.


2.2    Texas Managed Care Program
Texas transitioned a subset of adults with disabilities out of their publicly managed fee-for-
service Medicaid program and into private Medicaid managed care plans during the mid- to
late-2000s. We now describe the institutional details of the Texas managed care program.
     Texas’s Medicaid program is divided into ten service areas, shown in the left panel of
Appendix Figure A1 (where the 10th service area comprises much of the state and is shown
in white). Starting in February 2007, four of those service areas (Bexar, Harris, Nueces, and
Travis), all large urban areas of the state, required that all disabled Medicaid beneficiaries over
the age of 21 and not dually enrolled in Medicare enroll in a private Medicaid managed care
plan as part of the STAR+Plus program. Nearly all of these individuals were SSI beneficiaries.
We refer to this group of individuals as “adults with disabilities” for the remainder of the paper.
     Prior to February 2007, the vast majority of adults with disabilities in Texas were enrolled
in the traditional fee-for-service public Medicaid program, under which the state directly re-
imbursed physicians for healthcare services using the state’s fee-for-service price schedule.6
Starting in February 2007, enrollment in STAR+Plus became mandatory for all adults with dis-
abilities in the four affected service areas, and this group was shifted into private managed care
plans on February 1. Prior to the imposition of mandatory enrollment, all adults with disabili-
ties received information about the transition and were given an opportunity to choose one of
two or three plans available in their service area. Beneficiaries who did not make a choice were
   6 Harris County is the only exception to this, as this service area transitioned adults with disabilities to
STAR+Plus at an earlier date. Because of this, we omit Harris County from our sample, though we include other
counties in the Harris service area.



                                                      8
assigned to a plan by the state. Adults with disabilities outside these service areas remained in
the public Medicaid program.
    Under STAR+Plus, instead of directly reimbursing physicians for the services they pro-
vide, the state outsourced the provision of healthcare services to private managed care plans,
paying those plans a fixed monthly premium or capitation payment for each individual they
enrolled. Base payments were set at the county level by independent actuaries. The actuaries
took data on prior spending for all adults with disabilities in a given county (in the public or
private plans) and used that data to project future spending based on a time trend in healthcare
spending plus adjustments for any new services offered. Base payments were set equal to the
projected level of spending plus a fixed amount to cover administrative costs ($50 per person
per month). In the early years, when data from the public plan was used to project future
spending, projected spending was further reduced by around 15% to account for “anticipated
managed care savings.” Plan payments were then set equal to the base rate multiplied by a
budget-neutral risk adjustment factor that accounts for differences in enrollee health status (as
recorded in diagnoses on claims) across plans participating in a given service area. Plans then
used these payments to pay providers for all healthcare services received by their enrollees,
with the exception of any “carved-out” services as discussed in more detail below. Plans were
the residual claimant on all healthcare spending for their enrollees, keeping any savings and
absorbing any losses generated by healthcare spending exceeding their payments from the
state.
    Texas selected a limited number of insurers to participate in STAR+Plus through a periodic
procurement process that awarded multi-year contracts renewable for a cumulative period of
eight years. Throughout our study period, the set of participating carriers included Ameri-
group, Molina, EverCare, and Superior HealthPlan, with a subset of two or three of these
insurers participating in each service area. The private managed care plans then contracted
with physicians and hospitals to provide care to their members, negotiating their own prices
and building their own networks of providers. Under the STAR+Plus model, all enrollees were
required to choose a primary care physician (PCP) (or were assigned one), and this PCP acted
as a gatekeeper to all non-primary care medical services. All members were to have access to
a 24-hour nurse line, and the managed care plans were required to contact all members and
ascertain need for long-term services and supports (LTSS). Enrollees were also given access to
a new benefit: annual wellness check-ups that were not previously covered by Medicaid.
    Like many state Medicaid managed care programs at the time, Texas excluded (“carved
out”) prescription drug services from its contracts with private plans, continuing to pay for all
prescriptions on a fee-for-service basis through the public program even for beneficiaries en-
rolled in a private plan. As a result, the state, rather than the private plan, served as the resid-
ual claimant on all drug spending. Additionally, Texas’s public Medicaid program capped the
number of drugs it would pay for in any given month at just three prescriptions per beneficiary.

                                                 9
Such caps are common in public Medicaid programs (Lieberman et al., 2016). Importantly,
Texas lifted this cap for beneficiaries enrolled in a private plan, even though the state continued
to pay for all drugs through the public program. The assumption was that the private plans
would use other tools to control healthcare spending, including spending on drugs.
    Under the Texas STAR+Plus program, inpatient services were also carved out of private
plan contracts for adults with disabilities (but not for other Medicaid populations).7 While
the carve-out of inpatient services for adults with disabilities may have affected the behavior
of private plans, its effects may have been diminished by the fact that the carve-out did not
extend to the larger Medicaid population enrolled in private plans (unlike the drug carve-out),
but was unique to the disabled population. Adults with disabilities make up a relatively small
share of all private plan enrollees. As a result, managed care plans may not have adopted
cost-containment strategies customized for this particular population, and may have instead
maintained a single strategy across all populations. This raises the possibility that the overall
behavior of managed care plans was only moderately influenced by the carve out of inpatient
spending.8


3      Data and Sample
We use several administrative datasets from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) for the state of Texas for 2004-2010. These datasets contain information on Medicaid
enrollment status as well as healthcare utilization in the inpatient, emergency department,
outpatient, and prescription drug settings. Uniquely, the data allow for construction of an
individual-level panel of utilization, which covers everyone in public as well as private Medi-
caid plans, including those switching between the two. Furthermore, inclusion in these data is
not conditional on utilization of healthcare; this stands in contrast with hospital discharge data
(often used in the Medicaid literature) where individuals are only observed if they are utilizing
care. These data are also unique in tracking outpatient and prescription drug utilization in ad-
dition to inpatient care, allowing us to build a more complete picture of patient care compared
to past studies that have investigated inpatient care alone. This is particularly valuable, given
    7 Thiswas done to retain eligibility for federal matching of supplemental payments made to hospitals under
Upper Payment Limit (UPL) regulations (Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission, 2012). Intended
to augment Medicaid’s low hospital payment rates, UPL payments are based on the number of FFS inpatient days
by Medicaid beneficiaries in the state. Had inpatient services been included in private plan contracts, hospitals
would have lost a substantial amount of UPL revenue.
    8 STAR+Plus also differs from other state Medicaid managed care programs in covering various forms of be-

havioral health and long-term care, whereas other states often exclude these services from their managed care
contracts. Specifically, STAR+Plus plans cover a comprehensive set of mental health services, including cognitive
behavioral therapy. STAR+Plus plans also cover home health services, along with institutional long-term care
stays shorter than 4 months in duration. Due to data limitations that make it difficult for us to differentiate these
services from other non-inpatient services, we do not explore the effects of private provision on these services.



                                                         10
that non-inpatient care accounts for over 65% of this population’s healthcare spending.
    Using these data, we can precisely identify the cohorts of interest in our analyses. Specif-
ically, we restrict our analysis samples to Texas residents who were enrolled in Medicaid in a
given month during 2004-2010, who qualified for the program on the basis of disability, and
who were not simultaneously enrolled in Medicare. Finally, we restrict our main analyses to
individuals over 21, because private Medicaid plan enrollment always remained optional in
Texas for those under 21.


3.1   Beneficiary Characteristics and Enrollment Information
We obtain information on beneficiary characteristics and enrollment status from the CMS Med-
icaid Analytic eXtract (MAX) Personal Summary (PS) files, which contain person-month-level
enrollment status in Medicaid as well as Medicare. For individuals enrolled in Medicaid, these
files identify whether their Medicaid coverage in a given month comes through public or pri-
vate Medicaid plans. These files also identify the basis for each beneficiary’s eligibility for
Medicaid, such as through qualification for SSI, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, or
other eligibility pathways. Finally, the data also tracks specific plan of enrollment, for those in
private plans.


3.2   Inpatient, Outpatient, and Prescription Drug Utilization Data
We track inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug utilization using claims-level information
from the MAX Inpatient (IP), Other Therapy (OT), and Prescription Drug (Rx) files. These data
track claims paid by the public Medicaid program as well as those paid by private Medicaid
plans. The public data capture all healthcare utilization for those in public Medicaid, as well as
utilization of carved-out services for those in private Medicaid plans.
     Previous work comparing private and public provision of social health insurance has suf-
fered from data quality issues arising from differential reporting of service use under the public
and private programs. Our work does not face these issues for some categories of services, but
does potentially suffer from reporting issues for other categories. We therefore describe data
quality for each broad category of healthcare services (inpatient care, non-inpatient medical
services, and prescription drugs) in turn.


Prescription Drug Data As discussed in Section 2, prescription drugs in Texas are “carved-
out” of private plan contracts. This means that they are always paid by the public program both
for beneficiaries enrolled in the public program and for beneficiaries enrolled in a private plan
for their medical benefits. There is thus no change in the source of the prescription drug claims
data as beneficiaries shift from public to private plans, which means there is no concern about


                                                11
differential reporting affecting our estimates of the effects of private provision with respect
to prescription drugs. The prescription drug data include the prescription cost, the dates on
which the prescription was written as well as filled, the days’ supply associated with the fill,
and the drug identifier (NDC code), which we link to external data in order to group drugs
by therapeutic class. Based on a drug’s therapeutic class, we are able to identify the types of
chronic conditions that it could be meant to treat.


Inpatient Data Inpatient services are also carved out of private plan contracts in Texas, im-
plying that, like prescription drugs, there is again no concern about differential reporting con-
founding our estimates of the effects of private provision. The inpatient utilization data record
the date of each hospital visit, as well as the type of hospitalization, length of hospital stay, set
of procedures performed, and total visit costs. Using this information, it is possible to classify
hospitalizations into various relevant categories, including elective, emergency, and surgical
admissions.


Outpatient Data Unlike for inpatient services and prescription drugs, for outpatient services
differential reporting could potentially be a concern. While outpatient data for Medicaid ben-
eficiaries enrolled in public plans comes from fee-for-service claims paid directly by the state,
outpatient data for private Medicaid beneficiaries comes from claims paid by the private plans
themselves, which the plans then report to the state. A specific concern is under-reporting of
visits by private plans (Lewin Group, 2012). This concern is less applicable to our setting be-
cause private plans had already provided coverage to other Medicaid populations for many
years, allowing time for issues with data reporting to have been worked out. Concerns are
also mitigated by our finding of generally higher outpatient utilization under private Medicaid
plans, since under-counting of private plan visits would most plausibly produce the opposite
effect. This suggests that if there is a reporting issue, our estimates of outpatient utilization
increases are a lower bound for the true effect of private provision. However, the possibility
for differential reporting does make it difficult to differentiate between short-term (negative)
effects of the shift to private plans and changes in reporting.
    That said, while the outpatient claims data appear to be of sufficiently high-quality to allow
for analyses of changes in aggregate outpatient utilization (spending and number of days with
an outpatient claim), inconsistencies appear as outpatient utilization is broken down into finer
categories of services. Specifically, it appears that private plans and public plans code specific
outpatient services differently, making disaggregation of the effects of private provision on
outpatient utilization infeasible. Dissaggregation of the effects of private provision on inpatient
and prescription drug utilization, however, is completely feasible due to the consistent source
of the data across the public vs. private divide.
    The outpatient data includes information on actual cost amounts for both the public and

                                                 12
the private programs. Specifically, the data contains the negotiated amounts actually paid to
providers by the public or private plans at the claim-line level. These actual provider payment
amounts are available for all public Medicaid claims, as well as for about 80% of all private
Medicaid plan claims. For the 20% of private plan claims missing cost information, we are
able to impute this information, based on median observed private Medicaid rates for a given
procedure. After imputation, we observe payments for 99.6% of private Medicaid claims.9


3.3       Government Expenditure Metrics
We construct beneficiary-level measures of government (state + federal) Medicaid expenditures
using information contained in the CMS MAX files. We define government fiscal spending as
the sum of any spending on healthcare services paid directly by the government and any pre-
mium payments paid by the government to private Medicaid plans. Spending on healthcare
services paid directly by the government consists of spending on all services for beneficiaries
enrolled in the public Medicaid plan and carved-out services for beneficiaries enrolled in pri-
vate Medicaid plans. This spending is observed directly in the fee-for-service claims appearing
in the inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug files. Monthly premium payments paid by
the government to private Medicaid plans are also directly observed in the MAX files for bene-
ficiaries enrolled in private plans. We measure total government spending as the sum of these
two forms of spending.10


3.4       Mortality and Employment Data
We also examine indicators of beneficiary health and functional capacity, including death, em-
ployment, and the suspension of SSI benefits using the SSA’s Disability Analysis File (DAF).
The DAF contains monthly administrative records on the universe of SSI and SSDI beneficia-
ries. We isolate adults (21-64) enrolled only in the SSI program during our sample period. We
only observe Medicaid and Medicare eligibility and county of residence but not private vs.
   9 In  Appendix E we provide some evidence that the private plan payment amounts reflect actual payments
rather than fee-for-service fees from the public program. Specifically, we document cross-carrier variation in
prices. There are four carriers (EverCare, Amerigroup, Molina, and Superior HealthPlan) contracted by Texas
Medicaid. We estimate their impact on the negotiated price after accounting for provider, procedure, and time
fixed effects. The distribution of the estimated carrier fixed effects appears plausible, suggesting that the observed
negotiated rate information is high-quality and reflects actual payments. If the payment amounts were just fee-
for-service amounts or charges, we would not expect to observe the amount of cross-carrier variation in prices
within a provider that we estimate.
   10 Private plan premium payments include $50 per person per month in administrative costs (Texas Health

and Human Services Commission, 2007). Because administrative costs are not observed for public Medicaid
enrollees, in examining the effects of the shift to private provision on total Medicaid spending we remove $600
per person-year from private Medicaid premium payments. This allows us to study the effects of private provision
on Medicaid spending related to healthcare. These estimates necessarily abstract from any additional spending or
savings on administrative costs due to private provision.



                                                         13
public plan enrollment in the SSA data. Mortality is defined as a binary indicator for whether
a beneficiary died in a given quarter. Employment is defined as a binary indicator for whether
the beneficiary had positive earnings in a given quarter. SSI suspension is defined as a binary
indicator for whether a beneficiary’s SSI benefits were suspended due to work in a given quar-
ter. Mortality provides a direct measure of beneficiary health. Employment and SSI suspen-
sions provide indirect measures of functional capacity, with the assumption being that take-up
of employment or the suspension of benefits due to work indicate improvements in functional
capacity and overall well-being.


4      Empirical Framework

4.1      Control and Treatment Counties
To study the effects of private provision of Medicaid for adults with disabilities, we leverage
the introduction of the STAR+Plus program to four of the ten Medicaid service areas in Texas
(Bexar, Harris, Nueces, and Travis) starting in February 2007. As discussed in detail in Section
2.2, at the time of the introduction of STAR+Plus to these service areas, all eligible disabled
Medicaid beneficiaries who were not also eligible for Medicare were disenrolled from Texas’s
public Medicaid program and enrolled in a private Medicaid plan. Disabled beneficiaries re-
siding in other service areas remained in the public program throughout the study period. We
thus use a difference-in-differences strategy to estimate the effects of private provision.

                                      Figure 1: Treatment and Control Counties




                                          Control
                                          Treatment



Note: Figure shows the Texas counties that we include in our sample as treatment and control counties.


   Treatment (red) and control (blue) counties are shown in Figure 1. The set of treatment
counties is defined as any county in the affected service areas that is contiguous to at least
one county in an unaffected service area. The set of control counties is similarly defined as any

                                                                    14
                                               Table 1: Summary Statistics


                                                       Contiguous Control    Treatment    Non-Contiguous Control
                   Average Total spending 2004                10,729           11,404              11,621
                   Average Inpatient spending 2004             2,929            3,050               2,810
                   Average Outpatient spending 2004            5,499            5,868               6,368
                   Average Rx spending 2004                    2,302            2,486               2,444
                   Age 20 to 24                               .09083            .1037              .09585
                   Age 25 to 29                               .07696           .08478            .07654∗∗
                   Age 30 to 34                                .0778           .08149           .07306∗∗∗
                   Age 35 to 39                                .0817           .08782            .0791∗∗∗
                   Age 40 to 44                              .1013∗∗             .111              .1029∗
                   Age 45 to 49                                .1294            .1281               .1213
                   Age 50 to 54                                .1415            .1362               .1399
                   Age 55 to 59                                .1636            .1457             .1636∗∗
                   Age 60 to 64                               .1369∗            .1212            .1478∗∗∗
                   Female                                      .5782            .5556               .5739
                   Male                                        .4218            .4444               .4261
                   Heart Disease                               .348∗            .3125             .3559∗∗
                   Diabetes                                  .2146∗∗            .2085               .2226
                   HIV/AIDS                                  .008895           .01526              .0107∗
                   Cancer                                     .05177           .04644               .0473
                   Rheumatoid Arthritis                       .03595           .03406              .04246
                   Obesity                                    .02805           .03109              .02828
                   Substance Use                            .0509∗∗∗           .06205           .04668∗∗∗
                   Mental Illness                               .21             .2345            .1968∗∗∗
                   N recipients Jan 2004                       7,401           30,510              76,210
                   N recipients Dec 2010                       9,206           42,210             106,562
                   N pre-period recipient months             289,353         1,202,845          2,976,227
                   N post-period recipient months            405,188         1,824,141          4,594,026


Note: Table shows summary statistics for control and treatment counties. In our analysis, control counties are counties where Medicaid
managed care was not expanded that are contiguous with at least one county where Medicaid managed care was expanded. However, here
we also show summary statistics for all counties in Texas where Medicaid managed care was not expanded.



county in the unaffected service areas that is contiguous to at least one county in an affected ser-
vice area. Table 1 shows summary statistics for the treatment counties, the contiguous control
counties, as well as the full set of non-treatment counties in the state. The summary statistics
reveal that for many variables all three groups of counties look similar. For most variables,
however, contiguous control counties are more similar to treatment counties than the full set of
non-treatment counties. These differences are likely due to the fact that STAR+Plus was imple-
mented in urban areas of the state, while the vast majority of Texas is sparsely populated and
rural. By implementing the contiguity requirement, we restrict to relatively populated con-
trol counties, making the treatment and control groups more comparable.11 To further ensure
comparable treatment and control groups, in Appendix B we provide additional results where
we zoom in on zip codes on the service area borders, requiring that treatment and control zip
codes be within 25 miles of each other.
    In addition to the contiguity restriction, we divide control counties into four groups, match-
ing the four service areas where STAR+Plus was implemented. These groups are illustrated in
  11 An alternative strategy would be to use urban counties where STAR+Plus was not rolled out as control coun-
ties. These counties would potentially include the El Paso and Houston areas. Unfortunately, the state rolled out
other programs in these cities around this time, making this approach infeasible.


                                                                 15
the right panel of Appendix Figure A1. We use these groups to construct a set of indicators
we refer to as “service area grouping”-by-quarter fixed effects. For each service area, the indi-
cator is equal to one if the individual resides in either a treatment county or a control county
assigned to that service area grouping, as illustrated in the right panel of Appendix Figure A1.
We include these fixed effects in all regressions to control for any local shocks in healthcare
utilization. The inclusion of these fixed effects effectively ensures that a particular treatment
county is compared only to control counties that are contiguous to counties in the treatment
county’s service area.
     Figure 2 shows the portion of disabled Medicaid beneficiaries in our sample who enrolled
in a private Medicaid plan in treatment and control counties in Texas for each month between
January 2004 and December 2010. STAR+Plus was introduced in the treatment counties in
February 2007. It is clear that the switch from the public program to private plans was swift
and sharp. Effectively overnight, the portion of disabled Medicaid beneficiaries enrolled in a
private Medicaid plan in treatment counties went from around 10% to almost 80%.12 This sharp
variation in enrollment in private plans is the variation we exploit to identify the effects of pri-
vate provision. While take-up of private plans is sharp, it is not complete. There are several
possible reasons for this. First, some groups within the disabled population were exempted
from the requirement that they enroll in a private managed care plan. Unfortunately, our data
does not allow us to directly identify these exempted groups. Second, upon enrolling in Med-
icaid, new beneficiaries receive retroactive coverage for any healthcare expenditures they may
have incurred in the previous three months. This retroactive coverage is provided by the public
Medicaid program, meaning that some new Medicaid beneficiaries (including those in private
Medicaid) may be denoted as having at some point been covered under the public program.


4.2       Regression Framework
Because take-up is incomplete, we present reduced form estimates as well as instrumental
variable (IV) estimates. The IV estimates are local average treatment effects (LATEs) specific
to the population of disabled beneficiaries who complied with the private plan enrollment
mandate (70% of the population). Our reduced form specification is a difference-in-differences
specification in event-study form:

                                             Q4_2010
                              Yit = β 0 +      ∑         β t Treatit + αst + γi + eit                         (1)
                                            t= Q1_2004


where Yit is the outcome of interest, Treatit is an indicator equal to one if person i is living in a
treatment county in quarter t and zero otherwise, αst represents the full set of service area-by-
  12 In
      our analyses we drop all beneficiaries who are enrolled in a private plan at any point before February 2007.
These individuals are not excluded from Figure 2.

                                                         16
                                                                          Figure 2: First Stage




                                                      1
                                       Percent in Medicaid Managed Care
                                           .2      .4
                                          January 20040    .6    .8       January 2006     January 2008    January 2010
                                                                                          Month

                                                                                    Control         Treatment




Note: Figure shows Medicaid managed care enrollment in treatment and control counties. The red vertical line between January and February
2007 corresponds to the date of the introduction of the STAR+Plus Medicaid managed care program in the treatment counties.



quarter fixed effects illustrated in the right panel of Appendix Figure A1, and eit represents a
random error term. We also include a full set of individual fixed effects, γi to ensure that our
estimates are not driven by differential changes in the composition of Medicaid enrollees over
time in treatment vs. control counties. For our primary outcomes, we also include estimates
from regressions without individual fixed effects. We also estimate reduced form results pooled
over the pre-period (Q1_2004-Q4_2006) and post period (Q1_2007-Q4_2010) using a modified
version of the regression described in Equation (1) where we replace the quarter-by-quarter
interactions between quarter dummies and Treatit with a single indicator equal to 1 for any
quarter during the post period, Postt . In this regression the coefficient on Postt represents the
differential change in the outcome in treatment vs. control counties averaged across the entire
post-period.
    Our IV specification uses the county-level mandates as an instrument for enrollment in a
private plan. The first stage regression is:

                                 Privateit = δ0 + δ1 Treatit × Postt + αst + γi + ηit                                                (2)

where Privateit is equal to the portion of quarter t that person i is enrolled in a private plan,
Postt is an indicator equal to 1 for any quarter during the post period (Q1_2007-Q4_2010), and
η is a random error term. Here, δ1 represents the portion of person-quarters spent in a private
plan during the post-mandate period in treatment counties relative to control counties. The IV
regression specification is:

                                                          Yit = θ0 + θ1 Private
                                                                         \ it + αst + γi + ψit                                       (3)

where Private
       \ it represents the predicted values from Equation (2) and ψit is a random error


                                                                                         17
term. Here, θ1 is a LATE, representing the average difference in the outcome between pub-
lic and private Medicaid plans for the 70% of the disabled population who comply with the
private-plan enrollment mandate.


4.3   Identification
In order for θ1 to represent the causal effect of enrollment in a private Medicaid plan vs. the
public program, it must be the case that there was no other change in the treatment counties
between the pre- and post-STAR+Plus periods that did not also occur in the control counties.
Because there was no other contemporaneous change in Texas’s Medicaid program that only
affected treatment counties and not the controls, the main potential threat to identification is
spurious differential trends in outcomes across the treatment and control counties. To ensure
that differential trends do not explain our results, we first include service area grouping-by-
quarter fixed effects to account for any local shocks affecting healthcare utilization patterns.
Second, for all outcomes, we present event study graphs showing how the difference in the
outcome between the treatment and control counties changes over time. This offers a visual
test of whether differential pre-trends exist over the time period preceding the introduction
of private provision. Finally, in Appendix B we replicate all analyses restricting to border zip
codes within 25 miles of each other to further ensure that the control group represents a valid
counterfactual for the treatment group.
     A more subtle threat to identification is the potential for private provision to impact the
underlying composition of Medicaid enrollees. Private Medicaid plans benefit financially from
increasing take-up among Medicaid eligible individuals and from decreasing the rate at which
their enrollees disenroll from the program. Not all individuals are profitable, however, im-
plying that private plans may be incentivized to increase enrollment among some (healthier)
groups while decreasing enrollment among other (sicker) groups. While there is some evidence
of plans engaging in this type of selection behavior for the mainstream Medicaid population
(Currie and Fahr, 2005), such behavior is unlikely when it comes to the disabled, as Medicaid
eligibility for SSI beneficiaries is typically determined indirectly by the Social Security Admin-
istration rather than by state Medicaid programs.
     The possibility of differential shifts in the composition of disabled Medicaid beneficiaries in
treatment vs. control counties motivates our inclusion of individual fixed-effects. We also pro-
vide results of our primary analyses restricting to a balanced panel of Medicaid beneficiaries for
similar reasons. This ameliorates any problems stemming from composition changes, though
it also causes our estimates to reflect the effects of within-person changes in private provision
rather than the more general consequences of private provision. Overall effects of private pro-
vision combine the effects on individuals forced to actually switch from public to private plans
with the effects on individuals newly enrolling in Medicaid after the introduction of private


                                                18
provision. These two effects may be different, as the first may entail potential disruption to a
beneficiary’s care while the second may not entail any such disruption. Because of this, we in-
clude results with and without individual fixed effects for all of our primary outcomes, always
with the caveat that the results from regressions excluding individual fixed effects are poten-
tially vulnerable to differential shifts in the composition of enrollees in treatment vs. control
counties.
     Finally, as evidence that these types of compositional shifts do not explain our results, Ap-
pendix Table A6 shows that there is no significant effect of private provision on the number
of adults with disabilities entering or exiting Medicaid. Alongside our use of individual fixed
effects, these results provide strong evidence that our main estimates are not driven by differ-
ential shifts in the composition of Medicaid enrollment.


5     Main Results
We start by reporting the effects of private provision on healthcare spending and utilization,
beginning with overall healthcare spending and then drilling down on utilization by type.
Next, we proceed to assess effects on fiscal/program spending. We then focus on marginal
inpatient admissions and drugs and make conclusions about the effects of the shift to private
provision on quality of care and quality of life for our study sample in both states. Finally, in
Section 7 we study the mechanisms behind the utilization effects of the shift to private plans.


5.1   Healthcare Spending
Main results are reported in Table 2. For each primary outcome (log total realized healthcare
spending, log inpatient spending, log drug spending, log outpatient spending), we report co-
efficients from four regressions. The first two regressions include individual fixed effects while
the second two regressions do not. The first and third regressions include an interaction be-
tween an indicator for residing in a treatment county (“Treatment”) and an indicator for the
quarter being after February 2007 (“Post”), the month in which mandated enrollment in pri-
vate Medicaid plans began in Texas. The second and fourth columns break the “post” period
into two periods, an “early-post” period (2007-2008) and a “late-post” period (2009-2010). For
each regression specification we report both reduced form and IV coefficients. Reduced form
coefficients should be interpreted as the effect of a county-level private-plan enrollment man-
date on the outcome, allowing take-up of private plans to be incomplete even under mandated
enrollment. IV coefficients should be interpreted as the difference in the outcome in the pub-
lic Medicaid program vs. in a private plan for the average beneficiary who was induced by
the mandate to enroll in a private plan. For all primary outcomes, we also present event study
figures (Figure 3) showing the evolution of the reduced form difference in the outcome between

                                               19
                                                                                  Table 2: Main Outcomes


                             (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)      (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)     (14)       (15)      (16)
                                   Log Realized Spending                        Log Inpatient Spending                         Log Rx Spending                    Log Realized Outpatient Spending
      Treatment             0.053             0.112∗∗∗                -0.056∗∗∗                 -0.027             0.146∗∗∗             0.183∗∗∗                0.027             0.126∗∗∗
      × Post               (0.034)             (0.038)                 (0.019)                 (0.018)              (0.033)              (0.044)               (0.042)             (0.047)

      Treatment                       -0.001                0.048                 -0.056∗∗∗              -0.031∗              0.087∗∗∗              0.142∗∗∗              -0.054               0.018
      × Post                          (0.030)              (0.034)                 (0.020)               (0.017)               (0.031)               (0.041)             (0.040)              (0.042)
      (2007-2008)

      Treatment                      0.103∗∗               0.155∗∗∗               -0.058∗∗∗              -0.021               0.202∗∗∗              0.209∗∗∗             0.111∗∗              0.203∗∗∗
      × Post                         (0.042)                (0.049)                (0.020)               (0.022)               (0.041)               (0.053)             (0.051)               (0.056)
      (2009-2010)
      IV Coefficient       0.072∗     0.075∗    0.178∗∗∗   0.175∗∗∗   -0.076∗∗∗   -0.075∗∗∗    -0.043     -0.040   0.197∗∗∗   0.199∗∗∗   0.291∗∗∗   0.287∗∗∗    0.037     0.051    0.200∗∗∗   0.200∗∗
                           (0.043)    (0.042)    (0.060)    (0.062)    (0.024)     (0.021)    (0.028)    (0.028)    (0.039)    (0.040)    (0.073)    (0.076)   (0.053)   (0.054)    (0.076)   (0.078)
      Baseline Mean         5.825      5.825      5.825      5.825       .657        .657       .657       .657      4.096      4.096      4.096      4.096     4.59      4.59       4.59       4.59
      Individual Fixed        X          X                                 X           X                               X          X                               X         X
      Effects
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
20




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes. For each outcome, the first and third columns show estimates of control-treatment differences from
     estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable specification
     in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show reduced form and instrumental variable estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate
     periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
     the treatment and control counties over time. In Appendix Table A5 we also present regres-
sion results where the outcome is spending in levels rather than in logs.
     The first outcome we investigate is log total realized healthcare spending. This is not a mea-
sure of total fiscal or program spending, but instead the sum of total payments made by either
the public or private plans to providers or drug manufacturers for actual healthcare services
or drugs. Panel (a) of Figure 3 presents graphical evidence for the effects of private provision
on this outcome, reporting event study regression coefficients describing how the difference
in log total spending between treatment and control counties changed over time relative to the
difference in the last quarter of 2006 (the quarter prior to the introduction of the private plan en-
rollment mandate). The difference is relatively stable prior to the introduction of the mandate,
providing graphical evidence that the treatment and control counties had parallel trends for
the outcome during the pre-treatment period. Immediately following the introduction of the
mandate, there is a notable drop in spending in treatment counties relative to control counties,
reaching about 8% by the second quarter of 2007. This initial drop in spending is short-lived,
however, with the treatment vs. control difference returning to its pre-mandate level by the
first quarter of 2008. After that time, the spending differential between the treatment and con-
trol groups grows markedly, reaching almost 20% by the end of our sample period in the last
quarter of 2010. Regression results in Table 2 confirm the results presented in Figure 3. When
all post-mandate quarters are pooled, the effect of private provision is positive but statisti-
cally insignificant. However, when the post-period is divided into early and late periods, we
observe an insignificant negative effect in the early period followed by a significant positive ef-
fect (10.3%) in the late period. IV coefficients are positive and significant, indicating a spending
increase of 7% among compliers averaged across the entire post-period. Results in Appendix
Table A5 where spending is defined in levels instead of logs also confirm these findings, with a
long-run increase in spending of $535 per quarter over a baseline mean of $3,332, though here
there is no initial decline in spending. These results indicate that while there may be an initial
decline in healthcare spending of Medicaid beneficiaries immediately following their shift to
private Medicaid plans (potentially due to care disruption), the bulk of the evidence suggests
that the shift to private provision leads to spending increases in the longer-run.


5.2   Prescription Drugs
Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows the effects of the private plan enrollment mandate on log drug
spending. Again, the difference in drug spending between treatment and control counties is
stable prior to the mandate. Immediately following the mandate, however, drug spending
begins to increase in treatment counties relative to control counties. By the end of our sample
period, the effect of the mandate reaches 30%. Here, there is no clear initial drop in spending,
implying that the immediate “disruption” effect we observed in total healthcare spending is


                                                 21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1         0       1        2                                                          -.2   -.1       0   .1        .2    .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004q1                                                                                       2004q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004q2                                                                                       2004q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004q3                                                                                       2004q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004q4                                                                                       2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005q1                                                                                       2005q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005q2                                                                                       2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005q3                                                                                       2005q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2005q4                                                                                       2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006q1                                                                                       2006q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006q2                                                                                       2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006q3                                                                                       2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006q4                                                                                       2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007q1                                                                                       2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007q2                                                                                       2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007q3                                                                                       2007q3
                                                                                                                                                                       -.2   -.1   0   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007q4                                                                                       2007q4
                                                                                                                                                              2004q1                                                               2008q1                                                                                       2008q1
                                                                                                                                                              2004q2                                                               2008q2                                                                                       2008q2
                                                                                                                                                              2004q3                                                               2008q3                                                                                       2008q3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (c) Outpatient Days
                                                                                                                                                              2004q4                                                               2008q4                                                                                       2008q4
                                                                                                                                                              2005q1                                                               2009q1                                                                                       2009q1
                                                                                                                                                              2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a) Log Realized Spending




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009q2                                                                                       2009q2
                                                                                                                                                              2005q3                                                               2009q3                                                                                       2009q3
                                                                                                                                                              2005q4                                                               2009q4                                                                                       2009q4
                                                                                                                                                              2006q1                                                               2010q1                                                                                       2010q1
                                                                                                                                                              2006q2                                                               2010q2                                                                                       2010q2
                                                                                                                                                              2006q3                                                               2010q3                                                                                       2010q3
                                                                                                                                                              2006q4                                                               2010q4                                                                                       2010q4
                                                                                                                                                              2007q1
                                                                                                                                                              2007q2




22
     differences specification in Equation (1). For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                              2007q3                                                                        -.4        -.2       0       .2   .4                                                         -.2         0            .2        .4




                                                                                                                                                    Quarter
                                                                                                                                                              2007q4                                                               2004q1                                                                                       2004q1
                                                                                                                                                              2008q1                                                               2004q2                                                                                       2004q2
                                                                                                                                                              2008q2                                                               2004q3                                                                                       2004q3
                                                                                                                                                              2008q3                                                               2004q4                                                                                       2004q4
                                                                                                                                                              2008q4                                                               2005q1                                                                                       2005q1
                                                                                                                                                              2009q1                                                               2005q2                                                                                       2005q2




                                                                                                                                                                                            (e) Log Inpatient Spending
                                                                                                                                                              2009q2                                                               2005q3                                                                                       2005q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 3: Main Outcomes




                                                                                                                                                              2009q3                                                               2005q4                                                                                       2005q4
                                                                                                                                                              2009q4                                                               2006q1                                                                                       2006q1
                                                                                                                                                              2010q1                                                               2006q2                                                                                       2006q2
                                                                                                                                                              2010q2                                                               2006q3                                                                                       2006q3
                                                                                                                                                              2010q3                                                               2006q4                                                                                       2006q4
                                                                                                                                                              2010q4                                                               2007q1                                                                                       2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007q2                                                                                       2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007q3                                                                                       2007q3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Quarter




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2007q4                                                                                       2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2008q1                                                                                       2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2008q2                                                                                       2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2008q3                                                                                       2008q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (b) Log Rx Spending




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009q1                                                                                       2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009q2                                                                                       2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009q3                                                                                       2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (d) Log Realized Outpatient Cost




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2009q4                                                                                       2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010q1                                                                                       2010q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010q2                                                                                       2010q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010q3                                                                                       2010q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010q4                                                                                       2010q4




     Note: Figure shows control-treatment differences in the main outcomes. These coefficients are from estimating the event study difference-in-
not coming through prescription drugs. IV regression results in Table 2 indicate that the private
plan enrollment mandate led to an increase in individual drug spending of around 20% among
compliers, over the full post-mandate period, again with the increase building over time.
    Appendix Table A1 presents regression results for additional prescription drug outcomes.
Specifically, we show that private plans induce beneficiaries to increase days supply of drugs
by 76.6 days (41.7% of the baseline mean) by the end of the sample period, suggesting that the
spending increase is driven by increased drug use rather than shifts to higher-priced drugs.
Additionally, we show that there are spending increases for both generic (29.8%) and branded
(40.4%) drugs, suggesting that the spending increase is not entirely due to a shift from generic
to branded drugs but instead results from overall quantity increases among both types of
drugs.
    Although the spending increases under private provision appear to come from quantity
increases, we find no accompanying extensive margin effects on drug utilization (columns 3-4).
In other words, the shift to private plans appears to affect the quantity of drugs an individual
consumes, but not whether she consumes any drugs in a given quarter. This result rules out
the story that private plans increase drug consumption by getting people who are disconnected
from the healthcare system in to see a doctor for the first time. This is not surprising, given high
baseline levels of drug utilization for this population (73% of beneficiaries taking any drug). We
do find, however, that enrollment in private plans produces strong extensive margin effects at
the level of the therapeutic category. Panel (b) of Appendix Table A7 presents results from
regressions where the outcome is any spending in a particular therapeutic class. Enrollment in
a private plan led to significant increases in every category except for Immunosuppressants.
These results suggest that while enrollment in a private plan does not affect whether you take
any drugs, it clearly causes beneficiaries to start taking new drugs that they were not previously
taking.


5.3   Outpatient Services
Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 3 plot event study coefficients describing the effects of private provi-
sion on the number of outpatient days (Panel c) and log realized outpatient spending in (Panel
d). For both outcomes, the difference between treatment and control counties is relatively sta-
ble throughout the pre-mandate period, again indicating parallel pre-trends. Immediately fol-
lowing the introduction of the private plan enrollment mandate, both spending and days drop,
with the spending decrease reaching almost 20% by the second quarter of 2007. After the initial
quarters under private provision, however, the effect of mandated enrollment in private plans
switches from negative to positive. By the end of our sample period, outpatient spending in
treatment counties has increased by almost 20% relative to control counties. These results are
confirmed by the regression estimates presented in Table 2, where we estimate a statistically


                                                 23
insignificant negative effect of private provision in the early part and a significant positive ef-
fect in the late part of the post-mandate period. Results in Appendix Table A5 where outcomes
are measured in levels instead of logs provide further support for the hypothesis that the long
run effect of private provision on outpatient spending is positive, with statistically significant
positive effects in both the short and long run.
     This pattern of an initial drop followed by a long-run increase in outpatient spending under
private provision could be due to immediate “disruption” to beneficiaries’ healthcare (caused
by the shift to private provision) followed by long-run higher levels of outpatient spending
under private plans. However, it could also be due to differential reporting. Recall that this
outcome represents the only outcome where there was a shift in the data source (from the pub-
lic plan to the private plans) pre- vs. post-mandated private plan enrollment. This shift in the
source of the data implies that an alternative explanation for this initial drop could be differ-
ential reporting between the public plan and the private plans, especially during the first year
of the STAR+Plus program (2007). Importantly, however, under both interpretations, these re-
sults indicate long-run higher levels of outpatient spending under private vs. public provision,
and, in the case of under-reporting by private plans, our estimates represent a lower bound of
the size of those long-run increases.
     Appendix Table A2 provides regression estimates for additional outpatient outcomes. Again,
it is clear that the effect of the shift to private provision on outpatient days grows over time,
similar to the effect on spending. Additionally, we observe that, similar to drugs, there is no
extensive margin effect of private provision on outpatient utilization. Again, this is not par-
ticularly surprising given that 74% of beneficiaries are using some outpatient care during the
pre-mandate period. Appendix Table A2 also shows the effects of private provision on ED vis-
its. We find a statistically insignificant decrease in ED visits in the short run, and a larger, but
still insignificant, decrease in the long-run. We take these results as evidence that the transition
to private provision did not increase rates of ED use and may have even lowered them, espe-
cially given that the direction of the effect on ED visits is the opposite of the direction of the
effect on other types of outpatient care.


5.4   Inpatient Services
Panel (e) of Figure 3 plots the event study coefficients describing the effects of mandated en-
rollment in private plans on log inpatient spending. While this outcome is noisier than other
outcomes, we again observe that the difference between treatment and control counties is rel-
atively stable pre-mandate. Post-mandate, however, inpatient spending in treatment counties
clearly falls relative to control counties, with the IV regression coefficients in Table 2 indicat-
ing a decrease of 7.6%. Unlike for outpatient utilization, the decrease in inpatient spending is
permanent and persists through the end of our sample period. Appendix Table A5 shows that


                                                24
these results are even stronger when focusing on spending in levels rather than logs.
    Appendix Table A3 provides regression estimates for additional inpatient outcomes. Un-
like with other outcomes, there is a strong extensive margin (“any admissions”) effect of private
provision, where the shift to private plans decreased the probability of having any inpatient ad-
mission in a quarter by 0.6 percentage points or 8% of the baseline probability. Appendix Table
A3 also reveals that there is no effect of private provision on inpatient admissions related to
surgery, suggesting that private plans did not reduce inpatient admissions by simply shifting
beneficiaries from inpatient to outpatient surgeries. Instead, the entire effect comes through
non-surgery admissions which are less likely to be viewed as “discretionary” but more likely
to be deemed responsive to preventive measures (i.e. signals of low-quality care).


5.5       Heterogeneity
In Figure 4 and Appendix Table A9 we explore heterogeneity by health status in the effects
of the shift to private provision. For this analysis, we divide the population into three groups
based on their pre-mandate Elixhauser comorbidities: the top group has no comorbidities, the
middle group has 1-3 comorbidities, and the bottom group (the sickest) has 4+ comorbidities.13
Figure 4 shows IV coefficients from our primary regression specification for our three primary
outcomes: inpatient spending, outpatient spending, and drug spending. The figure shows
that the reduction in inpatient spending and the increase in drug spending appear to be driven
largely by the sickest beneficiaries. For the sickest group the shift to private provision decreased
inpatient spending by 27.5%, compared to a decrease of only 5.8% for the healthiest group. For
drug use, the shift to private provision increased spending by 33.3% for the sickest group vs.
a statistically insignificant 6.5% increase for the healthiest group. These results are consistent
with private health plans targeting their efforts to beneficiaries with conditions that can be
managed using the tools of managed care.
    In Appendix Table A10 we stratify the sample by age instead of health status. Younger
and older SSI beneficiaries are likely to be quite different. Duggan, Kearney and Rennane
(2015) show that over 70% of younger SSI beneficiaries (ages 18-40) qualified for SSI due to
a mental disability compared to fewer than 50% of older SSI beneficiaries (ages 50-64). The
stratified results indicate that the effects of the shift to private provision on drug spending are
clearly increasing in age. We estimate a statistically significant 11.9% effect on drug spending
for the youngest group (ages 20-34) and a significant 25.4% effect for the oldest group (ages
50-64). The effects on inpatient spending, on the other hand, appear to be driven primarily by
the middle age group (35-49), with a highly significant 13.3% decrease. While this result may
seem counterintuitive, it is likely that the types of inpatient admissions one would typically
  13 We use pre-privatization data to construct comorbidity measures in order to avoid contamination by the
causal effects of private provision on the probability of being diagnosed with chronic conditions.


                                                    25
                                           Figure 4: Heterogeneity by Health Status
                                                  (b) Log Realized Outpatient Spend-
           (a) Log Inpatient Spending             ing                                                        (c) Log Rx Spending




       0                                             0                                             0




     1-3                                           1-3                                           1-3




      4+                                            4+                                            4+




             -.4    -.3     -.2      -.1      0          -.2         0          .2         .4          -.2       0     .2       .4       .6




Note: Figure shows the impact of Medicaid managed care on log inpatient spending, log realized outpatient spending, and log prescription
drug spending by health status (measured as number of preperiod comorbidities). These coefficients are from estimating the instrumental vari-
able specification in Equation (3) separately for each comorbidity group (no comorbidities, 1 to 3 comorbidities, and at least 4 comorbidities).
For more details, see Section 4.2.



consider to be “marginal” are concentrated among this group: The younger group has very
low levels of inpatient use, suggesting that it may be difficult to further decrease use of this
type of care for that population, while the older group has much higher levels of inpatient use,
indicating increased severity of illness and suggesting greater difficulty in effectuating health
improvements that would translate to lower use of inpatient care.
     The treatment effect heterogeneity we document raises the possibility that the changing ef-
fects over the post-period (immediate disruption plus long-run effects being larger than short-
run effects) are due to changes in the composition of the sample over time. To address this
possibility, in Appendix Table A14 we present our main results using a balanced panel of Med-
icaid beneficiaries. Panel (a) uses a short panel (2005-2008) while Panel (b) requires enrollment
for the entire study period (2004-2010). While the balanced panel restriction clearly hurts sta-
tistical power, our key results are robust to the use of this balanced sample.




                                                                         26
                                                        Table 3: Medicaid Spending


                                  (1)             (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                               Log
                                 Log          Log                        Log                                    Not
                                                               Not                 Medicaid     Covered                    Realized
                               Medicaid     Covered                    Realized                               Covered
                                                           Covered                 Spending     Spending                   Spending
                               Spending     Spending                   Spending                               Spending
                                                           Spending
         Treatment × Post      0.073∗∗∗         0.061∗      0.090∗∗∗    0.054∗∗    355.169∗∗∗    242.004∗     113.165∗∗∗    273.429∗∗
                                (0.026)         (0.036)      (0.018)    (0.026)     (124.489)    (125.237)     (25.077)     (125.030)
         IV Coefficient        0.117∗∗∗         0.098∗      0.143∗∗∗    0.087∗∗    565.455∗∗∗    385.288∗∗    180.167∗∗∗    435.318∗∗
                                (0.040)         (0.055)      (0.027)    (0.040)     (191.790)    (192.763)     (38.400)     (192.451)
         Baseline Mean           8.192           7.737        7.129       8.19       3711.76     2444.256      1267.504     3702.188
         Standard errors in parentheses
         ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for Medicaid spending outcomes. For each outcome, county-level
estimates of control-treatment differences are from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and county-
level estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care are from estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3). For more
details, see Section 4.2.



5.6      Fiscal Costs of Medicaid and Pass-Through
We now turn to the fiscal costs of private provision. Thus far, all spending outcomes have been
based on payments from Medicaid insurers (either private plans or the government) to health-
care providers. We now ask how private provision affects the total fiscal cost of Medicaid for
the government (state and federal). As discussed in Section 3.3, fiscal spending consists of two
components. The first component is any fee-for-service healthcare spending paid directly by
the government to healthcare providers. This includes all spending for beneficiaries enrolled
in the Texas public plan as well as drug spending and inpatient spending for beneficiaries
enrolled in private plans. The second component is any premium payments from the govern-
ment to private health plans. This component is equal to zero for all beneficiaries enrolled in
the public plan and equal to the monthly premium payments paid to private health plans for
beneficiaries enrolled in private plans.
    We report regression estimates for fiscal spending outcomes in Table 3.14 The key outcomes
  14 These regressions differ from all previous regressions in that they are run at the county rather than the individ-

ual level. Logged spending outcomes in this table are the log of average spending for the county rather than the
average of log spending. We do this because typical log transformations are problematic for this particular anal-
ysis. Under the public plan, there are many individuals with zero fiscal spending in a given year. Typically, this
would only be a minor problem for conventional log transformations such as log(x + 1) or the inverse hyperbolic
sine transformation. Here, however, it presents a problem that is more severe than usual because under private
provision no individual has zero spending in a year (due to positive premium payments for all private plan en-
rollees). This causes any transformation to affect the public plan more than the private plans and generates results
of the effect of the shift to private provision on fiscal spending that are severely biased by the transformation. For
example, when using the log(x + 1) transformation, we obtain IV coefficients larger than 1.0, implying enormous
effects of private provision on fiscal spending, while when we estimate the same regression using spending levels
we obtain IV coefficients equal to about 20% of pre-period spending. Log spending outcomes are important here,
however, as visual analysis of treatment and control county trends reveals that control county log fiscal spending
represents a better counterfactual for treatment county log fiscal spending than control county fiscal spending in
levels as a counterfactual for treatment county fiscal spending in levels.


                                                                       27
of interest are log Medicaid spending and Medicaid spending. The results provide clear evi-
dence that the shift to private provision led to an increase in Medicaid spending, with fiscal costs
increasing by 7.3% in treatment counties relative to control counties.15 This spending increase
appears to come both from services that are covered by the private plan contract (“covered
spending”) and services that are carved-out of the private plan contract (“not covered spend-
ing”). The coefficients from the regressions where spending levels are the dependent variable
(columns 5-8) indicate that about one-third of the spending increase ($113.17) comes from in-
creases in spending on carved-out services while the other two-thirds ($242.00) comes from
premium payments to private plans being set higher than counterfactual public plan spending
for covered services. However, the “not covered” effects are also clearly larger as a percent of
the baseline mean as indicated by the strong log spending results in Column 3.
     The extent to which increases in fiscal spending under private provision translate into
increases in realized spending indicates the degree of marginal spending “pass-through” to
providers and patients (vs. private insurers). The coefficients in Columns 1 and 4 and in
Columns 5 and 8 of Table 3 indicate that increases in realized spending were slightly smaller
than increases in fiscal spending. Specifically, the results from regressions using spending lev-
els indicate that the increase in realized spending ($273.43) was about 77% of the increase in
fiscal spending ($355.17), providing suggestive evidence that the vast majority of additional
Medicaid spending went to providers and patients rather than to private insurers.


5.7      Robustness
As described above, graphical evidence from analyses of the effects of the shift to private pro-
vision indicates that all outcomes were trending similarly in treatment and control counties
prior to the roll-out of the private plan enrollment mandate. This suggests that post-mandate
trends of outcomes in control counties are likely to be good counterfactuals for post-mandate
trends in treatment counties in the absence of the shift to private provision. However, parallel
pre-trends need not necessitate parallel post-trends in the absence of the treatment. If treatment
and control counties are hit with a shock that affects these counties differently, the effects of this
shock, despite occurring in both treatment and control counties, could confound the effects of
the shift to private provision.
  15 A  subtlety about assessing the effects of the shift to private provision on fiscal spending has to do with ad-
ministrative costs. Premium payments to private plans include $50 per person per month that is meant to cover
administrative costs (Texas Health and Human Services Commission, 2007). We do not observe administrative
costs under the public plan, however, so we remove this $50 per person per month from our measures of fiscal
spending under private provision. This implies that our estimate will capture increases in non-administrative
fiscal costs under private relative to public provision, excluding differences in spending on administrative costs.




                                                        28
Border zip code analysis Concerns about the validity of our empirical approach could in-
clude potential confounding differences between treatment and control counties, given: (1)
treatment counties are more urban than control counties and (2) the treatment occurred in early
2007, not long before the start of the Great Recession. If the recession affected more-urban vs.
less-urban counties in different ways, this might confound the effects of the shift to private
provision. To test whether this is a problem, in Appendix B we present results where we only
include beneficiaries in treatment zip codes within 25 miles of a control zip code and benefi-
ciaries in control zip codes within 25 miles of a treatment zip code. Appendix Figure B1 shows
the included and excluded zipcodes. This restriction effectively excludes urban centers and ru-
ral outlying areas, leading to greater similarity between treatment and control groups on some
measures relative to the case where we use all zip codes in treatment and control counties.
Appendix Table B1 shows summary statistics for the included control and treatment zipcodes.
    With these restrictions, our results are virtually identical to the baseline results. Regression
estimates in Appendix Table B2 indicate that the shift to private provision caused a statisti-
cally significant increase in total realized healthcare spending, spending on prescription drugs,
and outpatient spending. Again, we also find a statistically significant decrease in inpatient
spending.


Potential spillovers Another potential concern might be that there are spillovers between
treatment and control counties. For example, if all beneficiaries living in control counties see
doctors practicing in treatment counties, and these doctors also treat a substantial number of
beneficiaries living in treatment counties, the control beneficiaries may be impacted by the
treatment. In the presence of this type of spillover, our estimates would represent a lower
bound of the overall effect of the effects of private provision. This type of spillover is of partic-
ular concern when we focus on county borders as in the analysis in Appendix B.
    To explore the extent to which spillovers may occur in our setting, we determine the extent
to which control county beneficiaries see doctors with high numbers of treatment county pa-
tients. Appendix Figure A2 is a histogram showing the percent of claims from treatment county
patients for each provider in the data. It is clear that the distribution is bi-modal, with most
providers either treating only control-county beneficiaries or treatment-county beneficiaries
and few providers treating patients from both treatment and control counties. This suggests
that spillovers of the treatment onto control county patients is unlikely.


Analysis by service area To further gauge the robustness of our findings, in Appendix Tables
A15-A18 we break down our difference-in-difference estimates by service area, finding that our
key results hold in each service area in the state (though with some loss of statistical power).
This shows that our results are not driven by one particular service area. Taken together, these
results provide additional confidence that we are capturing the effect of shifting to private

                                                 29
provision, rather than some other confounding factor.


6      Quality and Beneficiary Health
Thus far, we have assessed the effects of the shift to private provision on healthcare spending
and utilization patterns. We now turn to the question of how these shifts in utilization patterns
affected the quality of care received by and, ultimately, the health of SSI beneficiaries.
    To assess the effects of private provision on quality and health, we first focus our attention
on the marginal drugs and marginal inpatient admissions that are affected by the shift to pri-
vate provision. For drugs, we assess whether the marginal drugs are “high value” and have a
high likelihood of positively impacting the lives of chronically ill beneficiaries. For inpatient
admissions, we assess whether the marginal admissions fall into categories that are typically
deemed potentially “avoidable” given appropriate management of chronic diseases.16 We then
turn to measures of beneficiary health and and functional capacity. Specifically, we analyze the
effects of the shift to private provision on mortality, employment, and exit from the SSI program
using administrative data from the Social Security Administration.


Drug Outcomes Because drugs are carved out of private plan contracts in Texas, we have
detailed data on drug utilization that is consistently reported pre- vs. post-mandate. This
allows us to further investigate the effects of private provision on patterns of drug utilization in
order to assess whether the shifts in utilization are consistent with quality improvements. Panel
(a) of Figure 5 and Appendix Table A7 present the effects of the shift to private provision on log
spending and “any spending” by therapeutic category for the ten largest categories. The large
increase in drug spending we observe under private provision is driven by six categories: Anti-
infective agents, autonomic drugs, cardiovascular agents, central nervous system, hormones
and synthetic substitutes, and gastrointestinal drugs. The central nervous system class is the
largest class in this population, and further results using narrower classes (Appendix Table
A11) reveal that the largest effects are observed for anti-depressants, anti-psychotics, and drugs
used to treat pain. These drugs, especially the anti-psychotics, are critical for this population
given its high rate of mental illness (see Section D). The large increase in utilization of these
drugs suggests severe undertreatment of these conditions under the public Medicaid plan in
    16 Our
         data do not allow for the generation of many conventional quality measures. For example, we gener-
ated measures of the Prevention Quality Indicators (PQI) developed by the Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (AHRQ) for assessing quality in Medicaid. We discovered that many of these measures, such as breast
cancer screenings and smoking/tobacco cessation treatments, were highly sensitive to coding practices that were
changing over our sample period. For these two measures in particular, we find no instances of the codes used to
identify these procedures/treatments in any part of the state during our pre-period, with rapid increases in use
during the post-period in both treatment and control counties, making it difficult to assess the effects of the shift
to private provision on these outcomes. Other outcomes such as flu vaccinations also have unrealistically low
baseline means, suggesting measurement problems.


                                                         30
                        Figure 5: Prescription Drug and Inpatient Spending by Category
                      (a) Prescription Drug Spending                                           (b) Inpatient Spending

              Central Nervous System                                                           Infectious and parasitic

               Cardiovascular Agents                                                                       Neoplasms

                 Anti-Infective Agents                                      Endocrine; nutritional; metabolic; immunity

          Hormones & Synthetic Subst                                                                    Mental Illness

               Gastrointestinal Drugs                                                               Circulatory system

                    Autonomic Drugs                                                                Respiratory system

           Blood Form Coagul Agents                                                                  Digestive system

             Misc Therapeutic Agents                                                             Genitourinary system

                Antineoplastic Agents                                                     Skin & subcutaneous tissue

                Immunosuppressants                                                                  Injury & poisoning

                                         0   .2        .4         .6                                                      -.06   -.04   -.02   0   .02




Note: Figure shows the impact of Medicaid managed care on prescription drug spending and inpatient spending. Panel (a) shows estimates
for log prescription drug spending by Redbook therapeutic category. Panel (b) shows estimates for log inpatient spending by CCS category.
These coefficients are from estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3) separately for each of the categories. For more
details, see Section 4.2.



Texas.
     The detailed results for cardiovascular agents, the second largest class in this population,
are reported in Appendix Table A12. Here, the effects are driven by ACE Inhibitors, Beta Block-
ers, and Anti-hyperlipidemic Drugs (i.e. statins). All of these medications are considered “high
value” drugs that are highly effective at treating heart disease, a common condition in this pop-
ulation (see Table 1), again suggesting potential improvements to health and quality of life. The
detailed results for the hormones and synthetic substitutes class, the third largest class in this
population, are reported in Appendix Table A13. Here, the effects are driven by Adrenals and
anti-diabetic agents. Adrenal drugs are used to treat asthma and COPD, two common ailments
in this population. Anti-diabetic agents consist of insulins and sulfonylureas, both used to
manage diabetes.
     Thus, most of the large positive effect of private provision on prescription drug utilization
comes from drugs that are used to treat chronic conditions highly prevalent in this population.
Unlike some drugs, the value of these drugs for patients is well-established. These drugs are
also highly unlikely to be prescribed to patients who would not benefit from them. All of these
factors combine to provide strong suggestive evidence that private provision led to important
improvements in quality of care, and likely quality of life, for this population.


Inpatient Outcomes As with prescription drugs, our data on inpatient utilization is detailed
and consistently reported pre- vs. post-mandate, allowing us to perform a “deep dive” into
the effects of private provision on inpatient outcomes in both states. Specifically, we can as-
sess whether the shift to private provision led to reductions in potentially avoidable inpatient


                                                                       31
admissions. Panel (b) of Figure 5 and Appendix Table A8 break down the effects of private pro-
vision on inpatient spending in Texas by the Clinical Classifications Software (CCS) category
of the principal diagnosis for the admission.17 The strongest effect is observed for inpatient
admissions related to mental illness, for which the shift to private provision decreased spend-
ing by 13.4%. Three other categories saw statistically and clinically significant decreases of
around 5%: Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases and immunity disorders (where the
most common disease is diabetes); diseases of the respiratory system (including pneumonia,
asthma, and COPD); and diseases of the digestive system (including gastro-intestinal and liver
disorders).
    Inpatient stays across all four of these categories are often considered avoidable via appro-
priate management of underlying chronic conditions such as bipolar disorder, schizophrenia,
depression, diabetes, asthma, and COPD. The conditions associated with these categories are
also highly prevalent in this population. Reductions in inpatient spending in these areas thus
provide suggestive evidence that the shift to private provision led to important improvements
in quality of care, and, potentially, quality of life. An alternative explanation for these results is
that private plans were stinting on access to necessary inpatient care in these categories. Recall,
however, that in Texas inpatient care was carved out of private plan contracts so that private
plans do not benefit financially from limiting inpatient admissions.18 Further, the tight link
between the conditions associated with the CCS categories with the largest decreases in inpa-
tient admissions and the conditions associated with the therapeutic classes of drugs with the
largest increases in utilization (1) suggest a mechanism for the avoided inpatient admissions
(discussed further in Section 7) and (2) are consistent with important care improvements under
private provision, for example in terms of the key observable outcome of reduced avoidable
inpatient admissions.
    This link, when combined with the fact that private plans had little to gain by limiting
access to necessary inpatient care, causes us to conclude that the effects of private provision
on inpatient utilization that we observe in Texas are more consistent with improvements in the
quality of care received by and health of disabled Medicaid beneficiaries than with stinting by
private plans.


Mortality and Employment Outcomes We now turn to indicators of beneficiary health and
functional capacity, including death, employment, and the suspension of SSI benefits. Regres-
  17 The  Clinical Classifications Software (CCS) is a classification developed as part of the Healthcare Cost and
Utilization Project (HCUP) by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). It groups diagnosis codes
into clinically meaningful categories. For our analysis, we used the highest level of aggregation with 18 groups
and present results for the 10 most common categories. The CCS classification is available online at https:
//www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/ccs.jsp
   18 While there is no direct financial benefit to private plans for stinting on inpatient care, there could be an

indirect benefit in the form of deterring enrollment from beneficiary types who are likely to use need inpatient
treatment. See Geruso and Layton (2017) for a detailed treatment of these types of contract distortions.


                                                        32
sion specifications follow Equation (1) (intent-to-treat estimator), as we do not observe private
plan enrollment in the SSA data and therefore cannot account for incomplete take-up of pri-
vate provision in an instrumental variables framework.19 Regression results are presented in
Appendix Table A4 and Appendix Figure A4. Odd columns pool all years in the post-period,
and even columns split the post-period into an early and a late period. Coefficients generally
go in a direction consistent with overall improvements in health and functional capacity, with
private provision leading to long-run reductions in mortality, increases in employment, and
more suspensions of benefits due to work. However, none of the coefficients are statistically
significantly different from zero, and confidence intervals are quite wide. For mortality, we get
a point estimate of -0.06 percentage points, or a reduction of 6% relative to the baseline mean
quarterly mortality rate of 1%. However, the 95% confidence interval ranges from a mortality
reduction of 0.18 percentage points (18%) to a mortality increase of 0.05 percentage points (5%),
implying that we can only rule out mortality increases larger than 5%. For employment, we can
only rule out reductions larger than 0.32 percentage points (6%), and for suspensions we can
only rule out reductions larger than 0.21 percentage points (15%). We thus conclude that while
the signs on these coefficients are all consistent with improvements in health and functional
capacity under private provision, they are too noisy to lead to any firm conclusions.


7      Mechanisms
Our main analyses have provided evidence that in Texas private provision (1) increased pre-
scription drug utilization and spending, (2) increased outpatient utilization and spending, (3)
decreased inpatient utilization, (4) increased overall spending on healthcare, and (5) increased
fiscal spending. In this section, in an effort to unpack the “black box” of managed care, we em-
pirically explore the mechanisms behind results (1), (2), and (3). We then draw on the govern-
ment procurement literature in economics to rationalize results (4) and (5) and provide insights
into the contracting problem between states and private plans.


7.1         Prescription Drug Mechanisms
There are three features of the STAR+Plus program in Texas that could explain the increase
in drug utilization under private provision: (1) Strict rationing of drugs in the Texas public
program that is relaxed under private provision, (2) the “carve-out” of prescription drugs from
the private plan contracts, and (3) the shift to private provision of medical benefits. We discuss
each of these in turn, in some cases comparing our results from Texas to results from our work
on private provision in New York, where (2) and (3) held but (1) did not (Layton et al., 2019).
    19 We
      also do not include individual fixed effects, as this is not appropriate with the mortality and suspension
outcomes, which are absorbing states.


                                                      33
          Figure 6: Number of Months With More Than a Given Number of Unique Drugs




                                                                       1
                                          Coefficient (number of months)
                                          0     .2     .4  .6     .8
                                                                           2004q1
                                                                                    2004q2
                                                                                             2004q3
                                                                                                      2004q4
                                                                                                               2005q1
                                                                                                                        2005q2
                                                                                                                                 2005q3
                                                                                                                                          2005q4
                                                                                                                                                   2006q1
                                                                                                                                                            2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                     2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                              2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                       2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2007q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2008q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2010q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2010q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2010q4
                                                                                                                                                                                          Quarter

                                                                                                                                                            More than 0                                                                      More than 1
                                                                                                                                                            More than 2                                                                      More than 3
                                                                                                                                                            More than 4                                                                      More than 5
                                                                                                                                                            More than 6




Note: Figure shows control-treatment differences in the number of months during which more than a given number of unique drugs was
prescribed. These coefficients are from estimating the event study difference-in-differences specification in Equation (1). For more details, see
Section 4.2.



Drug caps Drugs are strictly rationed under Texas’s public Medicaid program. Individu-
als enrolled in the public program can only fill three prescriptions per month. There are few
exceptions to this rule, making it likely to be highly binding for adults with disabilities. To un-
derscore the stringency of this rule, given typical levels of drug utilization, 35% of adults with
disabilities enrolled in both Medicaid and Medicare (similar to, but not our sample) would have
exceeded this cap in a typical month during the 2006-2010 period. As a consequence, the relax-
ation of this cap for those enrolling in a private plan is likely to explain much of the private vs.
public difference in drug utilization.
    To understand how much of the increase in drug use under private provision comes from
the relaxation of the drug cap, we extend the regressions used as part of our primary analyses.
In these new regressions, the outcomes are indicators for the number of months in the year
in which the individual filled more than 0 prescriptions, more than 1 prescription, more than
2 prescriptions, etc. up to more than 6 prescriptions. If we see small or no effects for “more
than 0”, “more than 1”, and “more than 2” but large effects for “more than 3”, “more than 4”,
“more than 5”, etc. this will provide strong evidence that much of the effect on drug utilization
is coming from the relaxation of the drug cap as opposed to the drug carve-out or the shift
to private provision for medical services because both of those features would be expected to
shift all parts of the distribution of drug utilization rather than only shifting people to take
more than 3 drugs.
    The event study coefficients from each of these regressions are plotted in Figure 6. The
dotted lines show effects for changes in drug utilization below the 3-drug cap, while the solid
lines show effects for drug utilization above the 3-drug cap. There is essentially no effect for
“more than 0” or “more than 1”. There is a small effect for “more than 2”. The largest effect,
however, is for “more than 3”. There are also large effects for “more than 4”, “more than 5”,


                                                                                                                                                                                       34
and “more than 6”. This, combined with the absence of any effect of private provision on drug
utilization in New York (where there was no drug cap) from our prior work, suggests that much
of the effect of private provision on drug utilization in Texas was from beneficiaries starting to
fill more than 3 prescriptions in a month. This provides strong suggestive evidence that the
relaxation of the drug cap was responsible for much of the overall drug effect.


Carve-out of prescription drugs Even though the relaxation of the drug cap appears to be
the main mechanism through which private provision impacts drug utilization, the fact that
drugs were carved out of private plan contracts could also play a role; recall that drugs were
paid for by the public program for all beneficiaries in all years, even for beneficiaries enrolled
in a private plan. With this carve-out, plans had no incentive to reduce drug spending, and
may have instead been incentivized to drive up drug utilization, given potential drug-driven
medical offsets (Chandra, Gruber and McKnight, 2010; Starc and Town, 2015), including the
inpatient offsets we document in Sections 6 and 7.3. If drugs had been “carved-in” or included
in private plan contracts, plans may have chosen to ration access to drugs more aggressively
than they did in the presence of the carve-out, possibly limiting the effect of relaxing the public
drug cap. This suggests that our interpretation of the results in Section 5 as the difference
between public vs. private rationing of prescription drugs may not apply when drugs are
included in private plan contracts.
    To investigate this possibility, we leverage the fact that drugs were carved in to private plan
contracts in Texas starting in 2012. Our detailed claims and enrollment data ends in 2010, so we
cannot use it to study the effects of the carve-in of prescription drugs. Instead, we follow Dra-
nove, Ody and Starc (2017) and use publicly available aggregate data describing prescription
drug utilization and spending in Texas’s Medicaid program (both public and private plans)
over time.20 In Appendix Figure A3, we document per-enrollee prescription drug utilization
and expenditure levels in Texas Medicaid around the 2012 integration of drug services into pri-
vate Medicaid contracts. The figures show no meaningful change in any of these measures of
drug use within Texas Medicaid following the carve-in. In the figure, we also show the same
set of outcomes for Arkansas as a reference and control, as it is the neighboring state with the
most similar pre-2012 trends in drug utilization.
    These results provide suggestive evidence that the prescription drug carve-out is relatively
inconsequential for patterns of drug utilization in Texas. This is consistent with results from
Dranove, Ody and Starc (2017) who show that when a large set of states carve prescription drug
benefits into private plan contracts, patterns of utilization change in ways that are similar to
states which privatized medical and drug benefits at the same time. While they do find changes
overall spending, these appear driven by changes in unit prices rather than by changes in
 20 TheMedicaid State Drug Utilization Data is available online from https://www.medicaid.gov/
medicaid/prescription-drugs/state-drug-utilization-data/index.html.


                                                35
utilization. The implication of this body of evidence is that there seems to be little consequence
of including or excluding drugs from private plan contracts. In other words, the evidence
suggests that the effect of shifting to private provision on drug utilization would have been
comparable irrespective of whether drugs were carved in or carved out, at the time of the shift.


Shift to private provision of medical benefits While the analysis in Section 7.1 suggests that
private provision’s effect on drug utilization in Texas came partly through the accompanying
relaxation of drug caps, we cannot completely rule out the alternative mechanism of the drug
effect instead coming through private provision’s effect on patterns of medical care. For exam-
ple, it is possible that the activities of the private Medicaid plans related to outpatient care (i.e.
care management) naturally led to increased levels of drug utilization. Specifically, we showed
that private provision led to increased use of outpatient care in Texas and it is possible that just
seeing the doctor more could lead to higher levels of drug utilization.
    However, it seems unlikely that any care management activities would only affect utiliza-
tion on the margin of taking three or more drugs, the margin we showed to be by far the most
important for the drug effect we estimate. That said, the analysis in Section 7.1 cannot entirely
rule out comparable drug effects, even absent the lifting of the public drug cap under privatiza-
tion. To make this point, we must instead rely on the null result for drugs in our work studying
private provision in New York, which had no drug cap (Layton et al., 2019).
    Based on this evidence, we argue that the relaxation of the drug cap serves as the primary
mechanism through which privatization produced the observed increase in drug utilization.
This provides a peek into the black box of healthcare production under private as well as public
provision: Differences in outcomes between the programs are as much a function of the public
program’s design as they are of the design of and incentives embedded in the private program.


7.2   Outpatient Utilization Mechanisms
To unpack the increase in outpatient spending in Texas, we start by decomposing the spending
increase into changes in price and quantity. Recall that outpatient spending shifted from public
to private provision, so changes in spending could be due to either changes in quantities or to
differences between the rates paid to providers for a given service by public versus private
plans.
    We start by providing descriptive comparisons of prices in Texas’s public program vs.
prices paid by Texas’s private plans. These descriptive analyses are found in Appendix C.
For all analyses, we classify outpatient claims according to the procedure code listed on the
claim. We then compare public and private payments for each procedure code. Appendix Fig-
ure C1 provides scatterplots and histograms comparing public and private prices. All figures
suggest that there is some variation in prices between the public and private plans, but that


                                                 36
overall prices appear fairly similar.
   Next, we use a regression to estimate price differences between public and private plans.
Specifically, we estimate a regression of the following form:

                              log( Paymentcp ) = βprivatec + γ p + ηc                             (4)

The unit of analysis is the claim line, and we regress the log payment on a full set of procedure
fixed effects (γ p ) and an indicator for whether the claim is a private plan claim vs. a public plan
claim. β represents the average difference in payment for private vs. public plans, conditional
on procedure, which we interpret as the public vs. private price difference. We estimate this
difference to be 8.4%, as indicated in Panel (b) of Appendix Table C1. We also perform a version
of this regression where we allow the price difference to vary by procedure. The distribution
of public vs. private price differences estimated by this regression is presented in Appendix
Figure C2. The median price difference is 4%. Taken together, these analyses suggest that
private prices are slightly higher than public prices.
     This raises the question of whether the increase in outpatient spending reflects more money
being transferred to providers for providing the same set of outpatient services or instead rep-
resents a combination of higher prices and increased access and utilization achieved via those
higher prices. To answer this question, we first point to Panel (c) of Figure 3 and Appendix
Table A2 where, as discussed in Section 5.3, we show that the quantity of outpatient care (as
measured by the number of days with an outpatient claim) increases under private provision
in Texas. This result indicates that private provision resulted in higher prices and higher quan-
tities.
     Next, we use the estimates from Equation (4) to “re-price” private plan claims to be based
on public plan prices, by removing the estimated private plan price effect (either with or with-
out heterogeneity). We use these re-priced claims to build measures of price-equivalent “plan
outpatient spending” for each individual, which only reflects differences in utilization and not
in prices. We then run our primary regression specification using these outcomes. Results from
these regressions are found in Appendix Table C2. Columns 1-2 show results for actual outpa-
tient spending, columns 3-4 show results for spending that is adjusted to be price equivalent
(using public plan procedure-specific prices), and columns 5-6 show results for spending that
is adjusted using a fixed homogeneous public plan price. Comparing columns 1-2 to columns
3-4 reveals that differences between public and private prices account for less than 20% of the
$488.51 increase in outpatient spending under private provision. Columns 5-6 show that when
we impose a constant public vs. private price difference, prices explain a larger portion of
the outpatient spending increase (72%), but that a significant increase in outpatient spending
remains even with the adjustment.
     We interpret these results as suggestive evidence that in Texas (1) private plans pay higher


                                                 37
prices to healthcare providers than do public plans and (2) utilization of outpatient care in-
creases under private provision. These results are consistent with an upward-sloping sup-
ply curve for healthcare, with private plans paying higher prices for healthcare services and
providers responding by increasing their supply of those services to Medicaid beneficiaries.
Thus, a key difference between public and private plans in Texas seems to be the level of pay-
ments to physicians: Private plans pay more, but those higher payments come with better
access to care.


7.3   Inpatient Utilization Mechanisms
We showed in Section 5 that private provision led to a decrease in inpatient admissions in Texas.
In Section 6 we showed that the decrease in admissions is concentrated in admissions related
to mental illness, with additional significant effects on admissions related to diabetes and res-
piratory conditions such as asthma and COPD. Interestingly, in Section 6 we also showed that
the increase in drug utilization we observe under private provision is largely driven by drugs
used to treat mental illness, with important effects also observed for drugs used to treat dia-
betes and asthma. This raises the question as to whether the increase in drug utilization caused
the decrease in inpatient admissions.
    In our setting, it is not possible to disentangle how much of the reduction in inpatient ad-
missions comes from increased drug utilization versus other potential mechanisms, given that
private plans differed from public ones along many dimensions. That said, we provide sugges-
tive evidence to support the hypothesis that the increase in drug utilization was an important
factor contributing to the decrease in inpatient admissions.
    First, in Figure 4 we showed that the same groups (the sickest beneficiaries) see both the
largest increases in drug utilization and the largest decreases in inpatient utilization under
private provision. Second, in Figure 5 we showed that the conditions associated with the in-
patient admissions where we observe large reductions under private provision (mental illness,
diabetes, asthma, COPD) are the same conditions where we observe the largest increases in
drug utilization. These two results together provide strong suggestive evidence that the dif-
ference in public vs. private rationing of drugs may be at least partially responsible for the
reduction in inpatient spending. This suggests that the relaxation of the drug cap may be the
primary mechanism behind many of our results. We emphasize, however, that the relaxation
of the drug cap should not be viewed as confounding the effects of the shift to private provision
but instead as the primary mechanism behind the consequences of the shift to private provision.
This claim is bolstered by discussions with Texas Medicaid officials who confirmed that there
is no realistic counterfactual world where Texas relaxed the drug cap without shifting Medi-
caid beneficiaries to private plans; instead, these two seemingly distinct policy changes were



                                               38
inseparably linked.21


7.4       Contracting and Observed Increases in Healthcare and Fiscal Spending
We now turn to our results establishing that in Texas the transition to private provision led to (1)
an overall increase in healthcare spending and (2) an increase in fiscal spending. Considering
that many states cite lowering fiscal spending as a primary motivation for switching to private
provision, it is valid to ask why this goal was not achieved in Texas. We start by considering
the state’s procurement problem and the contracting tools available to it for accomplishing its
goals.
     The state has two levers to achieve its desired contracting outcomes: exclusion and pay-
ment. Exclusion refers to the state’s ability to choose which insurers will participate in its
Medicaid program. Payment refers to the method by which the state sets payments to the cho-
sen insurers. While payment can be part of the exclusion process (as would be the case in a
first-price auction or other auction-like procurement method), this need not be the case. In-
stead, states can set payments via formula and select insurers based on proposed non-payment
plan characteristics. Indeed, this is the form of Medicaid procurement in Texas as well as most
(but not all) other states.
     These two levers give the state roughly five different options to consider when designing
its procurement process. First, the state could tie exclusion and payment together and choose
plans in an auction, awarding contracts to the J insurers with the lowest price offers that also
meet the minimum requirements set forth by the state (i.e. a first-price auction). Second, the
state could pay plans “cost-plus”, reimbursing each insurer for its incurred costs plus a mark-
up to provide a profit margin, while selecting plans based on their predicted costs and other
non-cost plan characteristics (i.e. provider network, use of value-based payment, etc.). Third,
the state could set payments via “yardstick competition” (Shleifer, 1985), where the payment to
Plan j is equal to realized costs among all other plans, while again selecting plans based on their
predicted costs and other non-cost plan characteristics. Fourth, the state could set payments to
Plan j equal to average costs across all plans in the market, including Plan j, a hybrid of the
cost-plus and yardstick competition options, while still selecting plans based on their predicted
costs and other non-cost plan characteristics. Finally, the state could just set payments based
on some external benchmark, unrelated to realized plan costs, and again select plans based on
  21 In our work studying the effects of private provision in New York we also observed large decreases in inpa-
tient utilization related to mental health conditions, despite no change in drug utilization. This raises the possibil-
ity that the increase in drug utilization in Texas is not the only mechanism by which the shift to private provision
led to decreased inpatient use. However, in New York inpatient spending was carved in to private plan con-
tracts while in Texas it was carved out so that private plans were not responsible for inpatient spending. This key
difference in private plan incentives in New York and Texas could easily have led private plans in New York to
use additional tools, such as care management, offsetting use of non-inpatient psychiatric services, or just strict
rationing of access to inpatient care to reduce inpatient utilization related to mental illness.


                                                          39
predicted costs and non-cost plan characteristics.
    In practice, all of these procurement methods are used across state Medicaid programs,
with the exception of yardstick competition. Texas uses the hybrid of cost-plus and yardstick
competition, setting payments to plans equal to a projection of past costs across all plans in the
market to the current payment period. It is straightforward to see why such a model might
lead to increased healthcare and fiscal spending (or at least no decrease in fiscal spending as
observed in New York). In practice, plan payments are set by trending forward past spending
in a given service-area. In Texas, most service areas have just 2 insurers, implying a relatively
tight link between plan healthcare spending in year t and plan payments in year t + 1, limiting
the incentive for the plan to exert costly effort to reduce healthcare spending.22
    Why would states choose such an arrangement, when they could choose other options
with stronger incentives to reduce healthcare spending such as a first-price auction or yardstick
competition? One reason may be to induce higher quality plans to enter. If quality is difficult to
observe, strong incentives to restrain healthcare spending may induce a “race to the bottom” in
terms of quality where insurers compete on price to win the contract with the state at the cost
of quality. States may weaken insurer incentives to restrain spending in order to avoid such a
race to the bottom.
    Another more subtle reason to avoid strong incentives to restrain spending may be that
such incentives are not as strong as they appear. The theoretical literature on government
procurement has suggested that strong incentives for cost control may lead to ex-post payments
from the state to firms in the presence of unexpected cost shocks (Bajari and Tadelis, 2001). Such
ex-post renegotiation may result in transaction costs states wish to avoid. Additionally, the
possibility for this type of ex-post contract renegotiation may weaken the incentives of winning
insurers to actually engage in costly effort to reduce healthcare spending, because winning
insurers know that if their costs are high they will be able to renegotiate their contracts with
the state and recoup losses. Indeed, there is empirical evidence from state procurement in non-
healthcare sectors suggesting that contracts with strong incentives to reduce costs (i.e. contracts
chosen via first-price auction) often result in large ex-post payments (Decarolis, 2014). Similarly,
anecdotal evidence from state Medicaid contracting suggests that in cases where states used
contracts with strong incentives to reduce costs, similar ex-post contract renegotiation resulted
either in large ex-post payments to insurers and/or premature insurer exit from the program.23
  22 In New York, on the other hand, many counties have 4 or 5 insurers, implying a looser link between plan
healthcare spending and plan payments and a stronger incentive to limit healthcare spending. It is possible that
this difference in the number of plans and thus the strength of the incentive contributed to our finding of spending
increases in Texas vs. no change in spending in New York.
  23 In Kentucky, payment rates from the state to MCOs were included in insurer proposals and were part of

the plan selection process, providing strong incentives for insurers to design plans that produced low spending
levels. One of three chosen MCOs exited after the first year after sustaining large losses and after the state declined
to provide ex-post payments (Marton et al., 2017). Iowa also provided strong incentives for insurers to reduce
spending, setting payments to insurers below expected fee-for-service costs. This resulted in the exit of one plan


                                                          40
    Providing healthcare to hundreds of thousands (or sometimes millions) of households
clearly qualifies as a complex contracting problem given that many components of healthcare
provision are non-contractable. Medicaid contracts also tend to be 3-5 years in length, further
complicating the problem due to unpredictable year-to-year fluctuations in the evolution of
healthcare spending. In such a setting, contracts that involve some form of link between costs
and payment may be optimal, even acknowledging the possibility that such contracts weaken
insurer incentives to restrain spending (Bajari and Tadelis, 2001). This is especially likely to be
the case when the cost to an insurer of severing the contract is much smaller than the cost to
the state, due to political or social consequences of insurer exit. Indeed, similar links between
realized cost and insurer payment exist in the large-group health insurance market, the largest
sector of the U.S. health insurance market (Craig, Ericson and Starc, 2018). Thus, while the
procurement and payment systems may lead to higher levels of healthcare and fiscal spending
in the Medicaid program, these systems may be preferable to the counterfactual world where
private plans are contracted to provide Medicaid services but with strong cost-reduction incen-
tives.


8    Conclusion
An understanding of the distinctions and relative trade-offs between public and private provi-
sion of social insurance benefits is critical to the future of social insurance programs in the U.S.
and around the world. Previous work studying this question has reached mixed conclusions.
In this paper, we add to this literature by looking specifically at Medicaid, the largest social in-
surance program in terms of beneficiaries covered in the U.S. Our focus is on individuals with
disabilities enrolled in the Medicaid program: the population where private provision is most
likely to have an impact because enrollees are relatively sick, where the public-private transi-
tion is currently most policy relevant, and where little evidence exists on healthcare spending
and outcomes despite their importance for government spending. We examine the full array
of services under the program (including prescriptions and outpatient care), leverage clear and
transparent identification to distinguish between public and private program effects and de-
compose the mechanisms through which private provision impacts outcomes.
    We find that the effects of shifting from public to private provision of Medicaid benefits
are nuanced. In Texas, private provision clearly improves access to healthcare as well as the
quality of care received by beneficiaries. Private provision also appears to improve beneficiary
health in that state, through decreased rates of avoidable hospitalizations. These improve-
ments, however, come at the cost of higher spending levels for the Medicaid program. These
results suggest that the trade-off between spending and quality is real and is not broken by the
and large payments in later years to other plans to compensate them for losses (Forsgren, 2017).


                                                       41
shift to private provision.
    Why do the effects of private provision differ from our prior work studying the effects
of private provision in New York? We provide suggestive evidence that it is largely due to
differences in the generosity and overall design of each state’s public program. Texas strictly
rations access to prescription drugs in its public plan, while New York’s public plan allows rel-
atively liberal use of drugs. The dramatic increase in drug utilization under private provision
can largely be attributed to the accompanying relaxation of a 3 drug cap, which applies under
Texas’s public program but not for beneficiaries enrolled in private plans. We also provide sug-
gestive evidence that the relaxation of this cap at least partially explains the concurrent quality
improvements (i.e. decrease in avoidable hospitalizations) we observe.
    It is thus tempting to interpret our results as an endorsement of relaxing rationing un-
der the public program, rather than shifting entirely to private provision. However, because
these two approaches (relaxed rationing and the shift to private provision) were undertaken
simultaneously, it is impossible to conclude which ultimately led to the effects we observe.
More importantly, it is not clear that it is useful to separate them. The argument that all im-
provements from private provision could have also been accomplished through reduced public
rationing presumes that such a reform is possible. However, it is likely that one cannot be un-
dertaken without the other, given that conservative legislatures may only be willing to relax
rationing under their existing public programs through a shift to private provision, as those
legislatures believe that private provision will result in both marginal and inframarginal dol-
lars being spent more efficiently. Indeed, informal interviews with Medicaid officials from
Texas, North Carolina, and Massachusetts suggest that this is precisely the political economy
problem that is reality in many states. The key implication of this framing of the public vs.
private problem is that differences between public and private provision of social insurance
benefits will differ greatly across states and depend critically on the design of both the public
and the private programs.
    In the course of answering how public vs. private provision of social insurance impacts
beneficiary outcomes and public budgets, our work also raises a number of important ques-
tions. First, while privatization alters patterns of utilization in a manner generally consistent
with improvements in health (lower inpatient use, higher use of primary care and “high-value”
prescription drugs), we are unable to precisely estimate its effects on broader measures such
as disability status, functional limitations, or mortality. Future work that is sufficiently pow-
ered to link variation in private plan enrollment to these outcomes is critical for understanding
the full impact of private provision. In addition, while Texas represents a large and impor-
tant state, states’ private Medicaid managed care programs are clearly unique and not created
equal (Layton, Ndikumana and Shepard, 2018). Moreover, shifts in key program features, such
as the carving in of drug benefits (Dranove, Ody and Starc, 2017; Vabson, 2017), the carving
out of behavioral health benefits (Richards and Tello-Trillo, 2019), and changes in procurement

                                                42
rules around plan competition (Duggan, Starc and Vabson, 2016) or rate setting could signif-
icantly alter the consequences of privatization. Future work should aim to better understand
the contributions of specific program features to the effects of privatization.


References
Aizer, Anna, Janet Currie, and Enrico Moretti. 2007. “Does Managed Care Hurt Health? Evi-
  dence from Medicaid Mothers.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3): 385–399.
Alexander, Diane, and Molly Schnell. 2017. “Closing the Gap: The Impact of the Medicaid Pri-
  mary Care Rate Increase on Access and Health.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working
  Paper 2017-10.
Alpert, Abby, Mark Duggan, and Judith Hellerstein. 2013. “Perverse Reverse Price Compe-
  tition: Average Wholesale Prices and Medicaid Pharmaceutical Spending.” Journal of Public
  Economics, 108(1): 44–62.
Autor, David, Mark Duggan, and Jonathan Gruber. 2014. “Moral Hazard and Claims Deter-
  rence in Private Disability Insurance.” American Economic Journal:Applied Economics, 6(4): 110–
  141.
Bajari, Patrick, and Steven Tadelis. 2001. “Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A Theory of
  Procurement Contracts.” RAND Journal of Economics, 32(3): 387–407.
Cabral, Marika, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney. 2018. “Do Larger Health Insurance
  Subsidies Benefit Patients or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” American
  Economic Review, 108(8): 2048–2087.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. 2016. “Medicaid Managed Care Enrollment and
  Program Characteristics.”
Chandra, Amitabh, Jonathan Gruber, and Robin McKnight. 2010. “Patient Cost-Sharing and
  Hospitalization Offsets in the Elderly.” American Economic Review, 100(1): 193–213.
Chen, Alice. 2017. “Do the Poor Benefit From More Generous Medicaid Policies?” Mimeo.
Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2014. “Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives Affect
  Medical Treatment and Patient Health?” American Economic Review, 104(4): 1320–1349.
Congressional Budget Office. 2018. “Exploring the Growth of Medicaid Managed Care.”
  https://www.cbo.gov/publication/54235.
Council of State Governments Midwest. 2013. “Details of State Limits on Prescriptions for
  Medicaid Recipients.” http://www.csgmidwest.org/policyresearch/documents/
  scriptlimits.pdf.
Craig, Stuart V., Keith Marzilli Ericson, and Amanda Starc. 2018. “How Important Is Price
  Variation Between Health Insurers?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  25190.


                                               43
Currie, Janet, and John Fahr. 2005. “Medicaid Managed Care: Effects on Children’s Medicaid
  Coverage and Utilization.” Journal of Public Economics, 89(1): 85–108.
Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2019.
  “Healthcare Spending and Utilization in Public and Private Medicare.” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 11(2): 302–332.
Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2014. “Can Health Insurance
  Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 20818.
Decarolis, Francesco. 2014. “Awarding Price, Contract Performance, and Bids Screening: Evi-
  dence from Procurement Auctions.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1): 108–
  132.
Dranove, David, Christopher Ody, and Amanda Starc. 2017. “A Dose of Managed Care: Con-
  trolling Drug Spending in Medicaid.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
  23956.
Duggan, Mark, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson. 2016. “Who Benefits when the Government
  Pays More? Pass-Through in the Medicare Advantage Program.” Journal of Public Economics,
  141(1): 50–67.
Duggan, Mark, and Tamara Hayford. 2013. “Has the Shift to Managed Care Reduced Medicaid
  Spending? Evidence from State and Local-Level Mandates.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
  Management, 32(3): 505–535.
Duggan, Mark, Melissa S. Kearney, and Stephanie Rennane. 2015. “The Supplemental Secu-
  rity Income Program.” Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States Vol. 2,
  1–58. University of Chicago Press.
Epple, Dennis, Richard E. Romano, and Miguel Urquiola. 2017. “School Vouchers: A Survey
  of the Economics Literature.” Journal of Economic Literature, 55(2): 441–492.
Feldstein, Martin, ed. 1998. Privatizing Social Security. University of Chicago Press.
Forsgren, Ethan. 2017. “Medicaid Managed Care in Iowa.” Master’s diss. Harvard Kennedy
  School.
Geruso, Michael, and Timothy Layton. 2017. “Selection in Health Insurance Markets and Its
  Policy Remedies.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4): 23–50.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2017. “Delivering Public Health Insurance through Private Plan Choice in
  the United States.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(4): 3–22.
Hackmann, Martin B. 2019. “Incentivizing Better Quality of Care: The Role of Medicaid and
  Competition in the Nursing Home Industry.” American Economic Review, 109(5): 1684–1716.
Kaiser      Family      Foundation.       2014a.     “Medicaid       Enrollees     by   Enroll-
  ment           Group.”          https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/
  distribution-of-medicaid-enrollees-by-enrollment-group/.



                                              44
Kaiser      Family      Foundation.      2014b.    “Medicaid       Spending       by    Enroll-
  ment          Group.”            https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/
  medicaid-spending-by-enrollment-group/.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2014c. “Medicaid Spending per Enrollee (Full or
  Partial       Benefit).”         https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/
  medicaid-spending-per-enrollee/.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2016. “Medicaid Spending Growth Compared to Other
  Payers:     A Look at the Evidence.” https://www.kff.org/report-section/
  medicaid-spending-growth-compared-to-other-payers-issue-brief/.
Kaiser     Family      Foundation.      2017a.    “The     Effects    of    Premiums      and
  Cost Sharing on Low-Income Populations:                      Updated Review of Re-
  search           Findings.”          https://www.kff.org/medicaid/issue-brief/
  the-effects-of-premiums-and-cost-sharing-on-low-income-populations-updated-
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2017b. “Medicare Advantage 2017 Spotlight:                    Enroll-
  ment       Market       Update.”     https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/
  medicare-advantage-2017-spotlight-enrollment-market-update/.
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2018. “Medicaid-to-Medicare Fee Index.” https://www.kff.
  org/medicaid/state-indicator/medicaid-to-medicare-fee-index/.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Katherine Meckel, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2018. “Does Managed Care
  Widen Infant Health Disparities? Evidence from Texas Medicaid.” American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy, 10(3): 255–283.
Layton, Timothy J., Alice Ndikumana, and Mark Shepard. 2018. “Chapter 18 - Health Plan
  Payment in Medicaid Managed Care: A Hybrid Model of Regulated Competition.” In Risk
  Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in Health Insurance Markets. , ed. Thomas G.
  McGuire and Richard C. van Kleef, 523–561. Academic Press.
Layton, Timothy J., Nicole Maestas, Daniel Prinz, and Boris Vabson. 2019. “Private vs. Pub-
  lic Provision of Social Insurance: Evidence from Medicaid.” National Bureau of Economic
  Research Disability Research Center Paper NB 18-13.
Lewin Group. 2004. “Medicaid Managed Care Cost Savings – A Synthesis
  of      24     Studies.”        https://leg.mt.gov/content/Committees/Interim/
  2011-2012/Children-Family/Topics/Medicaid%20Monitoring/
  lewin-synthesis-of-managed-care-studies.pdf.
Lewin        Group.         2012.      “Evaluating       Encounter       Data        Complete-
  ness.”                     https://www.ccwdata.org/documents/10280/19002254/
  evaluating-encounter-data-completeness.pdf.
Lieberman, Daniel A., Jennifer M. Polinski, Niteesh K. Choudhry, Jerry Avorn, and
  Michael A. Fischer. 2016. “Medicaid Prescription Limits: Policy Trends and Comparative
  Impact on Utilization.” BMC Health Services Research, 16(15): 1–11.

                                         45
Manatt. 2016. “CMS Clarifies Medicaid Managed Care Prescription Drug Access.”
  https://www.manatt.com/Insights/Newsletters/Medicaid-Update/
  CMS-Clarifies-Medicaid-Managed-Care-Prescription-D.
Marton, James, Jeffery Talbert, Ashley Palmer, Embry M. Howell, Julia F. Costich, Dou-
  glas A. Wissoker, and Genevieve M. Kenney. 2017. “Medicaid Managed Care in Kentucky.”
  Urban Institute Research Report.
McGuire, Thomas G., and Richard C. Van Kleef. 2018. Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Pre-
  mium Regulation in Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice. Academic Press.
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission. 2012. “Medicaid UPL Sup-
  plemental Payments.” https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/
  MACFacts-UPL-Payments_2012-11.pdf.
Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission. 2019. “Physician Acceptance of
  New Medicaid Patients.” https://www.macpac.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/
  01/Physician-Acceptance-of-New-Medicaid-Patients.pdf.
Mumford, Meghan, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, and Ryan Nunn. 2016. “The Economics
  of Private Prisons.” The Hamilton Project at the Brookings Institution.
Newhouse, Joseph, and Thomas McGuire. 2014. “How Successful Is Medicare Advantage?”
  Milbank Quarterly, 92(2): 351–94.
Oostrom, Tamar, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein. 2017. “Outpatient Office Wait Times and
  Quality of Care for Medicaid Patients.” Health Affairs, 36(5): 826–832.
Polsky, Daniel, Michael Richards, , Simon Basseyn, Douglas Wissoker, Genevieve M.
  Kenney, Stephen Zuckerman, and Karin V. Rhodes. 2015. “Appointment Availability Af-
  ter Increases in Medicaid Payments for Primary Care.” New England Journal of Medicine,
  372(6): 537–545.
Richards, Michael, and Sebastian Tello-Trillo. 2019. “Public Spillovers from Private Insurance
  Contracting: Physician Responses to Managed Care.” American Economic Journal: Economic
  Policy, Forthcoming.
Rogerson, William P. 1994. “Economic Incentives and the Defense Procurement Process.” Jour-
  nal of Economic Perspectives, 8(4): 65–90.
Shleifer, Andrei. 1985. “A Theory of Yardstick Competition.” RAND Journal of Economics,
  16(3): 319–327.
Social Security Administration. 2018. “SSI Annual Statistical Report, 2017.” https://www.
  ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/ssi_asr/2017/ssi_asr17.pdf.
Sparer, Michael. 2012. “Medicaid Managed Care: Costs, Access, and Quality of Care.” Robert
  Wood Johnson Foundation Research Synthesis Report 23.
Starc, Amanda, and Robert Town. 2015. “Externalities and Benefit Design in Health Insur-
  ance.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 21783.



                                             46
Texas Health and Human Services Commission. 2007. “Medicaid Managed
  Care Star+Plus Program Rate Setting State Fiscal Year 2008.” https://rad.
  hhs.texas.gov/sites/rad/files/documents/managed-care/2008/
  2008-star-plus-actuarial-info.pdf.
Texas Health and Human Services Commission. 2017. “Texas Medicaid
  and     CHIP       in     Perspective.”      https://hhs.texas.gov/sites/default/
  files/documents/laws-regulations/reports-presentations/2017/
  medicaid-chip-perspective-11th-edition/11th-edition-complete.pdf.
Texas Health and Human Services Commission. 2018. “Texas Vendor Drug Program Phar-
  macy Provider Procedure Manual — Drug Policy.” https://www.txvendordrug.com/
  sites/txvendordrug/files/docs/manuals/drug-policy.pdf.
Vabson, Boris. 2017. “Efficiency Gains Under Incomplete Contracting: Evidence from Medi-
  caid.” Mimeo.
Van Parys, Jessica. 2015. “How Do Managed Care Plans Reduce Healthcare Costs?” Mimeo.
Winston, Clifford, and Jia Yan. 2011. “Can Privatization of U.S. Higways Improve Motorists’
  Welfare?” Journal of Public Economics, 95(7-8): 993–1005.




                                            47
Online Appendix


                     For Online Publication
                         Appendix for:
Private vs. Public Provision of Social Insurance: Evidence from
                           Medicaid

A    Additional Figures and Tables

                                 Appendix Figure A1: Texas Counties
                                                 (b) Treatment and Control Counties by Service
                  (a) Medicaid Service Areas     Area




        Bexar
        Dallas
        El Paso
        Harris
        Lubbock
        Nueces                                       Bexar Treatment    Bexar Control
        Southeast Region                             Harris Treatment   Harris Control
        Tarrant                                      Nueces Treatment   Nueces Control
        Travis                                       Travis Treatment   Travis Control




Note: Figure shows Medicaid service areas and the treatment and control counties we define
based on these service areas. Panel (a) shows all ten of the Medicaid service areas designated
by the Texas Health and Human Services Commission in April 2004. Panel (b) shows treatment
and control counties by service area. For more details, see Section 4.1.




                                                 1
Online Appendix


                                                                           Appendix Figure A2: Provider Overlap

                                                                                                  Q1: 0.8 Median: 0.9 Q3: 1.0




                                                                                40
                                                                                30
                                                                           Percent
                                                                             20 10
                                                                                0

                                                                                     0           .2            .4           .6                                                .8           1
                                                                                                      Percent of claims from treatment




Note: Figure shows the distribution of the percent of claims at a provider that come from
patients who live in treatment counties.


                                                        Appendix Figure A3: Impact of the Prescription Drug Carve-in
                                                       (a) Number of prescriptions                                                                                                   (b) Spending
                                           10




                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                      Log total reimbursement per enrollee
      Number of prescriptions per enrollee
                                   8




                                                                                                                                                   8
                           6




                                                                                                                                          6
                  4




                                                                                                                                    4
          2




                                                                                                                            2
                        0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                2006   2007   2008    2009     2010      2011         2012    2013                                              2006   2007        2008    2009     2010   2011    2012   2013
                                                                          Year                                                                                                                 Year

                                                                     Arkansas            Texas                                                                                            Arkansas         Texas




Note: Figure shows the number of prescriptions and the amount of spending per enrollee in
Texas and Arkansas before and after Texas carved prescription drugs into its managed care
contracts in 2012. The data displayed here come from the publicly available Medicaid State
Drug Utilization Data. For more details, see Section 7.1.




                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                -.005              0         .005
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Online Appendix




                                                                                                                                                                           2005q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2007q2
                                                                                                                      -.005   0   .005   .01                               2007q3




                                                                                                                                                                     Quarter
                                                                                                                                                                           2007q4
                                                                                                             2004q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (a) Mortality




                                                                                                             2004q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2008q2
                                                                                                             2004q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2008q3
                                                                                                             2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2008q4
                                                                                                             2005q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q1
                                                                                                             2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q2
                                                                                                             2005q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q3
                                                                                                             2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q4
                                                                                                             2006q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q1
                                                                                                             2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q2
                                                                                                             2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q3
                                                                                                             2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q4
                                                                                                             2007q1




3
                                                                                                             2007q2
                                                                                                             2007q3                                                                 -.03   -.02   -.01   0   .01




                                                                                                       Quarter
                                                                                                             2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q1
                                                                                                             2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q2
                                                                                                             2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q3
                                                                                                             2008q3
                                                                                                                                               (c) SSI Suspensions




    cation in Equation (1). For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                                           2004q4
                                                                                                             2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q1
                                                                                                             2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q2
                                                                                                             2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q3
                                                                                                             2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2005q4
                                                                                                             2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q1
                                                                                                             2010q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q2
                                                                                                             2010q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q3
                                                                                                             2010q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Appendix Figure A4: Other Outcomes




                                                                                                             2010q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2007q3
                                                                                                                                                                     Quarter




                                                                                                                                                                           2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Employment




                                                                                                                                                                           2008q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q1
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q2
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q3
                                                                                                                                                                           2010q4
    sions. These coefficients are from estimating the event study difference-in-differences specifi-
    Note: Figure shows control-treatment differences in mortality, employment, and SSI suspen-
                                                                                                                                                                     Online Appendix
                                                                   Appendix Table A1: Rx Outcomes
                                         (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)
                                                                                                                           Log       Log          Log       Log
                                        Log          Log           Any             Any          Days        Days       Spending    Spending   Spending    Spending
                                      Spending     Spending    Prescriptions   Prescriptions   Supply      Supply      Branded     Branded     Generic     Generic
                                                                                                                         Drugs      Drugs       Drugs      Drugs
                 Treatment             0.146∗∗∗                    0.003                       55.723∗∗∗                0.244∗∗∗               0.214∗∗∗
                 × Post                 (0.033)                   (0.004)                       (6.089)                  (0.037)                (0.025)

                 Treatment                          0.087∗∗∗                      -0.001                   37.250∗∗∗               0.142∗∗∗               0.160∗∗∗
                 × Post                              (0.031)                      (0.004)                   (4.867)                 (0.033)                (0.025)
                 (2007-2008)

                 Treatment                          0.202∗∗∗                       0.003                   76.604∗∗∗               0.358∗∗∗               0.270∗∗∗
                 × Post                              (0.041)                      (0.005)                   (8.286)                 (0.051)                (0.031)
                 (2009-2010)
                 IV Coefficient        0.197∗∗∗     0.199∗∗∗       0.004           0.002       75.168∗∗∗   78.093∗∗∗   0.329∗∗∗    0.346∗∗∗   0.288∗∗∗    0.292∗∗∗
                                        (0.039)      (0.040)      (0.005)         (0.005)       (6.101)     (6.421)     (0.042)     (0.044)    (0.031)     (0.030)
                 Baseline Mean           4.096        4.096         .676            .676        186.653     186.653      3.491       3.491      2.525       2.525
                 Individual Fixed          X            X             X               X            X           X           X           X          X           X
                 Effects
                 Standard errors in parentheses
                 ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
4




    Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for prescription drug outcomes. For each outcome, the first
    column shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification
    in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable specification in
    Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second column shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates,
    when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed
    effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                Online Appendix
                                                        Appendix Table A2: Outpatient Outcomes
                                                      (1)            (2)      (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)       (8)
                                                                            Number       Number
                                                     Log         Log
                                                                               of          of         Any         Any        ED        ED
                                                   Realized    Realized
                                                                           Outpatient   Outpatient    Use         Use       Visits    Visits
                                                    Cost        Cost
                                                                             Days         Days
                              Treatment x Post       0.027                   0.391                   -0.009∗∗               -0.072
                                                    (0.042)                 (0.274)                   (0.004)               (0.123)

                              Treatment                           -0.054                  0.121                 -0.013∗∗∗              -0.087
                              × Post                             (0.040)                 (0.239)                 (0.004)              (0.075)
                              (2007-2008)

                              Treatment                         0.111∗∗                  0.653∗                   -0.003               -0.219
                              × Post                            (0.051)                  (0.359)                 (0.005)              (0.216)
                              (2009-2010)
                              IV Coefficient         0.037        0.051      0.528        0.551      -0.013∗∗   -0.010∗      -0.097    -0.212
                                                    (0.053)      (0.054)    (0.350)      (0.372)      (0.005)   (0.005)     (0.157)   (0.178)
                              Baseline Mean          4.59         4.59       8.201        8.201        .717       .717       2.167     2.167
                              Individual Fixed         X            X          X            X            X          X           X         X
                              Effects
                              Standard errors in parentheses
                              ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
5




    Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for outpatient outcomes. For each outcome, the first column
    shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation
    (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation
    (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second column shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates, when
    the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed effects.
    Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                                            Online Appendix
                                                               Appendix Table A3: Inpatient Outcomes
                                         (1)            (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)        (9)       (10)         (11)      (12)
                                                                                                                Surgery            Non-Surgery
                                         Log Spending           Any Admissions          Admissions                                                      Length of Stay
                                                                                                              Admissions            Admissions
                 Treatment            -0.056∗∗∗                -0.005∗∗              -0.006∗∗               0.000              -0.007∗∗                -0.061∗
                 × Post                (0.019)                 (0.002)               (0.003)               (0.001)              (0.003)                (0.031)

                 Treatment                         -0.056∗∗∗              -0.005∗∗              -0.006∗∗             -0.001                -0.005∗∗                -0.019
                 × Post                             (0.020)                (0.002)               (0.003)             (0.002)                (0.002)               (0.037)
                 (2007-2008)

                 Treatment                         -0.058∗∗∗              -0.004∗               -0.005               0.003∗                -0.008∗∗∗               -0.041
                 × Post                             (0.020)               (0.002)               (0.003)              (0.002)                (0.003)               (0.031)
                 (2009-2010)
                 IV Coefficient       -0.076∗∗∗    -0.075∗∗∗   -0.006∗∗   -0.006∗∗   -0.008∗∗   -0.008∗∗    0.001     0.001    -0.009∗∗∗   -0.009∗∗∗   -0.082∗∗    -0.041
                                       (0.024)      (0.021)     (0.003)    (0.002)    (0.004)    (0.003)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.040)   (0.039)
                 Baseline Mean           .657         .657       .075       .075       .096       .096      .039      .039        .057        .057       .698       .698
                 Individual Fixed          X            X          X          X          X          X         X         X           X           X          X          X
                 Effects
                 Standard errors in parentheses
                 ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




    Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for inpatient outcomes. For each outcome, the first column
6




    shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation
    (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation
    (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second column shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates, when
    the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed effects.
    Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
Online Appendix


                                   Appendix Table A4: Other Outcomes

                                            (1)        (2)        (3)    (4)          (5)      (6)
                                              Mortality           Employment        SSI Suspensions
 Treatment × Post                       -0.00029                0.0028             0.000082
                                        (0.00054)              (0.0036)            (0.0011)

 Treatment × Post (2007-2008)                      0.000081             0.00034             -0.00037
                                                   (0.00066)            (0.0033)            (0.0011)

 Treatment × Post (2009-2010)                      -0.00063              0.0050              0.00049
                                                   (0.00060)            (0.0042)             (0.0013)
 Baseline Mean                            0.010      0.010      0.051    0.051      0.014     0.014
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



Note: Table shows reduced form estimates for mortality, employment, and SSI suspension. For
each outcome, the first column shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimat-
ing the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1), pooling over the entire
post-period. The second column shows reduced form estimates, when the post-period is bro-
ken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service area by year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.




                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                                                     Online Appendix
                                                              Appendix Table A5: Main Outcomes (Levels)
                            (1)       (2)      (3)     (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)       (9)      (10)     (11)       (12)      (13)      (14)     (15)     (16)
                                  Realized Spending                      Inpatient Spending                         Rx Spending                    Realized Outpatient Spending
        Treatment          365∗∗∗            214∗∗              -47∗∗                 -18               118∗∗∗             117∗∗∗               312∗∗∗             274∗∗∗
        × Post              (111)             (92)               (21)                 (21)               (16)               (17)                 (38)               (37)

        Treatment                   188∗              124∗∗                -33                  -7                 66∗∗∗               68∗∗∗             170∗∗∗             178∗∗∗
        × Post                      (108)              (56)                (24)                (22)                 (13)                (12)              (31)               (29)
        (2007-2008)

        Treatment                   535∗∗∗            249∗∗                -45∗                -18                178∗∗∗              149∗∗∗             427∗∗∗             322∗∗∗
        x Post                       (151)            (122)                (26)                (25)                (22)                (22)               (54)               (52)
        (2009-2010)
        IV Coefficient     572∗∗∗   585∗∗∗   393∗∗    361∗∗     -74∗∗     -61∗∗       -33        -25    185∗∗∗    197∗∗∗    214∗∗∗    212∗∗∗    489∗∗∗   480∗∗∗   503∗∗∗    479∗∗∗
                            (170)    (192)   (163)    (159)      (31)      (28)      (37)       (39)      (23)      (23)      (31)      (31)      (57)     (60)     (64)      (67)
        Baseline Mean       3,332    3,332   3,332    3,332    557.743   557.743   557.743    557.743   539.576   539.576   539.576   539.576    1,343    1,343    1,343     1,343
        Individual Fixed      X        X                          X         X                              X         X                             X        X
        Effects
        Standard errors in parentheses
        ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



    Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes. For each outcome, the first and third
    columns show estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification
8




    in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable specification in
    Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show reduced form and instrumental variable
    estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service area by year
    fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
Online Appendix


                        Appendix Table A6: Medicaid Entry and Exit

                                                 (1)                   (2)
                                               Enter                  Exit
                             Treatment × Post -0.004                 -0.001
                                              (0.004)               (0.003)
                             IV Coefficient    -0.026                -0.005
                                              (0.028)               (0.019)
                             Treatment        0.017∗∗                -0.003
                                              (0.008)               (0.006)
                             Baseline Mean      .148                  .101
                             Standard errors in parentheses
                             ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for Medicaid entry and
exit. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled
version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and the second row shows estimates of
the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable specification
in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for service area by year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.




                                                  9
                                                                                                                                                               Online Appendix
                                                                  Appendix Table A7: Therapeutic Classes
                                                                                   (a) Log Spending
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)         (9)      (10)
                                            Anti-       Anti-                 Blood                                                                  Misc
                                                                    Auto-                Cardio-    Central     Gastro-     Hormones &   Immuno-
                                           Infec-       neo-                  Form/                                                                 Thera-
                                                                    nomic                vascular   Nervous    intestinal    Synthetic   suppres-
                                            tive       plastic                Coagul                                                                peutic
                                                                    Drugs                 Agents    System       Drugs         Subst       sants
                                           Agents      Agents                 Agents                                                                Agents
                        Treatment
                                           0.334∗∗∗    0.033∗∗     0.365∗∗∗   0.034∗     0.238∗∗∗   0.300∗∗∗   0.317∗∗∗      0.256∗∗∗     0.009     0.088∗∗∗
                          × Post
                                            (0.041)     (0.014)     (0.060)   (0.019)     (0.046)    (0.048)    (0.056)       (0.048)     (0.011)    (0.020)
                        IV Coefficient     0.471∗∗∗    0.047∗∗∗    0.515∗∗∗   0.048∗∗    0.336∗∗∗   0.423∗∗∗   0.448∗∗∗      0.362∗∗∗      0.012    0.124∗∗∗
                                            (0.044)     (0.015)     (0.060)   (0.022)     (0.047)    (0.053)    (0.056)       (0.048)     (0.012)    (0.021)
                        Baseline Mean        1.774       .113        1.052      .378       1.834      3.639       1.13         1.625       .083       .221


                                                                                   (b) Any Spending
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)           (8)         (9)      (10)
                                            Anti-       Anti-                 Blood                                                                  Misc
                                                                    Auto-                Cardio-    Central     Gastro-     Hormones &   Immuno-
                                           Infec-       neo-                  Form/                                                                 Thera-
                                                                    nomic                vascular   Nervous    intestinal    Synthetic   suppres-
                                            tive       plastic                Coagul                                                                peutic
                                                                    Drugs                 Agents    System       Drugs         Subst       sants
                                           Agents      Agents                 Agents                                                                Agents
10




                        Treatment
                                          0.059∗∗∗    0.006∗∗∗     0.069∗∗∗   0.008∗∗    0.025∗∗∗   0.028∗∗∗    0.053∗∗∗      0.043∗∗∗     0.001    0.020∗∗∗
                          × Post
                                           (0.009)     (0.002)      (0.010)    (0.004)    (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.009)       (0.007)    (0.001)    (0.004)
                        IV Coefficient    0.084∗∗∗    0.009∗∗∗     0.098∗∗∗   0.011∗∗∗   0.036∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗    0.075∗∗∗      0.060∗∗∗     0.002    0.028∗∗∗
                                           (0.009)     (0.002)      (0.010)    (0.004)    (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.009)       (0.007)    (0.001)    (0.004)
                        Baseline Mean       .411         .02         .246       .072        .32        .61         .215         .303       .011       .046
                        Standard errors in parentheses
                        ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the most common therapeutic classes. The first row
     shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation
     (1) and the second row shows estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable
     specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors
     are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                Online Appendix
                                         Appendix Table A8: Inpatient Spending on the Top 10 CCS Categories

                               (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)    (10)
                                                       Endocrine;                                                              Dise-
                                                       nutritional;                 Dise-    Dise-      Dise-      Dise-        ases
                           Infectious                       and                     ases      ases      ases       ases           of     In-
                              and                       metabolic                     of       of         of         of          the   jury
                                              Neo-                    Mental
                            parasitic                      Dise-                     the      the        the        the         skin    and
                                             plasms                   Illness
                             Dise-                         ases                    circu-    respi-    diges-     genito-       and   poiso-
                              ases                          and                    latory   ratory       tive     urinary       sub-   ning
                                                       immunity                   system    system     system     system    cutaneous
                                                        disorders                                                              tissue
      Treatment               0.001           0.007      -0.040∗∗     -0.093∗∗∗    0.028     -0.036∗    -0.033∗    -0.006      -0.008  0.023
      × Post                 (0.019)         (0.009)      (0.019)      (0.025)    (0.025)    (0.020)    (0.019)   (0.018)     (0.014) (0.018)
      IV Coefficient          0.001           0.010     -0.058∗∗∗     -0.134∗∗∗    0.041    -0.052∗∗   -0.048∗∗    -0.009      -0.012  0.033
                             (0.022)         (0.011)      (0.021)      (0.026)    (0.029)    (0.023)    (0.021)   (0.021)     (0.016) (0.021)
      Baseline Mean            .114            .128        .144          .198       .39        .249       .264      .124          .1   .181
11




      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the top 10 most common Clinical Classification Software
     (CCS) groups of diagnoses. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of
     the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and the second row shows estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from
     estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for service area
     by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
Online Appendix


                  Appendix Table A9: Outcomes by Pre-Period Health Status
                                              (a) No Comorbidities
                                                  (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)
                                                                Log
                                                 Log                       Log
                                                             Realized                ED
                                               Inpatient                    Rx
                                                            Outpatient              Visits
                                               Spending                  Spending
                                                               Cost
                         Treatment × Post      -0.042∗∗        0.039       0.047     -0.049
                                                (0.020)       (0.114)     (0.075)   (0.113)
                         IV Coefficient        -0.058∗∗        0.055       0.065     -0.069
                                                (0.027)       (0.150)     (0.098)   (0.150)
                         Baseline Mean           .054          1.867       1.482      .423


                                               (b) 1-3 Comorbidites
                                                  (1)            (2)        (3)       (4)
                                                                 Log
                                                 Log                       Log
                                                             Realized                ED
                                               Inpatient                    Rx
                                                            Outpatient              Visits
                                               Spending                  Spending
                                                                Cost
                         Treatment × Post        -0.056        -0.047    0.143∗∗∗    -0.216
                                                (0.036)       (0.049)     (0.039)   (0.185)
                         IV Coefficient          -0.075        -0.064    0.192∗∗∗    -0.291
                                                (0.046)       (0.064)     (0.049)   (0.240)
                         Baseline Mean            .487          5.289      4.763     1.793


                                          (c) More Than 3 Comorbidites
                                                  (1)           (2)         (3)       (4)
                                                                Log
                                                 Log                       Log
                                                             Realized                ED
                                               Inpatient                    Rx
                                                            Outpatient              Visits
                                               Spending                  Spending
                                                               Cost
                         Treatment × Post       -0.207∗        0.035     0.251∗∗     0.172
                                                (0.104)       (0.094)     (0.101)   (0.496)
                         IV Coefficient        -0.275∗∗        0.046     0.333∗∗∗    0.228
                                                (0.126)       (0.116)     (0.121)   (0.613)
                         Baseline Mean           2.153         6.597       5.362     5.045
                         Standard errors in parentheses
                         ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes
broken down by pre-period health status. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment
differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1)
and the second row shows estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating
the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We
control for service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.
For more details, see Section 4.2.




                                                           12
Online Appendix


                            Appendix Table A10: Outcomes by Age
                                                        (a) 20-34
                                                 (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)
                                                               Log
                                               Log                         Log
                                                            Realized                   ED
                                             Inpatient                      Rx
                                                           Outpatient                 Visits
                                             Spending                    Spending
                                                              Cost
                        Treatment × Post       -0.035         0.032        0.074      -0.284∗
                                              (0.025)        (0.087)      (0.045)     (0.148)
                        IV Coefficient         -0.056         0.052       0.119∗     -0.458∗∗
                                              (0.038)        (0.130)      (0.067)     (0.232)
                        Baseline Mean            .35          4.272        3.513       1.491


                                                        (b) 35-49
                                                 (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)
                                                                Log
                                                Log                        Log
                                                             Realized                  ED
                                              Inpatient                     Rx
                                                            Outpatient                Visits
                                              Spending                   Spending
                                                               Cost
                        Treatment × Post      -0.100∗∗∗        0.010      0.166∗∗∗    0.009
                                               (0.036)        (0.053)      (0.058)   (0.186)
                        IV Coefficient        -0.133∗∗∗        0.014      0.220∗∗∗    0.012
                                               (0.045)        (0.065)      (0.067)   (0.229)
                        Baseline Mean            .685          4.506        4.014     2.548


                                                        (c) 50-64
                                                 (1)             (2)        (3)        (4)
                                                                Log
                                                Log                        Log
                                                             Realized                  ED
                                              Inpatient                     Rx
                                                            Outpatient                Visits
                                              Spending                   Spending
                                                               Cost
                        Treatment × Post        -0.023         0.049      0.204∗∗∗    0.098
                                               (0.032)        (0.049)      (0.045)   (0.144)
                        IV Coefficient          -0.029         0.061      0.254∗∗∗    0.122
                                               (0.036)        (0.057)      (0.053)   (0.166)
                        Baseline Mean            .839           4.86        4.543     2.335
                        Standard errors in parentheses
                        ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes
broken down by age. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment differences from es-
timating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and the second
row shows estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumen-
tal variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for
service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more
details, see Section 4.2.




                                                           13
                                                                                                                                                   Online Appendix
                                                Appendix Table A11: Central Nervous System Classes

                                   (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)     (6)       (7)          (8)         (9)        (10)
                                                                                  Anti-
                                                                                                     Psych     Psychother,
                               Analg/        Analg/                   Anti-       conv,                                       ASH,
                                                      Analg/                               Anti-     other,      Tranq/
                              Antipyr,       Antipyr,              convulsant,   Hydan-                                      Benzo-      ASH,
                                                      Antipyr,                             conv,     Anti-        Anti-
                              Nonstr/         Opiate                 Benzo-        toin                                        dia-      NEC
                                                       NEC                                 Misc     depres-        psy-
                              Antiinflm      Agonists               diazepine     Deri-                                      zepines
                                                                                                     sants        chotic
                                                                                 vative
      Treatment × Post          0.307∗∗∗     0.189∗∗∗   0.124∗∗∗    0.027∗∗∗      0.011  0.118∗∗∗   0.247∗∗∗    0.219∗∗∗     0.106∗∗∗   0.137∗∗∗
                                 (0.031)      (0.039)    (0.023)     (0.009)     (0.012)  (0.032)    (0.046)     (0.037)      (0.027)    (0.018)
      IV Coefficient            0.434∗∗∗     0.266∗∗∗   0.175∗∗∗    0.038∗∗∗      0.016  0.167∗∗∗   0.349∗∗∗    0.309∗∗∗     0.150∗∗∗   0.193∗∗∗
                                 (0.036)      (0.041)    (0.028)     (0.010)     (0.013)  (0.035)    (0.048)     (0.041)      (0.028)    (0.023)
      Baseline Mean               .778         1.139      .324        .182         .177     .99       1.453       1.118         .749      .606
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
14




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the most common subclasses of the central nervous
     system therapeutic class. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of
     the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and the second row shows estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from
     estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for service area
     by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                  Online Appendix
                                                         Appendix Table A12: Cardiovascular Classes

                                    (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)      (9)        (10)
                                                                                                                   Anti-
                                                                       Anti-                                      hyper-    Hypo-       Vaso-
                                                ACE       Cardiac                Alpha-
                                                                     arrhyth-                Beta   Calcium        lipi-    tensive    dilating
                                   NEC          Inhi-     Glyco-                  Beta
                                                                       mic                 Blockers Channel       demic     Agents,    Agents,
                                                bitors     sides                Blockers
                                                                      Agents                                      Drugs,     NEC        NEC
                                                                                                                   NEC
         Treatment × Post         0.031 0.156∗∗∗          0.013∗∗     -0.002     0.002     0.114∗∗∗   0.082∗∗∗   0.168∗∗∗   0.039∗∗∗   0.046∗∗∗
                                 (0.031) (0.022)           (0.006)   (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.027)    (0.017)    (0.057)    (0.011)    (0.009)
         IV Coefficient           0.044 0.221∗∗∗          0.019∗∗∗    -0.002     0.002     0.160∗∗∗   0.115∗∗∗   0.237∗∗∗   0.055∗∗∗   0.065∗∗∗
                                 (0.034) (0.023)           (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.029)    (0.019)    (0.061)    (0.013)    (0.009)
         Baseline Mean             .361    .509              .038      .015       .013        .427      .482        .898       .124       .102
         Standard errors in parentheses
         ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01
15




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the most common subclasses of the cardiovascular
     agents therapeutic class. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the
     reduced form specification in Equation (1) and the second row shows estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from
     estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for service area
     by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                               Online Appendix
                                                      Appendix Table A13: Hormones Classes

                                   (1)           (2)      (3)       (4)          (5)      (6)          (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)
                                             Contra-                           Anti-                 Para-                            Thy
                                                                   Anti-                 Anti-                Pituitary
                              Adrenals       ceptive, Estrogens              diabetic              thyroid                 Pro-    /Antithy,
                                                                  diabetic              diabetic                Hor-
                              & Comb,           Oral  & Comb,                Agents,                 Hor-                 gestins, Thyroid/
                                                                  Agents,               Agents,                mones,
                                NEC           Comb,     NEC                    Sulfo               mones,                  NEC        Hor-
                                                                  Insulins               Misc                   NEC
                                                NEC                          nylureas                NEC                             mones
      Treatment × Post         0.244∗∗∗        -0.009  0.026∗      0.006     0.075∗∗∗   0.084∗∗∗     0.002      -0.003     0.001    0.072∗∗∗
                                (0.041)       (0.010)  (0.014)    (0.027)     (0.017)    (0.022)    (0.004)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.015)
      IV Coefficient           0.344∗∗∗        -0.013  0.037∗∗     0.009     0.106∗∗∗   0.119∗∗∗     0.003      -0.004     0.002    0.102∗∗∗
                                (0.040)       (0.011)  (0.016)    (0.030)     (0.019)    (0.024)    (0.005)    (0.003)    (0.006)    (0.016)
      Baseline Mean               .39           .112     .15        .399        .326       .58        .018       .018       .022      .245
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the most common subclasses of the hormones and
16




     synthetic substances therapeutic class. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled
     version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and the second row shows estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed
     care from estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for
     service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                       Appendix Table A14: Main Outcomes (Balanced Panel)
                                                                                           (a) 2005-2008
                        (1)        (2)      (3)     (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)
                              Log Realized Spending                        Log Inpatient Spending                           Log Rx Spending                  Log Realized Outpatient Spending
 Treatment             0.013               0.013               -0.059∗∗∗                -0.059∗∗∗               0.083∗∗∗             0.083∗∗∗               -0.058            -0.058
 × Post               (0.030)             (0.029)               (0.021)                  (0.020)                 (0.028)              (0.027)               (0.042)           (0.041)
 Treatment                        0.007               0.007                 -0.059∗∗∗               -0.059∗∗∗              0.078∗∗∗              0.078∗∗∗             -0.073∗             -0.073∗
 × Post                          (0.030)             (0.029)                 (0.019)                 (0.018)                (0.028)               (0.027)             (0.043)             (0.042)
 (2007-2008)
 IV Coefficient        0.017      0.010     0.017     0.010    -0.078∗∗∗    -0.080∗∗∗   -0.078∗∗∗   -0.080∗∗∗   0.111∗∗∗   0.106∗∗∗   0.111∗∗∗   0.106∗∗∗    -0.077   -0.099∗    -0.077   -0.099∗
                      (0.038)    (0.039)   (0.038)   (0.039)    (0.026)      (0.024)     (0.026)     (0.024)     (0.034)    (0.035)    (0.034)    (0.035)   (0.054)   (0.057)   (0.054)   (0.057)
 Baseline Mean         6.336      6.336     6.336     6.336       .456         .456        .456        .456       4.753      4.753      4.753      4.753      4.98      4.98      4.98      4.98
 Individual Fixed        X          X                               X            X                                  X          X                               X         X
 Effects


                                                                                           (b) 2004-2010
                         (1)        (2)      (3)     (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)         (9)       (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)
                               Log Realized Spending                       Log Inpatient Spending                           Log Rx Spending                  Log Realized Outpatient Spending
 Treatment × Post       0.050               0.050               -0.045∗∗                 -0.045∗∗               0.102∗∗∗             0.102∗∗∗                0.040             0.040
                       (0.050)             (0.049)               (0.018)                  (0.017)                (0.038)              (0.037)               (0.058)           (0.057)
 Treatment                       -0.016              -0.016                  -0.053∗∗               -0.053∗∗∗               0.067∗∗               0.067∗∗             -0.077              -0.077
 × Post                          (0.050)             (0.049)                  (0.020)                (0.020)                (0.032)               (0.032)             (0.060)             (0.059)
 (2007-2008)
 Treatment                        0.093              0.093∗                  -0.038                  -0.038                0.127∗∗∗              0.127∗∗∗             0.122∗              0.122∗
 × Post                          (0.056)             (0.055)                 (0.024)                 (0.023)                (0.047)               (0.047)             (0.065)             (0.064)
 (2009-2010)
 IV Coefficient         0.066     0.056     0.066     0.056    -0.060∗∗∗    -0.059∗∗∗   -0.060∗∗∗   -0.059∗∗∗   0.134∗∗∗   0.131∗∗∗   0.134∗∗∗   0.131∗∗∗    0.053     0.041     0.053     0.041
                       (0.063)   (0.065)   (0.063)   (0.065)    (0.023)      (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.023)     (0.046)    (0.046)    (0.046)    (0.046)   (0.073)   (0.077)   (0.073)   (0.077)
 Baseline Mean          6.305     6.305     6.305     6.305       .419         .419        .419        .419       4.722      4.722      4.722      4.722     4.945     4.945     4.945     4.945
 Individual Fixed         X         X                               X            X                                  X          X                               X         X
 Effects
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes in a balanced panel. Panel (a) shows
a shorter panel, for 2005-2008 and Panel (b) shows all years, 2004-2010. For each outcome, the first and third columns show
estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1)
and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable specification in Equation (3),
pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show reduced form and instrumental variable estimates,
when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Online Appendix
                                                       Appendix Table A15: Main Outcomes (Bexar Service Area)
                                (1)        (2)      (3)     (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)       (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)
                                      Log Realized Spending                   Log Inpatient Spending                       Log Rx Spending                Log Realized Outpatient Spending
         Treatment             0.019               0.132               -0.140                -0.071               0.093              0.167                0.006             0.160
         × Post               (0.067)             (0.095)             (0.097)               (0.112)              (0.107)            (0.107)              (0.065)           (0.109)

         Treatment                       0.016               0.063               -0.088                 -0.041              0.017               0.052              -0.007               0.080
         × Post                         (0.071)             (0.092)             (0.093)                (0.091)             (0.097)             (0.107)             (0.072)             (0.090)
         (2007-2008)

         Treatment                       0.024              0.196∗              -0.223                 -0.098               0.214              0.275∗∗              0.027              0.235∗
         × Post                         (0.085)             (0.104)             (0.143)                (0.154)             (0.138)             (0.112)             (0.086)             (0.133)
         (2009-2010)
         IV Coefficient        0.025     0.026     0.225     0.233    -0.187∗   -0.209∗∗    -0.121      -0.124    0.124     0.160     0.285    0.300∗     0.008     0.015     0.273     0.283
                              (0.070)   (0.070)   (0.162)   (0.163)   (0.100)    (0.104)   (0.182)     (0.186)   (0.113)   (0.115)   (0.178)   (0.178)   (0.069)   (0.068)   (0.190)   (0.193)
         Baseline Mean         7.232     7.232     7.232     7.232     1.663      1.663     1.663       1.663     5.521     5.521     5.521     5.521     6.198     6.198     6.198     6.198
         Individual Fixed        X         X                             X          X                               X         X                             X         X
         Effects
         Standard errors in parentheses
         ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes in Texas’s Bexar Service Area. For
     each outcome, the first and third columns show estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version
18




     of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the
     instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show
     reduced form and instrumental variable estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and
     2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details,
     see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Online Appendix
                                                       Appendix Table A16: Main Outcomes (Harris Service Area)
                               (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)    (8)        (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)       (13)      (14)      (15)     (16)
                                     Log Realized Spending                     Log Inpatient Spending                    Log Rx Spending                 Log Realized Outpatient Spending
        Treatment             0.100                 0.000              -0.176                -0.088             0.110              0.172                0.147               0.131
        × Post               (0.060)               (0.102)             (0.122)              (0.100)            (0.089)            (0.098)              (0.097)             (0.097)

        Treatment                         0.039               -0.014             -0.271∗             -0.204∗              0.071               0.142               0.079                0.075
        × Post                           (0.080)             (0.094)             (0.131)             (0.106)             (0.076)             (0.109)             (0.139)              (0.127)
        (2007-2008)

        Treatment                        0.197∗               0.014              -0.022               0.017               0.173               0.200              0.255∗∗∗              0.181
        × Post                           (0.084)             (0.145)             (0.153)             (0.105)             (0.150)             (0.109)              (0.068)             (0.106)
        (2009-2010)
        IV Coefficient       0.141∗∗    0.177∗∗∗    0.001     0.004    -0.249∗    -0.170    -0.166    -0.138   0.156∗    0.176∗    0.324∗    0.329∗    0.208∗∗   0.244∗∗∗    0.246     0.258
                             (0.063)     (0.058)   (0.180)   (0.186)   (0.130)   (0.129)   (0.177)   (0.176)   (0.089)   (0.099)   (0.178)   (0.178)   (0.101)    (0.078)   (0.174)   (0.172)
        Baseline Mean         7.184       7.184     7.184     7.184     1.888     1.888     1.888     1.888     5.041     5.041     5.041     5.041     5.933      5.933     5.933     5.933
        Individual Fixed        X           X                             X         X                             X         X                             X          X
        Effects
        Standard errors in parentheses
        ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes in Texas’s Harris Service Area. For
     each outcome, the first and third columns show estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version
19




     of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the
     instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show
     reduced form and instrumental variable estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and
     2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details,
     see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Online Appendix
                                                          Appendix Table A17: Main Outcomes (Nueces Service Area)
                             (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)        (10)      (11)      (12)       (13)     (14)      (15)     (16)
                                   Log Realized Spending                        Log Inpatient Spending                          Log Rx Spending                 Log Realized Outpatient Spending
      Treatment            0.159∗                0.085               -0.243∗                -0.204∗∗                 0.260∗∗∗              0.155               0.199∗              0.093
      × Post               (0.085)              (0.106)              (0.134)                 (0.075)                  (0.064)             (0.102)              (0.109)            (0.114)

      Treatment                       0.133∗                0.124                -0.228                   -0.132                0.253∗∗∗             0.188∗               0.140               0.113
      × Post                          (0.073)              (0.109)               (0.170)                  (0.087)                (0.084)             (0.103)             (0.092)             (0.115)
      (2007-2008)

      Treatment                        0.200                0.049                -0.266                  -0.269∗                0.271∗∗∗              0.124              0.289∗               0.075
      × Post                          (0.120)              (0.112)               (0.153)                 (0.128)                 (0.078)             (0.111)             (0.149)             (0.119)
      (2009-2010)
      IV Coefficient       0.194∗∗    0.200∗∗    0.131      0.129    -0.296∗∗    -0.295∗∗   -0.313∗∗∗    -0.317∗∗∗   0.317∗∗∗   0.313∗∗∗    0.238     0.236    0.242∗∗   0.260∗∗    0.144     0.143
                           (0.082)    (0.086)   (0.158)    (0.158)    (0.130)     (0.123)    (0.109)      (0.111)     (0.062)    (0.058)   (0.149)   (0.149)   (0.106)   (0.110)   (0.169)   (0.169)
      Baseline Mean         7.514      7.514     7.514      7.514      1.997       1.997      1.997        1.997       5.726      5.726     5.726     5.726     6.676     6.676     6.676     6.676
      Individual Fixed        X          X                               X           X                                   X          X                             X         X
      Effects
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes in Texas’s Nueces Service Area. For
     each outcome, the first and third columns show estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version
20




     of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the
     instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show
     reduced form and instrumental variable estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and
     2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details,
     see Section 4.2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Online Appendix
                                                          Appendix Table A18: Main Outcomes (Travis Service Area)
                             (1)      (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)     (8)        (9)      (10)        (11)       (12)       (13)     (14)       (15)      (16)
                                   Log Realized Spending                      Log Inpatient Spending                     Log Rx Spending                    Log Realized Outpatient Spending
      Treatment             0.035             0.383∗∗∗                -0.057                0.048              0.130              0.356∗∗∗                0.062             0.361∗∗∗
      × Post               (0.070)             (0.059)                (0.079)              (0.036)            (0.081)              (0.094)               (0.085)             (0.062)

      Treatment                      -0.018                0.240∗∗∗             -0.059               0.000               0.067                0.305∗∗∗              0.004               0.230∗∗∗
      × Post                         (0.065)                (0.051)             (0.075)             (0.036)             (0.079)                (0.080)             (0.081)               (0.051)
      (2007-2008)

      Treatment                       0.118                0.505∗∗∗             -0.055              0.089∗∗             0.229∗∗               0.401∗∗∗              0.154               0.474∗∗∗
      × Post                         (0.096)                (0.077)             (0.089)             (0.041)             (0.091)                (0.112)             (0.107)               (0.076)
      (2009-2010)
      IV Coefficient        0.056     0.102    0.812∗∗∗    0.849∗∗∗    -0.093    -0.085    0.101     0.115    0.211∗∗   0.256∗∗∗   0.756∗∗∗   0.765∗∗∗    0.101     0.149    0.766∗∗∗   0.800∗∗∗
                           (0.087)   (0.091)    (0.125)     (0.128)   (0.097)   (0.094)   (0.074)   (0.075)   (0.098)    (0.096)    (0.193)    (0.197)   (0.104)   (0.105)    (0.127)    (0.130)
      Baseline Mean         6.621     6.621      6.621       6.621     1.365     1.365     1.365     1.365     4.394      4.394      4.394      4.394     5.506     5.506      5.506      5.506
      Individual Fixed        X         X                                X         X                             X          X                               X         X
      Effects
      Standard errors in parentheses
      ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes in Texas’s Travis Service Area. For
     each outcome, the first and third columns show estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version
21




     of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the
     instrumental variable specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show
     reduced form and instrumental variable estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and
     2009-2010. We control for service area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details,
     see Section 4.2.
Online Appendix


B     Border Zip Code Analysis
In this appendix we replicate our main results limiting to border zip codes. The motivation
for this analysis is that one might be concerned that our treatment counties are more urban
than control counties and urban and rural counties may have been deferentially impacted by
potential shocks that occurred around the time of our treatment (February 2007). Focusing on
border zipcodes may make control and treatment counties even more similar. Border zipcodes
are defined as zipcodes in a control county that are within 25 miles of a treatment county
and zipcodes in a treatment county that are within 25 miles of a control county. Distance is
measured as great-circle distance calculated using the Haversine formula based on internal
points in zipcodes.24
    Appendix Figure B1 shows a map of zipcodes in Texas. Control and treatment counties are
highlighted in shades of blue and shades of red, respectively, separating border and non-border
zipcodes.
    Appendix Table B1 replicates Table 1, limiting to the border zipcodes.
    Appendix Table B2 replicates Table 2, limiting to the border zipcodes. For each primary
outcome (log total realized healthcare spending, log inpatient spending, log drug spending,
log outpatient spending), we report coefficients from four regressions. The first two regres-
sions include individual fixed effects while the second two regressions do not. The first and
third regressions include an interaction between an indicator for residing in a treatment county
(“Treatment”) and an indicator for the quarter being after February 2007 (“Post”), the month in
which mandated enrollment in private Medicaid plans began in Texas. The second and fourth
columns break the “post” period into two periods, an “early-post” period (2007-2008) and a
“late-post” period (2009-2010). For each regression specification we report both reduced form
and IV coefficients. Reduced form coefficients should be interpreted as the effect of a county-
level private-plan enrollment mandate on the outcome, allowing take-up of private plans to
be incomplete even under mandated enrollment. IV coefficients should be interpreted as the
difference in the outcome in the public Medicaid program vs. in a private plan for the average
beneficiary who was induced by the mandate to enroll in a private plan. We highlight that our
main results remain quite similar on this restricted sample.




 24 Files
        with distances between zipcodes       are   available   at   https://www.nber.org/data/
zip-code-distance-database.html.


                                              22
Online Appendix


                             Appendix Figure B1: Texas Zipcodes




                 Control - not border
                 Treatment - not border
                 Control - border
                 Treatment - border
                 Not control or treatment


Note: Figure shows the map of zipcodes in Texas. For our analysis of zipcodes we classify
zipcodes within the control and treatment counties into border and not border zipcodes. Border
zipcodes are zipcodes in control counties within 25 miles of a treatment zipcode and zipcodes
in treatment counties within 25 miles of a control zipcode. Not border zipcodes are all the
other zipcodes in control and treatment counties. Distance is measured as great-circle distance
calculated using the Haversine formula based on internal points in zipcodes.




                                              23
Online Appendix


                      Appendix Table B1: Summary Statistics (Zipcodes)

                                                         Control   Treatment
                   Average Total spending 2004            10,648     11,649
                   Average Inpatient spending 2004         2,888      2,981
                   Average Outpatient spending 2004        5,439      6,123
                   Average Rx spending 2004                2,321      2,545
                   Age 20 to 24                           .09529      .1107
                   Age 25 to 29                           .07768      .0825
                   Age 30 to 34                           .08013     .08016
                   Age 35 to 39                             .084     .08626
                   Age 40 to 44                           .09945      .1106
                   Age 45 to 49                              .13      .1237
                   Age 50 to 54                            .1418      .1304
                   Age 55 to 59                             .162      .1493
                   Age 60 to 64                            .1297      .1263
                   Female                                  .5776      .5595
                   Male                                    .4224      .4405
                   Heart Disease                           .3388      .3146
                   Diabetes                                .1979      .2061
                   HIV/AIDS                              .009941    .008996
                   Cancer                                 .05182     .04958
                   Rheumatoid Arthritis                   .03555      .0369
                   Obesity                                .02802     .02873
                   Substance Use                          .05242     .05091
                   Mental Illness                          .2121      .2132
                   N recipients Jan 2004                   6,092      8,710
                   N recipients Dec 2010                   7,191     11,548
                   N pre-period recipient months         234,355    339,409
                   N post-period recipient months        315,790    503,044

     Note: Table shows summary statistics for border zipcodes in control and treatment coun-
ties. For our analysis of zipcodes we classify zipcodes within the control and treatment counties
into border and not border zipcodes. Border zipcodes are zipcodes in control counties within
25 miles of a treatment zipcode and zipcodes in treatment counties within 25 miles of a con-
trol zipcode. Not border zipcodes are all the other zipcodes in control and treatment counties.
Distance is measured as great-circle distance calculated using the Haversine formula based on
internal points in zipcodes.




                                               24
                                                    Appendix Table B2: Main Outcomes (Border Zipcodes)
                      (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)      (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)       (13)      (14)      (15)      (16)
                            Log Realized Spending                       Log Inpatient Spending                         Log Rx Spending                    Log Realized Outpatient Spending
 Treatment          0.087∗∗              0.110∗∗              -0.070∗∗∗                 -0.036             0.179∗∗∗             0.192∗∗∗                0.068              0.133∗∗
 × Post             (0.035)               (0.052)              (0.026)                 (0.023)              (0.038)              (0.058)               (0.046)             (0.061)

 Treatment                      0.036                0.069                -0.062∗∗               -0.028               0.130∗∗∗              0.162∗∗∗              -0.016               0.042
 × Post                        (0.034)              (0.046)                (0.026)               (0.021)               (0.036)               (0.056)             (0.048)              (0.054)
 (2007-2008)

 Treatment                     0.133∗∗∗             0.138∗∗               -0.072∗∗∗              -0.035               0.219∗∗∗              0.210∗∗∗             0.158∗∗∗             0.201∗∗∗
 × Post                         (0.047)             (0.067)                (0.027)               (0.028)               (0.053)               (0.070)              (0.058)              (0.072)
 (2009-2010)
 IV Coefficient     0.113∗∗∗   0.112∗∗    0.168∗∗   0.165∗∗   -0.090∗∗∗   -0.086∗∗∗    -0.055     -0.049   0.231∗∗∗   0.226∗∗∗   0.292∗∗∗   0.287∗∗∗    0.088     0.098     0.203∗∗   0.202∗∗
                     (0.042)   (0.044)    (0.079)   (0.081)    (0.032)     (0.028)    (0.034)    (0.031)    (0.046)    (0.049)    (0.091)    (0.095)   (0.056)   (0.060)    (0.095)   (0.096)
 Baseline Mean        5.99       5.99       5.99      5.99       .703        .703       .703       .703      4.298      4.298      4.298      4.298      4.76     4.76        4.76      4.76
 Individual Fixed       X         X                                X           X                               X          X                               X         X
 Effects
 Standard errors in parentheses
 ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01



Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for the main outcomes using only border zipcodes. For each
outcome, the first and third columns show estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled reduced form
specification in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable
specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second and fourth columns show reduced form and
instrumental variable estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. For more
details, see Section 4.2.
Online Appendix


C    Price Analysis

                                                  Appendix Figure C1: Prices Under FFS and MMC
                                      (a) MMC vs FFS Price (Unweighted)                                              (b) MMC vs FFS Price (Weighted)
                  8000




                                                                                                 8000
                           6000




                                                                                                          6000
           Median MMC Price




                                                                                          Median MMC Price
                 4000




                                                                                                4000
       2000




                                                                                      2000
                  0




                                                                                                 0
                                  0        2000    4000        6000    8000   10000                              0       2000    4000        6000      8000   10000
                                                    Median FFS Price                                                              Median FFS Price




                     (c) Distribution of MMC to FFS Price Ratio                                    (d) Distribution of MMC to FFS Price Ratio
               50




                                                                                              25
               40




                                                                                              20
             30




                                                                                           15
       Percent




                                                                                      Percent
               20




                                                                                              10
               10




                                                                                              5
               0




                                                                                              0




                                  0         2       4           6       8      10                                0          .5         1             1.5       2
                                                    Median Ratio                                                                  Median Ratio




Note: Figure shows how MMC and FFS prices compare in 2010, the final year in our data.
For each procedure that we observe both under fee-for-service (FFS) Medicaid and Medicaid
managed care (MMC), we compute the median price under FFS and under MMC. Panel (a)
shows an unweighted scatterplot of the median MMC price vs the median FFS price, censored
at $10,000 for readability. Panel (b) shows a weighted (by frequency under FFS) scatterplot
of the median MMC price vs the median FFS price, censored at $10,000 for readability. Panel
(c) shows a histogram of the distribution of the ratio of the median MMC price to the median
FFS price, censored at 10 for readability. Panel (d) shows a histogram of the distribution of the
ratio of the median MMC price to the median FFS price, censored at 2 for readability. For more
details, see Section 7.2.




                                                                                26
Online Appendix


          Appendix Figure C2: Distribution of Procedure-Specific Price Differences




              40
                                                         10th percentile: -.215
                                                         25th percentile: -.064
                                                             Median: .04
                                                         75th percentile: .177
                                                         90th percentile: .381
              30
           Percent
            2010
              0




                     -4         -2                0                2              4
                                          Price adjustment



Note: Figure shows the distribution of procedure specific price differences. We estimate Equa-
tion (4) on the sample of procedures that we observe both under fee-for-service (FFS) Medicaid
and Medicaid managed care, allowing the price difference to vary by procedure. We then plot
the distribution of the estimated price differences. For more details, see Section 7.2.




                                             27
Online Appendix


           Appendix Table C1: Per-Day Payments and Price Adjustment Coefficient
                                            (a) Per-Day Payments

                                             (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)
                                                                           Log        Log
                                        Realized        Realized
                                                                       Realized    Realized
                                          Cost           Cost
                                                                          Cost       Cost
                                          Per             Per
                                                                           Per        Per
                                          Day             Day
                                                                          Day        Day
                                        (Median)        (Mean)
                                                                       (Median)    (Mean)
                Treatment × Post         53.529∗∗∗     72.112∗∗∗        0.170∗∗∗   0.208∗∗∗
                                          (4.969)       (6.023)          (0.015)    (0.015)
                IV Coefficient           73.353∗∗∗     98.818∗∗∗        0.232∗∗∗   0.285∗∗∗
                                          (6.604)       (8.377)          (0.016)    (0.015)
                Baseline Mean             179.622       179.622           4.78       4.78
                Standard errors in parentheses
                ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                      (b) Price Adjustment Coefficient

                                                                      (1)
                                                                      Log
                                                                   Medicaid
                                                                   Payment
                                Medicaid Managed Care              0.084∗∗∗
                                                                    (0.000)
                                Standard errors in parentheses
                                ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




Note: Panel (a) shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for per-day outpatient
spending. The first row shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the
pooled version of the reduced form specification in Equation (1) and the second row shows
estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental variable
specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. We control for service area by
year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section
4.2. Panel (b) shows the estimated difference in log Medicaid payments between Medicaid
managed care and fee-for-service Medicaid. The results are from estimating Equation (4). For
more details, see Section 7.2.




                                                       28
                                                                                                                                                              Online Appendix
                                          Appendix Table C2: Price-Adjusted Outpatient Spending Outcomes
                                                              (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)                (5)                   (6)
                                                                                                                      Adjusted               Adjusted
                                                           Realized     Realized     Adjusted      Adjusted
                                                                                                                  (No Heterogeneity)     (No Heterogeneity)
                                                            Cost         Cost         Cost          Cost
                                                                                                                         Cost                  Cost
                         Treatment × Post                 312.056∗∗∗                 250.863∗∗∗                        90.129∗∗
                                                           (38.158)                   (44.157)                         (39.189)
                         Treatment × Post (2007-2008)                   169.799∗∗∗                 121.225∗∗∗                                  -6.897
                                                                         (31.471)                   (37.113)                                  (31.876)
                         Treatment × Post (2009-2010)                   426.839∗∗∗                 353.162∗∗∗                                159.304∗∗∗
                                                                         (53.595)                   (58.401)                                  (55.494)
                         IV Coefficient                   488.510∗∗∗    479.858∗∗∗   392.715∗∗∗    384.017∗∗∗          141.093∗∗             131.628∗∗
                                                           (56.500)      (60.172)     (64.262)      (65.891)            (58.343)              (62.858)
                         Baseline Mean                     1342.537      1342.537     1339.75       1339.75            1337.574               1337.574
                         Individual Fixed Effects             X             X            X             X                   X                      X

                                                                  (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)               (5)                    (6)
                                                                                                                       Log                    Log
                                                               Log         Log         Log          Log
                                                                                                                    Adjusted               Adjusted
                                                             Realized    Realized    Adjusted     Adjusted
                                                                                                                (No Heterogeneity)     (No Heterogeneity)
                                                              Cost        Cost        Cost         Cost
                                                                                                                      Cost                   Cost
                           Treatment × Post                    0.027                  -0.008                         -0.014
                                                              (0.042)                 (0.041)                        (0.041)

                                                                                                  -0.083∗∗                                  -0.089∗∗
29




                           Treatment × Post (2007-2008)                   -0.054
                                                                          (0.040)                  (0.040)                                   (0.039)

                           Treatment × Post (2009-2010)                  0.111∗∗                    0.070                                    0.064
                                                                         (0.051)                   (0.050)                                  (0.050)
                           IV Coefficient                      0.037      0.051       -0.010        0.003             -0.018                -0.004
                                                              (0.053)    (0.054)      (0.052)      (0.054)           (0.052)                (0.053)
                           Baseline Mean                       4.59        4.59        4.589        4.589             4.589                  4.589
                           Individual Fixed Effects              X          X            X            X                 X                      X
                           Standard errors in parentheses
                           ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01




     Note: Table shows reduced form and instrumental variable estimates for price-adjusted outpatient spending outcomes. For each
     outcome, the first column shows estimates of control-treatment differences from estimating the pooled version of the reduced
     form specification in Equation (1) and estimates of the impact of Medicaid managed care from estimating the instrumental vari-
     able specification in Equation (3), pooling over the entire post-period. The second column shows reduced form and instrumental
     variable estimates, when the post-period is broken into two separate periods, 2007-2008 and 2009-2010. We control for service
     area by year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. For more details, see Section 4.2.
Online Appendix


D         Medicaid and the Supplemental Security Income Program
The majority of adults with disabilities enrolled in Medicaid are eligible for Medicaid due to
their enrollment in the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program. The SSI program is one
of the largest welfare programs in the United States, providing monthly payments to more
than 8.2 million disabled or elderly beneficiaries in December 2017. Of these, 4.8 million were
adults with disabilities between the ages of 18 and 64, and the average monthly payment for
this group was $564.34 (Social Security Administration, 2018). For the non-elderly, eligibility
for SSI is based on medical criteria as well as income and asset tests. SSI has the same medical
eligibility criteria for adults as the Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) program, but
does not share SSDI’s work history requirements. Approximately one-third of SSI beneficiaries
are also enrolled in the SSDI program because they have sufficient prior work history for SSDI
but low enough income to quality for SSI as well.
    SSI beneficiaries are categorically eligible for Medicaid in most states, meaning that they
can enroll in Medicaid without having to apply separately.25 SSDI beneficiaries are categor-
ically eligible for Medicare, making those SSI beneficiaries who also qualify for SSDI dually
eligible for both Medicaid and Medicare. In Texas (as well as in most other states where pri-
vate provision has been rolled out to adults with disabilities), dually eligible beneficiaries were
excluded from the shift to private managed care plans. Thus, our analysis focuses on the two-
thirds of SSI beneficiaries who were not also eligible for SSDI.
    Cash benefit payments for disabled SSI beneficiaries quadrupled between 1990 ($12.2 bil-
lion) and 2017 ($48.2 billion) (Social Security Administration, 2018); however, these expendi-
tures are dwarfed by Medicaid expenditures for this population— $187 billion in 2014 (Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2014b). Adults with disabilities are the most expensive group in Medicaid,
with per capita spending equal to $16,859 in 2014, almost five times higher than per capita
spending for adults without disabilities ($3,278) (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2014c). One rea-
son for this higher spending profile is that SSI beneficiaries disproportionately qualify for the
program due to mental disorders: 57.4% of SSI beneficiaries qualified for SSI due to a mental
disorder, with intellectual disabilities (19% of beneficiaries who qualify due to a mental disor-
der) being the largest sub-category, followed by mood disorders (16%), and schizophrenic and
other psychotic disorders (8.9%). After mental disorders, the next largest categories are mus-
culoskeletal disabilities (13%) and nervous system disabilities (7.7%) (Duggan, Kearney and
Rennane, 2015). Thus, this population differs greatly from the average non-disabled Medicaid
beneficiary and even from the typical SSDI beneficiary, in its high prevalence of mental illness,
indicating a high level of need for mental healthcare. Also contributing to high costs is the fact
that individuals in this population suffer from multiple serious health problems. This suggests
that (1) the tools of managed care may be particularly effective for this group and (2) strict ra-
tioning in public FFS Medicaid programs (such as Texas’s three drug cap) is likely to be binding
for this group and could potentially have detrimental (and observable) health effects.




  25 10states have stricter criteria, while 7 states require a separate application but have no additional criteria. In
Texas, Medicaid eligibility is automatic for SSI beneficiaries


                                                          30
Online Appendix


E    Price Variation Across Managed Care Plan Carriers
The Texas outpatient data includes information on actual cost amounts for both the public and
the private programs. Specifically, the data contains the negotiated amounts actually paid to
providers by the public or private plans at the claim-line level. These actual provider payment
amounts are available for all public Medicaid claims in both states, as well as for about 80% of
all private Medicaid plan claims in Texas. In this section, we examine the variation in the ob-
served rates across the four carriers (EverCare, Amerigroup, Molina, and Superior HealthPlan)
that the state contracted with in 2009 and 2010, the years during which Medicaid managed care
was already rolled out and for which we have a crosswalk from plan identifiers in the data to
carrier names.
    We examine the sample of outpatient managed care claims for 2009 and 2010 for which the
payment from plans to providers is available, which comprises 80% of managed care claims.
Furthermore, we restrict to the 99.9% of claims that are associated with a plan and carrier that
we observe as a plan contracted by the state of Texas in the actuarial reports. To decrease
noise in prices, we exclude claims that have a quantity of service provided different from 1 and
claims that have a procedure modifier code. On this final sample of outpatient managed care
claims, we estimate the following regression:
                                        
                             log pichpt = γc + δh + ψ p + τt + ε ichpt                        (5)

where i indexes individuals, c indexes carriers, h indexes providers, p indexes procedures, and
t indexes time; γc is a set of carrier fixed effects, δh is a set of provider fixed effects, ψ p is a set
of procedure fixed effects, and τt is a set of year fixed effects. We define procedures as unique
combinations of procedure codes and place of service codes. We cluster standard errors at
the carrier level. Figure E1 shows the estimated carrier fixed effects. Relative to the omitted
carrier, Evercare, Amerigroup has on average 19% lower prices, Molina has on average 9%
lower prices, and Superior has on average 4% higher prices, though these latter two differences
are not statistically significant.




                                                   31
Online Appendix


             Appendix Figure E1: Distribution of Estimated Carrier Fixed Effects


                        Evercare




                      Amerigroup




                          Molina




                        Superior



                                   -.4     -.2            0            .2




Note: Figure shows the distribution of estimated carrier fixed effects from estimating Equation
(5). Standard errors are clustered at the carrier level.




                                                 32
