                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE CHOICE OF MONETARY INSTRUMENT
                      IN TWO INTERDEPENDENT ECONOMIES
                             UNDER UNCERTAINTY




                           Stephen J. Turnovsky
                               Vasco d'Orey




                          Working Paper No. 2604




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June 1988




The reseatch supported here is part of the NBER's researth program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed sre those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #2604
                                                    June 1988




              THE CHOICE OF MONETARY fl"STRLMNTIN TWO
            INTERDEPENDENT ECONOS LNDER LNCERTAINTY




                                            Abstract

    This paper analyzes the choice of monetary instrument in      a stochastic two country setting
where each country's set of monetary policy instruments includes both the money supply and the
interest rate, It shows how the optimal choice of instrument is determined in two stages. First, for
each pair, the minimum welfare cost for each economy is determined. This defines a pair of payoff

matrices and the second stage involves determining the Nash equilibrium for this bimatrix game.
In our illustrative example for the alternative shocks considered, a dominant Nash equilibriumis

always obtained.




  Stephen J. Turnovsky                              Vasco d'Orey
  Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
  University of Washington                          Universidade Nova de Lisboa
  301 Savery Hall                                   Lisbon, Portugal
  Seattle, WA 98195
   (206)   545-8028
                                          1.   INTRODtCTION
   The question of the optimal choice of monetary instrument was First introced nto:ae
macrostabilization literature by Poole (1970) and has been extensively discussed since, The ey
conclusioh is   that in a   world   of uncertainty, the superiority of the   money stock or Interest rate

as the operating target depends upon the sources of the stochastic disturbances impnging on the

economy.
    A crucial assumption underlying this literature is the presence of only a single policy maker.

Poole's                 and much of the derivative work, deals with a closed economy, in which
        original analysis,
this assumption is the obvious one.        Likewise, the international extensions are typically to small
                                                                       of his actions on the rest
open economies, in which the policy maker can ignore the repercussions
of the world. However, much of the recent work in international monetary policy stresses the in-

creasing interdependence between econorrues and policy making. Disturbances and policy actions
occurring in one country exert influences abroad, thereby inducing policy reactions. which in turn
feed back on    the first economy. Monetary       policy therefore involves important strategic consid-

erations. Beginning with early work by Hamada (1976), more recent authors such as Carizoneri
and Gray (1985) and others have analyzed strategic monetary policy under alternative behavioral

assumptions.
     The present paper analyzes the choice of monetary instrument in a stochastic two—country
setting. As will become evident, the nature of the monetary instrument in a two country envi-
ronment is of second order of dimensionality. Specifically, each country's set of policy instruments
includes both the money supply and the interest rate. The monetary instrument problem there-
fore involves assessing welfares in situations where the monetary authorities choose to set dl1erent

policy instruments, as well as in cases where the same instrument is selected. These various combi-
nations of instrument choice give rise to a pair of 2 x 2 payoff matrices in welfare costs and we treat
the monetary instrument problem as being to determine the equilibrium outcome to this bimatrix
game.




                                                       1
                             2. THE ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
        The analysis is based on   a two country stochastic   macroeconomic model, in wh:tb both

economies are subject      to real and nominal disturbances and expectations are rational         In   or
der to maximize analytical tractability, the simplest such model     is   used. SpeciOcally. we consider
two identical economies, each producing a common traded good and trading a single common bond.

Purchasing power parity (PPP) and uncovered interest parity are therefore assumed to hold. In
deviation form, the model is expressed by the following equations:


                                                 =P+E

                    Y +Y = d1( +Y)           -      -   ((P+1)    P]        0< d <1
                                                                            d2>0


                             Me—Pt=criYt—aJt+v               n>0,      cs5>0
                            M—P=1Y —nI±v

                                           =J      ((E1) -

                                       Y =[P -e1(P)i+w.


                                      1? =        - (1(P± w
where

Y   =   Real output in logarithms, measured as a deviation about its natural rate level,

P = price of domestic output, expressed in logarithms,
E = exchange rate (measured in terms of units of domestic currency per unit of foreign currency),
        expressed in logarithms,
I=      nominal interest rate, expressed in natural units,

M   =   nominal money supply, expressed in logarithms.

                                                    2
     = expectation, conditioned on information at time t,

Ut   = stochastic disturbance in the world demand for output.

vt = stochastic disturbance in the demand for money.
     = stochastic disturbance in supply.
 Domestic variables are unstarred; foreign variables are denoted with asterisks,

       Equation (1) describes purchasing power parity assumed to hold between domestic and foreign
 goods. Equation (2) describesequilibriumin the world goods market, where worlddemand depends

 upon world output, the real interest rates in the two economies, and the stochastic disturbance
 in demand, The money market equilibrium conditions n the two countries are standard and
 described by (3) and (3') respectively. The perfect substitutability between domest,c and foreign
 bonds is described by the interest parity condition (4). Finally, equations 5} and (5') describe

 outputs in the two economies in terms of standard Lucas 5UPiY functions: the dev:ation n output
 from its natural rate is postulated to be a positive function of the unanticipated movement in
 the price of output, together with the stochastic disturbance in supply. The stochastic variables,

 Ut,V,Wt,W, are assumed to be independently distributed with zero means and finite variances,
 denoted by         etc. If, in addition, as in fact turns out to be the case, the optimal choices of
 policy instruments are fixed over time, then, as is well known, the rational expectations solution to
 the system (1)     (5) implies that expectations for all future periods are constant, With the system
 specified in deviation form, this constant is zero, so that


                                            = ((P÷1) = e,(E,) = 0.                                    (6)

     Equations (1) - (6) describe the structureof the two economies. The policy makers in these
 economies are assumed to take as benchmarks, the level of output in a frictonless economy, one

 where wages and prices are fully flexible and the labor market clears, As is shown in the Appendix,

 assuming that labor is immobile internationally, the output in such an economy, responds only to
 its own SUPPlY shocks. In terms of the present notation this adjustment can be expressed as


                                =kw —kw                   kw (1+n)       ci                           (7)
                                                            1+ n+-i
 where    n is the elasticity of supply of labor. The level of output fluctuates less than proportionately
                                                      3
with the supply disturbance. Thus the respective objective functions of the two policy makers are
taken to be to minimize?


                                            fl,        E(Y,

                                                                                                               (8')

    These objective functions are assumed to be optimized through monetary policy. whioh we
assum.e can be conducted either by controlling          the money supplies or       by eetting the interest rates.4

Our concern is to compare the alternativeapproaches and to determine the cature of the "mcnetary
instrument" prnblem confronting policy makers within a strategic cotsxt. To do this requires us
to obtain alternative reduced form solutions,appropriate for each chcseo combinationof mcretary
instruments.


A. Reduced Ferns Under Money Supply Instruments
    When both policy makers use the nominal money supply as their respective monetary instru-

ments, the solutions for Yt and 7,7   are



                     Y = a(M          Vt)         o(M: — ufl + a,,u5         atv         Cw                     (9)




                    37 = <(M,     —
                                      e,)+ a0(M           —
                                                              or) + a,u4 + Cia,          OnWi                  (9')

where


                _i'rds
               a=l—+1J>O;    ,
                                 av=Lr_iJco
                                   irdz
                                      1                         a                        1




                    = 2a1
                       2DM
                          a = +7 > : = +
                              > o,       <        (1    a2)a,
                                                                    o,
                                                                               (1    Q2)a;
                                                                                     7



                            DM       d2J1   +     z + a57] + a3(1        —
                                                                             d,) >0.
                                                          4
S. Reduced Form Under Intereat Rate Instrument

    When the nominal interest rates are the policy instruments used by the pocy maxers. :he

money market equations (3) and (3') become irrelevant and the solutions for Y, and Y, become




                                 = b1], + bI + b,,u + bWt b,w   -                               (IC)




                           Y,.   = br + b1I -4-       -- bWt --- bw:                            (10')



where



                           =             1)   <0;   b=      —
                                                                    - >0
                        b=—2—>0      b=—>0-                 b    =_L<0
                           2D1
                                d1) + d2 > 0
                              —




C. Reduced Form Under Asymmetric Choice of Instruments

    With respect to asymmetric instrument       choice, it suffices  to consider the case where the
domestic monetary authority chooses the money stock as          the policy variable while the foreign

monetary authority sets the interest rate. The reverse pairing of instruments is analogous. The
solutions for Y and Y, now become:



                           = c,,(M, — v,) + cI + cut +                + c,w                      (11)




                                                                                                (11')
where



                = 2[2d2 +-i(1 — d)i >0 C = —2(1            —
                                                               d) >0
              c=-——>0;          c='   (1   hc    >0; c=—--'<0
                      '7

                =     2(_ d1) <0; e = —2[2d2(l            02    o) + o2(1     —
                                                                                  d1)]   <0

                           '7
                                      >0;    e=                <0; e=——->u



    Space   limitationspreclude   a detalled discussion of these reduced formc. which in any event are
straightfoard. However,severalobservationsare worth making. First, the impacts of exogenous
shocks on the two economies depend upon the chosen monetary policy choice, Secondly, in the

two cases of identical instrument choice, the symmetryof the underlying economies is re6ected in

the symmetry of the reduced form solutions. The cross country effects of policy on outputs are
negative. This is the "negative transmission" mechanism dating back to Mundell (1963) and which
under PPP is at its most potent. Essentially, a monetary expansion abroad say. leads to a nominal
depreciation of the foreign currency, ic, and appreciation of the domestic currency. This in turn
leads to a decline in the domestic price level, as PFP is restored, leeding to a reduction in domestic
output. Finally, with asymmetric choice of instruments, this symmetry is lost.


                 3.   DETERMrATION OF STRATEGIC EQUILIBRIA
     We now determinethe strategic equilibriumunder alternative assumptions regarding the choice

of monetary   policy instrument. We do so under the assumption of Cournot behavior, in which
each policy maker takes the behavior of his rival as given, and we allow for both the money supply
and the interest rate to serve as (alternative) policy instruments. Rather than discussing each case
in turn, the general approach is outlined.

    First, substitute for Y5 and Y from the reduced forms and for the frictionless output levels
      from (7) into the welfare functions (8), (8'). Taking expected values, in general these are
seen to be quadratic functions of the form

                                                   6
                                              =   (i,i,o)                                               (12)




                                              = (i,i,o')                                                (12')

where   u denotes the vector of variances and covariances of the stochasticdisturbances, Henceforth
time subscripts are dropped and    i,i, index the choice of policy instruments in the domestic and
foreign economies, respectively. Specifically,    i = M, I, and i = M, 1, giving rise to the four
possible combinations of instrument choice.
      The optimality conditionsare obtained by minimizing (12) with respect to i, (12') with respect
to   i Under the assumption of Cournot behavior, this yields


                                           äi        'ai•'                                              r13

Given the quadratic welfare functions, these equations are linear in the policy instruments and

define each country's reaction function, the slopes of which depend upon the policy choice. In a1

cases, since the random variables are independently distributed over time, the optimum calls for

setting = 1 = O(i = M,I;i = M',1). Substituting these values back into (12), (12') yields the
minimized welfare costs under the different regimes.


                       4. CHOICE OF MONETARY INSTRUMENT
      Table 1 summarizesthe minimized welfarecosts under the alternative instrument combinations
in the form of a 2 x 2 payoff matrix for each country. The three parts of this table summarize the
effects of: (i) monetary; (ii) real demand; and (iii) supply disturbances, each taken in turn. In all

cases unit variances are assumed. The optimal choice of monetary instrument is defined to be the
Nash equilibrium to this bimatrix game, in the sense that neither policy maker has an incentive
to switch unilaterally from this point.5 The three disturbances shall be discussed in turn.


A. Monetary Disturbances
       Consider first domestic monetary disturbances.   it is clear from A(i)   of the table   that   as long

as the domestic monetary authority controls the domestic interest, thereby allowing the domestic
                                                    7
money supply      to absorb      fully tbe domestic monetary shock, output      at    home and abroad will be

stabilized perfectly, irrespective of the choice of monetary instrument abroad. Thos both the
/— M       and   the I   —   I   instrument combinations represent Nash equilibria. Moreover, both are
admissible in the sense that neither is dominated by the other. in terms of welfare costs.

       With a perfectly correlated worldwide monetary disturbance, it            is   clear that the   I— P   in-

strument oombination is a Nash equilibrium, since both countries allow their respective money
supplies to absorb their monetary shocks, thereby perfectly insulating the output levels in the two
economies. This is a direct analogue of Poole. It is clear that neither the M —               P combination nor
the P — M combination can be a Nash equilibrium, since in either osse the policy noaker control-
lIng the money supply can be made better off by switching to setting the interest rate. But it ie
interesting to note that it       is   possible for the M —   M combmation to be a Ne3h equiiihrium. This
will   be so if and only if dr < -y(  d1)D. While for plausible parameter values this condition
                                             —


is   unlikely to be met, it cannot he ruled out (e.g. if d2 = 0). Basicaily, the negative interna-
tional transmission of monetary shocks means that the negative effects of domestic money demand
shocks on domestic output are offset             to some degree by the positive effects   of the corresponding

movements in the foreign disturbance. Under certain conditions these may be sufficiently large to

eliminate the incentive for either policy maker to switch unilaterally to setting the interest rate.
in this case, when M — M is a Nash equilibrium, it is generally               inferior   to   both policy makers

setting their respective interest rates. However, without cooperation,neither policy maker has the
incentive to make this switch.



B. Real Demand Disturbances


       Thesears straightforward. Directly evsluating the terms appearing in the matrix, we can
establish b, > c; Ou <       Thisimplies that the only Nash equilibrium is the M — M policy
combination. For any other policy combination the policy maker setting the interest rate would
have an incentive to switch unilaterally to setting the money supply. The intuition is the same as
in Poole. By controlling the money supply, the monetary authority allows some of the fluctuations
in demand to be borne by the interest rate, thereby reducing the fluctuations in output.
                                                           S
 C. Supply Dt.turbances

       Supply disturbances give rise to fluctuations in the frictionlesslevel of output and we therefore
 mea.sure deviations in output about    kw,kw, where k =             < I. Turning first to domestic
             we can showthat
 disturbances,                   e, a,2;b,2 >
                                    >                 c. It therefore follows that setting its money
supply dominates setting the interest rate insofar as the foreign economy is concerned. Intuitively,
a positive shock in w5 raises Y, lowers P and hence foreign output        Y" If the foreign monetary
authority pegs the money supply some of the fluctuations in the world output market are borne
                                            t
by the interest rate .1 and less by Y; if pegs        I
                                                 the fluctuations are more fully borne by Y
   Given that the foreign economy chooses to set its money stock, the optimal choice in the
domestic economy depends upon whether



                                    (a—e,)(a+e,—2k)               0.                               (14)

In   fact, either inequality in (14) may hold, dependingupon parameter values. For example, suppose
   = .75,d .5,a = 1,cs = .5,' = 1 are taken as reasonable values
                                                                     implying a.,,, = .573,e, =
 807. In this case, the M — M" combination is chosen if and only if k < .69, i.e., if and only if
the elasticity of supply of labor n < 1.23; otherwise, the domestic authorities choose to set the
interest rate, in which case the Nash equilibrium is the I — M policy combination. The         tokey
the choice here is which policy regime "tracks" the frictionless output level better. With n
                                                                                                  large,
the frictionless output is more sensitive to domestic supply shocks. For this
                                                                                   particular parameter
set this is more closely followed by setting I, but this is not true in all cases.

    Finally, C(ii) summarizes the welfare costs for worldwide supply disturbances. In this case one
can establish that both the M—M and the I—I" policy combinations are Nash
                                                                                 equilibria in that
starting from either, neither policy maker has an incentive to deviate unilaterally. However, one
of the two equilibria can always be shown to be superior. Which one it is, depends
                                                                                   critically upon
parameter values. For the above set, M — M is superior for n < .538, while I — dominates f
for n > .538. Since both policy makers have symmetric welfare costs in this
                                                                                case, there is no
potential conflict in the choice of these two Nash equilibria. But it is possible for the inferior
Nash equilibriumto be chosen and for the policy makers to be unable to coordinate their actions
to attain the dominant outcome. In this case, some form of communication between the
                                                                                                policy

                                                  9
                                                  the dominant Nash equhbrtum to be seiected.
makers, as suggested by Farrell (1987) may induce


                                      5. CONCLUSIONS
                                                                             in two interdependent
    We have shown    exactly how the optimai choice of monetary instrument
                                                                                     the minimized
economies is   determined in two stages First, for each pair of policy instruments,
                                                                            matrices and the second
welfare costs for each economy are determined. This definesa pair of payoff
                                                      of instruments for this bimatrix game.
stage involves determining the Nash equilibriumpair
                                                               model of two symmetric economies.
     To illustrate the procedure we have chosen the simplest

In all cases a dominant Nash equilibrium has been
                                                    obtained But it is possible, particularly with
                                                                to exist. In such cases there will
asymmetric economies, for no equilibrium in pure strategies
always  he a solution in mixed strategies. This will involve each policy maker switching between
the two instruments with probabilities determined by the game. It is also pcasibie
                                                                                          for multiple

                                                                   to the welfares for the two agents.
Nash equilibria to exist in which there are conflicts with respect
                                                                                       of
       case the outcome may not be an equilibriumone unless there is some form cooperation.
 In this
 These are interesting issues and merit further consideration.




                                                   10
                                                APPENDIX
                         DERIVATION OF EQUATION (7) OF TEXT


    The derivations for the domestic and foreign economies          -e analogous   and we shall focos on

the former. Suppose that output       is specified by   the Cobb—Douglas production fun :zon, exDressed

logarithmicallyby


                                                                                                     Al,

where      s a productivity shock and      N1   denotes the logarithm of employment The demand for

labor under frictionlessconditions,     N    is determmed by the marginal prodoct condton


                                                                                                     1A2'

where W denotes      the logarithm of the nominal wage rate, while the supply        of labor.   N' under
similar conditions is


                                                                                                     (A.3)


Assuming     that labor is immobile internationally,labor market clearance in the domestic economy,
characteristic of the frictionlees economy, implies


                               Nd = N
                                    —. =
                                                —

                                                    = nln(1—8) +
                                                         1+nB
                                                                    —  vs
                                                                     1+nG

so that output in the frictionlesa economy is


                                  —
                                         n(1—9)ln(I—G)            1+n
                                                1+nU
                                                                        the analysis, can be derived
     Now, the aggregate supply function (5) being assumed throughout
                                                                                   are assumed to be
 from the production function (A.1) if wages, instead of being perfectly flexible,
 determined by   a one period contract, at a level such that the domestic labor market is expected to
 clear.   The argument, familiar for a small open economy, applies directly to a large open economy
                     -                                   11
in which labor is immobile internationally, as   is being assumed   in this case   and w1 appearing

in (5) are related to 8 and   e appearing in (Al) by

                                            1—9
                                                       Wtw-j.                                 (AS)

Substituting for 9 and e from (A.5) into (A.4), and carrying Out the same procedure for the foreign
economy, the adjustments in the domestic and foreign frictionlesseconomies expressed in deviation
form are respectively



                                           'kw,         k11                                   (A.6)

which is (7) of the text.




                                                  12
                                            Table
                                        \ clfare Losses



          Domestic
                       A. (i) Domcstic Moncary Dsturbancc
                     Economy
                                                                 [    =

                                                                 Feign Fcnom
                 ti'                                                      t!       f

           M   T0
            IOO                                                  1        0        0:
                                1—M', I—1 are   ash eçuiiibria
               A. (ii) Worldwide MonetaryDisturbance      [a =        =        11



          Domestic Economy                                       Foreign Economy
                                                                                       1'
               (a, + a)2                                             4,   + a,)2

                                                            I     h—;-
I—! is a Nash equilibriurn.     M—M is a Nash equilibrium if and only if d2 <-i(l           —



                           B.   Output DemandDisturbance   [     =   1]

          Domestic Economy
                4f*        J
                                                                 Foreign Economy
                                                                          %f       r
            1T                    M—W is Nash Equilibrium
                                                                  I_
                    C. (i) Domcctic Supply   Disturmcc       =       11



     Domestic Economy                                    Forcin Eouorn

?!
        iI1

     (a, —k)         (c, k)2
                                                                 ET
                                                                 j
     (e - k )2 (b - k )2                                 i                    b2
         M—M        or i—M is Nash equilibrium according to whether
              (a,   —
                      e)(a + — 2k) 0; either case is possible.
        C. (ii) Worldwide Supply Disturbance      [o =       =            =   1



     Domestic Economy                                    Foreign Economy




:: :::::             :::   :E::                   ______
                           M—M, 1—!' are Nash equilibria
                                          FOOTNOTES


       We are grateful to Matthew Canzoneri and the referee for their suggestions.

    tThis is similar to Hamada's (1979) approach to deterrn.ning.nernalional monetary arraoge-
ments as a two—stage game. In the first stage the rules are set; ifl the second, the pOcies are
determined for the chosen set of rules.

      2For examples   of such models see some of the papers in Bhandari (l985.
      3The objective functions (8), (8') are well known to have desirabie welfare properties: see e.g
A.izenrnan and Frenkel (1985)

     4Our analysis follows the usual monetary instrument terature by restrIcting the choe oZ
alternative monetary instruments to the money stock and the interest rate. This restrict.on IS
somewhat arbitrary, since the monetary authorities can choose to control other aggregates as weli.
There are also other ways of conducting monetary policy such as adustng the money stock to

peg the price Level. While this would be optimal in the face of aggregate demand shocks u anc
monetary shocks v,v, it would be an inappropriate policy for dealing with supply shocks. In any
                                                                    extended range of monetary
event, the approach of this paper can be adapted to analyzing an
policy instruments.

      tOne minor point is the familiar observation that under rational expectations, pegg1ng the
interest rate leads to an indeterminate mean price level, This is not serious, since the analysis
focuses on deviations about equilibrium. Furthermore, the indeterminacy can be resolved by
simultaneously setting a corresponding mean level for the money supply
      6Fora discussion of Nash equilibrium in a bimatrix game see e.g. Basar and Olsder (l982.
Frequently, a game may have more than one such equilibrium. In such cases
                                                                            a Nash equilibrium is
said to be admissible if it is not dominated by some other equilibrium which yields higher payoffs
 to both agents.   It is also possible for the bimatrix game to admit more than one admissible   Nash
                                                                   ill—defined and may involve
 equilibrium, in which case the equilibrium outcome becomes rather
 conflicts; see Baser and Olader for further discussion.
                                                                                                and
       7These values are typical of those used in numerical simulation studies; see e.g. Miller
 Salmon (1985), Oudiz and Sacha (1985), Turnovaky and d'Orey (1986).
8See e.g. Turnovsky (1984) for   the derivation in the   ce of a small open economy.
                                        REFERENCES


Aizenman, J. and J.A. Frenkel, 1985, "Optimal Wage Indexaton, Foreign Exchange intervention,
    and Monetary Policy," American Economic Review 75, 402-423.

Basar, Tamer and Geert Olader, 1983, Dnamic Noncooperative Game Theory, Academic Press
Bhandari, Jagdeep S. (ed), 1985, Eachange Rate Management Under Uncertainty, MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA.
Canzoneri, Matthew and Jo Anna Gray 1985. "Monetary Pol:cy Games and the Conseqoerices of
   Noncooperative Behavior," Jnternational Economic Review 26. 547—564.
Farrell, J. 1987, "Cheap Talk, Coordination, and Entry" Rand Journal of Economics 14, 34—35.
Hamada, Koichi, 1978, "A Strategic Analysis of Monotary 1nterdepenience," Journal of P L;lico
    Economy 84,   677—700. Miller,   Marcus H. and Mark Salmon, 1985. "Policy CoorJnati.n and

    Dynamic Games," in W.H. Bolter and R.C Marston (eds ), International Economic Policy
    Coordination,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Mundell, Robert A., 1983, 'Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fixed and Flexbis
   Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science 29, 475—487.
Oudiz, Gilles and Jeffrey Sachs, 1985, "International Policy Coordination in Dynamic Macroe-
   conomic Models," in W.H. Buiter and R.C. Marston (eds.), International Economic Policy

    Coordination, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K.
Poole, William, 1970, "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Single Stochastic
     Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics84, 197—216.

Turnovsky, S.J., 1984, "Exchange Market Intervention Under Alternative Forma of Exogenous
     Disturbances," Journal of International Economics 17,   279—297.

Turnovsky, S.J. and Vasco d'Orey, 1986, "Monetary Policies in Interdependent Economies wtn
     Stochastic Disturbances: A Strategic Approach," Economic Journal 96, 696—721.
