NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN ANALYSIS OF POSTWAR U.S. CONSUMPTION
AND SAVING: Part I
The Model and Aggregation

Michael J. Soskin
Lawrence J. Lau

Working Paper No. 2605

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1988

We would like to thank Yoon-Je Cho, Dong-Ik Lee, Marc Robinson, and especially
Torn Prusa for valuable research assistance, and the National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc. , and the Stanford University Center For Economic
Policy Research for financial support. We alone are responsible for any
errors. The research supported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the national Bureau of Economic Research.

NEER Working Paper 26O5
June 1988

ABSTRACT

A new empirical analysis of aggregate United States consumption and

saving for the period 1947-80 is presented. The model is based on the
theory of exact aggregation. It recognizes explicitly that households with
different characteristics may be heterogeneous in their behavior and that
aggregate behavior may depend on the changing composition of households by
characteristics and therefore may not be adequately portrayed by a

representative consumer, but otherwise it imposes minimal assumptions on

household behavior. The model integrates longitudinal and cross-sectional
microeconomic data on household characteristics with the traditional

aggregate time-series data. Various hypotheses on consumption such as age
independence, proportionality to wealth, and price independence, are tested

and rejected. Strong evidence of relative price effects and a systematic
variation of aggregate consumption with changing age distribution of wealth

in the economy is found. Especially important is the substantial estimated
difference in the shares of wealth consumed between households headed by

persons born prior to and those born after 1939. One important lesson from
this study is that modeling the aggregate U.S. economy as a representative
consumer may give rise to misleading results.

Michael J Bos1cin

M.BER.
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
Stanford, CA 94305
(415) 326-7160

Lawrence J. Lau
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

1.

Introduction

The consumption and saving behavior of an economy reveals much about
the nature of its society, since it reflects its values, institutions,

incentives, and demographics. However, a large number of conceptual and
empirical issues cloud analyses and interpretations of postwar U.S.

consumption and saving. It is by now well known that, as conventionally
measured, the postwar U.S. saving rate is low by international standards,

and that it has fallen since the 1950s and 1960s. Simultaneously, the
average annual rate of growth in real consumption rose from 2.74% in the

period 1950-1962 to 3.45% in the period 1963-80, an increase of 25%. Had
consumption continued growing at its slower early postwar pace, annual real
consumption would have been at least 10% less by 1980 than in fact occurred.
The difference amounts to approximately 8% of GNP (or approximately double

the annual federal budget deficit). The cumulative value of this extra
consumption from 1963 to 1980 rivals the value of output lost in all postwar

recessions combined. What were the proximate causes of these changes?
Among the more interesting and important empirical questions are the
extent to which changes in relative prices (e.g., real after-tax rates of

return to saving) and demographics (as reflected by the shares of wealth
held by households headed by persons of different ages and vintages) affect

aggregate consumption. These issues are important as an explanation of
recent economic history, and possibly as a guide to understanding the
factors that may affect the future course of consumption and saving and the

implications of alternative economic policies. The effects of public debt
and Social Security on the level of private saving, the "interest
elasticity" of saving, and hence the optimal tax treatment of saving, are

1

not only current policy issues but have been the subject of much analytical
and empirical research in the past decade.

Since the aggregate saving rate is the net result of adding the saving done
by all households doing positive saving and subtracting the dissaving of all
households dissaving, analyses of aggregate consumption and saving must also
come to grips with the problem of aggregation to the extent that the households
are heterogeneous (see Corman (1953), Lau (1982), and Jorgenson, Lau, and
Stoker (1980, 1982)).

Much recent research on saving behavior has focused on tests of the leading
models of saving behavior such as the lifecycle hypothesis (LCH) or the

intergenerational altruism model (ICA) also known as the Ricardian equivalence

hypothesis. This is not our purpose here. Rather, it is to identify analyze
and account for empirical regularities, if any, in. the postwar consumption and

saving behavior of U.S. households. We do this by merging longitudinal and
cross-sectional microeconomic data on various household characteristics, such as
age cross-tabulated by income (or wealth), with aggregate time-series data such
as those on consumption, income, wealth, prices, wage rates and interest rates.

In the process, we also develop measures of and trends in aggregate household
wealth and its composition, including the shares of wealth held by households

headed by persons of different ages. We then analyze the share of aggregate
wealth consumed in current purchases of goods and services and also of

leisure.1 We do this in a model that imposes minimal behavioral assumptions
on the households. We maintain that household budget constraints are
identically satisfied and households have "no money illusion", but we do not
-

1. Leisure per person per year is measured as the difference between the maximum of
hours available, defined to be 4400 hours per year, and the actual number of
hours worked.

2

assume utility maximization on the part of the households, nor any functional
restrictions on the structure of household demands, such as inter- and/or intratemporal separability (which have been prevalent in the tests of the lifecycle
and intergenerational altruism models)

Instead, we ask the straightforward questions: Can the integration of
these longitudinal and cross-sectional microeconoinic data with the aggregate

time series data, subject to our minimal behavioral restrictions and "exact
aggregation" conditions, provide an adequate empirical model of postwar U.S.

consumption and saving? And if so, can the model be used to assess the
importance of various factors affecting aggregate consUmption and saving in

the postwar period and to account for the growth of aggregate consumption on

the basis of these factors? One might view this work as an integration of
traditional aggregate time series consumption function estimation and growth
accounting, but incorporating microeconomic data, paying attention to the
development of age-specific household balance sheets, and applying the

theory of exact aggregation.2 We test for the effects on aggregate
consumption of some potentially important factors such as the age
distribution of wealth, relative prices, and vintage.3

2. We also include leisure, which is generally omitted from most studies of
aggregate consumption, in our study.
3. A cautious interpretation would be that our results provide us a good
explanation of the aggregate consumption and saving behavior and thus
represent a useful reconstruction of recent economic history. A less
cautious interpretation, the plausibility of which we leave to the reader,
is that the results can be given a structural interpretation which bears on
some of the issues raised above. While we are sacrificing some of the
advantages associated with assuming an imposed structure such as utility
maximization by a representative consumer with intertemporally additive
and stationary preferences, we gain substantial flexibility at the expense
of some added caution in interpreting the results.

3

The results themselves are striking: we find substantial age effects on
consumption and leisure, which suggest that policies which shift resources
among age groups are likely to affect aggregate consumption and saving; the
"interest elasticity' of aggregate saving4 is -0.5 in 1972 and 0.5 in 1980
with wealth held constant, but essentially zero in 1972 and 0.1 in 1980 when
one includes the Summers' effect, i.e. ,

the

revaluation of human wealth when

real after-tax rates of return change. We find a significant vintage
effect, i.e. ,

households headed by persons born since 1939 consume a much

larger fraction of their wealth than persons born prior to 1939 at the same

ag other things being equal. We also present formal tests of various
hypotheses concerning aggregate consumption and leisure: unitary wealth
elasticity; proportionality of expenditures to wealth; intertemporal
separability of household demand functions; and the absence of real interest

rate and relative price effects. All of these hypotheses, with the
exception of intertemporal separability, can be rejected at the 1-percent

level of significance. Each of these results is individually quite
interesting and important. Together, they supplement previous empirical
research and we believe add an important new insight to the understanding of
aggregate consumption and saving behavior in the postwar United States.

Our paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a brief review of
the recent literature on the determinants of aggregate consumption and saving.

4. The "interest elasticity" of saving varies considerably across age cohorts
and across households with different ratios of nonhuman to human wealth.
These elasticities are evaluated at the 1972 and 1980 values of the
independent variables respectively. See Section 4 below.

4

It is not meant to be exhaustive, but to enable the reader to place the novel
aspects of our research in perspective, with respect to both their strengths and

potential limitations. We discuss issues of aggregation, age effects, relative
price effects, estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and/or

interest elasticity of saving, etc. We find that various approaches have both
strengths and weaknesses, and that this is inherently true of virtually any

approach to analyzing the aggregate data. Our conclusion is that while our
approach is not free of its own limitations, it does add considerable novelty in
terms of the construction and treatment of the data and the specification of the
econometric model of aggregate time series consumption behavior.

Section 3 presents the basic structure, rationale, andmaintained
hypotheses of the model. We discuss in some detail the theory of exact
aggregation and our use of it.5 Also presented are the comparative static
effects on consumption, leisure and saving of changes in factors such as the

prices of consumption and leisure, wealth and real after-tax rate of

interest. A discussion of the limitations of the model, including its
partial equilibrium nature, is given. Readers not interested in the
technical details of the derivations may skip to Section 4.

Section 4 presents our empirical results. We begin with a brief
description of the data, which include aggregate data taken from relatively
traditional sources and our integration of various longitudinal and crosssectional age-specific individual household data with the aggregate data.

5. For a detailed discussion of the theory of exact aggregation, see Lau
(1988).

a

.We report the model specification, parameter estimates, and the fit of the

econometric results. In the aggregate, the model fits the data quite well

by the usual statistical criteria, We also discuss the results of the
statistical tests. We interpret the estimates of some important parameters,
such as the interest elasticity of saving, defined in various ways, and
for alternative values of other variables.

We also compare our formulations and results to other typical aggregate

time series results. This is important not only to clarify the nature of
our results, but also to facilitate the comparison of our results to those
of the more traditional approach which analyzes aggregate consumption as a
function of aggregate income and possibly nonhuman wealth, since we analyze
the shares of aggregate wealth consumed, where wealth includes human and
nonhuman wealth, as a function of aggregate wealth and other variables.
We also discuss the implications of the estimated age profile of

consumption and saving. It follows a pattern that is consistent with a weak
form of the "hump saving" theory of Harrod (1948) and the insight of the

lifecycle hypothesis that the propensity to consume varies with age. We
also highlight the vintage effect, in which households headed by persons
born since 1939 have a substantially higher consumption, and hence lower
saving, propensity than those born prior to 1939, other things being equal.

Among other implications, these results suggest that the typical
"representative consumer" models estimated on aggregate time-series data may

be quite misleading. We discuss the implications of this demographic
feature of saving behavior for the future of aggregate saving in the United
States, and pose some puzzles related thereto.

Section 5 provides an interpretation of our results. We decompose the
growth in aggregate real consumption in the United States for the period
1950-1980 into components corresponding to the various factors affecting the

6

growth of consumption, such as population and household growth, and changes
in the average real wealth per household, the age distribution of wealth,

real after-tax wage rates, real after-tax rates of return, female labor
force participation rates, the unemployment rate, the share of wealth held

by households headed by persons born prior to 1939, etc. These
decompositions reveal interesting features of the factors associated with
the postwar growth of aggregate real consumption in the United States and,
in addition, illuminate the comparison of real consumption growth over
different time periods in which the trends in these factors may differ
substantially.

Section 6 presents a discussion of our results in the context of various

analytical, empirical, and policy issues. We discuss the basic conclusions of
our research in relation to other previous research, including both the
advantages and limitations of these new results and an agenda for future
research along these lines to complement other approaches to research on
aggregate consumption and saving behavior.

A brief discussion of our data and methods is presented in the Appendix.6

2.

A Brief Review of Research on Consumption and Saving
In the last fifteen years, there has been an explosion of research on

consumption and saving behavior. This research has attempted to achieve several
goals, explored several different types of data and employed alternative
methodologies.

It cannot be our purpose here to survey any of these lines of

research fully. Further, while the research ought to be complementary among the

6. A more detailed discussion of the data is available from the authors on request.

.7

different lines, often the work within a particular methodological approach
either ignores or is just unsympathetic to the results of research of other

approaches. Without commenting further on this issue, we turn to a brief
discussion of each of these lines of research.

First, there has been a substantial explosion of research along what might
be termed extension of traditional time series aggregate consumption function

estimation. Whether or not the lifecycle hypothesis of Modigliani and Brumberg
(1954) is maintained in the specification of the consumption relation, the basic
approach has been an attempt to expand the traditional set of factors thought to
influence aggregate consumption in a given period, and to derive better measures
of, or proxies for, the relevant variables such as permanent income, wealth, the

government budget deficit, or other fiscal and monetary variables. Particularly
influential has been a series of studies of the effect of expected future Social

Security benefits on saving, beginning with Feldstein (1974). While the debate
is hardly over, we believe that a sensible reading of the evidence would be that
each dollar increase in expected future Social Security benefits results in a

decrease in private saving of about twenty-five to fifty cents. The interested
reader should consult Feldstein and Barro (1978), Darby (1979), Leimer and
Lesnoy (1982), Sernheim (1987) and the methodological criticism of Auerbach and
Kotlikoff (1983).

The interest in the effects of fiscal policy on consumption was given
added impetus by the modern restatement of the Ricardian equivalence

hypothesis by Barro (1974). This model, also known as the intergenerational
altruism model, has the striking time series implication that changes in the
age distribution of resources should not affect aggregate consumption,

conditional on aggregate resources, because transfers among cohorts will
result in exactly offsetting consumption and saving behavior so as to

maintain aggregate consumption constant. Moreover, under certain

8

conditions, a shift from tax to debt finance, given the level of government
spending, will not affect consumption or national saving as government
borrowing would be offset by increased private saving in anticipation of

increased future tax liabilities. Numerous time series consumption function
studies of this phenomenon and attempted tests of the Ricardian equivalence
hypothesis are surveyed and criticized in Barth, et al (1984) and Sernheim

(1987). Two important papers are those of Feldstein (1982) and Kormendi
(1983) which disaggregate fiscal variables and measure them in several ways.

Boskin (1987) extends the measurement of government deficits and debt in
several important ways and incorporates these in estimates of consumption
functions and in analyses of the effect of deficits on the composition of

CNP. While the results of these studies are not uniform, and are subject to
some methodological criticisms (see especially the discussion in Bernheim
(1987)), the bulk of the research results tends to reject a strict

interpretation of the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis. Most studies also
reject complete Keynesian myopia and estimate that future taxes are

partially anticipated. Perhaps a quasi-consensus estimate is that a onedollar debt for tax substitution would increase consumption about thirty to
forty cents (see Boskin (1988)).

A more direct test, less susceptible to some of the criticisms of the
traditional time series consumption functions, is performed by Boskin and

Kotlikoff (1985). They build a finite approximation to an intergenerationally
altruistic infinitely-lived optimal consumption program and test whether the age

distribution of resources affects consumption. One of the striking implications
of the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis is that the age distribution of
resources should not affect aggregate consumption, given the aggregate level of

resources. Boskin and Kotlikoff (1985) reject this implication of the Ricardian

9

equivalence hypothesis.

Of course, the lifecycle hypothesis and the Ricardian equivalence

hypothesis, while conflicting theories of aggregate consumption and saving
behavior with drastically different implications for the efficacy of fiscal

policy, do not exhaust the potential set of possibilities. The strict lifecycle
hypothesis with an expected average propensity to consume over the lifecycle of
unity --

i.e.

,

no planned bequests --

is

also usually rejected by the data in

two types of tests. It is important to note that it is usually this strict
form of the lifecycle hypothesis, not the potential insight of consumption
smoothing or the age distribution of resources affecting aggregate consumption
(with or without a planned bequest motive), and therefore, the potential for
fiscal policy to affect consumption and national saving, that is being tested.

A weaker form of the lifecycle hypothesis with planned bequests or some convex
combination of the lifecycle hypothesis and other models of saving could still
leave some role for fiscal policy.

The two types of tests of the lifecycle hypothesis are based on the saving
or dissaving behavior of the elderly and existence or non-existence of "forward-

looking" behavior by consumers in time series studies. Basically, the first
type of test attempts to see how wealth varies with age. The strict form of the
lifecycle hypothesis suggests that the elderly should be dissaving. Mirer
(1979), Darby (1979), David and Menchik (1981), Danziger, et al (1982), and Kurz
(1984) all report results from cross-section data that the elderly seem not to

dissave, and in fact, may continue to save. This empirical finding has
questioned the applicability of the strict form of the lifecycle hypothesis.

Related studies attempting to examine consumption and earnings paths of
households to see if aggregate saving can account for a substantial fraction of
the capital stock also typically reveal that there is a large unexplained

10

residual (see Kotlikoff and Summers (1981))

Bernheim (1984) and Diamond and Hausman (1984) use longitudinal data to

examine the extent to which the elderly save or dissave. goth studies find that
the elderly do dissave after retirement, although the extent of dissaving is not

large in all cases. Hurd (1987) presents an interesting analysis in which the
retired elderly in the sample dissave, and therefore, the wealth-age
relationship of the elderly is consistent with the strict lifecycle hypothesis.

An interesting test for a bequest motive is whether the saving of the elderly

who have living children differs from those who do not. Hurd finds no evidence
for a bequest motive via differential saving of those who have living heirs.

The second type of test stems from the pioneering work of Hall (1978) and

Sargent (1978). These studies use the estimated Euler equations derived from
the first-order conditions for optimal consumption behavior under uncertainty.

As noted by Hall, this suggests that consumption should evolve as a random walk

or that changes in consumption should not be predictable. Hall (1986) further
observes that "the empirical work testing this proposition says, in sum, that
consumption is fairly close to a random walk, but certain variables have enough
predictive power that the hypothesis is rejected in formal statistical tests."
These studies estimate the parameters of a stochastic difference equation for
consumption, in which the influence of wealth and income on consumption should

be zero. The basic question is often interpreted as whether there is an excess
sensitivity of consumption to income which cannot be explained by people fully

7. This study contained a mathematical error which when corrected would increase
the fraction of the capital stock which can be accounted for by lifecycle saving
from 20% to 50% -far less than the total.

still

11

rationally optimizing over a long time horizon. Among the more influential
papers in this tradition are Flavin (1981), Hayashi (1982, 1985), and the

microeconomic data exploration of Hall and Mishkin (1982) which concludes that
about four-fifths of consumers could be modeled as if they were maximizing over

a long time horizon, whereas one-fifth could not. The traditional
interpretation of these results is a test for liquidity constraints (rather than
following rules of thumb or some other interpretation)

The Euler equation approach involves several important advances,
especially the ability to circumvent the thorny issue of measuring permanent

income. However, most of these studies assume rather strict maintained
hypotheses, e.g., maximization of a utility function (usually taken to be
intertemporally additive and stationary), that the econometrician can
specify the information set available to consumers at each point in time, or
more precisely, that innovations in information can be accurately measured

and modeled. For example, the response to a change in fiscal policy may
depend upon the entire previous history of certain variables, as these may
determine the subjective probability distribution of future fiscal decisions

as seen by the consumer. Even more importantly, in aggregate time series
studies, it is usually assumed that the economy can be modeled as a single

representative consumer. This notion has come increasingly into disrepute
for a variety of reasons. One is the vast array of empirical results
suggesting substantial heterogeneity in saving behavior; the theoretical
underpinnings, e.g., of the lifecycle model, suggest that differences in age

may matter; another is the studies finding a substantial fraction of the
general population liquidity constrained (Hall and ?'Iishkin (1982)), and of

the elderly liquidity constrained (Hurd and Boskin (1984)). Some analyses
are beginning to explore the ramifications of heterogeneity, e.g., in wages

or wage prospects and their implications for liquidity constraints (Hubbard

12

and Judd (1987), for example)

The influence of this offshoot of the

rational expectations hypothesis from macroeconomic theory is substantial,

but the empirical usefulness of the aggregate time series studies is clouded

by the aggregation issue; when there are two or more types of consumers,
the estimation procedure breaks down and the simple interpretation given to
the results is inappropriate.

There have also been several attempts to examine the theoretical
underpinnings of the lifecycle hypothesis and their implications for
aggregate consumption and employ various advances in technique in

reestimating aggregate consumption relations. Particularly important are
the papers of Blinder and Deaton (1985) and Deaton (1986) .

These papers

indicate that aggregation is important to issues of interpretation of the

effects of various variables on aggregate consumption, such as interest
rates; that distinguishing between fiscal actions perceived as temporary
rather than permanent is important; and that model specification may have
much to do with estimates of the degree of tax discounting.
Much emphasis has been placed on the degree of interteinporal

substitutability or in more traditional terminology, the "interest

elasticity" of saving. Boskin (1978), Summers (1981, 1982, 1984), Hansen
and Singleton (1983) and Hall (1985) are the most often quoted studies, and
come to rather different conclusions based on their different methodologies

and data. In the traditional aggregate time series framework, small and
statistically significant positive interest elasticities of saving are found
in Boskin (1978), somewhat larger ones by Summers (1982) .

Howrey and Hymans

(1980) criticize some of this work although they focus on only a very small

component of personal saving. The issue of the degree of intertersporal
substitutability is important to real business cycle theory and has been a

13

subject of much debate. Hansen and singleton (1983) estimate substantial
interteinporal substitutability, whereas Hall (1985) questions this

conclusion and finds little evidence of intertemporal substitutability.
Whether one wants to accept all of the maintained hypotheses in estimating
the intertemporal substitutability parameters (such as utility maximization
itself, or the usual intertemporally additive and stationary functional

form) and the methodology used is an open question. Problems also arise in
the interpretation of studies estimating interest elasticities of
consumption in structural consumption functions, since careful attention is
not always paid to a precise definition of the conceptual experiment under
consideration, such as what is presumed to be constant or allowed to vary.
Perhaps a tentative summary of recent research on consumption and saving
would include the following:

(1) No single model of consumption behavior, for example, the strict
lifecycle hypothesis or the Ricardian equivalence hypothesis, is sufficient to

explain aggregate consumption fully. Both theories are strongly rejected in
studies based on aggregate time series data, and the former is strongly rejected
in most studies of the dissaving behavior of the elderly.8

(2) There is substantial heterogeneity among consumers. This
heterogeneity may be a function of age, the steepness of earnings and desired
consumption profiles leading to liquidity constraints, or a host of social,
psychological, environmental, historical, and economic variables.

(3) The age distribution of resources, given their aggregate level,

8. See, however, the important exception of the recent findings of Hurd (1987).

14

appears to affect aggregate consumption.9

While substantial controversy still surrounds these issues, recent
methodological, data, and measurement advances hopefully will allow us to

improve our understanding of them. This paper is one attempt to do so. Our
results complement the strands of research described above without necessarily
maintaining the standard hypotheses contained within each of them.

9. See, for example, Boskin and Kotlikoff (1985).

15

3.

The Model

3.1 specification of the Variables
We begin by considering the determinants of the values of consumption
(including both goods and services) and leisure expenditures of the current
period, tth, appropriately imputed as necessary, of an individual, say the ith,

household. Real consumption expenditure of the ith household in the tth period,
is assumed to be a function of the spot prices of consumption,

and

leisure (or equivalently the after-tax spot wage rate) w., of the current, tth,
period and the forward prices of consumption,

and leisure,

it'

of future, t+t'th, periods in the current period, total wealth W.
it,t+t'

consisting

of human (HW) and nonhuman wealth (N}iWi) of the ith household in

the current period and the value of its set of demographic attributes, A.t.

which includes variables representing the age of the head of the household, in

the current period. The individual household's consumption expenditure function
for the current period may thus be written as:

(3 1) n C it =

rt

fic(nrtPtt,t÷l
n*

't,t±T'

wit'w*it,t+l

W A

it,t+T' it' it

Vi

t

where T, a positive integer, is the length of the planning horizon, which is set
sufficiently large so that it may be taken to be independent of the value of the
set of attributes A.t and t

itself.

(Of course, it is entirely possible,

depending, for example, on the age of the head of the household, which is
included in the set of attributes, A.t. that the forward prices of sufficiently
distant future periods may have no effect on the values of the consumption and
leisure expenditures of the current period.) As specified in equation (3.1),
all households are assumed to face identical spot and forward prices of
consumption but are allowed to have individual household-specific consumption
expenditure functions, as well as individual household-specific spot and forward

16

prices of leisure, wealth and set of attributes in each period. In addition,
the consumption expenditure functions are assumed to be stationary with respect
to time (but not necessarily with respect to age) .

What this means is that the

consumption expenditure of a household headed by a person aged 45, for example,

will be the same in each period if the current and forward prices, wealth and

set of other attributes remain unchanged. Thus, changing individual household
tastes are ruled out in our specification except insofar as they are embodied in
the changing value of the set of attributes over time.
Similarly, the ith household's leisure expenditure function for the current,
tth, period may be written as:

it it f iz

(3.2) w. Z. =

3.2

(pt' p*t,t+l'

...

'

w*
p*t,t+T w.
tt' tt,t+l

.

. . w*

tt,t+T

w.
it

A. ) i t.

it

Relationship Between Spot and Forward Prices

Futures markets are far from complete and forward prices of consumption and
leisure, to the extent that they exist meaningfully for an individual household
in its household decision-making process, are not generally directly observable.
It must nevertheless be true that the consumption expenditure of an individual

household in the current period depends in general not only on the prices of the
current period, but also on the expected prices of the future periods (or more

properly speaking, the (possibly subjective) joint distribution of prices of
future periods)

As these future (spot and forward) prices are not generally

observable, some assumptions on the expectations of the individual households
are necessary in order that equations (3.1) and (3.2) may be made operational.

We make the following simplifying assumptions with respect to the current and
future prices of consumption and leisure:

(1) The expected spot prices of consumption of all future periods,

17

taken at and conditional on the spot price of consumption of the
current period, are assumed to grow geometrically at a constant rate equal to
which may be referred to as the rate of expected inflation.

= Pt

(3.3)

where

(1 + itt)

is the expected spot price of consumption of the (t+t')th period

and

is the expected constant rate of increase of the spot price of

consumption per period, taken at and conditional on the spot price of
consumption of the current period (as well as the spot prices of consumption of
past periods).

(2) The expected after-tax spot prices of leisure of a household with a

standard set of attributes, A0, of all future periods, s0(÷f)'s taken at and
conditional on its spot price of leisure of the current period, w0 are assumed
to grow geometrically at a constant rate equal to

t,

(3.4) wO(.) w0 (1 + itt)

For example, suppose the standard household is one headed by a 45-year old
white male person, then the expected spot wage rates for a 45-year old white
male person for all future periods, taken at and conditional on the spot wage
rate of the current period, are assumed to be equal to the current spot wage
rate times a factor which grows geometrically at a constant rate equal to

per

period. Thus, the expected real after-tax spot prices of leisure are assumed to
be constant.

(3) For a household with a set of attributes, A.t different from A0, the
spot price of leisure in the current period is given by:
w.

=

h(A.)/h(A0)

.

18

where h(.) is a known function which is independent of time. Without loss of
generality h(A0) can be taken to be unity. Holding all components of thá set of
attributes other than age constant, then h(s) considered as a function of age
gives precisely the age profile of spot wage rates.
The spot price of leisure in any period, t'th, whether current or future,
is given by:

w1, =

(3.5)

where A.

it,

t'th

h(A.,)

woe,

is the value of the set of attributes of the ith household in the

period.

The expected spot prices of leisure of all future periods of a
household with a sequence of values of its set of attributes (Aits
A.

t÷1

A. t÷T are equal to a sequence formed by the products of

h(A.t+t,)'s and the expected spot prices of leisure of the standard
household in the t+t'th period, and hence, by assumption (2), equal to

h(At+t,) w0 (l ÷ t)t.

(4) The
periods,

expected nominal after-tax interest rate for all future
,

t'—l, . .T,
.

taken at and conditional on the nominal after-tax

interest rate of the current period, is fixed and equal to the nominal

after-tax interest rate of the current period, i, which is identical for
all households;
(5)

leisure

The joint distribution of the spot prices of consumption and
(of the standard household), the nominal interest rate and the rate

of inflation for all future periods in the current period, conditional on
the

spot prices of consumption and leisure, the spot nominal interest rate

and the rate of inflation in the current period are known to all individual

19

households;

(6) The moments of the joint distribution of the spot prices of consumption
and leisure, the nominal interest rate and the rate of inflation for all future
periods of order greater than or equal to the second, conditional on the spot
prices of consumption, leisure and the spot nominal interest rate and the rate
of inflation in the current period, are fixed constants known to all individual
households.

Note that the means of the conditional joint distribution in any current

period are assumed to be equal to the spot values of the current period. Thus
the means are allowed to change over time even though the higher-order moments
are assumed to be fixed constants.

Given these assumptions, and the possibility of arbitrage across current
and future periods, the forward prices of consumption are given by:
pt+t,

—

(1 +

(3.6)

it)t

(1-4-it

(1 +

i
+

—

where rt E

-

is

it

-

V

+rt)t,

t', t' 1;

the real after-tax rate of interest in the tth period.

Taking logarithms,

10. This relationship is exact in continuous time.

20

- t'in(l •+

£npt± =

(3.7)

r)

V t' ,

t'

1

Mote that equation (3.6) is merely an intertemporal efficiency condition and
does not, in itself, imply that the individual household behaves as if it
maximizes a household utility function.
Similarly, given these assumptions, and the possibility of interteniporal

borrowing and lending on the part of the individual household, the forward
prices of leisure are simply given by:

wUth(A.

Vt',t'l;or

t,t+t'

(3.8)

,

(l±r)
(3.9) 1n

£n w0 -

t'ln(l +

r) ÷ £nh(At÷t,)

Vt's

For an individual household with a set of attributes equal to

t'

1.

in the

current period, the sequence of A÷,'s is not arbitrary. It is reasonable,
in fact even likely, that A.

is expressible as a function of

and t'

knowit to the individual households:

(3.10) A.t+t, g(At') t' —

1

T.

Equations (3.9) and (3.10) in turn imply that

(3.11) £nwt+, = 2nwot

-

t'2n(l+r)

÷ 2nh*(A.,t?), Vt',t'l,

where h*(A.tts) h(g(At')). Vt',t'l, and h*(A.,t) considered as a function
of t' represents the stationary time profile of future expected spot prices of
leisure faced by the head of the ith individual household with set of attributes

21

Alt in the tth period. Note that equation (3.8) is also merely an intertemporal
efficiency condition for the ith individual household and does not, in itself,
imply that the ith individual household maximizes a household utility function.

Moreover under these assumptions, the ratio of the spot prices of leisure
facing the heads of the ith and jth individual households in the current period
depend only on the values of the sets of attributes of the ith and jth

individual households in the current period. Thus,

w h(A.t)

——

I

Vij;Vt.

h(A.t)

By substituting equations (3.5), (3.7) and (3.11) into equation (3.1),
we obtain:

(3.12)

=

T; w0,A,l,2

T; W.A.t),

'&i,t,

A similar substitution may be made for equation (3.2). Since the integers
I

T are constants, the individual household consumption and leisure

expenditure functions may be simplified into:

(3.13)

tit tct' w0, rtl W, A.t)

V i,t

and

(3.14)

tzt' w0, r1 tJ, A.) ,

V

it

where all the constants, including T, the length of the maximum planning

22

horizon, being constant over i and t, are suppressed.11 (Alternatively, one
may assume T., the maximum planning horizon of the ith individual household, to

be a function of A.t resulting in the same consumption and expenditure

functions as equations (3.13) and (3.14).) f*(.) and
course, be directly derived from

can, of

and f.(.) under the assumptions on

forward prices of consumption and leisure. Note that it is not necessary to
take into account "planned" bequests, if any, explicitly, as they are functions
of the saute variables as those on the right-hand sides of equations (3.13) and
(3.14)

12

3.3 Aggregation
If data on the consumption and leisure expenditures as well as the wealth
and values of the set of attributes of individual households (or groups of

households with approximately identical wealth and set of attributes) are
available on a time-series basis, then one can estimate the consumption and
leisure expenditure functions in equations (3.13) and (3.14) directly after
specifying parametric functional forms for

and

and stochastic

disturbance terms for the system of two equations. (All the variables included
in the consumption and leisure expenditure functions are observable.)
Unfortunately, such disaggregated data are not generally available on a time-

11. Similarly, the higher-order moments of the conditional joint distribution of
prices and interest rates, being constants, may also be suppressed even if they
affect current consumption and leisure expenditures.

12. We note that alternative assumptions on expectations can be consistent with hLs
model so long as they result in stationary household consumption and leisure
expenditure functions of the form in equations (3.13) and (3.14).

23

series basis. What are more generally available are data on aggregate
consumption and leisure expenditures for the whole economy, data on the joint
distribution of individual household wealth and attributes, and the total

number of individual households, Nt in the economy in the current period.
What is needed is thus a model in which variations in aggregate consumption and
leisure expenditures can be explained by variations in the spot prices of
consumption and leisure, the real interest rate, the joint distribution of
individual household wealth and attributes and the total number of individual

households. Variations in the joint distribution of individual household wealth
and attributes may be measured through variables that may be considered as

"statistics" of the joint distribution. Examples of such variables include
average wealth per household, average age of heads of individual households, and

the variance of wealth over individual households. If the joint distribution of
individual household wealth and attributes changes, the values of these
variables may be expected to change.

The aggregate consumption and leisure expenditure functions are thus
expected to take the form:

Nt
(3.15)

F(p, w0 rt NtJ s1t S2

S)

Nt
=

(3.16)

F(pt

Nt S1, S2

wot

S)

where N is the total number of individual households in the current, tth, period,

it i — 1,..,,

S.

,

n, are the values of the n variables --

"statistics"

--

reflecting the joint distribution of individual household wealth and attributes
of the current period.

24

The S's, i 1. n, are each functions of W1. WNt Ai.
ANt as well as Nt. Moreover, each such function should remain unchanged with
respect to a simple renumbering of the individual households. In other words,
each such function must be symmetric with respect to the indexes or

equivalently, invariant to a permutation of the indexes 1 through N. Thus, for
example,

(3.17)

WNt A1t

S1

=

S1t(W2

WN.

,

Wlt;

Nt)

A2t.

Furthermore, even if not all of
the values of
of

ANtI Alt; N)

A3t

are observed,

WNt Alt

can in general be estimated from an appropriate sample

WNt Alt
Substituting equations (3.13) and (3.14) into equations (3.15) and (3.16),

we obtain:

Nt
(3.18)

tct' w0,

W, At)

i—l

F(t. w0,

(3.19)

5nt

5lt

w0, rt W, A.)
=

w0 r. N. 51t

If equations (3.18) and (3.19) are to hold identically, that is, for all

w

ot'

it

t

r t and all joint distributions of W. 's and A. 's, and N >
it

25

n

Pt,

it can be

shown that13

(3.20)

tc —

;0 rt W, A.)

+

(3.21)

w0, r) j

f*(p,

tz =

+

1, 2

wot, r, W, A.)

f**(pt, w0, r)

N;

1, 2

In other words, the consumption and leisure expenditure functions of individual
households with identical wealths and attributes are each identical up to the

addition of a function independent of wealth and attributes. If it were
further assumed that the individual consumption and leisure expenditures are
nonnegative and aggregate consumption and leisure expenditures are both zero
when aggregate wealth is zero, the individual consumption and leisure
expenditure functions may be simplified to:
(3.22)

f*(pt, w0, r. Wj,

A.)

i

1

and
(3.23)

iz =

f*(pt, w0 rt W, A.t) i —

1

where

mt

0, A.t) =

w0, r. 0, A.t) =

0

It can be further shown under mild regularity conditions that the

13. See, for example, Jorgenson, Lau and Stoker (1982).

26

individual consumption and expenditure functions must take the form:

(3.24)

f*(p, wo rt. W, A.t)

A);

hk(Pt, wo r)
k=1

and

(3.25)

f*(p, w0,

W, A.t)

A)

k hk(pt, w0, r)

where

k—l,

A.)=O ,

...n

There are additional restrictions on the hkU) hk(.) and g(.) functions to
ensure that the expenditure functions, including planned future expenditures and
bequests, sum to total wealth (sununability) and that the individual households

have no money illusion (zero degree homogeneity). For our analysis we choose
the following types of gk(W.t, A.t) functions:

g1(W A.)
g 2(W.
it

,

A.

it )

= W. £nR.
it

it

g(WJ A) = Ai(k2)tWit

k=3

where A.. is the jth component of the vector of the set of attributes A.

it

iJt

27

3.4 Specification of the Individual Expenditure Functions
For each individual household of the jth type, that is, A.t =

A.,

the

consumption and leisure expenditure functions are specified parametrically as
follows:

+
(3.26)

a.

[a

(3.27)

it it

w. Z. =

az + a

+

crTh + r)

+

øccthPt

+

2nw0

1 +

finp

+

$c2nwot + flC2n(l +

ptct =

÷ $

zj

zc£np t

+

r)

$ zz LnwOt + $zr ,2n(l

+ $2nwo + f2n(l

1 +

+

flcwit]w

÷ r ) + fi 2nW.
t
zW
it,

+

it

r)

If it were required that the balance of the total (planned) expenditures,

including "planned" bequests, if any, VO, has the same paranetric form; that
is:

÷ a0. +

=

[a0

1 +

+ 0rTh0 + r) +

$O2np +

$:210t
$cThPt ÷ $nw0 +

r2"1

+

r)

$OwlflWit]r;

and that suznniability holds, that is,

t it

it it

p C. + w. Z. +

identically,

/0.it

it

— W.

then it can be shown that the consumption and leisure expenditure

functions may both be written in the form:

28

(3.28)

tit

CJ

1 +

(3.29)

a

.it it

+

cr1

÷ ficc2tWt +
+
ficzThVot

+

p C.

+

Czj

$inp

÷ s

.enw0

r2'

+

r)

+

+

/3wInWitl
J

r)

+

$€np + $zz€ttWot + $ln(l + r) + finW.
1 +

+

$lnw0

+

$rth(l

+

LC

it

r)

that is, the parameters in the denominators are identical.

If it were required that the consumption and leisure demand functions of
each individual household satisfy the zero degree homogeneity restriction, that
is, the individual household has "no money illusion," then it can be shown that
the following restrictions on the parameters are implied:

(3.30)

cc +

(3.31)

+

cz + cw —
zz

+

z—

0

fi

0

= 0

and
(3.32)

c +

The consumption and leisure expenditure functions may be rewritten in the fonn:

Cc +

t it

(3.33) p C.

a.

+

$ccThPt ÷ cz2'"0t +

acrno-

fl(2np

+

1 +

it it

(3.34) w. .

=

-

£nw0)

a + a . + $zc tipt + j9 mw +
zz
Ot
zJ
1 +

$(mnp

-

+

-

rln(l

$ zr£n(l +

)nw)

r) cc +

+

r)

+

rt

$rTh(

it

)

+

-

(3 zc +

j3

L€nY.
zz'
i

r)

In our empirical implementation we maintain the hypotheses of sunimabilit'z

and zero degree homogeneity. However, we do not maintain the hypothesis of

29

utility maximization on the part of the individual households, although our

specifications in equations (3.33) and (3.34) are not inconsistent with it. The
rationale for maintaining the hypothesis of suimnability is simply that each

individual household can make its lifetime consumption, leisure and bequest

choices only within its lifetime wealth constraint. The rationale for
maintaining the hypothesis of zero degree homogeneity is simply that each
individual household should not change its lifetime consumption, leisure and
bequest choices if the set of possible choices (represented by all available

choices within the lifetime wealth constraint) is unchanged. Note that the two
hypotheses do not imply utility maximization of the individual household. The
decision-making process within each household can be arbitrary as long as it is

stationary over tine. For example, one may have the husband and the wife of a
household each making decisions on fifty percent of the individual household's

total resources. The resulting behavior for the household can be expected to
satisfy summability and zero degree homogeneity but not necessarily utility
maximization by the individual household as a whole.

3.5 Specific Hypotheses on Consumption Behavior
The specification in equations (3.33) and (3.34) is sufficiently flexible
to embed a number of hypotheses found in the literature on consumption behavior.
We discuss each of these hypotheses in turn.

(1) Unitary Wealth Elasticity. It is often assumed that individual
household consumption (and leisure) expenditure is proportional to individual

household wealth. In the context of our specification, this hypothesis implies
that:

cW

-

cc

+

=0

and

30

'3zW =

- zc

+

0

(2) Proportionality of Expenditures to Wealth. This hypothesis is often
identified with Friedman (1957).14 It implies that consumption (and leisure)
expenditure is proportional to wealth, and, in addition, that the factors of
proportionality depend only on the rate of interest but not the prices, given

wealth. In the context of our specification, this hypothesis implies that:

cc

+pcz—o

p zc

+pzz—o

/3

=0

=ow
14. See also Slanchard's (1985) derivation and discussion.
15. Except for the degenerate case in which /3

cc

+ $cz =

0 and /3

=
zc +$zz

0;

(aC +aj$
cj c=j3cc

(cx
+aj$
$cz
C
Z
CJ
(a
c +aj$
cj r =$cr
(az +a.)$
c —pzc
zj
(az +a.)$ z =/3zz
zj

(az +a zj
.)$r

=$zr

Vj.

For this degenerate case consumption and leisure expenditures are fixed constant
proportions of wealth. The values of /3 parameters, subject to /3
= 0 and
+ /3
=
0,
are
arbitrary
but
in
particular
can
be
chosen
so
Rat
alt
of them
8zc +
are idenical1y zero, so that they satisfy the restrictions here. See
hypothesis (5), "Complete Price Independence", below.

31

obviously, if the hypothesis of unitary wealth elasticity does not hold, the
proportionality hypothesis cannot hold.

(3) Interteinporal Separability. Intertemporal separability is a
hypothesis that is often maintained when each individual household is assumed to
maximize its utility. It implies that the interternporal utility function of the
household has the form,

U.t(C.

Zi(t+ly... Ci(t+T)lZi(t+T))

Ut+T(Ci(t+T)Zi(t+T)))

Uit(1Jt(CitZit)IJt+l(Ci(t+l)frZi(t÷l))

It encompasses as special cases that of intertemporal additivity:

U
t'

and that of intertemporal stationary additivity:

U
t'=O

The principal empirical implication of intertemporal separability is
that the relative expenditures on different commodities within the same
period are independent of the prices of the commodities in a different

period. This is a necessary (but not in general sufficient) condition for

16. A further possible specialization consists of replacing U(.) by U(.).

32

intertemporal additivity and intertemporal stationary additivity as defined

above. This hypothesis is testable, however, even for a household not
necessarily assumed to be maximizing utility. Under our assumptions about
the relationship between current and expected future spot prices, this

hypothesis implies that the relative expenditures of the current period are
independent of the real after-tax rate of interest, holding wealth constant.
In terms of our specification, this hypothesis implies that:

pcr
and

zr
Note, however, that under this hypothesis, current consumption and leisure
expenditures may still be sensitive to the real after-tax rate of interest,

only their ratio is insensitive to the real after-tax rate of interest. The
hypothesis that we test, as discussed above, is weaker than the usual
hypothesis of intertemporal separability of the utility function (and a
fortiori weaker than the hypotheses of intertemporal additivity and
intertemporal stationary additivity).

(4) Absence of Interest Rate Effects. This hypothesis implies that

17. Except for the degenerate case in which
(a

c

+ajfizc =(a +a.)
zj cc
cj

z

(ac +a.)$
z
cj zz'(a -t-a.)$
zj cz

(ac +a cj
.)zr —(az

zj cr

Vj.

33

both consumption and leisure expenditures are, given aggregate wealth and
its distribution, independent of the real after-tax rate of interest.
However, it does not preclude a change in the real rate of interest from
affecting consumption and leisure expenditures indirectly through its effect

on the revaluation of wealth (the so-called "Summers' effect"). In the
context of our specification, this hypothesis implies

cr 0; zr —

0; and r —

Obviously, if the hypothesis of intertemporal separability does not hold, the
hypothesis of no interest rate effects cannot hold.

(5) Complete Price Independence. An extreme hypothesis about consumption
and leisure behavior is that the consumption and leisure expenditure to wealth
ratios are fixed independently of current and expected future prices, holding

wealth constant. Such a hypothesis implies that all the parameters are zero
except a c, a z

and a .'s and a l9
cj

All of these hypotheses imply specifications that are special cases of our
basic specification, which imposes only minimal assumptions on individual
household behavior (summability and zero degree homogeneity (no money illusion))

and minimal assumptions necessary for exact aggregation. We distinguish
among types of households based on the age of the head of household and allow
changes in the composition of the households by type to affect aggregate

18. Except for the degenerate case in footnote 15 above.

19. Except for the degenerate case in footnote 15 above. However, under the
conditions of complete price independence,
parameters are arbitrary and can,
in particular, be set identically equal to zero.

34

consumption and leisure expenditures. While it would be interesting to attempt
to analyze other attributes as well, we focus in this paper on the attribute
which has received the most attention in the analysis of consumption and saving.
namely age, as discussed in many of the studies reviewed in Section 2.

3.6 Specification of the Aggregate Expenditure Functions
The aggregate consumption and leisure expenditure functions are obtained by
adding up the individual consumption and leisure expenditure functions across
the households:

(3.35) tit —

+ $ccThPt + flczWot + $lnU + re)) W.t
-

cc ÷

cz w.inw. +

[1 + ac(npt -

lnwo)

+ r1'"1 + re)]

[(a + $zcThPt +

(3.36)

-

zc +

+ zrmn + rn)) W.

W.2nW +

[1 + $c(ThPt -

£nwo) + srno- + re)]

where Dt is a dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the ith
household is of the jth type at time t and 0 if the ith household is not of the
jth type at time t.

It is possible to estimate equations (3.35) and (3.36) directly.
However, we note that both dependent variables, aggregate nominal
consumption and leisure expenditures, are 1.ikely to show sustained increases

over time because of the increase in the number of households (population)

and inflation. It is therefore unlikely that additive stochastic
disturbance terms are (separately) homoscedastic for each of the two

35

functions. In order to mitigate the possibility of heteroscedasticity, we
divide both sides of equations (3,35) and (3.36) by aggregate wealth at time
t, obtaining the aggregate consumption expenditure to wealth and leisure
expenditure to wealth ratios:

1

ptcit

—

(3.37)

w.

'c
-

+ ccThPt + cz'Ot + /3crhl(l + r))

cc +

cz W.2nW./

+

a iDtWi/ W.t]/

[1 + C2np - £nwo) + $rTh(1 + r)J

E w. Z.

itit

[(a + $np + P .€nwo

(3.38)

+ P

it
-

(p

+ fi)

W.2nW./

r1

+ r))

+

[1 ÷ $(2np - .2nwo) + $in(l + re)]

where (Z W..enW.)/E W1 can be interpreted as "entropy,'t a measure of
the variability of wealth over individual households and Ct

DtW)/Z W.

can be identified as the share of aggregate wealth held by households of the jth

type. Equations (3.37) and (3.38) are the specifications used in the
estimation.

The variables - -

aggregate

consumption expenditure to wealth and leisure

expenditure to wealth ratios, and the prices of consumption, after-tax wage
rates, the after-tax real rate of interest, and aggregate wealth - -

36

are

all

either available as or can be developed from standard tune series data.

20

The 'statistics'1 representing the distribution of wealth by size and by the

type of household can be obtained from a time-series of cross-sectional
income surveys.

In addition, if the parameters are known, equations (3.37) and (3,38)

may be used to predict the effects on aggregate consumption, leisure and
saving of alternative potential future paths of evolution of the size and
age distribution of total wealth.

Finally, it is important to note that our model focuses entirely on the
household side - -

the

demands for current and future consumption and leisure

(or the mirror image, supplies of current and future labor). The households
are assumed to behave as price-takers, that is, as if their individual

actions do not affect the (possibly subjective) joint distribution of

current and futuze prices. The model leaves unexplained the current and
future prices, wealth and its distribution. Thus, it is a partial
equilibrium model, reflecting only the equilibrium of the households, but
not necessarily the markets for consumption goods, labor and saving.

3.7 Comparative Static Effects
We attempt to estimate the comparative static effects of changes in the
current price of consumption, after-tax wage rate, wealth and the real after-tax
rate of interest (with human wealth held constant as well as revalued) on the
consumption, leisure and value of saving (defined as in the National Income and

20. See footnote 1 for the calculation of leisure.

37

Product Accounts)21 of the individual households. Specifically, we calculate
the elasticities of each of the dependent variables with respect to the
independent variables (at a given set of values of the latter).
Equations (3.33) and (3.34) may be rewritten as

(3.39)
D

(3.40)

w. Z.

=
it

D

t

The elasticity formulae may be computed as follows:

3mG.it

3,2nD

.

cit

t

—-1÷
amnp

—

cc

-1±

-

1

t

—

_____________ -

21. The NIPA definition of current saving is the difference between current income
and current consumption and does not include net changes in wealth due to
revaluations.

38

cc
-1 +

[

In 1972, hip
t =

/

-

w

—

Lnw

Ot

it

(1+fl(Thp

t

Ot

+

r

0, and the elasticity formula simplifies to:

8 InC.

it

3np

-

1

t=1972

L(Pt/L) 1972

Similarly,

r

3lnC.

it

1

÷

3mw.it

c

[(Pc.nL)

-

£nw0)

+

j

a2nwo
where we have made use of the fact that

—

1;

/

(1 +

3£ nw.

it

8inC.it
amnw.

it

1

—

tl972

amnC.
= 1

I

[ (PtcttRt)ig72

r

($
cc +$ czl

-

[

it

3.2nW.

3ThG

BmW.

r

t=1972

+ $
ci

= 1

-

/

J

(l+fl(lnpInwo t )

($cc+$ cz )

1

I

I

I

I

L(PC1/Wt)=ig72J

39

+

$r£n(1+rt ));

/ (l+$n(l+r))

t

8nC.it
B2nNHW.

&PnG.
it

3ThW.
it

32nC.

ThEnW.

Th2NHW.

&2nW.

W.

($ cc+$ cz )

1

it

it

it

[
L

3InNHW.

it

it

= (NHW. /W. )(l it it

5nC.it

NHW.
it

it

)/(l+$ C (2npt nwo)+fin(l+rJ);

(Ptcit/t)i
1

it

= (NHW /W )
t=1972
it t=1972 (1

32nC.

r

Cr

it

/

(l+r)

32n0.

I

it

_____

cz

)

U

t

-

flnr

/

($ cc

-

(l.l$ (2npinw0) + $r+tt

cr

1

t—1972

r1972

/

(1 +

J(l+r1972)

ainr

Similar elasticities may be computed for the demand for leisure. The elasticity

of total expenditures, (E. a p C

t it

+ w Z ), with respect to wealth and
it it

nonhuman wealth may be computed as:

3inE.

(fi

it

= 1

it

8mW.

-

[
[

cc

+j3
cz÷zc
(E.it/Wit)

zz

j

/

(l+fl (Thp ThWo) +

40

(fi+$+fi+$)

anE.
=

1

/
-[

BlnWjt972

(E.t/W.t)t

it
ônW.it
flnE.

ThQnE.

it
—

Ô2nNHW.
it

1972

(N}TW.
it

/W. )

&EnE.

8.2nE.

antw.tlt1972

Given the estimated parameters and their estimated asymptotic variancecovariance matrix, these elasticities and their corresponding asymptotic
ptcit

standard errors can be estimated, conditional on the values of

it it

w. Z.

Wit

it

it

NT-lW.

and

the other independent variables.

Wt
We also compute the elasticities of consumption and leisure demands with

respect to the after-tax wage rate and the real after-tax rate of interest under

the assumption of full revaluation of human wealth of the household. Nonhuman
wealth of the household is assumed to consist entirely of floating rate assets
and liabilities and hence to remain unchanged with respect to changes in the
real after-tax rate of interest.

41

d2nC

(3.41)

it
Blnw.
it DlnW.it 3mw.it
3mG

DInG

DIt-IW.

+

dlnw.it

amnW

1 anw.

Bmw.it

W. aThw.

HW.

But

it

it

it

W.

where we have made use of the fact that (DmnUW. )/(8mnw.) =
assumptions on expectations. Hence:

dmnC

(342)

DInG

B2nC

MW.

it

•

+

dlnw.it

it

it

aInw.

B2nW.

it

W.

Similarly,
(3.43)

(3.44)

dInG

3ThC

dlnr t

Dint

DInG

DInW.
it
•

+

BmW.it

t

BInr

it

t

it

1 301W. + NBW.
_____________

BmW.it

—

Dlnr t

W.

t

it

1

BInr

BMW.

it

it

it

HW. 32nHW.

W 31nr W1 amnr
Thus, equation (3.43) maybe rewritten as:

42

1 under our

dnC

3mG

3ThG

—

(3.45)

dinr

t

HW.

3th}{W.

it

it

+
ôinr

t

Th€nR.

it

8inr

W.

it

t

which represents the elasticity of consumption with respect to an increase in

the real rate of interest with revaluation of human wealth. The values of
HW.

32n11W.

it

it

and
W.

may be calculated numerically for each age-cohort based on

t

it

its current and expected future wage rates and real rates of interest.
Finally, we attempt to estimate the effects of changes in the independent

variables on saving. The saving of the ith household in the tth period, S..
may be defined as the difference between current full income and current
expenditure on consumption and leisure:

(3.46)

where

sit w Z + (r+7r)NHW.

-

-

is the maximum quantity of leisure of the ith household in the tth

period.22 The elasticity formulae for saving may be computed as follows:23

22. Note that the net change in the value of wealth, including capital gains or
losses and transfers, is not included in this NIPA definition of saving, Of
course, transfers net to zero for the economy as a whole (except for net
unilateral transfers to foreigners).
23. It is assumed that 8,2nir/3inp — 0.

43

31nS.

1 aS

aThc

l

—

Th2nP

ainp

5it ampt

wZ aThz.
-

s aip

3.nS.

it

(w.(Z.

- Z.))/a2nwo

-

+

I

ptcit airic

sit a2nw0

82nS.

E.t a2nE.

aQnW.

S.

it

it

it

ô2nW.

(r-f1r)NHW. 25/

it

S.

24. S is allowed to take negative values. If S is negative,
ôInS.
it

a2np

is

it

1 as.
taken to be — _____
5it 8.Qnp

The same applies to the other saving elasticities below.
25. It is assumed that the change in wealth results from equal proportional changes
in both human and nonhuman wealth.

44

3nS.

E.t 3.2nE.

HW.t 26

amiw.it

s.itnnw.it

W.

8.2nS

it

E.t a.€nE. NHW.

-—

=

it

a2nNHtJ.
it

S.

B2nS.it
—

&2nE.

S.

ôlnr

B2nr

it

t

d.2nS.

—

dThw.

it

it

it

W

it
it

YIN.

r

+

it
Bmnw.
it

(r+lr )

W.

it
t

S.

it
it

3mnS.

3.2nS.

it

(3.47)

it

BmW.

it
-—
E.

NBW.
+

+

amn}IW.

26. We note that this effect is expected to be negative for positive saving
because the NIPA definition of saving does not include the net change in
wealth due to revaluation.

45

dlnS.
it

3.1n3.

it

(3.48)

t

d.2nr

&2nS.
it

BlnliW.

8.nHW.

Blnrt

it

÷

—
ThQnr

it

EN.

it

t

and

where the values of —,
W.

it

82nHW.
it

NHW.
it

t

We note that, with positive saving,

numerically for each age-cohort.

it

32nS.

may be calculated
ôinr

W.
it

3.EnHW.

it

and

both

32nr

3,nHW.
it

t
d.2nS.

are expected to be negative. Thus,

it>—

dnr

8inS.
it

32nr

that is, the interest elasticity of saving with human wealth evaluation is

expected to be greater than that without human wealth revaluation. With
negative saving, the opposite is true. One can also use these same formulae to
calculate the aggregate elasticities. For example, the elasticity of
aggregate saving with respect to the real after-tax rate of interest, with
human wealth revaluation, may be computed as:

cUnS

d9nS.

d,2nS.

=

/

dlnr

where s e

N.tSt

dinr

/

is

N.tSt

=

cUnr

the share (possibly negative) of

aggregate saving accounted for by households of the ith type in the tth
period.

46

4.

Empirical Results

4.1 A Brief Description of the Data
As discussed in the introduction and Section 3, we attempt to combine
various types of data in order to develop an improved empirical model of

aggregate consumption. Primarily, we combine disaggregated data on the age
distribution of income and its components and consumption with aggregate time

series data on consumption, leisure, wealth, and price variables. We use the
rich source of disaggregated information available in the annual Current
Population Surveys on income and other variables cross-tabulated by various
household characteristics such as age of head of household to build cohortspecific human and nonhuman wealth accounts which aggregate to national wealth.

We use additional information from the 1972-73 Consumer Expenditure Survey and
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics to estimate how the ratio of household
consumption and leisure to wealth varies by the age of the head of household.
The aggregate consumption data come from the National Income and Product
Accounts (NIPA), and no attempt is made here to develop a more consistent
treatment of the services of consumer durables, as is sometimes done (see, for
example, Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1988), Christensen and Jorgenson (1973), or
David and Scadding (1974)).

Data on interest rates, wage rates, and price levels are developed from
standard sources and their derivations are briefly described in the Appendix, as

are our data on female labor force participation and unemployment rates. Our
methods for deriving expected inflation and the expected present value of human

and nonhuman wealth are also briefly described in the Appendix. For human

47

wealth,

we estimate an age-wage profile

27

-

and discount expected future earnings

of each age cohort by the sum of the real after-tax discount rate and mortality

probability. For nonhuman wealth, we blow up, for each category of a property
income, the sum across all age cohorts so that it conforms to the corresponding
NIPA aggregate totals, and then capitalize total property income for each age

cohort. We use different discount rates for human and non-human capital as
discussed in the Appendix.

Before proceeding to a discussion of the econometric results it is
worthwhile to examine the trends in the actual consumption and leisure data.
Figure 4.1 presents the aggregate consumption and leisure expenditures for

the U.S. economy from 1947 to 1980 in constant 1972 prices. These have
grown steadily in the time period under study, with an apparent acceleration
in the rate beginning in the early 1960s.

Based on our estimated consumption and leisure expenditure equations, we
present in Section 5 below the decomposition of the annual growth rate of
aggregate consumption into factors presumed to explain it, broken down into two
periods, 1950-62 and 1963-80, roughly corresponding to modest and more rapid
growth in aggregate consumption, respectively.

Figure 4.2 presents a prelude to the econometric results. We compare the
estimated consumption to CNP ratio (derived from the product of our
econometrically estimated ratio of consumption to wealth and the ratio of our
estimated wealth to GNP) to the actual consumption to ON? ratio for the period

27. Male age-earnings profiles, controlling for education, race, etc., are quite
stable over time in the U.S., and surprisingly similar across countries (see,
for example, Smith and Welch (1986) and Psacharopoulos (1981)).

48

90

(billion, $)

1947

$0

$200

$400

$600

$800

$1,000

$1,200

$1,400

$1,600

$1,800

1952

1957

ieisture

1962

Coiisunipi iou

1967

lix peuniiftu res

(billion, 1972$)

awl Leistu re

Aggregaic Coiisiiiuptioii

Ii;iiuc 4.1

1972

1977

1947

0.56

0.58

0.60

0.62

0,64

0.66

0.68

0.70

1952

"'

1957

Est.Cons./GNP

1962

—

Cons/GNP

1967

Consuiaiptioii/GNP
Estiiiiated Consniiiption/GNP

Iiiiue '1.2

1972

1977

1947-80. In the immediate post-war period, saving, which had been a very small
fraction of GNP, rose substantially and this accounts for a five or six
percentage point decline in the consumption to CNP ratio from 1947 to 1951.

Consumption from the 1950s to the early l960s was relatively constant as a share

of CNP. Beginning in the early 1960s, it fell for several years, and then
fluctuated in a narrow band around 0.61 through the end of the 1970s. Our
estimated consumption/GNP ratio tracks the actual consumption/CNP ratio quite

well. The maximum deviation for any year is about one percent of CNP.
Figure 4.3 looks at the flip side of consumption, namely saving.

It

presents the actual NIPA saving to CNP ratio and the estimated saving to GNP

ratio derived from our consumption expenditure equation reported below. Again,
from a very low rate in the immediate post-war period, saving as a ratio of GNP
rose rapidly in the late 1940s, was fairly level around 7% throughout the 195Os,

rose to a little over 8% in the early 1970s, and has been on a somewhat downward
trend from the early 1970s to 1980 (a trend which continued in the l9SOs).

Again, since our estimated consumption to CNP ratio reflects actual consumption
to CNP quite well, so does our estimated saving to GNP ratio track actual saving

to CNP quite well. The maximum deviation is again approximately 1% of CNP (in
1957, at the time considered a bad recession).
We now turn to a detailed discussion of the econometric model and results.

These results include estimates of aggregate consumption and leisure expenditure
share (of aggregate wealth) equations, tests of various hypotheses concerning
aggregate consumption and estimates of parameters of particular economic
interest.

49

;L.

t

1947

0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

.0.10

1952

[

1962

list. Saviiig/GNP

1957

Saviiig/GNP

1967

Estimated Saving/GNP

SavingJGNP

'1.3

1972

1977

4.2 Econometric Specification and Estimation
We start from the specifications in equations (3.37) and (3.38). We
distinguish the types of households by means of the following set of dummy
variables:

1, if the age of the head of the ith household is between 14 and 24
years in the tth period;

it I1o,

otherwise.

if the age of the head of the ith household is between 25 and
34 years in the tth period;

D

otherwise
if the age of the head of the ith household is between 35 and
44 years in the tth period;

I
Io
1,

otherwise.

if the age of the head of the ith household is between 55 and
64 years in the tth period;

5
it
I.

65

otherwise.

1, if the age of the head of the ith household is greater than or
equal to 65 in the tth period;
otherwise.

if the head of the ith household in the tth period was born prior
to 1939;

otherwise.

We note that because of the presence of the constants a and a in equations
(3.37) and (3.38), it is not necessary to have a dummy variable for households

headed by persons in the age-cohort of 45-54 years. We further note that the
dummy variable D?9 attempts to distinguish between those households headed
by persons who experienced the Great Depression and those which were not.
In accordance with equations (3.37) and (3.38), we form variables of the
type:

50

Wit
for each j and t. These variables may be interpreted as the share of aggregate
wealth held by households headed by persons in the jth age-cohort in the tth
period.

In addition1 we introduce two non-household specific independent variables

which are believed to influence current consumption and leisure decisions. The
first variable is the female labor force participation rate (FLPR) in
percent.28 The second variable is the unemployment rate, represented by the
natural logarithm of the prime age white male unemployment rate (UE), in

percent. These two independent variables, as well as the share of wealth held
by the pre-1939 cohort, are presented in Figure 4.4 (normalized to be 1.0 in

1972), and compared against the pure time trend variable. It is readily
apparent that these variables move quite independently of one another and of the
pure time trend.

Finally, we add stochastic disturbance terms to both the consumption and

leisure expenditure share equations. The stochastic disturbance terms are
assumed to have a constant variance-covariance matrix over time and are possibly

correlated across equations but not across time periods. We use annual data

28. For the leisure expenditure equation, it is assumed that the female labor
force participation rate has no effect before 1963. The female labor force
participation rate accelerated around 1963, as did related household
formation and dissolution data, and it roughly marked the beginning of the
changing perception of women's roles in society.

51

Lii

[

— Time

0.50

0.70

0.90

110

1.30

1.50

1.70

Male uiictiiiIoyuiieiit)

In( Ikinic Age While

by

1939 cohort

of Wealth I icld
Pie—

Share

Additional RegressorsUsed iii Base Case
(iiouiializcd 1972 I)

Iiguii c 'I/I

ciiiale Labor
Pail icipat ion kale
I

from 1947 through 1980 for the estimation. The method of estimation used is
maximum likelihood, conditional on the given values of the right-hand-side

variables.29 The final specification takes the form:

(4.1) pC1 /

+ P £nw0
+ a

14(D}W. / LW.)

÷

a65(DW.)

+

/

Wi)]

ccczWitWit/Wit)

a25(YD?Wit/W.t)

+ a

÷ a 35(D?W. /

+

+

+$crm(l+rt)) -

55(D?tJ. /

W.t)

FLPR ÷

/

[l+$c(ThPtnwot)+$r2n(l+rt)]

+6 ct
(4.2)

/

wit

29. While at the level of the individual household it is reasonable to assume that
the household is a price-taker in the markets of consumption, labor and credit,
in the aggregate it is not plausible to maintain that the prices are exogenous
or predetermined. Thus, it may be preferable to estimate the parameters by a
nonlinear instrumental variables approach. This will be attempted at a later
date.

52

[(a+smPt÷s2nwot+sln(l+rt)) -

÷ ai4(D}Wi /

W.)+ a
W.)

+

(p+a)(W.nW.

2S(DW.t /

÷

/

LW.)

W.t)
/

LW.)

a6s(YDtJ.t /

+

FLPR

1UE +

/

/ [l+$(2np-Thw0)+fin(l+r]

zt

A word needs to be said about the estimation of the parameters a 's
cJ

and a.'s. They are not estimated entirely from the aggregate time-series
consumption and leisure to wealth share equations. Instead, the difference
between the consumption expenditure-wealth ratios (and the leisure
expenditure-wealth ratios) of any two age cohorts in 1972 is assumed to be

the same as the difference between the corresponding averages derived from

the 1972-73 Consumer Expenditure Survey. However, the absolute levels of
the cohort-specific consumption expenditure-wealth and leisure expenditure-

wealth ratios are not constrained to be the same as the averages in the

1972-1973 Consumer Expenditure Survey. In addition, these ratios are
required to satisfy unimodality constraints, that is, the slopes of their
respective age profiles are allowed to change signs only once up to age 64.

53

