                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            LONG-TERM EFFECTS FROM EARLY EXPOSURE TO RESEARCH:
                   EVIDENCE FROM THE NIH "YELLOW BERETS''

                                        Pierre Azoulay
                                      Wesley H. Greenblatt
                                      Misty L. Heggeness

                                       Working Paper 26069
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26069


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2019, Revised March 2020




Address all correspondence to pazoulay@mit.edu. This project was supported by the National
Institute on Aging under Award Number R24-AG048059 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We thank Dr. Michael Gottesman, Dr. Michael Lauer, and Dr. Kay Lund for their
steadfast support and encouragement. We are indebted to Dr. Anthony Fauci, Dr. Michael
Gottesman, Dr. Richard G. Wyatt, and Dr. John Gallin for reflecting on their experiences in the
ATP and encouraging us to investigate the impact of the NIH Intramural Program during the
Vietnam War. We would also like to thank Daniel Boehlert, Andrew Breazeale, Delaney
Cruickshank, Daphne Hines, Maria Isabel Larenas, Kyle Myers, Ryan Pfirrmann-Powell, Lindsey
Raymond, and Ying Zeng for their diligent efforts in sorting, entering, matching, and curating the
data. Lastly, this project would not be feasible without the help of Barbara Harkins and
Christopher Wanjek from the NIH Office of History. We also thank Scott Stern as well as
seminar audiences at Georgia Tech, Wisconsin, and Northwestern for constructive feedback. Any
opinions (and all errors) are solely those of the authors and do not represent any official position
of the U.S. Census Bureau, NIH, the Federal Reserve System, or the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Pierre Azoulay, Wesley H. Greenblatt, and Misty L. Heggeness. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-term Effects from Early Exposure to Research: Evidence from the NIH "Yellow Berets''
Pierre Azoulay, Wesley H. Greenblatt, and Misty L. Heggeness
NBER Working Paper No. 26069
July 2019, Revised March 2020
JEL No. I23,I26,M53,O31

                                           ABSTRACT

Can a relatively short but intense exposure to frontier research alter the career trajectories of
potential innovators? To answer this question, we study the careers and productivity of 3,075
medical school graduates who applied to the Associate Training Programs (ATP) of the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) during the turbulent period of the Vietnam War, 1965- 1975. Carefully
selecting on observables, we compare physicians who attended the program to those who passed
a first admission screen but were ultimately not selected. We find that program participants were
twice as likely to choose a research-focused position after training, and considerably less likely to
switch to purely clinical endeavors as their careers unfolded. Over the life cycle, NIH trainees
also garnered publications, citations, and grant funding at a much higher rate than synthetic
controls. The direction of their research efforts was also durably imprinted by their training
experience. In particular, NIH trainees appear to have acquired a distinct “translational” style of
biomedical research which became an implicit training model for physician-scientists as ATP
alumni came to occupy the commanding heights of academic medicine throughout the United
States.

Pierre Azoulay                                    Misty L. Heggeness
MIT Sloan School of Management                    U.S. Census Bureau
100 Main Street, E62-487                          4600 Silver Hill Road
Cambridge, MA 02142                               Washington, DC 20233
and NBER                                          and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
pazoulay@mit.edu                                  misty.l.heggeness@census.gov

Wesley H. Greenblatt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-483
Cambridge, MA 02142
whg@mit.edu
                                “[The ATP] did not help [my career], it made it. . . I followed a pathway
                                that was a combination of hard work, some talent and being in the
                                right place at the right time. . . None of that would have happened had
                                I not come down here as a Clinical Associate. . . [I would have] gone to
                                Vietnam for a few years in the Navy, [and then] I would have probably
                                returned to New York Hospital. I would probably be practicing
                                medicine right now on 69th Street and First Avenue. The Clinical
                                Associate program put me on a career track that I am still on.”
                                                                 Anthony Fauci, Director, NIAID
                                                                                Oral History (1998)




1    Introduction
   It has become a truism among economists and policy-makers that innovation and tech-
nological advances are a key determinant of economic growth (Solow 1957, Romer 1990,
Aghion and Howitt 1992). But innovation is fundamentally constrained by the supply of
innovators—those individuals whose skills and knowledge put them at risk of bringing forth
a useful “new-to-the-world” idea. Innovators are made, rather than simply born, and growth
possibilities are shaped by the institutions, incentives, and norms that nudge would-be in-
novators to receive the training necessary to bring themselves to the frontier. Indeed, over
the past century, macro evidence suggests that only by steadily increasing the number of
workers engaged in formal R&D activities has a steady growth rate in income per capita
been sustained (Jones 1995).

    In the medium run at least, designing institutions that might increase the supply of
potential innovators is therefore of crucial policy importance. Yet, severe headwinds frustrate
efforts to broaden the innovator pipeline. First, because scientific and engineering training
is protracted, individual career choices are often shrouded in uncertainty, both with respect
to the monetary payoffs and the direction of human capital investments likely to earn the
best labor market returns. Witness, for example, the dismal track record of “manpower
analysis” and the perennially flawed predictions of “innovator shortage” (Freeman 1975,
Teitelbaum 2014). Second, innovative careers are fragile (Milojevic et al. 2018) both because
of the winner-take-most aspect of the scientific reward system, and because skills at the
frontier depreciate rapidly, leading many initial entrants to abandon the idea sector and
reenter the production sector (Deming and Noray 2018). Third, especially for countries with
domestic training capabilities, restrictions on high-skilled immigration can act as a brake on
plugging leaks in the innovator pipeline (Kerr 2018). As a result of these headwinds and the



                                                 1
elimination of mandatory retirement in academia in the mid-1990s, the scientific workforce
is aging rapidly (Blau and Weinberg 2017).

    Despite the paucity of research examining the allocation of talent to innovative activities,
some recent evidence points to an important friction, that of exposure to research during
an individual’s formative years. In a telling anecdote, Urschel and Thomas (2019) recount
how pro-footballer turned Math PhD student John Urschel’s athletic prowess was identified
and nurtured from a young age, whereas his mathematical talents were left undeveloped
until a chance encounter with an inquisitive college instructor. More systematically, Bell
et al. (2019), using IRS tax records linked to U.S. Patent data, provide evidence of a
strong association between fathers and sons’ propensity to patent in the exact same narrow
patent class, a finding most easily explained by early socialization opportunities regarding
the feasibility and desirability of a research career.

    The existence of exposure effects might at first blush appear surprising, but their poten-
tial importance is better appreciated if one remembers that early research careers exhibit
both brittleness—in the sense that small negative shocks can shift individuals back to the
production sector of the economy (Hill 2018)—and malleability—in the sense that the flexi-
bility to alter one’s research trajectory declines over the life cycle (Higgins 2005). Together,
brittleness and malleability suggest that transient but intense formative experiences in the
early career may significantly influence potential innovators’ decision to enter the “ideas sec-
tor” of the economy, as well as their choice of research trajectory, domain, or methodology.

    Despite the empirical plausibility of exposure effects, providing convincing evidence of
their existence and magnitude presents seemingly insurmountable challenges. Three neces-
sary ingredients are required. First, one needs to identify a population of “naı̈ve to research”
individuals who nonetheless possess much of the human capital required to propel themselves
to the research frontier. Second, one requires an intervention consisting of a short but intense
exposure to research in a rarefied intellectual environment to a (preferably random) subset
of this population. A final requirement is the opportunity to observe these individuals for a
long period with minimal loss to follow-up, and see their career unfold.

    In this paper, we study an intervention in physician training that comes close to bringing
together these three ingredients: The Associate Training Program (ATP) of the National
Institutes of Health (NIH). The ATP brought recent MD graduates to the intramural campus
of the NIH in Bethesda, Maryland for two to three years to participate in research under
the supervision of NIH investigators. Though quite small when the program was founded in


                                               2
1953, its scale steadily grew with applications dramatically increasing during the years of the
Vietnam War.1 The ATP can be considered a large human capital intervention not because
it selected a particularly large cohort (even at its 1973 peak, the program drafted only 229
associates, or approximately 2.5% of graduating male students) but because it induced a
very high proportion of eligible participants to actually apply, from around 20% in 1963 to
close to 80% in 1971.2 Though some applicants had prior exposure to biomedical research
in medical school or during their undergraduate studies, the unpopularity of the war drove
many physicians who otherwise would not have been interested in a research career to apply
for one of those coveted positions (Varmus 2009). This unique confluence of events provides
us with a quasi-experimental lever to disentangle the role of sorting from that of training
and mentorship, always a vexing challenge in empirical studies of the scientific labor market.

    We study the careers and productivity of 3,075 medical school graduates who applied
to the ATP during the turbulent period of the Vietnam War. Following the serendipitous
discovery of previously unexamined index cards, our sample includes all male physician
applicants who applied to the program and were interviewed on campus between 1965 and
1975. We build a rich hand-collected data set containing the complete training and career
histories for these individuals, including all publication, patents, NIH grants, and citations.

    Despite lasting only two to three years, we find that the ATP had a large and sustained
impact on the careers of those who attended. Carefully selecting on observables, we com-
pare physicians who attended the program to those who passed a first admission screen but
were ultimately not selected. Relative to synthetic control applicants, we find that program
participants were twice as likely to sort into research-focused positions (mostly, but not
exclusively in academic medicine), and dramatically less prone to switch to purely clinical
endeavors as their careers unfolded. Over the life cycle, NIH trainees also garnered pub-
lications, citations, and grant funding at a much higher rate than synthetic controls, with
over a 70% higher odds of joining the biomedical research elite.3 Moreover, the direction of
their research efforts was durably imprinted by their training experience. In particular, NIH
   1
     A unique aspect of the program is that for historical reasons, these physician-trainees became commis-
sioned officers in the U.S. Public Health Service upon acceptance, and as such their participation fulfilled
a draftee’s military service requirement (Berry 1976). After the war ended, trainees began to refer them-
selves ironically as “Yellow Berets,” a derogatory term used to contrast draft dodgers with the elite Green
Berets—the U.S. Army Special Forces (Baskir and Strauss 1978, Klein 1998).
   2
     Since records on the total number of applicants in each year have not survived, the first figure comes
from a back of the envelope calculation (see footnote 7), whereas the second stems from anecdotal accounts
that are plausible, but hard to substantiate empirically.
   3
     Defined as receiving the Nobel Prize, being appointed Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator,
being elected to the National Academy of Science/Medicine, or winning an NIH R37 MERIT award.



                                                     3
trainees appear to have acquired a distinct “translational” style of biomedical research which
became an implicit training model for physician-scientists as ATP alumni came to occupy
the commanding heights of academic medicine throughout the United States.

    In addition to the unique historical importance of the NIH ATP (Klein 1998, Khot et
al. 2011), our study sheds light on the forces that shape skill acquisition in medicine, and
how medical training influences the rate and direction of medical progress. Much of the
training physicians receive in medical school, internship, and residency is fungible between
medical care and medical research. Early in their career, physicians invest heavily in human
capital, but then typically go on to apply their skills narrowly, for the benefits of their
(private) patients. These same skills, however, can be redeployed in research activities,
where physician effort also generates social returns. In fact, it has been a long-standing
policy goal of the medical elite to steer a larger number of physicians towards research
careers (Wyngaarden 1979). As a result, studying the NIH training programs in the Vietnam
War era provides a unique window on the long-term consequences of exogenously shifting
a well-defined population from the “production sector” of the economy (i.e., clinical care)
to its “ideas sector” (i.e., biomedical research, including bench, clinical, and translational
research).

    The rest of the manuscript proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides institutional back-
ground on the NIH ATP program, including the procedures used to select the trainees.
Section 3 describes our sample construction and provides descriptive statistics. Section 4
discusses our econometric approach, while Section 5 presents our main results. Section 6
concludes.


2    Institutional Setting
    Relative to other professional or creative endeavors, the scientific labor market is notable
for the extent to which, at any given point of time, a handful of research institutions are
responsible for training a disproportionate share of the future elite in a field while simul-
taneously providing an extraordinary environment for breakthrough discoveries. Examples
abound from a wide variety of scientific fields. In Physics, the Cavendish laboratory was the
prime breeding ground of atomic physicists in the first half of the twentieth century (Rhodes
1986); the Laboratory of Molecular Biology, also located at the University of Cambridge,
played a similar role for biomedical research after the second world war (Bynum 2012, Rubin
2006). This phenomenon is not limited to the physical sciences. For example, the MIT



                                               4
economics department stands out from those located at other universities in the extent to
which it spawned a community of academics who went on to exert a profound influence on
the discipline (Svorenc̆ı́k 2014).

    During the period of our study, the intramural campus of the NIH, located in Bethesda,
Maryland, was widely recognized as one of the preeminent biomedical research institutions.
One aspect setting it apart from other elite institutions, however, was its unique ability to
attract recently minted physicians eager to pursue a research career. Due to the confluence
of multiple factors—the Doctor Draft, plentiful federal funding, and the opening of a massive
clinical research center in 1953—the NIH had probably no equal in the world with respect
to the training of “physician-scientists” (Park 2003). Below, we draw on historical evidence,
including a large archive of oral histories curated by the NIH Office of History4 to describe
this setting in more detail, review the genesis and development of the Associate Training
Program, and describe how trainees were selected and trained during this period.


2.1      The Intramural Campus of the National Institutes of Health
         and Its Research Environment

    NIH traces its roots to 1887, when a one-room “Laboratory of Hygiene” was created
within the Marine Hospital Service, a predecessor agency to the U.S. Public Health Service.
This laboratory evolved into the Hygienic Laboratory, which moved to Washington, D.C.
in 1891 and, with the Ransdell Act of 1930, became the National Institute of Health. NIH
remained primarily an intramural effort until after World War II, although it collaborated
with academic institutions during wartime to solve war-related health problems such as the
need for large-scale production of penicillin and the need for new drugs for malaria treatment.
In 1944, the Public Health Service Act authorized the Public Health Service to make grants
to universities, laboratories, and hospitals for the conduct of research. The early success of
the extramural funding component of the National Cancer Institute (which became part of
NIH in 1947) laid the foundation for the concept of a health research agency relying on a
mix of extramural and intramural research (NIH Office of History 1982).

    After the war, Vannevar Bush, director of the Office of Scientific Research and Devel-
opment, outlined a program for postwar scientific research which affirmed the contributions
of “remote and unexpected fields of medicine and the underlying sciences” in the progress
against disease, and the benefits of cooperative endeavors with industry and academia (Cas-
  4
      https://history.nih.gov/archives/oral histories.html



                                              5
sell et al. 1994). Over the next few decades, Congress greatly increased funding to the
NIH, and various institutes and centers within the NIH were created for specific research
programs. The 1953 opening of the Clinical Center on the NIH campus added a new di-
mension to the intramural program—a large capability for patient-related research in close
proximity to basic research laboratories—and brought to the campus a new complement of
physicians as well as other professionals and staff needed to run a research hospital (Shapiro
et al. 1988).

    By the early 1960s, the NIH intramural program had become an elite research institution,
a fact acknowledged by a committee report criticizing the rationale for its existence on
the grounds that “. . . the government should not undertake the direct conduct of research
activities that fit precisely into the pattern of scientific work that the universities or other non-
government institutions are equipped to perform” (Wooldridge Committee Report 1965).5

    Oral histories from NIH staff are replete with claims attesting to the cutting edge research,
deep expertise, and concentration of talent in biomedical research within the confines of the
intramural campus that resulted in this rarefied environment. Alan Schechter, an ATP fellow
and later Chief of the Molecular Medicine Branch at the NIH noted the NIH created much
of the psychiatric research at the biochemical level, research which was “almost non-existent
anywhere else in the country, or throughout the world, before it was started at the [National
Institute of Mental Health] in Bethesda” (Schechter and Schechter 1998). Similarly, Vincent
DeVita, an ATP fellow who helped to develop the first successful combination chemotherapy
program and held a series of leadership positions at the National Cancer Institute, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, and Yale recalls that “I was going to stay at Yale for a
fellowship, as well, but after I got here I realized that what I was doing at the NIH was
so much more advanced in the cancer field than what was going on here at Yale, that I
just decided to go back” (DeVita 1997). Donald Fredrickson, the Director of NIH between
1975 and 1981, emphasized the breadth of expertise available, noting “you had an expert in
virtually everything you were working on right here on this campus,” so often collaborating
or learning new techniques was a simple walk down the hallway (Fredrickson 1998).

    In addition to its scientific expertise, the NIH at the time had several unique strengths. Its
culture is often described as more similar to a university than to a government research lab.
Unlike a university, however, investigators had fewer administrative and teaching responsi-
   5
      Writing a letter to Science in defense of the intramural program, Alfred Gellhorn, a prominent physician-
scientist at Columbia University noted the importance of research training for physicians, asserting that
“. . . this enlargement of manpower in the health-research sciences would be justification enough for the intra-
mural program” (Gellhorn 1965).


                                                       6
bilities, allowing them to focus a greater proportion of their time on research. Resources
were plentiful, and intramural funding protected investigators from the vagaries of the grant
peer review process. The culture encouraged researchers to be independent and explore their
own ideas wherever they led. Edward Scolnick, an ATP fellow and former head of research
and development at Merck Research Laboratories noted that at the NIH, “the obligation was
that you shouldn’t just turn out the papers. You really had to work on something that was
truly meaningful” (Scolnick 1998).

    The draft, and resulting remarkable concentration of talent in one location, also con-
tributed to the research environment at the NIH. Harry Kimball, an ATP fellow and former
President of the American Board of Internal Medicine, recalls, “the very best people and
trainees in the country came to the NIH and that of course led to an atmosphere and an en-
vironment which was truly remarkable. . . Make no mistake the draft concentrated a number of
brilliant minds at one institution” (Kimball 1997). Beyond just impacting their experience
on the NIH campus, the density of talent at the NIH helped form a rich network alumni
could tap into later in their careers.

    Finally, many ATP fellows came to view the focus on what would later be called trans-
lational research as a distinctive element of the approach to research at the NIH. This was
no accident. James Shannon, one of the early leaders of the NIH, carefully structured the
intramural program to facilitate close cooperation between basic and clinical research (Gold-
stein and Brown 1997, Park 2003). This was reinforced in the physical design of buildings,
where the clinical center had patient care areas and research laboratories adjacent to one an-
other within each floor to facilitate interactions across them. Shannon saw a special role for
the physician-scientist, who could make fundamental discoveries about biologic mechanisms
and apply these findings to the bedside. Anthony Fauci, an ATP alumni and prominent
HIV/AIDS researcher, recalls, “what the Clinical Associate Program does is it gives you a
very interesting perspective on the relationship between disease and the basic science that you
have to study to be able to approach disease. . . Also the link, as we used to say, between the
bed and the bench, you see something at the bedside, you bring it back and ask the question at
the bench or you make a discovery at the bench and you go back and apply it to the bedside,
that bedside to bench phenomena was really what the Clinical Associates program was all
about” (Fauci 1998). Fauci also contrasts the approach at the NIH to those of other aca-
demic medical centers at the time, “[At Cornell] there was very little time to think about why
patients developed certain diseases or infections. It was always treat them, get them ready
and get them out. Whereas at the NIH, you see the patient and then you say, ‘You know, I
think I want to do a project to ask that question.’”


                                              7
2.2     The Associate Training Program

    The NIH ATP started in 1953 with about 15 medical graduates to provide research
training to physicians (Klein 1998). Associates would come to the NIH and do research
under NIH investigators, usually after completing a portion of their residency training. Two
years were typically spent in the program, but in some cases there was the option to extend
the period to three years. From the start, the program was focused on turning physicians
into independent medical investigators well-grounded in scientific knowledge and methods.
The goal was on learning how to do research more than simply doing research itself and
on bringing the physicians into close contact with accomplished scientists. In addition to
the research, the NIH also hosted a set of after-hours basic sciences courses for program
participants that could rival the offerings of major universities. Christian Anfinsen, a Nobel
Laureate and NIH investigator during the early years of the program, describes its key
features: “The importance of having the [associates] work on problems of [their] own choice
rather than be servants in the research problems of the preceptor, and the importance of
providing the student[s] with some integrated and organized basic knowledge as a foundation
that would permit them to do their own integrating of knowledge later” (Anfinsen 1963).
While the focus was on research, for some clinical specialties and subspecialties participants
were able to get credit for their time at the NIH towards their required clinical training for
board certification.

    By the early 1960s, the Associate Training Program at the NIH had been expanded to
include three separate tracks. Clinical associates would divide their time between clinical
care at the NIH Clinical Center and laboratory research. Research associates would spend
most of their time on research and had limited clinical responsibilities. Staff associates also
had training in research administration as well as undertaking clinical or laboratory research.

    Since the NIH, through historical accident, grew out of a laboratory within one of the
U.S. Navy Marine Hospitals, ATP applicants applied to the program under the auspices
of the U.S. Public Health Service and those selected became commissioned officers. This
allowed service with the U.S. Public Health Service to fulfill any military service obligation
a physician may have if drafted.6
   6
    Of note, in addition to the NIH, the U.S. Public Health Service had other programs through which
physicians could apply to spend two years of service, including at the Center for Disease Control, the Food
and Drug Administration, and the Indian Health Service.




                                                    8
    Understanding the institutional setting of the NIH ATP requires reviewing the relation-
ship between physicians and the military draft during the Korean and Vietnam Wars. With
the start of the Korean War in June of 1950, there was an increased need for physician in
the military to care for the expanding population of enlisted personnel. While physicians
could be drafted, their extended training and educational exemptions in the draft allowed
them a better chance to avoid being called through the standard draft process (Card and
Lemieux 2001, Park 2003). To ensure an adequate supply of physician draftees, lawmakers
passed an amendment to the Selective Service Act in September of 1950, colloquially known
as the Doctor Draft. This amendment allowed for the special registration and induction of
physician and certain allied health professionals. The Berry Plan, named after Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Health and Medical Affairs Frank Berry, was enacted in 1954 and
modified the Doctor Draft. The Berry Plan allowed trainees to defer their military service
during medical school and for a certain portion of their residency training; however, timing
preferences were often not honored (Berry 1976, Klein 1998). In 1967 there were additional
restrictions on exemptions for physicians seeking draft deferment. This change in exemp-
tions, along with increasing needs by the Department of Defense, led to about 6,000 of the
9,000 doctors graduating from medical school annually to be drafted, with about 700 physi-
cians, dentists, and allied professionals able to fulfill military obligations through the Public
Health Service Commissioned Corps (Committee on Labor and Public Welfare 1970).

    While the NIH ATP began on a small scale, it steadily grew throughout the 1950s and
1960s. The NIH was often seen as a highly desirable place to spend time for young doctors,
reflecting both its prominence within the U.S. biomedical R&D ecosystem as well as its
singular position as a training center that would enable young physicians to fulfill their
military obligations while still advancing their medical careers. The interest in and level of
competition for spots in the program increased in proportion to the perceived hardship of
military service. The program, however, was highly competitive even before the increased
interest during the Vietnam War. Unfortunately, there is no reliable information on the
total number of applicants to the program, except in a single year before the start of our
information period: 1963. That year 53 of 1,464 physician applicants were selected (NIH
Office of Research Information 1963).7 At its peak, in 1973, the program included 229
associates (Klein 1998). In contrast, in the year following the 1973 Paris Peace Accords which
effectively led to an end to the military draft, the NIH was not able to fill its associateship
   7
     In 1963 there were 7,265 graduates from US Medical Schools (Association of American Medical Colleges
2016), an estimated 5.6% of which were female (Snyder 1993). Using this, we can conclude approximately
21% of eligible applicants actually applied to the NIH ATP in 1963.




                                                   9
quota for the year, and by 1976 included only 108 physicians, down over 50% from its peak
(Klein 1998).

    While certainly some of the physicians would have applied to and attended the program
regardless of the war, avoiding the draft was a significant motivation for some physicians.
Donald Frederickson, a former director of the NIH and one of the first clinical associates
in the program in 1953, later played a role in determining who to admit to the program
during the 1960s and 1970s. He recalled, “The NIH Associates program would never have
been as popular or as competitive as it was without the draft” (Fredrickson 1998). Anthony
Fauci, a program alumni and the former head of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease, echoed these sentiments “. . . every single physician went into military
service. . . essentially, I came down to the NIH because I didn’t have any choice” (Fauci
1989). The ability of program participants to fulfill their military service requirement did
not escape popular attention. The NIH associates were often called the “Yellow Berets,”
although the exact origin of this term is unclear (Klein 1998).8

    Not only did the draft influence individual decisions to apply to the NIH, it shaped the
growth of the NIH by facilitating concentration of talent in one location. Some have argued
that the ATP and doctor draft played an important role in the preeminence of the NIH for
precisely this reason (Park 2003). Harry Kimball, an alumni of the program and former
president of the American Board of Internal Medicine said, “We all knew we were going to
serve in the military one way or the other. . . so it was just a matter of trying to arrange the
best possible experience during your military time. . . the fact that there was a doctor draft
made the NIH the premier place.” (Kimball 1997).


2.3     The Application Process

    Applications to the NIH ATP were typically submitted two years in advance, generally
during the final year of medical school with a planned program start date after completing in-
ternship and the first year of residency training. Applications included academic transcripts,
references, publications, and planned post-graduate training institutions. After a first screen
based on these documents, a small number of applicants were invited to interview on campus
at the NIH in order to match with a particular laboratory and mentor. Unfortunately, much
of this written documentation was destroyed, leaving only the application index cards of the
subset of candidates who cleared the first admission hurdle and attempted to match with a
   8
    Bob Seger wrote a parody of Barry Sadler’s “The Ballad of the Green Berets” called “The Ballad of the
Yellow Beret,” which was composed by D. Dodger in 1966.


                                                   10
laboratory. There is also no official record of the labs with which each participant attempted
to match or of offers made. The data can only tell us that out of these second round appli-
cants, roughly 63% accepted an ATP position and attended the program. According to the
NIH’s official documentation, these final appointments were made based upon intellectual
attainment and demonstrated research interest and ability (NIH 1968).

    Applicants were undoubtedly positively selected from the eligible population—male med-
ical school graduates. In Appendix B, Table B1, we can see that compared to a random
sample of non-applicants drawn from the American Medical Association (AMA) Physician
Master File, applicants graduated from more selective medical schools (as measured by NIH
grants) and published at significantly higher rates than non-applicants before application (0.9
vs. 0.3 publications on average). However, it would be wrong to conclude from this evidence
that applicants displayed a preternatural disposition for research career prior to application.
For instance, the median number of publications for applicants is zero; the overwhelming
majority of applicants do not hold a PhD degree; and applicants do not appear particu-
larly precocious, relative to the eligible population (kernel densities corresponding to the age
distribution of at the time of application for applicants and non applicants is depicted in
Figure B1; the two curves are nearly identical).9

    The oral and written historical records also speak to the difficulty in evaluating research
potential and making decisions between candidates. Donald Fredrickson, an ATP alumnus
who later served on the selection committee for the program in the 1960s and 1970s, recalls
that “. . . the main objective was getting people who would use this environment to turn into
scientists,” but also notes selecting participants was “extremely difficult because all we really
had was the scholastic record of most people. Very few had done any research. . . so the
art of picking out of a whole group of qualified people those who might become successful
scientists was extremely difficult. . . We would have to pick them with a certain amount of
variety because our programs needed people of diverse interests” (Fredrickson 1998). Harry
Kimball, another alumnus of the program who was also later involved in applicant selection
remembers “It was truly astonishing how qualified these people were and the kind of close
decisions you had to make as to who to offer a spot in the program” (Kimball 1997). Harold
Varmus describes how the decisive factor in his own selection into the program likely did not
   9
    An additional piece of evidence argues against viewing the applicant population as being dominated
by science “geniuses”: matching carefully the applicant roster with the Directory of Rhodes Scholars, we
found only seven matches (four treated physicians and three control physicians). Note that comparisons
with “non-applicants” are subject to an important caveat: since we do not know the identity of the first-
round applicants, our sample of non-applicants could in fact include individuals who did not pass the first
application screen.



                                                    11
hinge on his promise as a budding scientist. Rather, he writes that during his interview with
Ira Pastan “My schooling in literature turned out to be more important than my interest in
endocrinology, Ira’s field, because Ira’s wife Linda, a poet, had often complained that Ira’s
colleagues seldom talked about books. Ira, himself an enthusiastic reader, thought it might be
helpful to have someone with my background in his lab” (Varmus 2009).


2.4    Prior Evaluations

    A handful of prior studies have examined the program. Klein (1998) provides a thorough
description of the ATP and the NIH during the Vietnam era grounded primarily in the
conduct and review of historical documents and interviews. We have drawn on her analysis
to provide much of the necessary institutional background required to guide our empirical
analysis. Khot et al. (2001) analyze the careers of NIH ATP attendees from 1955 to 1973,
comparing them to a random sample of medical school faculty that graduated in the same
years selected from the Association of American Medical Colleges Faculty Roster. The
authors show that relative to these controls, ATP participants were 150% more likely to
achieve the rank of full professor, twice as likely to become a department chair, and three
times as likely to become a medical school dean. Matching the population of attendees with a
series of prestige markers appropriate for biomedical researchers, they found in their sample
nine winners of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, ten recipients of the National
Medal of Science, 44 members of the National Academy of Sciences, and 125 members of the
Institute of Medicine. Our study improves on their design with a more appropriate control
group, that of unsuccessful applicants to the ATP, which helps shed light not simply on the
effect of ATP attendance on the intensive margin—articles, citations, grants, patents—but
also on the extensive margin: how did selection shape applicants choice of career, in particular
participation in research activities as opposed to purely clinical endeavors?


3     Empirical Design, Data, and Descriptive Statistics
3.1    Data

   The application index cards for the NIH Associate Training Programs form the raw
material for the creation of our dataset. While the cards for successful applicants had
been previously digitized and used in prior research efforts (e.g., Khot et al. 2011), the
index card for applicants who did not attend the program were previously thought to have
been destroyed. In 2015, carton boxes containing a subset of these index cards—those


                                              12
corresponding to applicants who interviewed on campus but were ultimately not offered a
position—were discovered at the National Archives by the NIH archivist, Barbara Harkins.
Figure 1 displays the number of index cards in our dataset in each year belonging to our
observation window, 1965 and 1975. While the ratio of successful to unsuccessful applicants
is approximately 2:1 over the entire period, this average masks large swings, with the years
1970, 1971, and 1972 exhibiting a greater proportion of unsuccessful applicants. These years
correspond to the height of the Vietnam War mobilization effort, coincidentally those during
which the draft lottery was in effect.

    We limited our analysis to those who applied to the program between 1965 and 1975.
To arrive at the final list of 3,075 applicants, we eliminated 22 applicants who did not hold
an MD degree, three unsuccessful applicants who applied at the very start of medical school
(and did not reapply), and eight who died while in training, or soon thereafter. We also
excluded 34 female and 22 foreign medical school graduates as their motivations to apply,
and conditional on applying, attend may have been very different from applicants subject to
the draft. Despite our best effort, we also lost 13 applicants to follow-up (less than 0.42% of
the total). In the case of repeated applications for the same applicant, we retained only the
latest one.

    For each of these physicians, we manually collected their training and career history using
a mix of Google, Doximity, and LinkedIn searches; medical licensure records; professional
profiles and CVs; Who’s Who profiles; and other publicly available internet sources. These
were supplemented with physician biographical information contained in the AMA Physician
Masterfile. To ascertain treatment status, participation in the ATP was verified with the
biographical resources above as well as NIH telephone directories and internal human resource
records.10 Applicants who were appointed to the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps
but served at the Center for Disease Control (CDC) or the Indian Health Service were
assigned to the control group. Of course, many members of the control group received
research training in traditional academic medical settings, some of them after a period of
military service, though only one applicant in the sample appears to have served in the
Vietnam military theater. The final sample contains the records of 3,075 physicians (1,929
program attendees and 1,146 non-attendee controls).
  10
    Our set of treated applicants include fellows who completed their training outside of the confines of the
NIH intramural campus in Bethesda, such as the Baltimore Cancer Research Center or the FDA. Other NIH
locations were even more far-flung such as the Rocky Mountain Laboratory (located in Hamilton, Montana)
or the Panama Control Zone. As a robustness check, we repeated our analysis excluding the 267 ATP
attendees not located on the main NIH campus in Bethesda with similar results obtained.




                                                     13
    We distinguish between three career phases for all applicants. First, the education,
or pre-application phase, which ends at the end of medical school. Second, the training
phase, which covers internship, residency, post-residency fellowships, as well as national
service regardless of the setting where it was served (Army/Navy, NIH, CDC, Indian Health
Service). Finally, the independent phase of the career begins immediately after the end of
the training phase, and ends with retirement or death. When referring to career choice in the
rest of the paper, we refer to the choice of employment in this last career phase. 277 (9.01%)
applicants pass away prior to their retirement; 762 (24.78%) retire prior to 2017, the end of
our observation period; and for 2,036 applicants (66.21%), the career is still ongoing as of
2017. Though these observations are technically censored, it is important to acknowledge
that the youngest applicant in our sample was 65 years old in 2017 and in his thirty first
career year. To a first order of approximation, these physicians are therefore at the twilight
of the active phase of their research or clinical careers.

    Publications, citations, patents, and NIH grants were collected for each individual from
PubMed, the Web of Science, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), and the NIH’s
Consolidated Grant Applicant File, respectively, and carefully name-disambiguated. For
publications we include only original research articles, excluding other types of publications
such as letters, erratum, and review articles. Importantly for our analysis, we use the
richness of the individual profiles collected to measure participation in research independently
of the applicants’ employers. For instance, the career of many of our applicants unfolds
within academic medical centers in purely clinical positions where there is no expectation of
publication. In contrast, other applicants work in industry or other non-academic institutions
and yet amass a respectable publication record in the context of non-traditional research
careers. Since our motivation is to understand how early career interventions might influence
long-run engagement with the idea sector of the economy, distinguishing between career locus
(academic versus non-academic jobs) and career focus (research jobs versus clinical jobs) is
important.


3.2    Descriptive statistics

Pre-application characteristics. Table 1a presents descriptive statistics regarding ATP
applicants at the time of application. Applicants with stronger academic credentials, or with
evidence of involvement in research activities are also more likely to attend the program. For
instance, applicants holding a PhD degree, those with a publication record, those inducted




                                              14
in an elite medical school honors society (AΩA),11 and those having graduated from elite
medical schools (as proxied by the NIH funding received by its affiliated faculty members)
are more likely to be selected.12 Recall that these applicants all survived a first screen, so one
might have expected that covariates observable before this initial screen would not influence
the selection decision at the interview stage. The fact that observable markers of “research
preparedness” do in fact predict selection imply that interviewing “skills” are correlated with
these markers, or alternatively, that the ultimate decision makers place positive weights on
them even at the second stage of the process. However, one must remember that due to
the young age of the applicants, the signals of research potential upon which the selection
decision relies are necessarily noisy. For instance, 59.4% of applicants have no publication
to their name within two years of their ATP application (67.4% for attendees; 54.7% for
non-attendees). ATP attendees also applied to more NIH institutes (3.9 vs. 2.9), perhaps
signaling greater interest in or motivation for research undertakings. At application, their
age and draft lottery number (for the subset of 1,898 applicants whose birth year made them
eligible for the draft lottery) are balanced across attendees and non-attendees, as one would
expect.


Career choice. Table 1b provides basic statistics regarding career outcomes, with a par-
ticular focus on the first job following the end of the training phase and the last job held
by each applicant before the earliest of 2017, retirement, or death (Appendix Tables A2
and A3 provide a finer-grained occupational breakdown). It is immediately apparent that
ATP attendees choose academic (76% vs. 57%) and research (69% vs. 46%) careers at a
more pronounced rate, relative to non-attendees, following the end of their training. These
differences reflect in part time spent in training, though this contrast is not especially stark:
On average, ATP attendees spend an additional 6.7 months in post-graduate training prior to
achieving career independence, relative to non-attendees. The gap does not seem to narrow
as their career unfolds, though one can observe attrition in the subsample of attendees. The
proportion of fellows in research positions falls from 69% to 52% between the beginning and
the end of the career. Overall, these univariate comparisons corroborate the claims made by
ATP alumns regarding the effect of their training on career orientation. For instance, Harry
Keiser, an ATP alumnus and later clinical director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
  11
     Criteria for selection into AΩA varies by school, but typically weighs academic and clinical excellence
most heavily.
  12
     Appendix Table A1 lists the 10 most frequent medical schools from which physicians in the sample
graduated, separately for attendees and non-attendee controls. Appendix Figure A1 provides a histogram
for the distribution of the number of original publications published up to the year of ATP application,
weighted by the journal impact factor of the publication outlet in which they appeared.



                                                    15
Institute, mentions that “if I had gone back to Northwestern. . . I would have almost certainly
gone out into private practice. . . but I certainly would not have continued to devote the rest
of my life to research” (Keiser 1998).


Research outcomes. Tables 1c reports descriptive statistics on a variety of research out-
comes. ATP attendees garner over twice the number of career publications on average (77.8
vs. 37.3). Similar differences can be observed for patents (1.7 vs. 0.7), NIH extramural grant
funding ($12.4 vs. $4.5 million), and citation impact (5,131 vs. 1,988 for article-to-article
citations; 20.2 vs. 7.5 for patent-to-patent citations). ATP attendees publications are also
more heavily cited in patents (252 vs. 80). Attendees receive greater NIH R01 funding as
well, with $3.1 million compared to $1.2 million over their career.

    We also examine the “fecundity” of ATP applicants by identifying the set of individuals
they train over their career who go on to be awarded NIH R01 funding, a key marker of
research independence in U.S. academic medicine. In the context of our data, a trainee is
an individual who, in a window centered on the time of her highest degree, appears as first
author on a publication jointly with the ATP applicant in last authorship position. We
then match the names of these individuals with the NIH Consolidated Grant Applicant File,
allowing us to identify the subset of trainees who go on to be awarded NIH funding (more
details are provided in Appendix B). This is a relatively sparse outcome, but there again,
successful applicants appear more prolific than unsuccessful ones (0.76 vs. 0.21 R01-funded
trainees on average).

    Panels A, B, and C of Figure 2 display histograms for the distribution of career pub-
lications, citations, and NIH funding by treatment status. The differences in achievement
between attendees and non-attendees are even more pronounced in the right-tails of these
distributions. This is also reflected in the rate at which attendees accrue markers of research
excellence over the career, relative to non-attendees (Table 1d). In the control group, no
physician ever receives a Nobel Prize or a Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Inves-
tigatorship (the corresponding numbers in the treatment group are 7 and 32, respectively).
The differences in the rate at which treatment and control physicians become Members of
the National Academies or NIH MERIT awardees are less stark, but still large in magnitude.


Research style. We develop a battery of measures to capture differences in research style
across physicians in the sample. In particular, we take a first stab at measuring “transla-
tional” biomedical research. Translational research does not have an agreed-upon definition



                                              16
(Butler 2008, Woolf 2008). For the purposes of this paper, we will build upon the view
of David Nathan, an NIH ATP alumni and former president of the Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute (2005):


      “Translational clinical investigators come in at least two flavors. . . One class includes
      physician-scientists interested in disease mechanisms. . . But these almost never interact
      in their research with an intact patient/subject. Such disease-oriented researchers are
      content to study tissue samples, cell lines, and model systems such as mice, fish, and
      yeast and do so with great benefit. . . Their career paths are only slightly distinguishable
      from those of basic scientists. . . The other class of physician-scientists include patient
      oriented researchers. They actively search for patients who may enable them to uncover
      the secrets of complex diseases, care for those patients, and with their permission, un-
      dertake to explore new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to treating their diseases.”


As a concrete (and famous) example of translational research of the first type, consider the
work of NIH ATP alumni Joseph Goldstein and Michael Brown, recipients of the 1985 Nobel
Prize for Medicine and Physiology. Their initial investigations were inspired by observa-
tions of patients with familial hypercholesterolemia they saw at the NIH Clinical Center
(Goldstein and Brown 1997). Through patient-inspired basic investigations performed at
the laboratory bench, they identified the underlying root case of this disease as a lack of
low-density lipoprotein receptors. These discoveries in turn informed drug development ef-
forts, ultimately leading to the market introduction of statins. The work of Goldstein and
Brown illustrates well the importance of both the “bench to bedside” and “bedside to bench”
transitions which are a recurring theme in the oral histories of ATP alumni.

    Conversely, Philip Pizzo personifies an approach to translational research closely con-
nected with patient care. After his clinical associateship, Pizzo stayed on at NIH, becoming
Chief of Pediatrics and Scientific Director of the Division of Clinical Sciences at the National
Cancer Institute before being named Physician-in-Chief of Boston Childrens Hospital and
later Dean of Stanford Medical School. An expert in infectious disease and cancer, examples
of his contributions include the first use of antiretroviral medication in children with HIV,
a phase I trial of a solubilized receptor used by HIV for cell attachment, assessing the effec-
tiveness in cancer patients of a diagnostic test for invasive fungal infection previously studied
only in animal models, and in vitro testing of approaches to rescue neutrophil dysfunction
using HIV patient samples.

   The MeSH thesaurus from the National Library of Medicine provides the raw material
necessary to create our measures of research style. MeSH consists of terms arranged in a


                                                  17
hierarchical structure that permit searching at various levels of specificity (there are over
29,000 descriptors in the 2019 edition of MeSH). Almost every publication in PubMed is
tagged with a set of MeSH terms (between 1 and 68 in the current edition of PubMed,
with both the mean and median approximately equal to 10). For each article published
by a scientist in the sample, we measure disease orientation by the presence of a disease
MeSH term. To capture bench research, we take note of the presence of MeSH terms for
molecular biology techniques—such as nucleic acid amplification techniques or cell migration
assays, MeSH terms corresponding to model organisms—such as the nematode caenorhabditis
elegans or the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster, MeSH terms related to cellular structures
and macromolecules—e.g., DNA topoisomerase IV, or MeSH terms denoting biochemical
and cellular processes—e.g., oxidative phosphorylation (See Appendix D for further details).

    In a second step, we partition the bibliome into four mutually exclusive styles: (i) Basic
science articles are not disease-oriented, are tagged by at least one bench science keyword,
and are not clinical trials; (ii) translational articles are disease-oriented, tagged by at least
one bench science keyword, and not clinical trials; (iii) clinical trials (identified using the
publication type field in PubMed ); and (iv) “other” clinical articles, which are disease-
oriented, not clinical trials, and not tagged by any bench MeSH keywords.13

    We create three additional measures. First, we designate an article as “inspiring transla-
tional research” whenever it is translational according to the above criteria and is cited by a
clinical trial publication. Second, we identify work that “builds on translational research”:
articles that report the results of a clinical trial and also list a translational publication in
their references. Finally, we tag each article that garners at least one citation in the header
of a patent subsequently granted by the USPTO (see Marx & Fuegi 2020 for more details
on article-to-patent citations). This provides a crude way to capture the extent to which
biopharmaceutical firms build on the work of the scientists in the sample to inform their
applied R&D efforts.

   Table 1e reports descriptive statistics for the research style measures. Because these
measures are only meaningfully defined for publishing researchers, we create a subsample
that only includes the 2,584 scientists (1,730 treated and 854 controls) who publish at least
one article after the end of their training. Rather than focusing on the levels of these
variables, we normalize them by the total number of articles published by each scientist in
the independent career phase.
  13
    Jointly, these styles comprise 93% of the applicant’s published output. For the style analysis, we ignore
the residual unclassifiable publications.



                                                     18
    Non-attendees and attendees differ markedly in the style composition of their published
work. The proportion of basic science articles is almost twice as high for successful applicants
(19.9% vs. 10.4%); the proportion of translational articles is approximately 30% higher; and
the proportion of clinical trials is approximately 10% higher. This means that a higher
fraction of the non-attendees’ output falls into the “other” clinical category.

    Additional univariate comparisons point to higher translational orientation for attendees,
relative to non-attendees using additional metrics such as the number of articles appearing
in a small set of explicitly translational journals, the number of articles inspiring follow-on
translational research, or the number of articles building on translational research. A higher
fraction of attendees’ articles is also referenced in patents. Below, we explore whether these
differences subsist when comparing treated and control physicians with similar observable
characteristics.


3.3     Econometric Considerations

    The univariate comparisons point to large differences in outcomes between attendees
and non-attendees of the NIH ATP. It would be hazardous to interpret these differences
as reflecting the causal effect of the ATP “treatment,” since it is obviously a goal of NIH
laboratory heads to admit applicants with the most research promise. Recall that all appli-
cants in our sample already passed a first selection screen. Yet residual sources of selection
might remain at the interview stage, e.g., the admissions committee might extract relevant
information regarding an applicant’s suitability for a research career in a series of relatively
short interviews. To address this fundamental identification challenge, we adopt a propensity
score weighting methodology which belongs to a broad class of “selection-on-observables”
techniques.


Inverse probability of treatment weighted estimation. Let us first assume that the
NIH PIs recruiting fellows at the interview stage are unable to select applicants on the
basis of covariates unobserved by the econometrician and correlated with research career
success—the “unconfoundedness” assumption. This assumption is not refutable and it places
strong demands on the data generating process.14
  14
     We know from past research that “selection-on-observables”-type techniques perform best (in the sense
of replicating an experimental benchmark) when it is possible to include a comprehensive list of covariates to
model the probability of assignment to treatment (Dehejia and Wahba 2002). In our sample, we have at our
disposal a large set of pre-treatment covariates that we believe to be likely to confound comparisons between




                                                     19
    In addition, we must assume that, for all included values of the covariates predicting
treatment, the likelihood of being selected to attend is positive—the “common support”
assumption. The common support assumption implies that we should limit our comparisons
to sets of values for which there is sufficient overlap in the match probabilities between actual
and counterfactual matches (Barber, Murphy, and Verbitsky 2004).

    Under these assumptions, Hirano and Imbens (2001) show that various treatment effects
of attending the NIH ATP on outcome y, conditional on exogenous applicant characteris-
tics Z, can be recovered by estimating
                                                       0
                               E[y|X, Z] = β0 + β1 Z + β2 T REAT                                            (1)

by weighted least squares or weighted maximum likelihood (depending on the distribution
of y), where the weights correspond to the inverse probability that each observation is treated.
Implementation is straightforward. We first estimate the propensity of attending the program
as a function of pre-treatment observable characteristics

                                  φ(Xi ) = P rob(T REATi = 1|Xi )                                           (2)

for each applicant i. The predicted probabilities (the propensity scores) help create regression
weight wi for each subject. To estimate the Average Treatment Effect (ATE):
                                    ( 1
                                               if T REATi = 0
                              wi = 1−1φ̂(Xi )                                              (3.1)
                                      φ̂(X )
                                               if   T REAT  i = 1
                                                i


To estimate the Average Treatment Effect on the Treated (ATET):
                                (
                                    φ̂(Xi )
                                  1−  φ̂(Xi )
                                              if T REATi = 0
                           wi =                                                                           (3.2)
                                  1           if T REATi = 1

Weighting equation (1) by wi effectively creates a pseudo-population of applicants in which X
no longer predicts assignment to treatment and the causal association between treatment
and the outcome variable is unchanged from the original population.15 We refer to β2 when
equation (1) is weighted by wi as the Inverse Probability of Treatment Weighted (IPTW)
estimator of β2 (Xu et al. 2010, Austin and Stuart 2015).
attendees and non-attendees: quality of medical school attended, research publications as an undergraduate
and medical school student, etc.
  15
     We use stabilized inverse probability of treatment weighting, which multiplies weights by the marginal
probability of receiving treatment. This method addresses the difficulty of very large weights being assigned
to treated individuals with a probability of treatment close to zero or controls with a probability of treatment
close to one (Xu et al. 2010, Austin and Stuart 2015).


                                                      20
Informative censoring. Although we focused the first part of the discussion on the problem
of non-random selection into treatment, a second problem arises because some applicants
might fail to engage in research activities for the sole reason that their chosen position does
not afford them the possibility to publish, seek external grants, or train the next generation
of scientists. This problem is distinct from informative loss to follow-up. These physicians
careers are observed in full and yet it does not seem meaningful to compare the research
productivity of a full-time, tenure-track academic researcher with that of a clinician who
very occasionally dabbles in research. We deal with this problem by treating early exit
from research as another treatment. As Robins et al. (2000) note, adjusting for this type
of informative censoring in this way is tantamount to estimating the causal effect of ATP
attendance on an outcome if, contrary to the fact, all applicants had remained engaged in
research rather than followed their censoring history. We model the exit decision as a function
of the same pre-application covariates used to model selection into treatment, and compute
weights corresponding to the probability of exit given these observables. Concretely, we
estimate the propensity of early exit as a function of pre-treatment observable characteristics
and program receipt:

                             ρ(Xi ) = P rob(EXITi = 1|Xi )                                 (4)

for each applicant i. The predicted probabilities help create regression weights vi for each
subject. For example, the Average Treatment Effect (ATE) can be estimated with vi defined
as:                               (
                                         1
                                               if EXITi = 0
                             vi = 1−ρ̂(X
                                       1
                                            i)
                                                                                        (4.1)
                                    ρ̂(Xi )
                                               if EXIT  i = 1
Hernan et al. (2001) show that consistent estimates for β2 can be obtained by multiplying
the weight corresponding to the inverse probability of treatment wi and the weight corre-
sponding to the inverse probability of censoring vi . The denominator of the final weight is
the probability that an applicant subject would have followed his own treatment and cen-
soring history, conditional on observables. We label this methodology Inverse Probability of
Treatment and Censoring-Weighted (IPTCW) estimation in what follows.

Selection on unobservables. Despite a long list of observable covariates to predict selec-
tion into the ATP, IPTW estimation does little to address the threat to identification due
to factors unobservable to the econometrician. The time period of the study suggests an
instrumental variable approach based on draft eligibility, as in Angrist (1990). For several
cohorts of applicants in our sample, their eligibility for the draft was potentially influenced
by the lotteries held by the U.S. Selective Service in 1969, 1970, and 1971. In total, 1,898


                                              21
(61.72%) of the applicants were born between 1944 and 1952 and therefore assigned a lottery
number, based on their birth date. Applicants whose number was called might have been
especially determined to escape service in Vietnam, and invested more in preparing their
application. Alternatively, NIH PIs might have exhibited a bias in favor of applicants whose
alternative to training at NIH would have been service in a conflict zone. In the subsample
of applicants impacted by the draft lottery, 978 (51.53%) have a number that was called,
i.e., classified as available for military service (more details are provided in Appendix C).

   For the vast majority of the physicians in the sample affected by the draft, the lottery
occurred several years prior to their graduation from medical school and their application to
the ATP. As a result, most may have been able to postpone their draft eligibility through
deferments granted for educational purposes (Rousselot 1971). Table C1 in Appendix C
demonstrates that in practice, having one’s number called in the lottery does not help predict
ATP attendance.


Estimation procedure. Many of the outcomes we study, including publication counts
and NIH grants awarded, are skewed and non-negative with a large mass point at zero (see
Figures 2a, 2b, and 2c). For example, 426 (13.9%) of the applicants do not publish after
their training; approximately two thirds of the sample never receive any NIH grant funding
over the career. Following a long-standing tradition in the study of scientific and technical
change, for these skewed outcomes we present Poisson quasi-maximum likelihood (hereafter
QML) estimates (Santos Silva and Tenreyro 2006). Because the Poisson model is in the
linear exponential family, the coefficient estimates remain consistent as long as the mean of
the dependent variable is correctly specified (Gouriéroux et al. 1984). QML (i.e., “robust”)
standard errors are computed using the outer product of the gradient vector (and therefore
does not rely on the Poisson variance assumption).


4    Results
   The exposition of the econometric results proceeds in stages. We first explore empirically
the determinants of selection into the ATP. Using the predicted probabilities from these
models as regression weights, we then report estimates of the effect of ATP attendance
on (i) career choice outcomes; (ii) research productivity outcomes; and (iii) research style
outcomes. Finally, we perform a battery of robustness tests to probe the plausibility of the
unconfoundedness assumption in our context.



                                             22
4.1     Selection into the NIH ATP

    We model the likelihood of selection in a logit framework using an extensive list of
covariates observed at the time of selection (Table 2).16 We capture the research orientation
of the medical school and intended internship hospital for each applicant with the NIH
funding that accrue to principal investigators in these institutions. We also include an
indicator variable for applicants who received a PhD before they applied, and an indicator
variable for election to the AΩA Honor Medical Society. The most informative indicator of
research promise is probably demonstrated engagement in research activities, as ascertained
by an applicant’s list of scientific works published, or soon-to-be-published at the time of
application. We weight each of these student publications by the impact factor of the journal
in which they appeared as a crude quality adjustment (raw counts produce similar results).

    Columns 1a and 1b report the results and finds the coefficient signs for most of the
covariates are in the expected direction. Relative to applicants without publications, and at
the mean of all other covariates, applicants with one publication are 7% more likely to be
selected; those with two publications or more, 20% more likely.

    Estimates in column 1c correspond to the results of a cross-fit partialing-out lasso logit
procedure with ten folds, as described in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). The specification
includes all the covariates mentioned above, plus a full suite of medical school indicator vari-
ables and a full suite of internship hospitals indicator variables, for a total of 372 covariates,
151 of which the procedure selects for inclusion as control variables. This procedure allows
for statistical inference to be performed on five covariates of interest also included in the
specification in column 1b, enabling the coefficients and standard errors to be compared
across columns.17

    Columns 2a, 2b, and 2c perform a similar exercise, but the response variable is not
selection in this case, but rather exit from research at the end of training. The signs of the
coefficient estimates for the predictive covariates are flipped, relative to the specifications in
columns 1a, 1b, and 1c.
  16
      In fact, most of these factors might have been observed at the initial selection stage (e.g., medical school
attended) while for others the timing is more ambiguous as they might become known to the applicant
between the first and second stage of the ATP selection process (e.g., intended internship hospital, accepted
or forthcoming journal publications).
   17
      Note that medical school and internship hospital funding variables are not separately identified from the
fixed effects and drop out of the specification. The χ2 test statistic (i.e., the Wald test of the hypothesis
that the coefficients of these five covariates are jointly equal to zero) is equal to 78.85 (p < 0.01).




                                                       23
    The specifications used to compute selection probabilities and regression weights for each
applicant depart ever so slightly from those in columns 1c (for the selection weights) and 2c
(for the informative censoring weights). Since the estimation of the propensity score is purely
a prediction exercise, we favor an abundance of explanatory variables in these models. Our
least restrictive specification includes 94 fixed effects for medical schools and 238 indicator
variables for intended internship hospitals. We constrain the model to include the same
variables as the specification in column 1c and 2c as well as the inverse hyperbolic sine of
medical school and internship hospital NIH grant funding. The other variables are selected
via a logit procedure with a lasso penalty term, using ten-fold cross-validation to prevent
overfitting the data. The predicted probabilities from this model are used to generate the
benchmark set of weights used below to estimate treatment effects.18

    Appendix Table A4 confirms that pre-application covariates appear balanced across
treated and control observations in the sample appropriately weighted using the fitted se-
lection probabilities to construct the selection weights according to the method described in
Section 3.3.


4.2     Career choice

    Table 3 reports estimates of the treatment effect of ATP attendance on career outcomes.
For each outcome (which differ across rows), the first column of reports the naı̈ve cross-
sectional estimate. The next set of two columns reports the average treatment effect (ATE)
and the average treatment effect on the treated (ATET) using inverse probability of treat-
ment and censoring logit weights (computed using the model in Table 2, columns 1b and 2b).
The final set of two columns reports the ATE and ATET using inverse probability of treat-
ment and censoring lasso weights (computed using the model in Table 2, columns 1c and 2c).

   The first two rows of Table 3 report the ATP effect on the length of the training period
as well as the length of the career overall. Each estimate in the table corresponds to the
coefficient on a treatment indicator variable (and its associated robust (QML) standard error)
from a Poisson model where the outcome of interest is regressed on an indicator variable for
  18
     We test the quality of our predictions by splitting the sample into a prediction subsample (2,460 or 80%
of the observations) and a hold-out sample (615 or 20% of the observations). The out-of-sample deviance
ratio (a measure of goodness of fit for logit models) is equal to 0.70 of the corresponding in-sample value,
which is acceptable. Note that the correlation between the predicted selection probabilities from column 1b
and that of the model with lasso regularization is 0.919. As a result, the magnitudes and precision of the
IPTCW estimates presented below are not very sensitive to the choice of weights.




                                                     24
holding a PhD degree at the time of application and a full suite of medical school graduation
year effects in addition the treatment variable.

    Exponentiating the coefficient and subtracting one yields a magnitude interpretable as
an elasticity. For example, the estimates in the first cell of Table 3 imply that ATP attendees
spend 100 × (exp[0.087] − 1) = 9.1% longer in training than non-attendees—an additional
six months on average. This is a meaningful yet rather small increase relative to the time
of commitment of the ATP (two years). It underscores the extent to which our results
pertain to the effect of the content of training, rather than to the mere fact that training
was received. We also find that NIH training reduces slightly the length of the overall post-
independence career, but the effect is small (between 1 and 2%, or seven months on average),
and imprecisely estimated in some specifications.

    The next six rows of Table 3 pertain to the effect of the program on the choice of career.
We report the marginal effects from logistic regressions of these career choice indicators on the
treatment indicator and our usual set of controls. Across columns, we observe that attending
the ATP greatly increases the likelihood of embarking on an academic or research career.
For instance, using the average treatment effect estimated using lasso weights, the marginal
effect of starting in academia is 0.11, which corresponds to an odds ratio of 1.77. The
program increases the probability of a research-focused initial job even more (the marginal
effect is 0.17, which translates into an odds ratio of 2.17) for treated physicians, relative to
controls. The effects are also persistent, with similar magnitudes observed when analyzing
the program’s impact on end-of-career positions. Conversely, attending NIH ATP appears
to make it markedly less likely to choose a clinical career (an odds ratio of 0.46).

    We also create a composite outcome for joining the biomedical research elite over the
course of one’s career, which we define as either (i) receiving the Nobel Prize; (ii) being
elected to the National Academy of Sciences or the National Academy of Medicine; (iii) being
appointed Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute; or (iv) getting a MERIT
designation from the NIH in at least one R01 grant cycle. Only 173 (5.6%) of the applicants
belong to this select group by career’s end (7.7% of the attendees; 2.2% of the non-attendee
controls). Adjusting for selection and censoring based on observable covariates dampens
somewhat this raw difference in odds, but the average treatment effect still corresponds to
a sizable odds ratio of 1.77.




                                               25
4.3     Research outcomes

   Whereas Table 3 focused on the effect of NIH training at the extensive margin (i.e., the
choice to begin a research career or to stay in one), Tables 4 and 5 hone in on the effect of
the program at the intensive margin (the intensity of research effort over the career, as it is
being converted into publications, patents, and grants).

    Table 4 reports estimates of the treatment effect of ATP attendance on various metrics
of research output over the career. Each outcome variable has been constructed to exclude
output that results from research undertaken as a student or a trainee: they correspond
to research output for the entire post-training (i.e., “independent”) career. We consider
seven different outcomes: a count of original publications (i.e., excluding reviews, editorials,
etc.); a count of original publications, excluding those where the applicant is in the middle
of the authorship list;19 the cumulative count of citations that accrued to each scientist’s
post-training original publications by 2015; a count of patents granted by the USPTO (by
2016); a count of references to the scientist’s publications appearing on the front page or
within the body of patents (Marx and Fuegi 2020); the cumulative amount of NIH grants
received as a principal investigator; and the cumulative amount of NIH R01 grants received
as a principal investigator.

    Synthesizing the results across rows and columns of Table 4, a number of patterns emerge.
First, the magnitude of the treatment effects are large, even when they filter out the effect
of selection and censoring under the maintained assumption of unconfoundedness. Using the
lasso weights, for example, the ATE for publications corresponds to an increase of 67.7%,
and the ATET to an increase of 60.5%. Second, modeling selection based on observable
covariates does shrink the magnitude of the estimated effects by 25 to 50%, depending
on the outcome. Third, the ATE and ATET typically have similar magnitudes, which is
logical since control scientists are drawn from the same underlying population. All estimates
are precisely estimated, although some specifications for patents and R01 grants are only
significant at the 10% level.20
  19
      A robust social norm in the life sciences systematically assigns last authorship to the principal investi-
gator, first authorship to the junior author who was responsible for the conduct of the investigation, and
apportions the remaining credit to authors in the middle of the authorship list, generally as a decreasing
function of the distance from the extremities (Dance 2012; Sauermann and Haeussler 2017). Therefore, the
first- and last-authored publications correspond to those associated most closely with each applicant.
   20
      This is not entirely surprising since a sizable number of applicants become NIH staff scientists and are
not eligible to apply for extramural funding. Furthermore, applicants in clinical research careers are at very
low risk of patenting (only 20% of the physicians on the sample are awarded at least one patent over the
course of their career). In contrast, all applicants in the sample are at risk of publishing.



                                                      26
When trainees become trainers. The imprint left on trainees by their training could
persist through the training of the next generation. In this way, the impact of training
institutions can ripple through a much larger community of scholars as yesterday’s trainees
become the trainers of today.

    We examine the fecundity of ATP applicants by identifying the set of individuals they
train over their career who go on to later secure NIH funding of their own. Our results (on
the last row of Table 4) demonstrate that ATP attendees appear to train proportionately
more successful researchers, as measured by receipt of NIH R01 by these offsprings once they
embark on their own independent careers. The magnitude of the effect is on the order of
68% after adjusting for the influence of observable covariates through inverse probability of
treatment and censoring weights.


Citation analysis. The estimates for the effect on overall citations in Table 4 conflate the
effect of treatment on the quantity of output with the effect of treatment on the quality of
output. Table 5 sheds light on the effect of NIH training on citation impact (a reasonable
proxy for publication quality) specifically. For each publication, we use the Web of Science
to ascertain its percentile in the vintage-specific article-level citation distribution.21 This
makes it possible to meaningfully aggregate, for each applicant, the number of his post-
training publications whose eventual impact falls above the j th -percentile of the citation
distribution, even though these publications might have appeared at different times. The
structure of Table 5 is otherwise identical to that of Table 3.

   The first row of Table 5 replicates the first row of Table 4, with the caveat that we exclude
from the publication count variable those for which citations are not available because they
appear in a journal indexed by PubMed but not the Web of Science.22 The next five rows
progressively restrict the count to those whose citations put them above an impact percentile
threshold: above the 50th , above the 75th , above the 95th , above the 99th , and above the 99.9th
percentile. Looking across the rows, the magnitude of the treatment effects increases slightly
as one moves up the tail of the impact distribution (except when focusing on the one in a
thousand “citation hits”). The more important conclusion is that ATP attendance increases
  21
     When referring to the vintage-specific, article-level distribution of citations, the relevant universe to
compute quantiles is not limited to the articles authored by scientists who belong to our applicant sample.
Rather, the relevant universe includes the entire set of 17,312,059 articles that can be cross-linked between
PubMed and the Web of Science.
  22
     These account for 13,853 of 192,785 (7.2%) of all post-independence original research publications for
the sample of applicants.




                                                     27
dramatically the number of low-impact as well as the number of high-impact publications
over the career.

Isolating the effect of informative censoring. We know from the results in Table 3
that the program shifts physicians from the clinical sector (where publication is considered
at best a hobby) to the research sector (where publications and grants are absolutely key to
career success). The large intensive margin magnitudes documented in Tables 4 and 5 could
reflect, at least in part, the choice or opportunity to select into a position that affords the
possibility of participating in idea-producing activities. To gauge whether this is the case,
we could re-estimate the models corresponding to the outcomes in Table 4 on the subsample
of physicians who begin their careers as researchers. However, since an initial placement in
a research position lies on the causal pathway between training and research output, the
estimates on the restricted sample cannot be given a causal interpretation.

    Instead, we choose to analyze the effect of treatment using weights that adjust the naive
estimates for selection into the program, but do not adjust them for selection into research
careers (i.e., the corresponding specifications use IPT weights w rather than IPTC weights
w × v [cf. Section 4.4, eqns. (3.1) and (4.1)]). Appendix Table A5 reports these results.
The magnitudes are always higher when using IPT weights instead of IPTC weights, but
the differences between the two is not itself very large. Non-attendees publish less than
attendees not simply by virtue of the fact the former are much less likely to be researchers.
Rather, the effects on output reflect impacts at both the intensive and extensive margins.


4.4     Research style

    Table 6 examines the impact of NIH training on the style of the research published by
applicants to the ATP. Since the style measures cannot be computed absent publications,
we limit the analysis in this section to the 2,584 applicants (1,730 attendees and 854 non-
attendees) who publish at least once in the post-training phase of the career.23 We consider
eight distinct style measures. The effect on the overall number of publications for the re-
stricted sample of publishers appears in the first row of Table 6 as a benchmark.

   The first four measures of styles—basic science, translational medicine, clinical trials,
and “other” clinical—are mutually exclusive and account for almost 95% of these scientists’
   23
      The inverse probability of treatment and censoring weights are recomputed on the restricted sample to
take into account the fact that the publication constraint disproportionately drops unsuccessful applicants
from the data.



                                                    28
overall post-training output. The results imply that the program increases output regardless
of style, but not evenly. The effect on the number of basic science publications is unambigu-
ously the largest in magnitude, followed by translational and clinical trial publications, with
the “other clinical” experiencing only modest and imprecisely estimated increases.24

    Recall that a hallmark of the training received at NIH was exposure to laboratory research
for young physicians that might have had only limited exposure to the bench as undergrad-
uates or medical school students (and might be unable to receive that style of training in
postgraduate fellowships outside of NIH). Our evidence shows that this imprinting persists
after training. Given the emphasis placed in the oral histories on facilitating the “bench
to bedside” transition, we seek additional approaches to uncover the empirical signature of
a translational research style.25 We find that relative to controls, treated physicians pub-
lish much more in six high-impact journals that prominently advertise their translational
focus (the Journal of Clinical Investigation, the Journal of Translational Medicine, Science
Translational Medicine, Nature Medicine, Translational Research: The Journal of Labora-
tory and Clinical Medicine, and the Journal of Experimental Medicine). A natural way
for the transition from bench to bedside to take place is for clinical researchers to further
develop translational work, for example by performing a clinical trial. We do find that at-
tendees greatly “inspire” follow-on translational research according to this definition. In the
same spirit, we can also compute the number of times applicants publish clinical trials that
backward-reference translational articles. We also find large effects of treatment on the ap-
plicants’ tendency to “stand on translational shoulders.” Yet a different way to facilitate the
bench-to-bedside transition is to enable biopharmaceutical firms to build on the applicants’s
published research, since many health-related innovations cannot reach patients unless firms
invest in bringing them to market (Azoulay et al. 2009). Consistent with that intuition, we
find that the NIH ATP increases the proportion of published output that will eventually be
cited in one or more USPTO patents.

   While Table 6 presented results on the influence of NIH training on the direction of re-
search pursued in the independent phase of a research career, Appendix Table A6 focuses on
providing direct evidence of imprinting during training. To do so, the publication outcomes
  24
      Estimating these four specifications jointly enables us to compare the magnitudes explicitly. χ2 tests
strongly reject the hypothesis that the coefficient for basic science is equal to any of the other three categories
(p < 0.01). Similarly, we can reject the hypothesis that the coefficient for translational medicine and clinical
trials are equal to the coefficient for “other clinical” articles. However, we fail to reject the hypothesis that
the translational medicine and clinical trial coefficients are in fact equal.
   25
      This is not straightforward, since the term has been progressively emptied of content through overuse.
Our working definition of a translational publication is the simultaneous presence of a disease keyword and
a basic science keyword (e,g., molecular biology technique, model organism, etc.)


                                                        29
include only articles that appeared after one year from medical school graduation up to one
year after the start of the independent career (to allow for publication lags). Unsurprisingly,
NIH trainees publish more than non-attendee controls in training. But the type of publi-
cation published also differs markedly from that exhibited by control trainees. Attendees’
publications are much less likely to fall in the “other clinical” category, for instance.26

    Considered as a whole, these results points to a durable intellectual imprint associated
with the training received at NIH. Some of the trainees became bench scientists, indistin-
guishable in their output from PhD-holding scientists trained in biology or other basic science
departments. Harold Varmus, who went on to win the Nobel Prize in 1989 for his discovery
of oncogenes with J. Michael Bishop, is an exemplar of the subset of trainees who leveraged
their training to embark on a career at the laboratory bench. Many others, however, did not
foresake clinical work completely, but rather acquired in Bethesda an approach to clinical re-
search that was informed by basic research advances, seeding academia with a new generation
of who saw themselves as “physician-scientists” rather than “clinician-researchers.”


4.5     Robustness analyses

    We perform a number of robustness checks to probe the sensitivity of our estimates to
alternative modeling assumptions and subsamples. Recall that in addition to unconfound-
edness, the validity of IPTW estimates requires common support. Figure 3 displays the
histogram corresponding to the predicted probabilities generated by the selection model in
column 1b of Table 2. One can readily observe that the common support assumption is
violated in the tails: our model predicts a high probability of selection for very few controls,
and low probability of selection for very few treated applicants. The first three columns of
Table 7a vary the extent of winsorization for the regression weights: no winsorization (as in
Table 3), winsorization at the 5th and 95th percentiles of the distribution of lasso weights;
and winsorization at the 10th and 90th percentile of the distribution of lasso weights. The
magnitudes of the average treatment effect (corresponding to a single outcome, the num-
ber of post-training publications) increases slightly. The violation of the common support
assumption is therefore not a first-order concern to assess the robustness of our results.

   Rather than weighting by the inverse probability of treatment, the next set of estimates
uses coarsened exact matching, a blocking technique due to Iacus et al. (2011) to match
attendees and non-attendees on a handful of covariates: year of medical school graduation,
  26
    In the subsamples for each track, we only include as controls trainees who applied unsuccessfully for
that track.


                                                   30
medical school attended, and quintile of the distribution of the pre-application publication
count, weighted by journal impact factor. Any treated applicant for whom we cannot find a
matched control based on this list of pre-application covariates is simply dropped from the
estimation sample. We find that the estimated treatment effect is similar in magnitude to
that reported earlier (Table 3).

    The last set of two columns in Table 7a focuses on the subset of 1,837 applicants (59.7%
of the sample) who had little—if any—research preparation at the time they applied for
the program, as ascertained by a lack of any published output. It is of course possible
that interviewers were able to divine research potential at the second stage of the selection
process, but they would not have had a strong evidentiary record to back up their intuition.
The results show that the magnitude of the average treatment effect is just as high, if not
higher, in this subpopulation.

    Table 7b reports estimates using the “post-double-selection” lasso (hereafter pds-lasso)
estimator due to Belloni et al. (2014). This estimator uses the lasso to select covariates to
predict both the treatment and the outcome variable, and then estimates the treatment effect
of interest by the linear regression of the outcome on the treatment variable and the union
of the set of variables selected in the two variable selection steps. The resulting estimator is
“doubly robust” in that it allows for imperfect variable selection in either (but not both) of
the covariate selection steps. Since the theoretical properties of the pds-lasso estimator have
been demonstrated for a linear model, we apply it to our data using ordinary least squares
to model the impact of the NIH ATP on the count of post-training publications.27 The
estimates yielded by this procedure are once again large in magnitude, very similar to those
associated with IPTW estimation using OLS, and precisely estimated. The point estimate
of 25 extra publications, corresponds to 62% of the raw mean difference in the number of
publications between attendees and non-attendees.

    We also use the bounding technique recently proposed by Oster (2019) to gauge the sen-
sitivity of our results to a failure of the unconfoundedness assumption. The intuition behind
this approach is that the stability of the coefficient for the treatment effect when varying
the set of control variables included in the model, scaled by movement in R2 , provides in-
formation about the potential impact of unobserved covariates. To generate these bounds,
the analyst must assume proportionality between the covariances of the outcome with ob-
  27
    We also use the inverse hyperbolic sine function to transform the publication count. This generates
estimates that can approximately be interpreted as elasticities, and therefore be compared to those presented
in Table 3.



                                                     31
served and unobserved covariates, and posit a maximum value for R2 if the regression could
include all observed and unobserved covariates. Oster’s technique generates a bound δ, the
covariance ratio that would be required to reduce the magnitude of the treatment effect to
zero. Table 7c reports the results of this exercise for a number of research outcomes. In all
cases, δ is far above one, the threshold value recommended by Oster to suggest robustness
to the influence of unobservable covariates.

    Appendix Table A7 examines whether the program’s effects varied in magnitude over the
time period considered in this study. Recall from Figure 1 that we have only a small number
of controls available in the early part of the sample (1965-1969). It is also possible that the
incentives to apply (and to attend if selected) decreased in the waning years of the Vietnam
conflict and the impending end of the draft (1973-1975). We find that program attendance
impacted initial placement in research-focused jobs regardless of time period. In contrast,
effects at the intensive margins (e.g., post-training career publications) are lower and less
precisely estimated in the latter part of the observation period. This attenuation might
reflect a decrease in the quality of the applicant pool, but a more cogent explanation is that
the progressive availability of high-quality research training outside the confined boundaries
of NIH’s Bethesda campus boosted the outcomes for non-attendees.

    Finally, in Appendix Table A8 we examine whether the effects of program attendance
differ according to the track (research associate, clinical associate, or staff associate) for which
attendees were selected. Across a broad range of outcome variables, we do not find evidence
of markedly different magnitudes between the effects of the research and clinical associate
tracks, whereas the post-training record of staff associates appears slightly less distinguished.
Similarly, we find little evidence of significant differences in the style-composition of the
research portfolio for scientists in these tracks (once again this is less true for the staff
associate track). While perhaps surprising, it is important to note that research associates
and clinical associates ultimately often worked in the same labs, and the distinction between
research and clinical time was not always clear-cut in practice.


5     Conclusion
    In this article, we examine the role of early career exposure to research on sorting into
the “ideas sector” of the economy, as well as research trajectory and productivity within
this domain. The NIH ATP had a large impact on attendees’ careers on both the intensive
and extensive margins. Attendees entered research positions at higher rates after training



                                                32
and remained in them for longer. They not only published more and earned more grant
funding, their work was also more impactful as measured by citations. More specifically,
ATP attendees acquired at NIH a more “translational” style of research, with a greater focus
on the bench-to-bedside transition. Remarkably, these changes were sustained throughout
their subsequent careers. It is notable that, while there are more “superstars” among ATP
attendees than in the set of non-attendee controls, the average physician showed a substantial
treatment effect as well. All in all, it is a remarkable impact for a two- to three-year training
experience.

    Our conclusions depend on the maintained assumption that, conditional on an extensive
list of covariates observable at the time of application, selection into the program was es-
sentially random. At first blush, this would appear to be an untenable assumption. While
we have adopted a variety of econometric strategies to minimize omitted variable bias, we
recognize that at least some of our results could be explained by factors observed by the
scientists in charge of selecting the trainees, but not by the econometric analyst. Yet, the
institutional setting and the details of the selection process suggest that these concerns may
loom less large than expected.

    Our control group includes only those who have also applied to the program, which
eliminates interest in the program as a potential omitted variable (Jones et al. 2018). In
addition, the set of non-attendee controls consists exclusively of those who reached the final
interview stage for program admittance and are therefore already highly selected. While
we would of course prefer to have interview notes to model the influence of unobservable
covariates directly, a large literature suggests that unstructured interviews provide only
limited additional information, relative to what is observable on a curriculum vitæ (Dana et
al. 2013, McDaniel et al. 1994, Wiesner and Cronshaw 1988, Huffcutt et al. 1996, Wright
et al. 1989). In fact, psychological research has shown that the addition of noisy signals
may in fact impair the quality of decision making (Nisbett et al. 1981, Hall et al. 2007).
Our reading of this literature leads us to doubt that the unstructured NIH ATP interviews
enabled the selection of individuals poised for research greatness. Indeed, medical education
is one of a handful of settings where the limited usefulness of interviews has been documented
in the field (Milstein et al. 1981).28 In line with this literature, the oral histories corroborate
the difficulty faced by the interviewers in discerning the scientific potential of applicants at
  28
     For instance, the University of Texas Medical School at Houston was forced to admit an additional 50
students, all of whom were initially rejected for admission post-interview, due to a legislative decree in 1979;
these students had no meaningful difference in clinical performance, academic performance and honors, or
attrition at either the end of medical school or the first year of postgraduate training (Devaul et al. 1987).




                                                      33
such an early career stage. Finally, the evidence on research style does not appear to be
consistent with the view that selection alone accounts for the results. It strains credulity
that the demand side of this labor market might have been able to evaluate aptitude for
translational research specifically, in addition to more general research abilities.

    It is likely that attending the NIH ATP may impact career and research trajectories
through multiple mechanisms, including skill building, signaling, status, peer, and network
effects, or instilling values and aspirations (Argote and Fahrenkopf 2016). Distinguishing
between these mechanisms lies outside of the scope of this study, and indeed more than a
single mechanism might be responsible for the treatment effects we estimate. It is notable
that many physicians in the control group had exposure to research opportunities outside of
the NIH; there was only a small difference in total training time compared to ATP attendees
relative to the length of the program. This suggests that the NIH treatment entails more
than mere exposure to research. At the same time, the research style evidence seems hard
to reconcile with a simple status or signaling story.

    Table A9 in Appendix A reports the results of an analysis contrasting the effect of different
levels in the intensity of treatment, as proxied by the number of years spent in the ATP.
Within the set of 1,929 attendees, 12 (0.6%) spent a year or less at NIH, which we interpret
as reflecting the decision to quit the program and receive training elsewhere; 1,321 (68.5%)
spent exactly two years as trainees; and 596 (30.9%) three years or more.29 In these analyses,
we model ATP attendance as a multi-valued treatment (Imbens 2000), and use an ordered
logit specification to generate inverse probability of treatment weights. The results uncover
a strong dose-response relationship. Across several outcomes, “quitters” and non-attendees
exhibit similar outcomes (with the caveat that the effect of quitting is very imprecisely
estimated). The effect of spending an additional year within the program is large, and
precisely estimated. For example, relative to non-attendees, those staying 3 years publish
more over their careers (106% vs. 49%), gather more citations (153% vs. 41%) and are
more likely to enter a research job after training (23% vs. 15%) than those staying only the
two years necessary to fulfill their service obligation. Once again, we must interpret these
results with a great deal of caution, since treatment length is endogenous, and after two
years, preceptors are presumably better able to ascertain correctly the research potential
of a trainee. While not rejecting selection as a plausible mechanism, this dose-response
relationship appears inconsistent with an interpretation of the results based on signaling
or status, since it is unlikely that additional years spent in the program would shift future
  29
    This last category includes a small set of about sixty attendees who transitioned from the ATP to another
postdoctoral fellowship within NIH, before securing a permanent position.


                                                     34
employers’ perceptions, or elevate one’s status even more in the minds of collaborators,
funders, editors, and referees.

    Many of the ATP alumnis oral histories evoke the feeling of being in the right place at the
right time. In light of these accounts, the sociological concept of imprinting offers a powerful
lens to interpret our results. This stream of research finds that organizations and individuals
often exhibit a sensitive period, during which they are susceptible to external influences and
come to reflect aspects of this environment, and these aspects can persist despite subsequent
environmental changes (Stinchcombe 1965, Marquis and Tilcsik 2013). While much of the
work on imprinting has focused on firms, there is evidence that imprinting also occurs in
the context of individual careers (Burton and Beckman 2007, Boeker 1988, Baron et al.
1999, Hannan et al. 1996, Higgins 2005). During career imprinting, individuals absorb a
set of capabilities, connections, and cognitive models from one employer which persist as
they change employers later on. Careers are more likely to exhibit the characteristics of an
early imprint when their current environment allows them to be surrounded by colleagues
with the same imprint, offers them considerable freedom in how they might express an
imprint, and if they believe the imprint contributed to prior success (Higgins 2005). The
NIH ATP and the academic medicine context would appear particularly conducive to career
imprinting: not only was the ATP an intense experience early in the career, when an imprint
is more likely to be absorbed, but the program also had many alumni who seeded the
expansion of U.S. Medical Schools in the period immediately following the end of the Vietnam
War.30 Finally, academic research offers a considerable degree of leeway to investigators in
structuring the direction and style of their research, and the senior NIH investigators who
had acted as mentors to the ATP trainees during the program exemplified the creative use
of this autonomy.

    In light of the unique historical circumstances within which physician research training
took place at NIH during the period of our study, we must exercise caution to suggest wider
policy implications. Certainly, part of the effectiveness of the ATP in turning physicians
into researchers owes much to the extreme concentration of talent in one institution that was
facilitated by the Vietnam War. The effects of the ATP may have been large and long-lasting
precisely because the exposure received was intense. Yet, this program provides an existence
proof for the proposition that it is possible to design interventions to turn individuals who
in the main would not have had scientific careers into frontier researchers. This stands in
contrast with many other active labor market policies often studied by economists. The
  30
   Between 1975 and 2005, the number of faculty members un US Medical Schools increased by a factor of
more than two (Jolly 1988; AAMC Data Book, various editions).


                                                 35
effects of these programs are typically modest in magnitude, and their effects relatively
transitory (Heckman et al. 1999). Conversely, the labor market effects of military service
appear to mostly correspond to loss of experience, as the earnings profiles of veterans and
non-veterans converge relatively quickly (Angrist 1990, 2011).

    There have been attempts to recreate the “hot house” environment that characterized
the intramural campus of the NIH in the 1960s and 1970s (Rubin 2006). This raises, but
does not answer, the question of how much dilution in the intensity of treatment is allowable
before any resultant impact starts to fade. While it is unclear to what extent other training
programs can be designed to reproduce the effect of the ATP, there is little doubt that in
addition to durably altering the course of attendees’ careers, the ATP also generated human
capital externalities and established the research path as a relatively mainstream choice
available to physicians. In the words of Donald Fredrickson (1988): “You can say that out of
this program, unequivocally, came a remarkable surge of momentum that has set the standard
for biomedical research in this country and all over the world.”




                                             36
References
Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.”
      Econometrica 60(2): 323-351.
Association of American Medical Colleges. 2016. “Diversity in Medical Education: Fats & Figures
       2016.” Washington, D.C.: AAMC.
Anfinsen, Christian B. 1963. “History of the Research Associate Program.” Office of NIH History.
Angrist, Joshua D. 1990. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence from
       Social Security Administrative Records.” The American Economic Review 80(3): 313-336.
Angrist, Joshua D., Stacey H. Chen, and Jae Song. 2011. “Long-term Consequences of Vietnam-
       Era Conscription: New Estimates Using Social Security Data.” American Economic
       Review: AEA Conference & Proceedings 101(3): 334-338.
Argote, Linda, and Erin Fahrenkopf. 2016. “Knowledge Transfer in Organizations: The Roles of
       Members, Tasks, Tools and Networks.” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
       Processes 136: 146-159.
Austin, Peter C., and Elizabeth Stuart. 2015. “Moving Towards Best Practice When Using Inverse
       Probability of Treatment Weighting (IPTW) Using the Propensity Score to Estimate
       Causal Treatment Effects in Observational Studies.” Statistics in Medicine 34(28): 3661-
       3679.
Azoulay, Pierre, Waverly Ding, and Toby Stuart. 2009. “The Effect of Academic Patenting on
      the Rate, Quality, and Direction of (Public) Research Output.” Journal of Industrial
      Economics 57(4):637-676.
Barber, Jennifer S., Susan A. Murphy, and Natalya Verbitsky. 2004. “Adjusting for Time-Varying
       Confounding in Survival Analysis.” Sociological Methodology 34(1): 163-192.
Baron, James N., M. Diane Burton, and Michael T. Hannan. 1999. “Engineering Bureaucracy:
       The Genesis of Formal Policies, Positions, and Structures in High-Technology Firms.”
       Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15(1): 1-41.
Baskir, Lawrence N., and William A. Strauss. 1978. Chance and Circumstance: The Draft, The
       War, and the Vietnam Generation. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
Bell, Alexander M., Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen. 2019.
        “Who Becomes an Inventor in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(2):647-713.
Belloni, Alexandre, Victor Chernozhukov, and Christian Hansen. 2014. “Inference on Treatment
        Effects after Selection among High-Dimensional Controls.” Review of Economic Studies
        81(2): 608-650.
Berry, Frank B. 1976. “The Story of ‘The Berry Plan’.” Bulletin of the New York Academy of
       Medicine 52(3): 278-282.
Blau, David M., and Bruce A. Weinberg. 2017. “Why the US Science and Engineering Workforce
       is Aging Rapidly.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114(15): 3879-3884.
Boeker, Warren. 1988. “Organizational Origins: Entrepreneurial and Environmental Imprinting at
       Time of Founding.” In Glenn R. Carroll (Ed.), Ecological Models of Organizations, pp. 33-
       51. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.


                                              37
Burton, M. Diane, and Christine M. Beckman. 2007. “Leaving a Legacy: Position Imprints and
       Successor Turnover in Young Firms.” American Sociological Review 72(2): 239-266.
Butler, Declan. 2008. “Translational Research: Crossing the Valley of Death.” Nature 453(7197):
        840-842.
Bynum, William. 2012. “What Makes a Great Lab?” Nature 490(7418): 31-32.
Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. “Going to College to Avoid the Draft: The Unintended
       Legacy of the Vietnam War.” American Economic Review 91(2): 97-102.
Cassell, Gail H. et al. 1994. “NIH Intramural Research Program. Report of the External Advisory
        Committee of the Director’s Advisory Committee.”
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen,
      Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2018. “Double/debiased Machine Learning for
      Treatment and Structural Parameters.” Econometrics Journal 21(1): C1-C68.
Committee on Labor and Public Welfare. Subcommittee on Health. 1970. “National Health Service
     Corps Act of 1970.” Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Dana, Jason, Robyn Dawes, and Nathanial Peterson. 2013. “Belief in the Unstructured Interview:
       The Persistence of an Illusion.” Judgment and Decision Making 8(5): 512-520.
Dance, Amber. 2012. “Who’s on First?” Nature 489(7417): 591-593.
Dehejia, Rajeev H. and Sadek Wahba. 2002. “Propensity Score-Matching Methods for
       Nonexperimental Causal Studies.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 84(1): 151-161.
Deming, David J., and Kadeem L. Noray. 2018. “STEM Careers and Technological Change.”
      NBER Working Paper #25065.
Devaul, Richard, Faith Jevey, James Chappell, Patricia Caver, Barbara Short, and Stephen
       O’Keefe. 1987. “Medical School Performance of Initially Rejected Students.” Journal of the
       American Medical Association 257(1): 47-51.
DeVita, Jr., Vincent T. 1997. “National Cancer Institute Oral History Project.” edited by Gretchen
       A. Case. Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Fauci, Anthony S. 1989. “In Their Own Words AIDS Oral History Series.” edited by Victoria
       Harden. Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Fauci, Anthony S. 1998. “Clinical Associates Program Oral History Series.” edited by Melissa
       Klein. Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Fredrickson, Donald S. 1998. “Clinical Associates Program Oral History Series.” edited by Melissa
       Klein. Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Freeman, Richard B. 1975. “Supply and Salary Adjustments to the Changing Science Manpower
      Market: Physics, 1948-1973.” American Economic Review 65(1): 27-39.
Gellhorn, Alfred. 1965. “Research at NIH: The Wooldridge Report.” Science 149(3679): 6.
Goldstein, Joseph L., and Michael S. Brown. 1997. “The Clinical Investigator: Bewitched,
       Bothered, and Bewildered—But Still Beloved.” Journal of Clinical Investigation 99(12):
       2803-2812.
Gouriéroux, Christian, Alain Montfort, and Alain Trognon. 1984. “Pseudo Maximum Likelihood
       Methods: Applications to Poisson Models.” Econometrica 53(3): 701-720.



                                               38
Hall, Crystal C., Lynn Ariss, and Alexander Todorov. 2007. “The Illusion of Knowledge: When
       More Information Reduces Accuracy and Increases Confidence.” Organizational Behavior
       and Human Decision Processes 103(2): 277-290.
Hannan, Michael T., M. Diane Burton, and James N. Baron. 1996. “Inertia and Change in the
      Early Years: Employment Relations in Young, High Technology Firms.” Industrial and
      Corporate Change 5(2): 503-536.
Heckman, James J., Robert J. Lalonde, and Jeffrey A. Smith. 1999. “The Economics and
      Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs.” In Orley C. Ashenfelter, and David Card
      (Eds.), Chapter 31 in Handbook of Labor Economics 3A: 1865-2097. Amsterdam: Elsevier
      North-Holland.
Hernan, Miguel A., Babette Brumback, and James M. Robins. 2001. “Marginal Structural Models
      to Estimate the Joint Causal Effect of Nonrandomized Treatments.” Journal of the
      American Statistical Association 96(454):440-448.
Higgins, Monica C. 2005. Career Imprints: Creating Leaders Across an Industry. San Francisco:
       Jossey-Bass/Wiley.
Hill, Ryan Reed. 2018. “Searching for Superstars: Research Risk and Talent Discovery in
       Astronomy.” Working Paper, MIT.
Hirano, Keisuke, and Guido W. Imbens. 2001. “Estimation of Causal Effects using Propensity
       Score Weighting: An Application to Data on Right Heart Catheterization.” Health Services
       & Outcomes Research Methodology 2: 259-278.
Huffcutt, Allen I., Philip L. Roth, and Michael A. McDaniel. 1996. “A meta-analytic investigation
       of cognitive ability in employment interview evaluations: Moderating characteristics and
       implications for incremental validity.” Journal of Applied Psychology 81(5): 459-473.
Iacus, Stefano M., Gary King, and Giuseppe Porro. 2011. “Multivariate Matching Methods That
        are Monotonic Imbalance Bounding.” Journal of the American Statistical Association
        106(493): 345-361.
Imbens, Guido W. 2000. “The Role of the Propensity Score in Estimating Dose-response
      Functions.” Biometrika 87(3): 706-710.
Jolly, Paul. 1988. “Medical Education in the United States, 1960-1987.” Health Affairs 7(Suppl
        2): 144-157.
Jones, Charles I. 1995. “R&D-based Models of Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy
       103(4): 759-784.
Jones, Damon, David Molitor, and Julian Reif. 2018. “What do Workplace Wellness Programs
       Do? Evidence from the Illinois Workplace Wellness Study.” NBER Working Paper
       #24229.
Keiser, Harry. 1998. “Clinical Associates Program Oral History Series.” edited by Melissa Klein.
        Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Kerr, William R., and William F. Lincoln. 2010. “The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa
      Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention.” Journal of Labor Economics 28(3): 473-508.
Khot, Sandeep, Buhm Soon Park, and Jr. W.T. Longstreth. 2011. “The Vietnam War and Medical
       Research: Untold Legacy of the U.S. Doctor Draft and the NIH “Yellow Berets”.” Academic
       Medicine 86(4): 502-508.


                                               39
Kimball, Harry R. 1997. “Clinical Associates Program Oral History Series.” edited by Melissa
      Klein. Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Klein, Melissa K. 1998. “The Legacy of the ‘Yellow Berets’: The Vietnam War, the Doctor Draft,
       and the NIH Associate Training Program.” Manuscript, NIH History Office, National
       Institutes of Health.
Marquis, Christopher, and Andras Tilcsik. 2013. “Imprinting: Toward a Multilevel Theory.” The
      Academy of Management Annals 7(1): 193-243.
Marx, Matt and Aaron Fuegi. 2019. “Reliance on Science: Worldwide Front-Page Patent Citations
      to Scientific Articles.” Boston University Questrom School of Business Research Paper No.
      3331686.
McDaniel, Michael A., Deborah L. Whetzel, Frank L. Schmidt, and Steven D. Maurer. 1994. “The
     Validity of Employment Interviews: A Comprehensive Review and Meta-Analysis.”
     Journal of Applied Psychology 79(4): 599-616.
Milojevic, Staša, Filippo Radicchi, and John P. Walsh. 2018. “Changing Demographics of Scientific
       Careers: The Rise of the Temporary Workforce.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences 115(50): 12616-12623.
Milstein, Robert M., Leland Wilkinson, Gerard N. Burrow, and William Kessen. 1981. “Admission
        Decisions and Performance During Medical School.” Journal of Medical Education 56(2):
        77-82.
Nathan, David G. 2005. “The Several Cs of Translational Clinical Research.” Journal of Clinical
      Investigation 115(4): 795-797.
NIH. 1968. “Associate Training Program in the Medical and Biological Sciences at the National
       Institutes of Health.” Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
NIH Office of History. 1982. “Intramural Science at the NIH.” Office of NIH History, National
      Institutes of Health.
NIH Office of Research Information. 1963. “New Class of 101 New Physicians Join NIH Research
      Training Programs.” NIH Office of Research Information, National Institutes of Health.
Nisbett, Richard E., Henry Zukier, and Ronald E. Lemley. 1981. “The Dilution Effect:
       Nondiagnositc Information Weakens the Implications of Diagnostic Information.”
       Cognitive Psychology 13(2): 248-277.
Oster, Emily. 2019. “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence.”
       Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 37(2): 187-204.
Park, Buhm Soon. 2003. “The Development of the Intramural Research Program at the National
       Institutes of Health after World War II.” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 46(3): 383-
       402.
Robins, James M., Miguel A. Hernan, and Babette Brumback. 2000. “Marginal Structural Models
       and Causal Inference in Epidemiology.” Epidemiology 11(5):550-560.
Rhodes, Richard. 1986. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Touchstone.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political Economy 98(5):
      S71-S102.
Rousselot, Louis M. 1971. “Doctor Draft.” Archives of Surgery 102(1): 88-89.



                                               40
Rubin, Gerald M. 2006. “Janelia Farm: An Experiment in Scientific Culture.” Cell 125(2): 209-
       212.
Santos Silva, João M.C. and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of Gravity.” The Review of
       Economics and Statistics 88(4): 641-658.
Sauermann, Henry, and Carolin Haeussler. 2017. “Authorship and contribution disclosures.”
      Science Advances 3(11): e1700404.
Schechter, Alan, and Geraldine Schechter. 1998. “Clinical Associates Program Oral History
       Series.” edited by Melissa Klein. Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Scolnick, Edward. 1998. “National Cancer Institute Oral History Project.” edited by Gretchen A.
       Case. Office of NIH History, National Institutes of Health.
Shapiro, Harold T. et al. 1988. “A Healthy NIH Intramural Program: Structural Change or
       Administrative Remedies? Report of a Study.” Institute of Medicine.
Snyder, Thomas D. (Ed.). 1993. “120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait.”
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.
Solow, Robert M. 1957. “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” The Review
       of Economics and Statistics 39(3): 312-320.
Stinchcombe, Arthur L. 1965. “Social Structure and Organizations.” In James G. March (Ed.),
       Handbook of Organizations, (pp. 142-193) Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Svorencík, Andrej. 2014. “MIT’s Rise to Prominence: Outline of a Collective Biography.” History
       of Political Economy 46(suppl 1): 109-133.
Teitelbaum, Michael S. 2014. Falling Behind? Boom, Bust and the Global Race for Scientific
       Talent. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Urschel, John, and Louisa Thomas. 2019. Mind and Matter: A Life in Math and Football. New
       York: Penguin Group.
Varmus, Harold. 2009. The Art and Politics of Science: W. W. Norton & Company.
Wiesner, Willi H., and Steven F. Cronshaw. 1988. “A Meta-analytic Investigation of the Impact
      of Interview Format and Degree of Structure on the Validity of the Employment
      Interview.” Journal of Occupational Psychology 61(4): 275-290.
Wooldridge Committee Report. 1965. “Biomedical Science and Its Administration: A Study of the
      National Institutes of Health.” edited by President’s NIH Study Committee. Report to the
      President. February 1965 United States. Government Printing Office.
Woolf, Steven H. 2008. “The Meaning of Translational Research and Why it Matters.” Journal of
       the American Medical Association 299(2): 211-213.
Wright, Patrick M., Philip A. Lichtenfels, and Elliot D. Pursell. 1989. “The Structured Interview:
      Additional Studies and a Meta-analysis.” Journal of Occupational Psychology 62(3): 191-
      199.
Wyngaarden, James B. 1979. “The Clinical Investigator as an Endangered Species.” New England
     Journal of Medicine 301(23): 1254-1259.
Xu, Stanley, Colleen Ross, Marsha A. Raebel, Susan Shetterly, Christopher Blanchette, and David
       Smith. 2010. “Use of Stabilized Inverse Propensity Scores as Weights to Directly Estimate
       Relative Risk and Its Confidence Intervals.” Value in Health 13(2): 273-277.


                                               41
Figure 1. NIH ATP interviewed candidates by year




Note: Number of second-round applicants, by year and treatment status. N=3,075 applicants (1,929 attendees; 1,146
non-attendees). Sources: ATP Index Cards.




                                                        42
Figure 2. Career research outcomes

              A. Career publications                                            B. Career citations                                         C. Career NIH funding




Note: Histogram for the number of original journal             Note: Histogram for the cumulative number of citations to       Note: Histogram for the cumulative NIH funding received
publications over the entire post-training career. Twenty      original journal publications published over the entire post-   over the entire post-training career (2015 dollars, deflated
five outliers with more than 500 post-training publications    training career. Twenty outliers with more than 50,000          by the Biomedical R&D PPI). 1,087 fellows receive at least
omitted. 86% of applicants publish one article or more after   citations omitted (excludes citations to publications as a      some NIH funding during their career. Two hundred and
career independence (91% of attendees; 78% of non-             student or trainee). Sources: ATP Index Cards, PubMed,          eighty four outliers with more than $25 mln. in career
attendees). Sources: ATP Index Cards and PubMed.               and Web of Science.                                             funding omitted. Sources: ATP Index Cards and NIH
                                                                                                                               Compoud Grant Applicant File (CGAF).




                                                                                           43
Figure 3. Predicted probability of selection




Note: Predicted probabilities from the logit specification reported in Table 2, column (1b).




Note: Predicted probabilities from the lasso penalized logit procedure described in the last paragraph of section 4.1 of
the manuscript. The correlation coefficient between the two sets of weights is 0.92.




                                                           44
  Table 1a. Descriptive statistics: Pre-application data
                                                  Mean              Median        Std. Dev.       Min.         Max.
Non-Attendees
PhD                                               0.013                0            0.114           0             1
Age in the Year of Last Application               25.931               26           1.427          22            39
Nb. of Applications                               1.028                1            0.170           1            3
Draft Lottery Number                             187.935              192          108.667          1           366
Draft Lottery Number Called                       0.510                1            0.500           0             1
Number of Institutes Applied For                  2.948                3            1.944           1           11
Number of Associate Tracks Applied For            1.828                2            0.776           1             3
AΩA Honor Medical Society                         0.257                0            0.437           0             1
Pre-ATP Nb. of Publications                       0.582                0            1.243           0            13
Pre-ATP JIF-weighted Nb. of Publications          3.288                0            9.882           0           100
NIH Grants for Applicant’s Medical School      170,322,949        144,327,040    128,368,334    2,229,763   598,948,672
NIH Grants for Applicant’s Internship Hospital 89,384,220         63,689,084     87,060,971         0       285,714,560
Attendees
PhD                                               0.036                0            0.186          0              1
Age in the Year of Last Application               26.016               26           1.428          21            35
Nb. of Applications                               1.029                1            0.170          1             3
Draft Lottery Number                             183.468              188          105.714         1            366
Draft Lottery Number Called                       0.521                1            0.500          0              1
Number of Institutes Applied For                  3.933                4            2.237          1            11
Number of Associate Tracks Applied For            2.068                2            0.763          1              3
AΩA Honor Medical Society                         0.383                0            0.486          0              1
Pre-ATP Nb. of Publications                       1.005                0            1.692          0             14
Pre-ATP JIF-weighted Nb. of Publications          6.595                0           14.496          0            154
NIH Grants for Applicant’s Medical School      207,006,393        171,863,840    150,979,213        0       639,319,744
NIH Grants for Applicant’s Internship Hospital 95,494,683         85,238,536     82,201,355        0        285,714,560
Note: N=3,075 applicants (1,929 attendees; 1,146 non-attendees). For NIH grants, original amounts were deflated using the
Biomedical R&D Producer Price Index (2015 dollars). JIF—journal impact factor. Sources: ATP Index Cards, PubMed, CGAF.




                                                       45
Table 1b. Descriptive statistics: Career choice
                                                                Mean      Median      Std. Dev.        Min.        Max.
 Non-Attendees
 Deceased                                                       0.074         0          0.262           0            1
 Years of Post-graduate Training                                5.864        6           1.688           1           13
 Nb. of Career Years (censored in 2017)                         37.651       39          5.805           0           50
 First Job in Academia                                          0.572         1          0.495           0            1
 Ends Career in Academia                                        0.381         0          0.486           0            1
 Researcher First Job                                           0.460        0           0.499           0            1
 Ends Career as Researcher                                      0.300        0           0.459           0            1
 First Job in Clinical Practice                                 0.535        1           0.499           0            1
 Ends Career in Clinical Practice                               0.657        1           0.475           0           1
 Attendees
 Deceased                                                       0.100         0          0.299           0            1
 Years of Post-graduate Training                                6.425        6           1.556           1           15
 Nb. of Career Years (censored in 2017)                         38.149       39          6.389           0           50
 First Job in Academia                                          0.757         1          0.429           0            1
 Ends Career in Academia                                        0.546         1          0.498           0            1
 Researcher First Job                                           0.694        1           0.461           0            1
 Ends Career as Researcher                                      0.519        1           0.500           0            1
 First Job in Clinical Practice                                 0.296        0           0.457           0            1
 Ends Career in Clinical Practice                               0.441        0           0.497           0           1
Note: Academia includes both universities/medical schools and research settings such as the NIH or private non-profit
institutes (e.g., The Salk Research Institute). Researcher jobs is different from academia in that it includes for-profit
industry research positions but excludes clinical university faculty. Clinical practice includes both those in community
practice as well as medical school clinical faculty. Sources: ATP Index Cards, AMA Physician Masterfile, doximity.com,
state licensure records, NIH telephone directories.




                                                           46
Table 1c. Descriptive statistics: Research outcomes
                                               Mean        Median         Std. Dev.          Min.           Max.
Non-Attendees
Nb. of Pubs, Training Period                   2.400            1           4.079             0              38
Career Nb. of Pubs                             37.313           5          80.078             0             826
Career Citations                               1,988           127          5,345             0            55,480
Nb. of Patents                                 0.657            0           3.729             0              51
Career Citations to Patents in Patents         7.506            0          53.651             0            1,159
Career Citations to Pubs in Patents           80.095            0          347.028            0            4,487
NIH Grant Recipient                            0.206            0           0.405             0               1
Career NIH Grants ($ 2015)                   4,511,372          0        35,192,232           0        1,043,797,568
Career NIH R01 Grants ($ 2015)               1,193,642          0         5,035,673           0          72,207,600
Nb. NIH-R01-funded Trainees                    0.214            0           0.885             0              14
Attendees
Nb. of Pubs, Training Period                  6.050             4           6.389             0             65
Career Nb. of Pubs                            77.773            34         109.584            0             841
Career Citations                              5,131            1235         10,391            0           181,822
Nb. of Patents                                1.738             0           6.569             0             163
Career Citations to Patents in Patents        20.227             0         106.080            0            2,409
Career Citations to Pubs in Patents          252.029            19         914.263            0           19,247
NIH Grant Recipient                           0.442             0           0.497             0              1
Career NIH Grants ($ 2015)                  12,436,209           0       42,898,984           0        1,114,597,504
Career NIH R01 Grants ($ 2015)              3,149,951            0        8,197,320           0         101,280,192
Nb. NIH-R01-funded Trainees                   0.758             0           1.914             0              25
Note: Except in the first row, all outcomes should be understood to be restricted to output in the post-training (i.e.,
independent) phase of the career. Sources: ATP Index Cards, PubMed, CGAF, USPTO, Marx and Fuegi (2020)
“reliance on science” publication-to-patent linkages.




Table 1d. Notable achievements
                                               Natl.              Howard
                                                                                       NIH MERIT [R37]
                         Nobel Prize        Academies           Hughes Med.
                                                                                           Awardee
                                             Member             Investigator
 Non-Attendees             0 (0.00%)         14 (1.12%)           0 (0.00%)                   14 (1.22%)
 Attendees                 7 (0.36%)         90 (4.67%)          32 (1.66%)                   79 (4.10%)
 Total                     7 (0.23%)        104 (3.34%)          32 (1.04%)                   93 (3.02%)
Sources: ATP Index Cards, CGAF, Nonel Prize, HHMI, and NAS web sites.




                                                          47
Table 1e. Descriptive statistics: Research style
                                                          Mean        Median     Std. Dev.       Min.     Max.
Non-Attendees
Basic Science Articles                                    0.107          0         0.200          0         1
Translational Medicine Articles                           0.209          0         0.234          0         1
Clinical Trial Articles                                   0.097          0         0.161          0         1
Other Clinical Articles                                   0.467          0         0.324          0         1
Articles Appearing in “Translational” Journals            0.012          0         0.065          0         1
Inspires Translational Research                           0.088          0         0.135          0         1
Builds on Translational Research                          0.068          0         0.131          0         1
Articles Cited in Patents                                 0.109          0         0.149          0         1
Attendees
Basic Science Articles                                    0.199          0         0.248          0         1
Translational Medicine Articles                           0.273          0         0.232          0         1
Clinical Trial Articles                                   0.107          0         0.162          0         1
Other Clinical Articles                                   0.338          0         0.292          0         1
Articles Appearing in “Translational” Journals            0.016          0         0.039          0         1
Inspires Translational Research                           0.118          0         0.137          0         1
Builds on Translational Research                          0.078          0         0.130          0         1
Articles Cited in Patents                                 0.162          0         0.162          0         1
Note: N=2,584 scientists (491 scientists with zero publications cited at least once in the independent phase of
the career are excluded). Statistics correspond to the fraction of each scientist’s work with the corresponding
characteristic. Sources: ATP Index Cards, PubMed.




                                                         48
Table 2. Modeling selection into the NIH ATP
                                                                            Program Selection                                 Informative Censoring
                                                                   Parsimonious                                         Parsimonious               Saturated
                                                                                           Saturated
                                                                      Model                                                Model                    Model
                                                                                          Model [Lasso]
                                                                      [Logit]                                              [Logit]                  [Lasso]

                                                                   (1a)         (1b)             (1c)                  (2a)          (2b)              (2c)

 Log(Pre-ATP Nb. of Publications)                                              0.308**         0.325**                             -0.192**          -0.210**
                                                                               (0.071)         (0.070)                             (0.064)           (0.066)
 Ln(NIH Grants for Applicant’s Medical School)                    0.357**      0.317**                               -0.193**      -0.158*
                                                                 (0.090)       (0.091)                               (0.067)       (0.066)
 Ln(NIH Grants for Applicant’s Internship Hospital)               0.019*       0.017†                                -0.031**      -0.029**
                                                                 (0.009)       (0.010)                               (0.008)       (0.009)
 PhD                                                              0.926**      0.568†          0.807**               -1.348**      -1.037**          -1.140**
                                                                 (0.333)       (0.341)         (0.313)               (0.354)       (0.358)           (0.359)
 No Internship                                                    1.467†       1.265†           5.223                -2.755**      -2.643*           -4.703†
                                                                 (0.761)       (0.768)         (9.418)               (1.054)       (1.065)           (2.743)
 Applies more than once                                           -0.033        -0.083          0.061                 0.076          0.115            -0.030
                                                                 (0.299)       (0.294)         (0.276)               (0.246)       (0.249)           (0.242)
 AΩA Honor Medical Society                                        0.686**      0.699**         0.662**               -0.345**      -0.345**          -0.345**
                                                                 (0.105)       (0.106)         (0.102)               (0.088)       (0.088)           (0.087)
 Constant                                                        -3.263†        -2.634                                3.076*        2.362†
                                                                 (1.747)       (1.775)                               (1.313)       (1.312)
 Medical School Fixed Effects                                       No            No             Yes                    No            No               Yes
 Internship Hospitals Fixed Effects                                 No            No             Yes                    No            No               Yes
 Nb. of Non-zero Predictors                                                                      151                                                   169
 Nb. of Potential Predictors                                                                     372                                                   372
 χ2 Test Statistic                                                                              78.85                                                 38.32
 Pseudo-R2                                                         0.250        0.265                                  0.056        0.073
 Log-likelihood                                                   -1,522       -1,493                                 -1,944        -1,910
 Nb. of Applicants                                                3,075        3,075            3,075                 3,075         3,075             3,073
Note: The dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one for attendees, zero for non-attendees (first three columns) or an indicator variable equal to one
for attendees who exit research immediately after training (last three columns). All models incorporate a full suite of medical school graduation year effects; a set of
indicator variables for the applicant’s age at the time of application; indicator variables for the number of distinct NIH component institutes that received the
application; indicator variables for the number of tracks applied to within the Associate Training Program; indicator variables for the number of years between the
application and the medical school graduation year; and a series of indicator variables capturing if the applicant (1) intended to postpone his internship until after


                                                                                  49
training, (2) intends to perform his internship abroad, (3) intends to intern in a hospital affiliated with the Veterans Affairs Administration, or (4) has missing
information regarding his intended internship hospital. All models except (1a) and (2a) also include an indicator variable for applicants without any publication
before application. Estimates in columns [1c] and [2c] correspond to the results of a cross-fit partialing-out lasso logit procedure with ten folds, as described in
Chernozhukov et al. (2018). The specification includes all the covariates mentioned above, plus a full suite of medical school indicator variables and a full suite of
internship hospitals indicator variables, but only a subset of this list is selected for inclusion (151 out of 372 in model [1c]; 169 out of 372 in model [2c]. In both
models [1c] and [2c], a Wald test rejects the hypothesis that the “coefficients of interest” (i.e., those that are constrained to appear in the model, and for which
inference is performed) are jointly equal to zero. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). Sources: ATP Index Cards, PubMed, CGAF.




                                                                                  50
Table 3. Career choice outcomes
                                              X-Sect.                Logit Weights                    Lasso Weights
                                              Naive                 ATE       ATET                   ATE       ATET
 Poisson Estimates

                                              0.087**              0.081**        0.072**           0.080**       0.067**
 Years of Post-graduate Training
                                              (0.011)              (0.018)        (0.025)           (0.014)       (0.018)

                                              -0.012†               -0.012        -0.016†           -0.012†        -0.011
 Nb. of Career Years
                                              (0.006)              (0.008)        (0.009)           (0.007)       (0.008)

 Logit Estimates

                                              0.160**              0.109**         0.073*           0.111**       0.082**
 First Job in Academia
                                              (0.018)              (0.025)        (0.033)           (0.021)       (0.025)

                                              0.146**              0.095**        0.101**           0.131**       0.109**
 Ends Career in Academia
                                              (0.020)              (0.019)        (0.034)           (0.032)       (0.027)

                                              0.212**              0.179**        0.161**           0.168**       0.150**
 Researcher First Job
                                              (0.018)              (0.026)        (0.033)           (0.022)       (0.026)

                                              0.216**              0.140**        0.175**           0.191**       0.173**
 Ends Career as Researcher
                                              (0.019)              (0.022)        (0.030)           (0.031)       (0.025)

                                              -0.212**             -0.180**      -0.165**           -0.168**     -0.151**
 First Job in Clinical Practice
                                              (0.018)              (0.025)       (0.033)            (0.022)      (0.026)

                                              -0.215**             -0.135**      -0.180**           -0.187**     -0.172**
 Ends Career in Clinical Practice
                                              (0.019)              (0.021)       (0.030)            (0.029)      (0.025)

                                              0.056**               0.008          0.032†            0.025*        0.031*
 Joins the Research Elite
                                              (0.013)              (0.007)        (0.017)           (0.012)       (0.013)

 Number of Applicants                          3,075                3,075          3,075             3,075         3,075
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. The dependent variables are listed
in the left-most column. All models incorporate a full suite of medical school graduation year effects as well as an
indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application. The last four columns perform inverse probability
of treatment weighted estimation for first career position and training length outcomes (rows 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7) and
inverse probability of treatment and censoring weighted estimation for all other outcomes; the corresponding estimates
can be interpreted as the ATE/ATET of NIH training, under the assumption of unconfoundedness. On the first two
rows, the estimates stem from Poisson regressions. Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes
interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimate in the top cell of the first column imply that attendees stay
100×(exp[0.087]-1)=9.1% longer in training, relative to non-attendees; the effect is highly statistically significant. On the
next six rows, the estimates stem from logistic regressions. The marginal effects for the treatment indicator are reported.
For instance, the coefficient in the third row of the first column implies that attendees are 16.0% more likely than non-
attendees to be initially placed in academia after completing their training. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p
< 0.05, **p < 0.01). Sources: ATP Index Cards, AMA Physician Masterfile, doximity.com, state licensure records, NIH
telephone directories.




                                                            51
Table 4. Research outcomes
                                           X-Sect.             Logit Weights                     Lasso Weights
                                           Naïve             ATE         ATET                  ATE         ATET

                                           0.653**          0.529**          0.561**          0.488**          0.504**
 Career Nb. of Pubs
                                           (0.076)          (0.088)          (0.112)          (0.078)          (0.091)

 Career Nb. of Pubs,                       0.678**          0.536**          0.557**          0.511**          0.528**
 First/Last Authorship Position            (0.074)          (0.093)          (0.119)          (0.078)          (0.092)

                                           0.840**          0.562**          0.670**          0.560**          0.615**
 Career Citations
                                           (0.098)          (0.124)          (0.150)          (0.108)          (0.118)

                                           0.922**           0.225            0.254            0.487*           0.440†
 Nb. of Patents
                                           (0.207)          (0.244)          (0.319)          (0.226)          (0.262)

 Career Citations to Pubs in               1.104**           0.478†           0.560†          0.629**          0.652**
 Patents                                   (0.170)          (0.268)          (0.317)          (0.205)          (0.236)

                                           0.939**           0.482            0.480            0.610*           0.587*
 Career NIH Grants
                                           (0.231)          (0.311)          (0.367)          (0.266)          (0.288)

                                           0.827**           0.366†           0.538*          0.509**          0.572**
 Career NIH R01 Grants
                                           (0.154)          (0.213)          (0.250)          (0.179)          (0.193)

                                           0.880**           0.298            0.446            0.477*           0.520*
 Nb. NIH-R01-Funded Trainees
                                           (0.151)          (0.294)          (0.341)          (0.217)          (0.256)
 Number of Applicants                       3,075            3,075            3,075            3,075            3,075
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. All estimates stem from Poisson
regressions. The dependent variables are listed in the left-most column. All models incorporate a full suite of medical
school graduation year effects as well as an indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application.
Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes interpretable as elasticities. For example, the
estimate in the first cell imply that attendees publish 100×(exp[0.653]-1)=92.13% more original articles during the
independent phase of their career, relative to non-attendees; the effect is highly statistically significant. The last four
columns perform inverse probability of treatment and censoring weighted; the corresponding estimates can be interpreted
as the ATE/ATET of NIH training, under the assumption of unconfoundedness. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10,
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). Sources: ATP Index Cards, PubMed, Web of Science, CGAF, USPTO, Marx and Fuegi (2020)

“reliance on science” publication-to-patent linkages.




                                                           52
Table 5. Publication outcomes, by citation quantiles
                                                 X-Sect.           Logit Weights               Lasso Weights
                                                 Naïve            ATE     ATET                ATE      ATET
 Career Nb. of Pubs, Total                       0.669**         0.512**       0.562**       0.487**        0.512**
 (with citation data available)                  (0.077)         (0.091)       (0.114)       (0.079)        (0.093)

 Career Nb. of Pubs                              0.725**         0.539**       0.588**       0.520**        0.541**
 Top 50% of the Citation Distribution            (0.082)         (0.100)       (0.127)       (0.086)        (0.101)

 Career Nb. of Pubs                              0.769**         0.539**       0.602**       0.529**        0.557**
 Top 25% of the Citation Distribution            (0.088)         (0.113)       (0.142)       (0.095)        (0.111)

 Career Nb. of Pubs                              0.853**         0.594**       0.677**       0.575**        0.614**
 Top 5% of the Citation Distribution             (0.105)         (0.135)       (0.167)       (0.113)        (0.129)

 Career Nb. of Pubs                              0.976**         0.679**       0.842**       0.652**        0.744**
 Top 1% of the Citation Distribution             (0.131)         (0.162)       (0.188)       (0.146)        (0.152)

 Career Nb. of Pubs                              1.034**         0.644**       0.843**       0.674**        0.781**
 Top 0.1‰ of the Citation Distribution           (0.189)         (0.207)       (0.218)       (0.204)        (0.193)

 Number of Applicants                             3,075           3,075         3,075         3,075          3,075
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. All estimates stem from Poisson
regressions. The dependent variables are listed in the left-most column. All models incorporate a full suite of medical
school graduation year effects as well as an indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application.
Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes interpretable as elasticities. For example, the
estimate in the bottom cell of the first column imply that attendees publish 100×(exp[1.034]-1)=181% more articles in
the top 0.1‰ of the citation distribution during the independent phase of their career, relative to non-attendees; the
effect is highly statistically significant. The last four columns perform inverse probability of treatment and censoring
weighted estimation; the corresponding estimates can be interpreted as the ATE/ATET of NIH training, under the
assumption of unconfoundedness. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). Sources: ATP Index
Cards, PubMed, Web of Science.




                                                           53
Table 6: Research style
                                                     X-Sect.           Logit Weights                Lasso Weights
                                                     Naive             ATE     ATET                 ATE    ATET
                                                     0.475**          0.413**      0.423**         0.393**     0.416**
 Career Nb. of Pubs
                                                     (0.073)          (0.088)      (0.108)         (0.076)     (0.089)
                                                     1.025**          0.622**      0.663**         0.766**     0.741**
 Basic Science Articles
                                                     (0.115)          (0.173)      (0.218)         (0.137)     (0.169)
                                                     0.604**          0.385**      0.453**         0.426**     0.457**
 Translational Medicine Articles
                                                     (0.107)          (0.140)      (0.163)         (0.117)     (0.134)
                                                     0.460**          0.473**      0.614**         0.430**     0.548**
 Clinical Trial Articles
                                                     (0.119)          (0.118)      (0.126)         (0.114)     (0.114)
                                                      0.054           0.285**       0.207           0.137       0.143
 Other Clinical Articles
                                                     (0.088)          (0.104)      (0.129)         (0.100)     (0.110)
 Articles Appearing in                               0.934**          0.646**       0.711*         0.707**     0.785**
 Translational Journals                              (0.167)          (0.211)      (0.317)         (0.176)     (0.200)

                                                     0.587**          0.460**      0.514**         0.459**     0.502**
 Inspires Translational Research
                                                     (0.117)          (0.131)      (0.151)         (0.117)     (0.125)
                                                     0.526**          0.462**      0.635**         0.458**     0.584**
 Builds on Translational Research
                                                     (0.126)          (0.127)      (0.133)         (0.123)     (0.120)
                                                     0.760**          0.469**       0.538*         0.555**     0.586**
 Articles Cited in Patents
                                                     (0.106)          (0.160)      (0.215)         (0.125)     (0.152)
 Number of Applicants                                 2,584            2,584        2,584           2,584       2,584
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. All estimates stem from Poisson
regressions. The dependent variables are listed in the left-most column. All models also include a full suite of medical
school graduation year effects as well as an indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application.
Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes interpretable as elasticities. For example, the
estimate in the cell at the bottom left imply that attendees publish 100×(exp[0.760]-1)=113.82% more articles cite by
patents, relative to non-attendees; the effect is highly statistically significant. The last four columns perform inverse
probability of treatment and censoring weighted; the corresponding estimates can be interpreted as the ATE/ATET of
NIH training, under the assumption of unconfoundedness. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).
Sources: ATP Index Cards, PubMed.




                                                          54
Table 7a: Robustness analyses
                                      IPTC Lasso Weights                                     Zero Pre-ATP Pubs
                                    No         Winsoring,    Winsoring,                     Top 10 Med  Other Med
                                 Winsoring     95th pctl.    90th pctl.
                                                                              CEM
                                                                                              Schools    Schools
                                  0.488**       0.419**       0.382**        0.653**             0.992**         0.516**
 Career Nb. of Pubs
                                  (0.078)       (0.082)       (0.084)        (0.114)             (0.158)         (0.140)
 Log Pseudo-Likelihood           -152,455       -129,538     -113,547        -53,656            -47,084          -49,882
 Number of Applicants              3075           2769         2461           1,036               849              988
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. All estimates stem from Poisson
regressions. All models incorporate a full suite of medical school graduation year effects as well as an indicator variable
for holding a PhD degree at the time of application. Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes
interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimate in the first column imply that attendees publish 100×(exp[0.488]-
1)=62.91% more articles during the independent phase of their career, relative to non-attendees. The first three columns
vary the sample to reflect the winsorization of the regression weights. In the fourth column, CEM refers to coarsened
exact matching, a blocking technique to guarantee balance on a small set of covariates. The last two columns restrict
sample to the set of applicants with no research experience prior to application, separately for those having graduated
from elite and non-elite medical schools. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).




Table 7b: Robustness analyses
                                                Nb. of Pubs                              sinh-1(Nb. of Pubs)
                                        IPTC Lasso                                   IPTC Lasso
                                                            Double Lasso                                   Double Lasso
                                          Weights                                      Weights

                                          27.460**            25.749**                 0.893**               0.868**
 ATE
                                          (3.975)             (4.001)                  (0.115)               (0.085)
 Number of Applicants                        3,075             3,075                    3,075                 3,075
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the average treatment effect in a separate regression. All estimates stem from
OLS regressions. The dependent variable is either the number of post-training publications in levels (first pair of columns)
or the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of post-training publications (second pair of columns). The first and third
columns perform inverse probability of treatment and censoring weighted estimation as in Table 4. The second and
fourth column report an estimate of the average treatment effect using the “post-double-selection” lasso estimator due
to Belloni et al. (2014). Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).




Table 7c: Robustness analyses
                                                                                                Oster’s δ
 Career Nb. of Pubs                                                                                1.740
 Career Nb. of Pubs, Top 5% of the Cit. Distrib.                                                   1.788
 Career Nb. of Pubs, Top 1% of the Cit. Distrib.                                                   1.766
 Career Citations                                                                                  1.751
 Nb. of Patents                                                                                    2.282
 Career NIH Grants ($ 2015)                                                                        1.518
Note: The score reported corresponds to the δ parameter from Oster (2019), the ratio between the covariances of the
outcome with observed and unobserved covariates, respectively. All outcomes are transformed using the inverse
hyperbolic sine function, and δ is computed using OLS regression and the list of covariates selected by the pds-lasso
estimator of Belloni et al. (2014), and chosen to produce an estimate of the treatment effect equal to zero. We follow
Oster’s recommendation of setting Rmax = 1.3×R2 from the fully saturated specification.

                                                             55
          Appendix A: Robustness Checks & Ancilliary Results



Figure A1. Pre-application publications




Note: Histogram for the number of original publications published up to the year of ATP application weighted by the
journal impact factor of the publication outlet in which they appeared. Twenty four outliers are omitted.




                                                         i
Table A1. Most common medical schools attended by applicants
                                                               Non-
 Medical School                                                          Attendees   Total
                                                             Attendees
                                                                 86          274       360
 Harvard Medical School
                                                               (7.50)      (14.20)   (11.71)
                                                                 54          113       167
 Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
                                                               (4.71)      (5.86)    (5.43)
                                                                 57          85       142
 Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons
                                                               (4.97)      (4.41)    (4.62)
                                                                 53          87       140
 University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine
                                                                (4.62)      (4.51)    (4.55)
                                                                  45          84       129
 New York University School of Medicine
                                                                (3.93)      (4.35)    (4.20)
                                                                  52          77       129
 Yale University School of Medicine
                                                                (4.54)      (3.99)    (4.20)
                                                                  52          63       115
 Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University
                                                                (4.54)      (3.27)    (3.74)
                                                                  22          75        97
 Duke University School of Medicine
                                                                (1.92)      (3.89)    (3.15)
                                                                  38          51        89
 SUNY Downstate Medical Center College of Medicine
                                                                (3.32)      (2.64)    (2.89)
                                                                  30          52        82
 Cornell University Medical College
                                                                (2.62)      (2.70)    (2.67)
                                                                 489         961      1,450
 Total
                                                               (42.67)     (49.82)   (47.15)
Note: Column percentages in parentheses.




                                                   ii
Table A2. Occupational breakdown, first position (post-training)
 First Position                 Non-Attendees     Attendees       Total
                                           509          1,170      1,679
 Academic Researcher
                                       (44.42)          (60.65)    (54.60)
                                         131              130        261
 Academic Clinician
                                       (11.43)           (6.74)     (8.49)
                                          15              161        176
 NIH Staff Scientist
                                        (1.31)           (8.35)     (5.72)
                                         176              143        319
 Solo Clinical Practice
                                       (15.36)           (7.41)    (10.37)
                                         233              203        436
 Group Clinical Practice
                                       (20.33)          (10.52)    (14.18)
                                          73               95        168
 Hospital Clinical Practice
                                        (6.37)           (4.92)     (5.46)
                                          2                 7          9
 Industry
                                        (0.17)           (0.36)     (0.29)
                                          1                 1          2
 Biopharma Consulting
                                        (0.09)           (0.05)     (0.07)
                                          1                 2          3
 Administrative Position
                                        (0.09)           (0.10)     (0.10)
                                          2                15         17
 Health & Science Policy
                                        (0.17)           (0.78)     (0.55)
                                          3                2          5
 Miscellaneous
                                        (0.26)           (0.10)     (0.16)
                                        1,146            1,929      3,075
 Total
                                      (100.00)         (100.00)   (100.00)
 N                                     3,075
Note: Column percentages in parentheses.




                                                 iii
Table A3. Occupational breakdown, last position
 Last Position                  Non-Attendees     Attendees      Total
                                           295          851       1,146
 Academic Researcher
                                       (25.75)         (44.12)    (37.30)
                                         134             168        302
 Academic Clinician
                                       (11.69)          (8.71)     (9.82)
                                           8              34         42
 NIH Staff Scientist
                                        (0.70)          (1.76)     (1.37)
                                         209             222        431
 Solo Clinical Practice
                                       (18.24)         (11.51)    (14.02)
                                         317             344        661
 Group Clinical Practice
                                       (27.66)         (17.83)    (21.50)
                                          93             116        209
 Hospital Clinical Practice
                                        (8.12)          (6.01)     (6.80)
                                          24              79        103
 Industry
                                        (2.09)          (4.10)     (3.35)
                                          17              38         55
 Biopharma Consulting
                                        (1.48)          (1.97)     (1.79)
                                          24              50         74
 Administrative Position
                                        (2.09)          (2.59)     (2.41)
                                          15              18         33
 Health & Science Policy
                                        (1.31)          (0.93)     (1.07)
                                          10              9          19
 Miscellaneous
                                        (0.87)          (0.47)     (0.62)
                                        1,146           1,929      3,075
 Total
                                      (100.00)        (100.00)   (100.00)
 N                                     3,075
Note: Column percentages in parentheses.




                                                 iv
Table A4. Covariate balance after weighting
                                                              Unweighted sample                  Logit IPTW Reweighting               Lasso IPTW Reweighting
                                                         Treated   Control   T-Stat            Treated Control T-Stat                Treated Control T-Stat
 Pre-ATP JIF-Weighted Publications                        6.595     3.288     6.835              4.587     6.349  1.540               5.362     5.524  0.218
                                                         (0.330)   (0.292)                      (0.636)   (1.093)                    (0.311)   (0.682)
 NIH Grants for Applicant's Medical School               207.006   170.323    6.879            169.964 188.220     0.815             191.941 187.942   0.447
                                                         (3.438)   (3.792)                     (22.130) (8.776)                      (6.135)   (6.388)
 NIH Grants for Applicant's Internship Hospital           97.153    90.890    1.986             82.556    83.688   0.096              93.377   90.501  0.619
                                                         (1.882)   (2.592)                     (10.984) (4.276)                      (3.259)   (3.274)
 PhD                                                      0.036     0.013     3.738              0.024     0.030   0.585              0.027     0.025  0.295
                                                         (0.004)   (0.003)                      (0.004)   (0.011)                    (0.003)   (0.007)
 No Internship                                            0.009     0.003     2.187              0.006     0.008  0.354               0.007     0.008  0.171
                                                         (0.002)   (0.002)                      (0.002)   (0.005)                    (0.002)   (0.005)
 Applies more than once                                   0.028     0.027     0.154              0.025     0.041  1.604               0.028     0.042  1.398
                                                         (0.004)   (0.005)                      (0.005)   (0.010)                    (0.004)   (0.009)
 AOA Honor Medical Society                                0.383     0.257     7.162              0.294     0.328  0.706               0.332     0.307  1.050
                                                         (0.011)   (0.013)                      (0.039)   (0.028)                    (0.014)   (0.019)
 Attended Harvard Medical School                          0.142     0.075     5.614              0.110     0.106  0.130               0.122     0.107  0.871
                                                         (0.008)   (0.008)                      (0.016)   (0.021)                    (0.008)   (0.015)
 Attended Johns Hopkins School of Medicine                0.059     0.047     1.356              0.050     0.041   0.797              0.056     0.043  1.501
                                                         (0.005)   (0.006)                      (0.008)   (0.008)                    (0.006)   (0.007)
 Attended Columbia University                             0.044     0.050     0.725              0.037     0.052   1.191              0.043     0.049  0.668
                                                         (0.005)   (0.006)                      (0.007)   (0.011)                    (0.005)   (0.007)
Note: Means, standard errors, and t-statistics are reported; reweighting is performed using average treatment effect inverse probability of treatment weights. T-
statistics are calculated using IPTW-weighted OLS regression of the variable of interest on an indicator variable for ATP attendance. Harvard, Johns Hopkins, and
Columbia are the three most common medical schools attended in the sample. For NIH grants, original amounts were deflated using the Biomedical R&D Producer
Price Index (2015 dollars) and presented in units of millions of dollars. JIF—journal impact factor.




                                                                               v
Table A5. Research and training outcomes by weighting procedure
                                              Naive         Reweighted         Reweighted          Reweighted
                                            Estimates        Estimates          Estimates           Estimates
                                             X-Sect.          IPTW               IPCW                IPTCW
 Logit Estimates

 Researcher First Job                        0.212**            0.168**
                                             (0.018)            (0.022)

 Ends Career as Researcher                   0.216**            0.189**          0.180**              0.191**
                                             (0.019)            (0.024)          (0.021)              (0.031)

 Poisson Estimates

 Career Nb. of Pubs                          0.653**            0.520**          0.544**              0.488**
                                             (0.076)            (0.079)          (0.077)              (0.078)

 Career citations                            0.840**            0.644**          0.699**              0.560**
                                             (0.098)            (0.108)          (0.102)              (0.108)

 Nb. of Patents                              0.922**            0.630**          0.802**               0.487*
                                             (0.207)            (0.221)          (0.208)              (0.226)

 Career NIH R01 Grants ($ 2015)              0.827**            0.573**          0.730**              0.509**
                                             (0.154)            (0.172)          (0.155)              (0.179)

 Nb. NIH-R01-funded trainees                 0.880**             0.530*          0.778**               0.477*
                                             (0.151)            (0.219)          (0.149)              (0.217)
 Number of Applicants                         3,075              3,075            3,075                3,075
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. The dependent variables are listed
in the left-most column. All models incorporate a full suite of medical school graduation year effects as well as an
indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application. In the first two rows, the estimates stem from
logistic regressions. The marginal effects for the treatment indicator are reported. For instance, the coefficient in the
first row of the first column implies that attendees are 21.2% more likely than non-attendees to be initially placed in a
research position after completing their training. In the remaining rows, the estimates stem from Poisson regressions.
Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes interpretable as elasticities. For example, the
estimate in the first column of the third row imply that attendees publish 100×(exp[0.653]-1)=92.13% more original
publications after career independence, relative to non-attendees. The first column corresponds to a naïve cross sectional
estimate of the difference in outcomes for treated and control applicants, controlling for a handful of predetermined
covariates. The second column corresponds to reweighted estimates using inverse probability of treatment weights,
which adjust the effect for selection but ignore informative censoring. The third column corresponds to reweighted
estimates using inverse probability of censoring weights, which adjust the effect for early exit from research but ignore
selection concerns. The fourth column combines the two sets of weights, producing estimates robust to selection and
informative censoring under the maintained assumption of unconfoundedness. All weights are average treatment effects
calculating from a lasso model. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).




                                                           vi
Table A6. Research outcomes and style during training, by program track
                                                           All Associates          Research Assoc.               Clinical Assoc.                 Staff Assoc.
                                                          Naive      ATE           Naive      ATE               Naive        ATE               Naive        ATE
  Poisson Estimates for full sample
                                                         0.878**     0.723**       0.886**       0.780**       0.926**        0.788**         0.951**         0.766**
  Nb. of Pubs, Training Period
                                                         (0.059)     (0.079)       (0.074)       (0.094)       (0.064)        (0.076)         (0.107)         (0.134)
  Number of Applicants                                    3,075       3,075         1,940         1,940         2,460          2,460           1,044           1,044


  Poisson Estimates for research style sample
                                                         0.416**     0.359**       0.419**       0.410**       0.446**        0.402**         0.452**         0.371**
  Nb. of Pubs, Training Period
                                                         (0.050)     (0.054)       (0.061)       (0.068)       (0.053)        (0.059)         (0.092)         (0.100)

                                                         1.058**     0.941**       1.001**       0.898**       1.026**        0.882**         0.992**         0.961**
  Basic Science Articles
                                                         (0.088)     (0.095)       (0.113)       (0.126)       (0.097)        (0.108)         (0.167)         (0.180)

                                                         0.607**     0.513**       0.599**       0.563**       0.714**        0.617**         0.542**         0.445**
  Translational Medicine Articles
                                                         (0.074)     (0.081)       (0.098)       (0.108)       (0.079)        (0.090)         (0.144)         (0.147)

                                                         0.535**      0.501*        0.508*        0.548*       0.719**        0.767**          0.591           0.511
  Clinical Trial Articles
                                                         (0.200)     (0.200)       (0.226)       (0.217)       (0.182)        (0.194)         (0.364)         (0.341)

                                                         -0.127†      -0.106       -0.227*       -0.192*        -0.078         -0.057          -0.151          -0.229
  Other Clinical Articles
                                                         (0.074)     (0.088)       (0.088)       (0.089)       (0.079)        (0.081)         (0.126)         (0.159)

                                                         0.559**     0.450**       0.599**       0.547**       0.712**        0.641**         0.520**         0.553**
  Inspires Translational Research
                                                         (0.103)     (0.110)       (0.130)       (0.135)       (0.109)        (0.122)         (0.198)         (0.183)

                                                         0.551**      0.518*        0.584*       0.664**       0.707**        0.789**          0.460           0.452
  Builds on Translational Research
                                                         (0.204)     (0.207)       (0.246)       (0.244)       (0.199)        (0.216)         (0.380)         (0.362)
  Number of Applicants                                    2,486       2,486         1,625         1,625         1,968          1,968            862             862
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. All estimates stem from Poisson regressions. The dependent variables are listed in
the left-most column. All models incorporate a full suite of medical school graduation year effects as well as an indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time
of application. The second, fourth, sixth, and eighth columns perform inverse probability of treatment weighted estimation as computed from lasso specifications very
similar to that appearing in Table 2; the corresponding estimates can be interpreted as the ATE of NIH training, under the assumption of unconfoundedness.
Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimate in the top cell of the first column imply that
attendees publish 100×(exp[0.878]-1)=140.61% more publications during training relative to non-attendees; the effect is highly statistically significant. The first row uses
the full sample, while the other rows limit the sample to those with at least one cited publication during training. The number of applicants includes all those known to
have applied to the corresponding track within the Associate Training Program. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).

                                                                                    vii
Table A7. Treatment effect by application year
                                         All years                  Applied 1965-1969               Applied 1970-1972                Applied 1973-1975
                                    Naive          ATE              Naive        ATE                Naive        ATE                 Naive        ATE

 Researcher First Job              0.212**         0.168**         0.239**           0.175*         0.219**         0.173**         0.173**         0.135**
                                   (0.018)         (0.022)         (0.050)          (0.070)         (0.022)         (0.026)         (0.040)         (0.042)

 Career Nb. of Pubs                0.653**         0.488**         0.848**          0.707**         0.743**         0.569**          0.269           0.138
                                   (0.076)         (0.078)         (0.210)          (0.241)         (0.089)         (0.093)         (0.171)         (0.171)
 Total Applicants                   3,075           3,075           1,037            1,037           1,570           1,570            468             468
 Attendees                          1,929           1,929            959              959             690             690             280             280
 Non-Attendees                      1,146           1,146            78               78              880             880             188             188
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. The dependent variables are listed in the left-most column. All models
incorporate a full suite of medical school graduation year effects as well as an indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application. The
second, fourth, sixth, and eighth columns perform inverse probability of treatment (row 1) or inverse probability of treatment and censoring (row 2) weighted
estimation as computed from lasso specifications very similar to that appearing in Table 2; the corresponding estimates can be interpreted as the ATE of
NIH training, under the assumption of unconfoundedness. On the first row, the estimates stem from logistic regressions. The marginal effects for the
treatment indicator are reported. For instance, the coefficient in the second row of the first column implies that attendees are 21.2% more likely than non-
attendees to be initially placed in academia after completing their training. On the second row, the estimates stem from Poisson regressions. Exponentiating
the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimate in the top cell of the first column imply that
attendees publish 100×(exp[0.653]-1)=92.13% more original publications after career independence, relative to non-attendees; the effect is highly statistically
significant. The number of applicants during each time period are also presented. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).




                                                                                    viii
Table A8. Research outcomes and style, by program track
                                                         All Associates                 Research Assoc.            Clinical Assoc.                  Staff Assoc.
                                                        Naive       ATE                 Naive      ATE            Naive         ATE               Naive         ATE
 Logit Estimates
                                                       0.212**       0.168**        0.195**       0.154**        0.193**         0.140**         0.225**          0.173**
 Researcher First Job
                                                       (0.018)       (0.022)        (0.023)       (0.029)        (0.021)         (0.025)         (0.032)          (0.039)
 Number of Applicants                                   3075          3075           1,940         1,940          2,460           2,460           1,044            1,044

 Poisson Estimates for full sample
                                                       0.653**       0.488**        0.651**       0.506**        0.651**         0.486**         0.655**          0.487**
 Career Nb. of Pubs
                                                       (0.076)       (0.078)        (0.095)       (0.099)        (0.086)         (0.088)         (0.134)          (0.148)
 Number of Applicants                                   3075          3075           1,940         1,940          2,460           2,460           1,044            1,044

 Poisson Estimates for research style sample
                                                       0.475**       0.393**        0.495**       0.358**        0.486**         0.391**         0.461**          0.360**
 Career Nb. of Pubs
                                                       (0.073)       (0.076)        (0.090)       (0.091)        (0.081)         (0.086)         (0.127)          (0.125)

                                                       1.025**       0.766**        1.005**       0.896**        1.004**         0.834**         0.893**          0.748**
 Basic Science Articles
                                                       (0.115)       (0.137)        (0.144)       (0.143)        (0.135)         (0.142)         (0.205)          (0.210)

                                                       0.604**       0.426**        0.627**       0.487**        0.656**         0.433**          0.427*           0.322†
 Translational Medicine Articles
                                                       (0.107)       (0.117)        (0.134)       (0.129)        (0.125)         (0.140)         (0.197)          (0.191)

                                                       0.460**       0.430**        0.434**        0.200         0.530**         0.464**          0.426†           0.259
 Clinical Trial Articles
                                                       (0.119)       (0.114)        (0.162)       (0.192)        (0.135)         (0.139)         (0.222)          (0.222)

                                                        0.054         0.137          0.015         -0.086         0.073           0.115           0.183            0.121
 Other Clinical Articles
                                                       (0.088)       (0.100)        (0.117)       (0.118)        (0.093)         (0.096)         (0.166)          (0.152)

                                                       0.587**       0.459**        0.629**       0.491**        0.689**         0.478**          0.415†           0.282
 Inspires Translational Research
                                                       (0.117)       (0.117)        (0.146)       (0.144)        (0.138)         (0.142)         (0.225)          (0.216)

                                                       0.526**       0.458**        0.516**        0.258         0.618**         0.509**          0.521*           0.313
 Builds on Translational Research
                                                       (0.126)       (0.123)        (0.161)       (0.198)        (0.143)         (0.147)         (0.210)          (0.224)
 Number of Applicants                                   2,584         2,584          1,685         1,685          2,061           2,061            899              899
Note: Each cell contains an estimate for the treatment effect in a separate regression. The dependent variables are listed in the left-most column. All models incorporate
a full suite of medical school graduation year effects as well as an indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application. The second, fourth, sixth,
and eighth columns perform inverse probability of treatment (row 1) or inverse probability of treatment and censoring (row 2-9) weighted estimation as computed


                                                                                   ix
from lasso specifications very similar to that appearing in Table 2; the corresponding estimates can be interpreted as the ATE of NIH training, under the assumption
of unconfoundedness. On the first row, the estimates stem from logistic regressions. The marginal effects for the treatment indicator are reported. For instance, the
coefficient in the first row of the first column implies that attendees are 21.2% more likely than non-attendees to be initially placed in a research position after
completing their training. The estimates of the other rows stem from Poisson regressions. Exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes
interpretable as elasticities. For example, the estimate in the second row the first column imply that attendees publish 100×(exp[0.653]-1)=92.13% more publications
after career independence, relative to non-attendees; the effect is highly statistically significant. The first two rows uses the full sample, while the other rows limit the
sample to those with at least one cited publication during training. The number of applicants includes all those known to have applied to the corresponding track
within the Associate Training Program. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).




Table A9. Intensity of Treatment Effects (dose-response relationship)
                                                                                                                 Academic         Academic        Research         Research
                                            Publications      Citations        NIH Funding         Patents
                                                                                                                 First Job        Last Job        First Job        Last Job
                                                0.109            -0.209           -1.597*           -1.054          0.068           0.069            0.144           0.118
 One year of NIH training
                                               (0.393)          (0.554)           (0.731)          (0.928)         (0.142)         (0.129)          (0.149)         (0.121)
                                               0.396**          0.347**            0.147            0.182          0.095**         0.151**          0.152**         0.214**
 Two years of NIH training
                                               (0.080)          (0.111)           (0.295)          (0.274)         (0.023)         (0.033)          (0.026)         (0.029)
                                               0.724**          0.928**           1.296**          0.826**         0.172**         0.178**          0.228**         0.217**
 Three years of NIH training
                                               (0.103)          (0.127)           (0.408)          (0.241)         (0.031)         (0.036)          (0.032)         (0.035)
 Log Pseudo-Likelihood                        -176,266       -14,078,704      -72,591,506,317      -10,356         -1,786           -2,364          -1,946           -2,319
 Number of Applicants                           3,075           3,075              3,075            3,075          3,075            3,075           3,075            3,075
Note: Each column reports estimates from a regression of the outcome listed in the header on four indicator variables corresponding to different intensities of treatment,
as well as a full suite of medical school graduation year effects and an indicator variable for holding a PhD degree at the time of application. No NIH training is the
omitted category of treatment intensity. The estimates stem from Poisson regressions (first four columns) and logit regressions (last four columns). For the Poisson
estimates, exponentiating the coefficients and subtracting one yield magnitudes interpretable as elasticities. For the logit regressions, marginal effects are reported.
Each observation is weighted by its inverse probability of treatment and censoring (columns 1-4, 6, and 8) or inverse probability of treatment (columns 5 and 7), as
computed from a separate ordered logit specification very similar to that appearing in Table 2. The corresponding estimates can be interpreted as the ATE of NIH
training, under the assumption of unconfoundedness. Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).




                                                                                     x
                                       Appendix B
                                   Non-applicant Sample


To construct information on the characteristics of physicians who did not apply to the NIH ATP, we capi-
talized on the American Medical Association (AMA) Physician Masterfile. The AMA Physician Masterfile
was established in 1906; records for United States medical graduates are established upon medical school
enrollment. We obtained records only for those physicians whose last name and first initial matched one
of the applicants in our sample. We limited our analysis to male M.D. graduates from 1965 to 1975 who
attended a U.S. medical school. Age was calculated directly from birthdates; we excluded those with an age
greater than 36 out of concern for erroneous recorded birthdates. The final sample was comprised of 10,738
physicians who did not interview for an NIH ATP position.

To identify publications by non-applicants during medical school attendance, we focused on a subset of this
population with a name frequency of 1 or 2 in our AMA Masterfile data (188 non-applicants and 1,502
applicants). Non-applicants were matched against author-name disambiguated publications using Author-
ity (Torvik et al. 2005; Torvik and Smalheiser 2009). All potential matches to publications were manually
verified. Paralleling the measurement of pre-application publications by applicants, we kept only those
original articles published within 1 year of medical school graduation.

References

Torvik, Vetle I., Marc Weeber, Don R. Swanson, and Neil R. Smalheiser. 2005. “A probabilistic similarity
metric for Medline records: a model for author name disambiguation.” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 56(2):140-158.

Torvik, Vetle I., and Neil R. Smalheier. 2009. “Author Name Disambiguation in MEDLINE.” ACM Trans-
actions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 3(3):11.




                                                    xi
Figure B1. Age at medical school graduation




Note: Kernel density of age at medical school graduation by application status. Non-applicants are male U.S. medical
school graduates 1965-1975 identified from the American Medical Association Physician Masterfile (see Appendix B for
details). N = 13,814 physicians (3,075 applicants and 10,738 non-applicants). Sources: ATP Index Cards, AMA
Physician Masterfile.




Table B1. Descriptive Statistics: Characteristics of Non-Applicants
                                                              Mean       Median       Min.      Max.      Nb. of Obs.
 Non-Applicants
 Age at medical school graduation                              26.513    26.004        22        36          10,738
 NIH Grants for Applicant’s Med. School (×1,000)              103,459    77,069        0       639,320       10,738
 Pre-ATP Nb. of Publications                                   0.314     0.000         0          5           188
 ATP Interviewees
 Age at medical school graduation                              25.952     25.845       22        36           3,075
 NIH Grants for Applicant’s Med. School (×1,000)              193,335    164,903       0       639,320        3,075
 Pre-ATP Nb. of Publications                                   0.917      0.000        0         12           1,502
Note: Non-applicants are male U.S. medical school graduates between 1965 and 1975 identified from the American Medical
Association Physician Masterfile. Pre-ATP publications are identified only for those with a name frequency of one or two
(see Appendix B for details). For NIH grants, original amounts were deflated using the Biomedical R&D Producer Price
Index (2015 dollars). Sources: ATP Index Cards, AMA Physician Masterfile, PubMed, CGAF.




                                                        xii
                                        Appendix C
                                  Draft Lottery Subsample


For several cohorts of applicants in our sample, their eligibility for the draft was potentially influenced
by the lotteries held by the U.S. Selective Service in 1969, 1970, and 1971. In total, 1,898 (61.72%) of
the applicants were born between 1944 and 1952 and therefore assigned a lottery number, based on their
birth date. Applicants whose number was called might have been especially determined to escape service in
Vietnam, and invested more in preparing their application. Alternatively, NIH PIs might have exhibited a
bias in favor of applicants whose alternative to training at NIH would have been service in a conflict zone.
In the subsample of applicants impacted by the draft lottery, 978 (51.53%) have a number that was called,
i.e., classified as available for military service.

For the vast majority of the physicians in the sample affected by the draft, the lottery occurred several years
prior to their graduation from medical school and their application to the ATP. As a result, most may have
been able to postpone their draft eligibility through deferments granted for educational purposes (Rousselot
1971). Table C1 demonstrates that in practice, having one’s number called in the lottery does not help
predict ATP attendance, focusing on the applicants cohorts for which the draft lottery was operating (i.e.,
those born between 1944 and 1952).

Column 1 enters the same covariates into the specification as column 1a in Table 2, but estimates the model
on the restricted sample of 1,898 “lottery-affected” applicants. Using this parsimonious model, column 2
shows that having one’s lottery number called does not predict selection into the program, consistent with
the premise that physicians were already on the required service list during the Vietnam era. Column 3
confirms this result using a lasso covariate selection procedure akin to that used in Table 2, column 1c (the
draft lottery number indicator variable is constrained to appear in the specification).




                                                     xiii
Table C1. Modeling selection into the NIH ATP: Draft Lottery
                                                               w/o Draft           w/ Draft            Saturated
                                                               Covariates          Covariates         Model [Lasso]
                                                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)
 Draft Lottery Number Called                                                           0.061                0.047
                                                                                      (0.103)              (0.100)
 Log(Pre-ATP Nb. of Publications)                                 0.294**             0.294**              0.302**
                                                                  (0.078)             (0.078)              (0.079)
 Ln(NIH Grants for Applicant’s Medical School)                     0.248*              0.247*
                                                                  (0.109)             (0.109)
 Ln(NIH Grants for Applicant’s Internship                          0.008               0.008
 Hospital)                                                        (0.011)             (0.011)

 PhD                                                               0.744               0.747                1.087*
                                                                  (0.494)             (0.496)              (0.453)
 No Internship                                                                                              2.770*
                                                                                                           (1.143)
 Applies more than once                                            0.119               0.117                0.433
                                                                  (0.305)             (0.307)              (0.282)
 AΩA Honor Medical Society                                        0.634**             0.634**              0.623**
                                                                  (0.121)             (0.121)              (0.115)
 Constant                                                         8.775**             8.746**
                                                                  (2.178)             (2.179)
 Medical School Fixed Effects                                       No                  No                   Yes
 Internship Hospitals Fixed Effects                                 No                  No                   Yes
 Nb. of Non-zero Predictors                                                                                  155
 Nb. of Potential Predictors                                                                                 369
 χ2 Test Statistic                                                                                          52.22
 Pseudo-R2                                                          0.144              0.144
 Log-likelihood                                                    -1,125              -1,125
 Nb. of Applicants                                                 1,898               1,898                1,898
Note: Estimates in columns 1a and 1b stem from logit specifications; the dependent variable is an indicator variable
equal to one for attendees, zero for non-attendees. All models incorporate a full suite of medical school graduation
year effects; a set of indicator variables for the applicant’s age at the time of application; indicator variables for the
number of distinct NIH component institutes that received the application; indicator variables for the number of
tracks applied to within the Associate Training Program; indicator variables for the number of years between the
application and the medical school graduation year; an indicator variable if the applicant applied more than once; an
indicator variable for zero publications before application, and a series of indicator variables capturing if the applicant
(1) intended to postpone his internship until after training, (2) intends to perform his internship abroad, (3) intends
to intern in a hospital affiliated with the Veterans Affairs Administration, or (4) has missing information regarding
his intended internship hospital. Estimates in column 1c correspond to the results of a cross-fit partialing-out lasso
logit procedure with ten folds, as described in Chernozhukov et al. (2018). The specification includes all the covariates
mentioned above, plus a full suite of medical school indicator variables and a full suite of internship hospitals indicator
variables, for a total of 369 covariates, 155 of which the procedure selects for inclusion as control variables. The χ2
test statistic (i.e., the Wald test of the hypothesis that the coefficients of the five variables of interest—for which
inference is performed and are constrained to appear in the model—are jointly equal to zero) is equal to 52.22 (p <
0.01). Robust errors in parentheses (†p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01). Sources: ATP Index Cards, AMA Physician
Masterfile, PubMed, CGAF, draft lottery numbers available at https://www.sss.gov/history-and-records/vietnam-
lotteries/.




                                                            xiv
                                        Appendix D
                                  Research Style Measures


To characterize research style, we take advantage of MeSH terms, a hierarchical controlled vocabulary the-
saurus maintained by the National Library of Medicine. The National Library of Medicine employs pro-
fessional indexers to select MeSH indexing terms for biomedical publications according to specific protocol
and considers each article in the context of the entire collection. Importantly, given the subjectivity of any
indexing task, the authors are not involved in the process of selecting MeSH terms.

Disease-oriented articles were identified as all those under the MeSH tree disease category (C01-C26). We
excluded C22, which primarily measures veterinary diseases, and included F03, mental disorders. All together
this measure includes 4,895 unique MeSH terms. Example terms include hematuria, aortic valve stenosis,
and Klippel-Feil Syndrome. Some microbiologic agents, such as escherichia coli, may be both pathologic
causes of disease as well as common organisms in molecular biology research. To ensure results are not
being driven by conflation of microbiologic disease with a research model organism, a second measure of
disease-orientation was constructed as above but dropping all bacterial infectious disease terms (C01) with
similar results obtained.

Articles using molecular biology methods were identified primarily based on the MeSH category for inves-
tigative techniques (F05). These were manually reviewed to eliminate any terms which may have a potential
direct clinical application outside of a laboratory, such as angioplasty or glasgow coma scale. The final
list of MeSH codes includes: E05.017, E05.091, E05.118, E05.181, E05.196 (but excluding E05.196.353),
E05.197, E05.198, E05.242.223, E05.242.335, E05.242.363.342, E05.242.373, E05.242.383.910, E05.242.551,
E05.242.800, E05.295, E05.301, E05.313, E05.318.416, E05.393, E05.478, E05.481, E05.484, E05.490, E05.522,
E05.588, E05.591, E05.595, E05.598, E05.601, E05.624, E05.650, E05.657, E05.830, E05.916.680, and A11.251
(excluding A11.251.476). Together, these codes identify 510 unique MeSH terms with examples including
immunoelectrophoresis, nucleic acid hybridization, and real-time polymerase chain reaction.

To construct a measure of the use of a model organism in research, we compiled a list of 53 different
model organisms used in biomedical research: tobacco mosaic virus, bacteriophage λ, bacteriophage φX174,
SV40, T4 phage, escherichia coli, bacillus subtilis, caulobacter crescentus, aliivibrio fischeri, synechocys-
tis, pseudomonas fluorescens, azotobacter vinelandii, Streptomyces coelicolor, chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
dictyostelium discoideum, tetrahymena thermophila, eremothecium, aspergillus nidulans, coprinus cinereus,
Cryptococcus neoformans, ceurospora crassa, saccharomyces cerevisiae, schizophyllum, schizosaccharomyces
pombe, ustilago maydis, arbacia punctulata, aplysia, caenorhabditis elegans, ciona intestinalis, drosophila,
loligo pealei, trichoplax adhaerens, ambystoma mexicanum, cat, chicken, dog, mesocricetus auratus, guinea
pigs, rabbits, oryzias latipes, mice, genetically modified animals (B01.050.050.136 and B01.050.050.199.520),
mole-rat, pigeon, poecilia reticulata, rat, rhesus macaque, petromyzon marinus, takifugu, xenopus laevis,
and zebrafish. The associated MeSH codes for these organisms resulted in 125 unique MeSH terms. As a
robustness check to ensure the result was not driven by microbiologic model organisms which may also be
pathologic diseases, as well as for clarity given the large number of organisms, a second measure limited only
to major non-microbiologic organisms was constructed. This consisted of the MeSH codes for the following
model organisms: caenorhabditis elegans, drosophila, zebrafish, mice, genetically modified animals (exam-
ples under this category include knockout and SCID mice), saccharomyces cerevisiae, and rhesus macaque.
This subset contained a total of 67 unique MeSH terms. Results were similar using this alternative measure
of model organism.

We constructed two additional measures of basic science based on the research topic: the first focused
on cellular structures and macromolecules, and the second on biochemical and cellular processes. We
identified 2,620 MeSH terms related to cellular structures and macromolecules and 1,028 related to bio-


                                                     xv
chemical and cellular processes. Care was taken to avoid terms which may have direct clinical relevance.
The final list of MeSH codes for cellular structures and macromolecules includes: A11.284, A20 (excluding
A20.593), D05.500, D08.811, D09.067 (excluding D09.067.687.668, D09.067.342.531), D09.254, D12.125.780,
D12.644.360, D12.644.770, D12.776.575, D12.776.580, D12.776.835, D12.776.938, D12.776.947, D13, D23.125,
and D23.585. Example MeSH terms capture by this measure include golgi apparatus, 16S ribosomal RNA,
DNA topoisomerase IV, and COP9 signalosome complex. The final list of MeSH codes for biochemical
and cellular processes includes: G02 (but excluding G02.111.130, G02.111.007, G02.186, G02.819), G03
(but excluding G03.015, G03.030, G03.180, G03.191, G03.312, G03.442, G03.458, G03.615.500, G03.680,
G03.787, G03.800, G03.820, G03.857), G04 (excluding G04.140), G05 (excluding G05.045, G05.090, G05.180,
G05.285, G05.347, G05.350, G05.390, G05.400, G05.410, G05.697, G05.815, G05.910), G06.920 (excluding
G06.225.420, G06.920.850), G07.265.755, G12, G11.561.653, G11.561.638, G16.075.250. Examples include
chaperone-mediated autophagy, signal transduction, post-transcriptional RNA processing, and oxidative
phosphorylation.

Clinical trial articles were identified by two approaches. First, we used MeSH terms for publication type
(V03.175) as well as topic (E05.318.372.250, N05.715.360.330.250, N06.850.520.450.250), with veterinary
terms eliminated (V03.175.375, V03.175.750, N05.715.360.330.250.375, N06.850.520.450.250.750). These
MeSH codes resulted in 25 unique MeSH terms. Examples include clinical trial, phase II; randomized
controlled trial; and observational study. As a second measure, we identified all those papers tagged in
PubMed with a publication type containing the term trial. Example publication types include adaptive
clinical trial; clinical trial, phase III ; and randomized controlled trial.




                                                  xvi
                                         Appendix E
                                  Identification of Trainees


To identify the trainees of ATP applicants who later go on to receive NIH grants, we first identified the
set of original research articles after career independence in which the ATP applicant was the last author.
The first authors of these publications were then matched against NIH grantees who earned their doctorate
degree 1965-2015 from the Consolidated Grant Applicant File and NIH Exporter. Only those publications
that occurred in a window centered on the time of his or her highest degree were considered to be during
training (3 years prior to earning a doctorate to 5 or 7 years afterwards for a PhD or MD, respectively, to
account for residency, fellowship, and postdoctoral training as well as any publication lags). This established
a set of potential trainee/ATP applicant dyads.

We employed several strategies to verify the potential match between the first author and NIH grantee. We
considered all dyads matching on location or specialty to be a valid match. We defined a location match as
occurring if the NIH grantee institution matched either the institutions of the NIH ATP applicants first or last
job after career independence. This approach capitalizes on the fact that a significant number of residency
or fellowship graduates take their first faculty job at the same institution they completed their training.
Care was taken to account for close institutional affiliations (for example, the San Francisco Veterans Affairs
Medical Center and University of California, San Francisco would be considered as matching).

The specialty of NIH grantees was derived from their departmental affiliation when available. A difficulty
with this approach is that some medicine subspecialists are reported as working in the general medicine
department rather than their subspecialty (i.e. reported in the department of medicine rather than a cardi-
ology department). We conservatively only considered exact specialty matches (i.e. general internal medicine
matching to general internal medicine and cardiology to cardiology). As a robustness check, the analysis
was repeated using a stricter definition of specialty match which excluded any general medicine or general
pediatrics matches. We also considered a specialty as matching if a pediatric subspecialist studied with their
adult physician counterparts or vice versa.

For our baseline specification, we defined a trainee/ATP applicant dyad as valid if it matched on location,
matched on specialty, or had a last name frequency within the NIH grantees of less than or equal to 10.
As a robustness check, we employed a stricter definition using only a hand-coded subset. We consider R01
grantees to also include those receiving R29 and R37 grants.




                                                     xvii
