                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE DEBT CRISIS: STRUCTURAL
                     EXPLANATIONS OF COUNTRY PERFORMANCE




                                 Andrew Berg
                                Jeffrey Sachs




                           Working Paper No. 2607




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  June 1988




We are grateful to the participants in the First Interamerican Seminar on
Economics and in particular to Albert Fishlow and our discussants Marcelo
Selowsky and Ernesto Zedillo. Andrew Berg acknowledges financial support
from an NSF Graduate Fellowship. The research supported here is part of the
NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2607
                                        June 1988




                         THE DEBT CRISIS: STRUCTURAL
                      EXPLANATIONS OF COUNTRY PERFORMANCE




                                   ABSTRACT

This paper develops a cross-country statistical model of debt rescheduling,
and the secondary market valuation of LDC debt, which links these variables
to key structural characteristics of developing countries, such as the trade
regime, the degree of income inequality, and the share of agriculture in CNP.
Our most striking finding is that higher income inequality is a significant
predictor of a-higher probability of debt rescheduling in a cross-section of
middle-income countries. We attribute this correlation to various
difficulties of political management in economies with extreme inequality.
We also find that outward-orientation of the trade regime is a significant
predictor of a reduced probability of debt rescheduling.




Andrew Berg                              Jeffrey Sachs
N.B.E.R.                                 Department of Economics
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                      Littauer M-14
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
I.    Introduction



       The debt crisis can be studied as a problem in epidemiology. A

powerful virus, high world interest rates, hit the population of capital-

importing developing countries in the early l9BOs. Some countries succumbed

to the virus, having to reschedule their debts on an emergency basis, while

others did not. And of those countries that arrived for emergency

treatment, some recovered sufficiently to enter a period of quiet

convalescence, while others are still suffering from febrile seizures in the

ElF's intensive care unit.

       The epidemiologist studies the progression of a disease in order to

understand the disease better, and to recommend improved forms of treatment.

For the same reason, it is important to understand why some countries fell

prey to the debt crisis while others did not, and why some countries have

recovered from the crisis while other countries remain deeply enmeshed in

it. The goal of our paper is to find answers to these questions, and then

to draw inferences about the fundamental nature of the debt crisis itself.

Was the crisis mainly the result of external shocks, internal policy

mistakes, the organization of political power within the debtor countries,

or other structural features of those economies that succumbed to crisis?

       Several earlier studies (e.g. Cline, 1984; McFadden, et. al. ,   1985)

have tried to identify the proximate causes of the debt crisis by estimating

a probability model of rescheduling for a cross-section of debtor countries.

Typically, such studies try to explain the crisis by looking mainly at the

cross-country variation of a set of financial variables, such as the ratio

of   debt service to exports,   the ratio of foreign exchange reserves to
 imports, and so forth. These studies are problematical, however, since many

of the supposedly "causal" variables (e.g. low foreign exchange reserves)

are really symptoms of the crisis rather than fundamental causes. Moreover,

learn little about the kinds of policies or structural conditions within an

economy that lead to the adverse changes in the financial variables.

     Our study seeks to identify causes of the debt crisis that are more

fundamental than the values of financial variables on the eve of

rescheduling. Several earlier studies provide us with the foundation for

such an analysis. Ealassa (1982), Sachs (1985), and many others, for -

example, have shown that the forej2n trade regime in each country is an

extremely important determinant of which countries succumbed to the debt

crisis, and which ones did not. The accumulated evidence is clear that

outward-oriented trade policies, such as those pursued in East Asia, have

been successful in raising the share of exports in national production,

spurring overall growth, and providing the foreign exchange earnings to

service foreign debts without reschedulings in the 1980s.

     Other studies such as those in the NEER Study on Foreign Debt (edited

by Sachs, 1988) stress the political prerequisites for avoiding a debt

crisis, and for recovering from such a crisis after it begins. It appears

that in many developing countries, the reliance of a government on heavy

foreign borrowing of the l97Os was determined by the political needs of the

incumbent government, rather than by calculations of intertemporal economic

efficiency. Foreign borrowing was, in many cases, a way for governments to

satisfy intense social demands for higher government spending without having

to suffer (in the short-term) the political consequences of higher tax




                                        2
collections or the inflationary consequences of money-financed deficits)

     In our view, the political pressures for excessive foreign borrowing

tend to be wore acute in economies with extreme inequalities of income. In

such economies, the pressures for redistributive policies tend to be

greatest, while the ability of the wealthy to resist the pressures for

income redistribution also tend to be strong given their significant command

over economic and political resources in the country. Competing interest

groups tend to see very little commonality of interests given the wide

disparities in income, and the economic policies that resqlt from this

distributional tug-of-war may tend to be short-sighted and to oscillate

widely over time. In many Latin American countries, for example, urban

workers support populist regimes, while landowners and other economic elites

often support highly repressive governments that promise to suppress worker

demands. Policies vary significantly as these groups alternate in political

power,

     Another key dimension of the political system is the extent to which

agricultural versus urban interests influence the political decisions over

economic policymaking. Huntington (1968) and other political scientists

     1
       Note that while the social pressures leading to overborrowing were
probably around for many years before the debt crisis, the manifestation of
those pressures in the form of heavy foreign debt had to await the dramatic
rise in the willingness of commercial banks to engage in cross-border
sovereign lending in the l970s. The sudden rise in international commercial
bank lending no doubt reflected other structural changes in the world
economy, such as: expansionary U.S. monetary policies in the early l970s,
the breakdown of the fixed exchange rate system and the sharp rise in global
liquidity attendant upon the collapse of the system, the OPEC oil price
increases in 1973-74 and the consequent growth of "petrodollar recycling",
the dimming of bankers' memories of the defaults on sovereign loans in the
Great Depression. Moreover, without the sharp and remarkable rise in world
interest rates in the early 1980s, the heavy lending to the developing world
could well have continued without overt crisis for many more years.


                                        3
have stressed that itt the case of developing countries, urban politics tends

to be a cauldron of instability and populist policies. Governments are most

secure which find a significant base of support in the agricultural sector,

which tends to favor more conservative and stable policies.    In Huntington's

words:

       In modernizing countries the city is not only the locus of
       instability; it is also the center of opposition to the
       government. If a government is to enjoy a modicum of
       stability, it requires substantial rural backing. If no
       government can win the support of the countryside, there is
       no possibility of stability. (p.435)

   -   In some instances, urban revolts may overturn rural-based
       governments, but in general governments which are strong in
       the countryside are able to withstand, if not to reducs or
       eliminate, the continuing opposition they confront in the
       cities.  (p. 437)



These considerations lead us to expect that the structural importance of

agriculture in the economy, which we measure roughly as the share of

agriculture in GNP, will help to predict the extent of political stability,

and by extension, the proneness of countries to an external debt crisis.

       Several other variables have been mentioned by observers of the debt

crisis as possible structural factors which may raise or lower the

probability of debt crisis in a particular country.     Possible explanatory

variables include: movements in the terms of trade; the structure of foreign

trade (e.g. the share of manufacturing goods versus primary products in

total exports, and the extent of the commodity diversification of exports);

the level of per capita income in the country; and the geographical location

of the country, especially if there are regional "contagion effects" in

commercial bank lending.

       Thie size of the debt burden (e.g. the debt-export ratio) at the time

                                          4
of the rise in real interest rates in the early 1980s helps to explain the

effect of the debt crisis in the various countries.   tie expect that our

structural variables should help to explain the debt-export ratios of the

individual countries (e.g. more unequal countries will have a higher

expected debt-export ratio). We also expect indecendent effects of our

structural variables, after controlling for the debt-export ratio, since the

structural variables should help to account for how much of any given amount

of debt was acquired on grounds of intertemporal optimality, and also how

effectively the country was able to respond to the rise in world interest

rates.

     Our strategy in this paper is to develop a basic statistical model of

debt rescheduling, that links reschedulings to key structural

characteristics of developing countries: trade regime, income inequality,

share of agriculture in production, etc. In Section II of the paper, we

introduce the basic statistical models and the key explanatory variables.

In Section III we present the empirical estimates of the basic models. In

Section IV we explore the robustness of the statistical results by

considering additional candidate variables in the key regression equations.

In Section V, we discuss the implications of our findings for the

understanding of the debt crisis, for the choice of policies in the debtor

coutries, and for future research on the political economy of stabilization

in the developing countries.



II. Structural Factors in Debt Reschedulings: A Probability Model


     Several earlier studies, including Callier (1985), dine (1984), Feder

and Just (1977), and McFadden et. al. (1985), have developed probability

                                        S
models of debt reschedulings. From these studies we learn that debt

reschedulings tend to occur when governments have heavy external debts and a

shortage of foreign exchange reserves. The equations usually tell us little

about the kinds of countries that are likely to arrive at that unpleasant

condition. The study by Callier is a partial exception to this statement,

since in addition to the usual financial indicators he considers some

"structural' variables in the debtor countries, including population,

investment rates, and openness to trade.

     Consider Cline's (1984) influential study of debt reschedulings. dine

estimates a logit model on a time-series, cross-section of developing

countries during 1972-1983. In terms of country-specific variables, dine

demonstrates that the probability of debt rescheduling in year t is a

function of the following variables in year t-1 (with the sign indicated in

parentheses): the country's current account deficit (s-), the debt service-

export ratio (+),   the   ratio of foreign reserves to imports (-),    and the

ratio of net debt to exports (+) .     Other structural variables that Cline

includes in his model, such as the economy's growth rate, per capita income

level, and savings rate, turn out to have little explanatory power.

     Our approach differs from Cline's treatment by attempting, like

dallier, to relate debt reschedulings to deeper structural characteristics

of the economies, characteristics which change slowly over the course of a

decade and thus can be considered as temporally prior to the financial

distress itself. In general, where the data are available we measure these

structural characteristics during the L97Os (e.g. as an average for 1970-

80), to emphasize that we are looking at country     characteristics    that

preceeded the debt crisis itself.


                                            6
      We develop two basic probability models, the first for the onset of the

debt crisis, and the second for the difficulties of the various countries in

overcoming the crisis. The first model is a standard cross-section probit

model of rescheduling, of the form:



(1)        ?rob(Ri_l) —



where Ri is a variable equal to I if country I rescheduled it debt during

1977-85, and equal to Oif there was no rescheduling. The vector Z             -

                                                                          -

includes    the economic and political variables in the model. I is the

cumulative   standard normal distribution.

      The second model is a tobit model, based on the secondary market value

of the country's debt as of July 1987. The idea is as follows. The

secondary market value of a country's debt can be used as a cardinal measure

of the country's creditworthiness. Countries which have escaped the debt

crisis will have debt that sells at par or very close to par in the

secondary market. Countries enmeshed in the crisis will have debt that

sells at a discount relative to par, with the size of the discount providing

a good indicator of the political and economic incapacity of the country to

service its debt.

      A tobit model allows us to test for the factors that determine the size

of the discount on the debt, taking into account the fact that for a range

of creditworthiness, the discount will be zero.     The Tobit model is

specified as follows:



(2)    Di —         +        if Di > 0
                                             7
                 0             otherwise

where       is the discount on the debt and    is, as before, the vector of

explanatory variables in the model.

        Throughout this study, our attention is focussed on commercial

borrowers and commercial bank reschedulings, as defined by the World Bank.

The World Bank and International Monetary Fund define commercial borrowers

as those developing countries for which at least one-third of foreign

borrowing is from private sector creditors. Thus, we restrict our attention

to the subset of developing countries with access to commercial bank lending

during the l970s, and do not analyze the conditions leading to reschedulings

of official debt in the Paris Club. While our sample includes a few low

income countries that did have access to commercial loans (e.g. India, Sri

Lanka, and China) most of the focus is on middle-income developing countries

with per capita incomes above $600 per capita. Even with the restriction to

commercial borrowers, the range of countries is enormous, with per capita

CR in 1981 ranging from $260 in India to $5670 in Trinidad and Tobago.

     Our sample is further restricted to countries with a population in

excess of 1 million in 1980, and to countries for which the key income

distributional data are available. The resulting list of countries, with

their rescheduling histories is shown in Table 1. Note that there are 35

countries in the sample, of which 15 have rescheduled with commercial

creditors, In Latin America and the Caribbean, 10 of 12 countries are

reschedulers, with Colombia and trinidad and Tobago the only two

nonreschedulers.2 In East Asia, only 1 in 9 countries, the Philippines, is

     2
       Colombia has not rescheduled its principal, but it has lost a measure
of access to new lending on normal market terms. In 1985, it negotiated a
"concerted" loan of $1 billion from the commercial bank creditors, while

                                           8
       Table 1: Rescheduling History
           Commercial Borrowers

Name              Rescheduling    History         Discount

         Latin America

Argentina         1983,1985,1987                         53
Brazil            1983,1984,1986                         45
Chile             1983,1984,1985,1987                    33
Colombia          None                                   19
Costa Rica        83,85                                  67
Ecuador           83,85                                  55
Mexico            1983,1984,1985,1987                    47
Panama            1983,1985,1987                         36
Peru              1983                                   89
Trinidad&Tobago   None                                    0
Uruguay           1983,1986                              32
Venezuela         1986,1987                              33

               East Asia

China             None                -
                                              -           0
                                  -

Hong Kong         None                               -    0.
Indonesia         None        -
                                                          0
                                                          0
                                          -

Korea             None
Malaysia          None                                    0
Philippines       1986.1987                              33
                  None                                    0
Singapore
Taiwan            None                                    0
Thailand   -
                  None                                    0

               Other

Egypt             None                                    0
Hungary           None                                    0
India             None                                    0
Israel            None                                    0
Ivory Coast       1985,1986                              40
Kenya             None                                    0
Mauritius         None                                    0
Morocco           1986,1987                              35
Portugal          None                                    0
Spain             None                                    0
Sri Lanka         None                                    0
Tunisia           None                                    0
Turkey            1982                                    0
Yugoslavia        1983,1984,1985                         30

Rescheduling History: Dates of rescheduling agreements
  with commercial borrowers, 1982 through 1987.
  Source: World Bank(1987b,1986).

Discount(DISC): 100 - the bid price for a $100 claim of debt to
  financial institutions on the secondary market as of July 1987.
  Note that source does not report a discount for the non-reschedulers
  (except Colombia). We assign a zero discount for such countries.
  Source: Salomon Brothers, in Huizinga and Sachs(1987).
 a commercial rescheduler. In Sub-Saharan Africa, 1 of 3 countries

 rescheduled (Ivory Coast), while two did not (Kenya and Mauritius). In

 Europe and North Africa, 2 out of 4 countries rescheduled (Morocco and

 Yugoslavia).

      We must stress the severe but inevitable problem of working with a
                                                                           very
 small sample. Not only are we restricted to a subset of commercial

 borrowers, but our hypothesis testing is limited by the fact that the number

 of non-Latin American reschedulers is only 5. Note that all of the

 significance tests reported for the probits and tobits are justified

 asymptotically. Moreover, it should be recognized that our explanatory

 variables are no doubt measured with error (especially the distribution of

 household income, and the index of outward orientation).

      We now turn to our principal explanatory variables.


     A. Trade Regime

     There is now a considerable amount of evidence that outward-

orientation of trade policy enhances the growth prospects of developing

countries, as well as their capacity to adjust to external shocks. Several

classic studies have addressed the relative merits of outward orientation

versus inward, import-substitution policies, as a strategy of long-ten

development. Virtually all such studies reach the conclusion that outward-

orientation has produced superior results in the intermediate   term (see for

example Little, Scitovslq', and Scott (1970), the Bhagwati-Krueger NBER Study

(see Krueger (1978) for a summary of the conclusions), and Balassa (1982).


remaining current on debt servicing obligations. As noted later in the
text, we may interpret Colombia as having had a "mini-debt crisis".
Interestingly, in our probit model, it turns out that Colombia is almost
always estimated to be just on the borderline between rescheduling and non-reschedul

                                      9
More recently, several authors have stressed that outward orientation has

led not only to better growth performance but also an enhanced ability to

adjust to external shocks, including the debt crisis of the l980s. Balassa

 (1984) and Sachs (1985) give evidence in support of such a conclusion.

     It should be stressed that outward orientation refers to the relative

incentives given to the production of exportables versus importables (with a

zero bias or a pro-export bias both considered to be outward oriented), and

na to   the extent to which the trade regime is laissez faire. As argued by

many authors, e.g. Bradford (1987), tin (1985), Sachs (1987), several of the

most outward-oriented economies (such as Korea and Taiwan) have hijhly

diriziste governments, with highly regulated trade. The difference of these

countries from the inward-oriented policies elsewhere is that the dirigisme

is directed towards export promotion rather than import-substitition.

     There are several linkages between trade orientation and the

probability of debt rescheduling. Most directly, outward-oriented economies

have typically maintained a lower ratio of debt service to exports, because

of the rapid rise of export earnings. Moreover, outward-oriented economies

have tended to maintain exchange rates at levels necessary to maintain

export profitability, given that exporters represent a major interest group

with strong influence on exchange rate policies. These countries therefore

have avoided the political commitments to overvalued exchange rates that

characterized many Latin American economies in the late 1970s and early

l980s (e.g. Mexico and Venezuela during 1980-82), and thus have avoided the

worst excesses of capital flight that were produced by exchange rate

overvaluations.

    Our basic measure of outward orientation comes from the World Bank


                                       10
                            Table 2: Basic Independent Variables

                                   Income   Distribution
                             Quintiles                         Trade
 Name          Rescheduler lowest highest              Ratio   Regime      .Ag/CNP   CNP/r.ipita
                                        Latin America
 Argentina        Yes             4.4           503   11,43            1      9.7       2560
 Brazil           Yes             2.0       66.6      33.30            3     13.1       2220
 Chile            Yes             4.5       51.3      11.40            3      7.6       2560
 Colombia         No              2.8       59.4      21.21            2     28.6       1380
 Costa Rica       Yes             3.3       54.8      16.61            2     20.3       1430
 Ecuador          Yes             1.8       72.0      40.00       NA         15.1       1180
 Mexico           Yes             4.2       63.2      15.05           2       9.5       2250
 Panama           Yes             2.0       61.8      30.90       NA         11.8       1910
 Peru             Yes             1.9       61.0      32.11           1       9.9       1170
 Trin&Tob         No              4.2       50.0      11.90       NA            3       5670
 Uruguay          Yes             4.4       47.5      10.80           3      10.2       2820
 Venezuela        Yes             3.0       54.0      18.00       NA          5.9       4220

 Average          83%        -
                                  3.2       57.7       21.1      2.1         12.1        2259

                                        East Asia

China             No              7.0       39.0       5.57       NA        32.5         300
Hong Kong         No              6.0       49.0       8.17        4         1.3        5100
Indonesia         No              6.6       49.4       7.48        2        28.7         530
Korea             No              6.5       43.2       6.95        4        20.3        1700
Malaysia          No              3.5       56.0      16.00        3        26.4        1840
Philippines      Yes              3.9       53.0      13.59        2        25.9         790
Singapore        No               6.5       49.2       7.57        4         1.7        5240
Taiwan           No               8.8       37.2       4.23        4        18.1        2528
Thailand         No               5.6       49.8       8.89        3        27.7         770

Average          11%              6.0       47.5        8.7      3.3        20.3        2089

                                        Other

 Egypt           No               4.6       48.4      10.52       NA        24.5         650
 Hungary         No              10.0       34.0       3.40       NA        18.1        2100
 India           No               4.7       53.1      11.30        1        40.6         260
 Israel          No               8.0       39.0       4.88        3         5.3        5160
 Ivory Coast     Yes              2.4       61.4      25.58        2        26.1        1200
 Kenya           No               2.6       60.4      23.23        2        35.1         420
Mauritius        No              4.0        60.5      15.13      NA         18.2        1270
Morocco          Yes             4.0        49.0      12.25      NA         18.2         860
Portugal         No              5.2        49.1       9.44      NA         13.6        2520
Spain            No              6.0        45.5       7.58      NA          8.2        5640
Sri lanka        No              6.9        44.9       6.51       2         28.6         300
Tunisia          No              6.0        42.0       7.00       3         18.3        1420
Turkey           Yea             2.9        60.6      20.90       3         23.8        1540
Yugoslavia       Yes             6.6        41.4       6.27       2         13.2        279Q
Average          29%             5.3        49.2      11.7      2.3         20.8        1866
Overall
 Average         43%            4.8     j.y       14.1      2.5             17.7        2123
                       See next page for definitions and sources.
                  Table 2: Definitions and sources


Rescheduler(RESC): The dependent variable for the probit
     regressions. Countries which are reschedulers (RESC—l)
     rescheduled their foreign debt owed to commercial
     lenders between 1982 and 1987.
     Source: World Bank(1987b,l986).

Income Distribution Data(RATIO): Data is originally from surveys of
     households, yielding estimates of the country-wide size
     distribution of income by household. The surveys were generally
     taken in the late l960s or early l970s.
     Sources: Jain(1975),United Nations(l98l,1985),World Bank(1987a),
          Jodice and Taylor(1983).

Trade Regime(0UT7385): The World Bank (1987a) reports
     estimates of the trade regime over 1973 to 1985, for 41 developing
     countries, based on: the effective rate of protection, direct
     trade controls, export incentives, and exchange rate overvaluation.
     The countries are classified into four groups, from "inward oriented"
     (to which we assign a value of 1) to "outward oriente&,
                                -
                                                                 -

     to which we assign a 4.      -         -

Agriculture/CNP (AGV7O81): The share of agriculture in CNP, averaged
     over the period 1970 to 1981.
     Source: World Bank(1983,l976), Taiwan Statistical Data Book(l984).

CNP/Capita (GNPc8I): CNP per capita, in thousands of 1981 U.S. dollars.
     Source: World Bank(1983) and Taiwan Statistical Data Book(1984).
(1987) categorization of trade policies Ln 41 developing countries. The

data are reported in the fourth data•column of table 2. The World Bank

variable divides countries into four categories (strongly outward oriented,

moderately outward oriented, moderately inward oriented, and strongly inward

oriented), and we use this fourfold division as an index ranging from 1

(most inward oriented) to 4. The great advantage of the World Bank measure

over other indicators of the trade regime, such as the growth in exports or

the share of exports in GNP, is that it is based on an assessment of trade

nolicies in the developing countries rather than trade outcomes.

     It has two majorprobleuns however. First, it is available for only 24

of the 35 countries in our sample. To handle this we run two set of

regressions: one with the 24 observations, and one with the 35, but

correcting for the missing observations (see details below). The second

problem is one of timing. The variable is constructed for the "average"

policy orientation during 1960-73, which is too early for our analysis, and

for the average during 1973-85, which is a bit too late, since it includes

years after the onset of the debt crisis. After experimenting with both

measures, we have used the later measure despite this timing problem (it

turns out that an average over the two periods produces similar results to

the variable that we use).

     We experimented with other outcome-based" measured of the trade

regime, such as the growth of the export-GNP ratio and the excess of the

export-GNP ratio over a predicted value. In general these alternative

measures entered the models with the expected sign but often with much less

explanatory power than did the World tank variable. Their use did not

change the explanatory power of the other included variables. For the sake


                                        Il
of brevity, we do not report the estimates using the alternative measures.



     8..   Political Determinants

     For many countries, the debt crisis reflects a political crisis as well

as an economic crisis. The political crisis shows up most directly in the

inability or unwillingness of governments to restrain large and chronic

public sector deficits. In some cases, the large deficits reflect a decline

in the legitimacy of a governing party, which attempts to use public

spending to maintain political support and to buy off the opposition for as

long as possible. In some cases, the regime is so narrowly based and so

precarious that it chooses to use the public purse to enrich a small part of

the population, aware that political power may slip away at any time. The

time horizon of fiscal policymaking becomes extremely short, and the

incentives for any particular government in power to balance the budget

become extremely weak. In yet other cases, the political process is

paralyzed, because power is too widely dispersed among various groups who

hold a veto over economic policy, but who cannot coalesce around a

consistent economic program.

     Because of data limitations, we cannot directly test for the importance

of fiscal deficits in the debt crisis, since available cross-country data on

budget deficits in developing countries are very poor. Without a detailed

analysis of the fiscal data, as in the country monographs in the NBER Study

on Foreiwn Debt and Economic Performance: the Country Studies, edited by

Sachs (1988b), it is not possible to make a meaningful cross-country

comparison of budget deficits.

    More generally, it is also not possible to construct clear direct


                                       12
measures of the political determinants of country performance. In

particular, we are concerned that political weakness and instability come in

many guises. We may observe, for example, continuing political stalemate, a

rapid alternation of governments, the attempt of a ruling group to buy off

the opposition through unsustainable expansionary macroeconomic policies,

political violence, and so forth.      We therefore choose to follow a

'reduced form" strategy, by identifying two structural characteristics in

the economies of the debtor countries that would tend to contribute to

political polarization, inefficient and dynamically inconsistent policies,

and inability to respond effeitively to crises. In other words; we seek to

identify fundamental economic factors that might contribute to instability,

rather than using direct measures of the instability itself as predictors of

debt rescheduling. In a later study, we will attempt to draw the

statistical linkages between our structural "predictors" of policy

ineffectiveness and alternative measures of political stability.

     We identify two fundamental characteristics that we believe should be

important for effective political management: the extent of income

inequality, and the division of the economy between agricultural and non-

agricultural sectors. The extent of income inequality should matter in

several distinct ways. Higher income inequality should be expected, all

other things being equal, to:
     -   raise the pressures for redistributive policies among the
         poor and working classes;
     -   enhance the power of economic elites to resist taxation
         to the extent that they command a large share of national
         resources;
     -
         reduce the size of the more taxable income classes;

     • decrease the political legitimacy of a governments that

                                         13
         defend the existing distribution of income;

     -   contribute to direct labor militancy, which may threaten
         the stability of the regime;

     -   raise   the fears of violence in the form of urban rioting;

     -   increase the prospects of a military coup, by requiring a
         civilian government to rely on the army to maintain
         civil peace;

     -   decrease the support for export-promotion measures that
         threaten to reduce the labor share of income in the short
         ten.
     -   increase the likelihood and importance of capital flight to the
         extent that financial wealth is highly concentrated.

     -   more generally, impede the development of a social consensus around
         policies that promote development in the long term, but which may
         impose costs on some social groups in the short term.

Thus, one of our central hypotheses is that a high degree of income

inequality should be associated with a high probability of rescheduling,

since the income inequality undermines the political stability and political

effectiveness needed for successful macroeconomic management.

     Alesina and Tabellini (1987) have presented a formal model showing how

distributional cleavages among competing income classes in a society can

contribute to a debt crisis. In their model, a left-wing labor force

competes with capitalists for political power (the competition may or may

not be via the electoral process). The groups alternate randomly in their

hold on power, and both groups recognize that each governments tenure is

likely to be quite short. When labor is in power, it has an interest in

squeezing the profits of capitalists, while capitalist governments have the

incentive to tax labor heavily.

     Whichever group is in power, there is a strong incentive of that

government to borrow up to the lending limit of the forcing banks. This is


                                            14
because the group in power can benefit heavily from an increase in

contemporaneous government spending (financed by foreign funds), while there

is a good chance that the opposing 2roup will be saddled with the debts,

assuming that political power alternates in the future. The shorter is the

expected longevity of the government, the greater is the government's

incentive to over-borrow from abroad (relative to the amount that the

government would borrow were it certain that it would maintain its hold on

government forever). At the same time, the risk of political alternation

induces all residents in the economy to hold their wealth outside of the

country (i.e. to engage in capital flight), and thereby to keep their wealth

beyond the tax collections of the opposing group.



     Note that the focus on income distribution as a causal factor in

explaining economic performance reverses the usual focus in the development

literature on explaining income distribution as the result of government

policies and the development process itself. In Adelman and Robinson's

(1987) valuable survey of "Income Distribution and Development", for

example, almost the entire focus is on the effects of growth on income

distribution, rather than the possible effects of income distribution on

growth. They focus on the problem that in the growth process in developing

countries the income distribution tends to become more unequal before it

begins to equalize (as was suggested by Kuznets (1955)), and suggest that

there may be an ethical case for equalizing incomes (e.g. via land reform)

before the growth process begins (a strategy that Adelman has termed

"redistribution before growth", in contrast to "redistribution with

growth").


                                        15
     A few authors have adopted the strategy here of reversing the

direction of causality, and attempting to explain economic performance as a

result of the income distribution. Pyo (1986), Sachs (1987), and Williamson

(1987), all suggest that the relatively equal income distribution in East

Asia is an important factor in that region's strong economic performance in

the post-War period. For a broad cross-section of developing countries, Pyo

shows that the Cmi coefficient has a significantly negative effect on

aggregate growth during 1960-80 (i.e. higher inequality is associated with

slower average growth). -   In    our sample of countries it is also true that the
                                                                                -


average CNP growth rate between 1960 and 1980 is highly and negatively

correlated   with the degree of income inequality.3 Political scientists more

than economists have studied the effects of income distribution on social

outcomes. For a useful survey of the political science literature, and some

empirical results linking income inequality to political violence, see

Sigelman and Simpson (1977).

     In many of the countries under study, the adverse effects of high

income inequality on policymaking are readily observable. According to the


       We use a measure of inequality the ratio of income of the richest
quintile of households to the poorest quintile of households (we label this
variable RATIO). Then, in a regression of the average growth during 1965-85
on RATIO we find:

         CROW'rH608O —    4.24      -   0.079    *    RATIO
                         (7.45)         (2.33)

with P2 —   0.12   (t-statistic in parentheses).




        Sigelman and Simpson summarize the political science literature up
till 1977 as holding that "antisystem frustrations are apt to be high where
a substantial proportion of the public does not share fully in the
allocation of scarce resources." (p. 106)

                                                     16
analysis of Mexico by Buff ie and Sangines in Sachs (1988b), for example,

attempts to contain social conflict during 1970-82 contributed to heavy

government spending with a populist -   redistributive   aim, while at the same

time the government bowed to the objections of the economic elites, and

dropped tax reform measures that might have provided an adequate revenue

base for the increased government spending. The government spending boom

was therefore financed heavily by foreign borrowing and by oil in the late

1970s and early 1980s. This precarious financing base collapsed in 1982.

     In Argentina, similar problems (inadequate tax revenues and pressures

for large government spending) have afflicted virtually all governments

since World War II. But the problems are greatly exacerbated relative to

Mexico by the powerful and well-organized Argentine labor movement, which

has resisted real wage cuts and fiscal austerity through direct labor

militancy. As a famous example, the worker riots in Cordoba during 1969

(known as the TMcordobazo") effectively killed the Krieger-Vasena

stabilization program begun under a military government in 1967, and thereby

set the economy on a trajectory of sharply rising deficits and inflation.

That instability continued to worsen for several years, and led to the

return of Juan Peron from exile in 1973, and eventually to a militarycoup

that toppled Peron's wife from power in 1976.

     In Brazil, the fears have centered less on labor militancy than on the

potential for direct and destabilizing violence in the favelas of Rio and

Sao Paulo. It is frequently saidof Brazilian governments in the past

fifteen years that they dared not risk a slowdown in the economy because of

the possible consequence of unleashing uncontrollable social conflict, and

because of the concern for protecting the course of redemocratization that


                                         17
has been underway during this period. The government's felt need to

maintain growth at all costs because of the social pressures was a major

contributing factor in Brazil's eventual crisis. Rather than cooling off

the economy in the late l970s, the government kept the economy in high-gear

with heavy foreign borrowing. At a crucial moment in 1979, when Brazil

still had the chance of avoiding crisis by slowing the economy, the

Brazilian finance minister Mario Simonsen was sacked for recommending

austerity, and was replaced by Delfim Netto, whose policies helped to run
                                                                           -
the economy straight into its debt crisis.

     Countries with a low degree of income inequality can likely avoid many
of these policy debacles. Sachs (1987) has suggested, for example, that the

extremely j3 levels of inequality immediately after World War II in Japan,

Korea, and Taiwan, can help to account for the economic success of those

countries, by giving the governments in power the opportunity to focus on

issues of growth rather than redistribution.5 To some extent, the low

levels of inequality were fortuitous outcomes of the political upheavals of

the time. In Japan, the destruction caused by the war, followed by massive

land reform under the U.S. occupation authorities, and the high post-war

inflation, resulted in a profound narrow of income inequalities. In Korea

and Taiwan, the same factors (war, land reform, and high inflation) played a

similar role, as did the decolonization from Japan, which removed a class of

wealthy overlords from the two economies.


       Dornbusch and Park(l987) suggest for the Korean case:

           "Exactly how income distribution has influenced growth,, other than
by promoting social stability, is open to discussion. But it would
certainly shape the domestic market firms face, it may influence saving
behavior, must influence politics, and may have important implications for
the ease with which the government can shift economic policies."

                                        18
     In more recent years, these economies have displayed the capacity to

adjust to external shocks with little public upheaval. At the same time

that Brazil sacked its finance minister in 1979 for urging fiscal restraint,

South Korea embarked on a period of fiscal austerity in response to the

early signs of tightening foreign credit conditions. Between 1980 and 1983,

South Korea reduced its budget deficits (from 3.2 percent of CNP to 1.6

percent of GM?, according to Collins and Park, Table 4 in Sachs(1988b)),

while Brazil's inflation-corrected deficit soared to 15.2 percent of COP in

1983 (see Cardoso and Fishlow, Table 1 in Sachs(19a8b)). -

     We   are fully aware of the fact that a given degree of income inequality

by itself will have quite varying effects on the political order depending

on the political institutions in place in the society. Huntington suggests

that a country with strong political parties may be able to channel the

grievances over income distribution into partisan political conflict, with

little jeopardy to the fundamental political order. Similarly, a country

with competing interests organized by peak associations (e.g. a unified

national labor organization) may be able to incorporate potential opponents

of the regime at relative low cost, and thereby purchase a degree of

political stability. This is the strategy known as neo-corporatism, which

is exemplified in the developed countries by Sweden, and in the developing

countries by Mexico.



     In our empirical work, we measure income inequality by taking the ratio

of the income share of the top 20 percent of the households, relative to the

income share of the bottom 20 percent of the households, as reported by the

World Bank and the United Nations (see Table 2 for sources). As seen in the


                                         19
third data column of Table 2, this ratio is unusually high in the Latin

American countries, a point which remains true after controlling for the

level of per capita income. To see this, we follow the idea of the Kuznets

curve and regress, in cross-section data, the income ratio on per capita

GNP, per capita GNP squared and regional dummy variables for Latin America

and for Last Asia. As seen in regression 2 of table 3, the ratio of income

of the top to the bottom 20 percent is significantly higher in Latin America

than in East Asia, The ratio averages 21.1 in Latin America (the per

household income of the rich is 21.1 times greater than the perhousehold

income of the poor), and only 8.7 in East Asia.

     We have restricted ourselves to income distribution data which in

principle come from household surveys of the entire population, use a common

unit (the household), and include income from all sources. This variable is

measured with error, of course; we can only hope that the cross-country

variation will dominate measurement error. For a discussion of the sources

and quality of this data, see for example Jain(l975).



     A second indicator of political stability that we investigate is the

share of the national production that is located in the agricultural sector,

as reported in the fifth data column in Table 2. The share of agriculture

in production is included to offer a rough indication of the extent to which

governments can derive their political backing from rural interests rather

than urban interests, on the theory that a rural power base tends to be more

stable and more supportive of export-promoting policies.

     We have already touched on Huntington0s analysis of the links between a

rural base of power and political instability. Mobilized opposition to the


                                        20
                                 Table 3
                   Kuznets Curve Estimation, With Regional Dummies
                          (OLS    Estimation)
      Dependent    Constant      GNPcB1 GNPcSlA2   LaCaD     E&ASD
       Var table

3.1       Ratio       13.47      0.0025 -6.5E-07                     0.03
                     (3.18)      (0.65)   (1.05)

3.2       Ratio      16.24 -0.0032 2.3E-07         10.85     -2.61   0.35
                     (4.41)      (0.94)   (0,42)   (3.47)   (0.83)


Definitions and sources;
         CNPc81: GNP per capita in 1981, thousands of 1981 U.S. dollars.
                 Source: World Bank(l983) and Taiwan Statistical
                 Data Zook(1984)
         LaCaD: Latin Ainerican/Carribean dummy variable
          EaAsD: East Asia dummy
government tends to be found in the urban centers, where students,

government works, industrial workers, and so on, can be successfully

organized. Not only can these groups threaten the survival of a regime,

they can also apply effective pressure for government spending and low taxes

on the urban population as the price for political peace. There may also be

a direct link between agriculture and trade policy: in most countries

agriculture is a tradeable good that is hurt by an overvalued exchange rate

and by a heavy emphasis on import-substitution policies.

     These ideai find initial support in our sample of countries. It is

noteworthy that among the 35 countries that we are considering, the

incidence of violent coups in the 1970s can be partially explained in a

probit model as a negative function of the share of agriculture in CNP

during the decade, controlling for the level of per capita income (higher

income countries, cet. par., showed a smaller probability of a violent

coup).6 To see why this relationship is found, note that of the 15

countries in the sample with a share of agriculture in GNP of 15 percent or

less, 6 countries (40 percent) experienced a violent coup during the 1970s.

Of the 11 countries with a share of agriculture in CNP of 25 percent or




     6
         The probit regression takes the form:

     COUP7OBO    — 2.01   -   0.115 * Agv7081   -   l.4E-7   * GnpcBlA2
                  (1.78) (2.34)                     (1.84)

     Where 80 % of the countries are correctly predicted and t-statistics
     are in parentheses.

     C0UP7080 is a dummy variable which takes a 1 if there was a coup during

the l970s for that particular country and 0 otherwise.

                                            21
more, only Thailand (9 percent of the cases) experienced at a violent coup.7

     In our view, it is the importance of the rural base of politics that

helps to explain why Colombia is the only commercial borrower in Latin

America to have escaped a debt crisis in the l980s. Colombia's share of

agriculture in GNP averaged 29 percent during 1970-81, which was by far the

highest for the region, and more than twice the overall average for Latin

America and the Carribbean, 12.1 percent of 01W. It has been suggested by

some observers that the heavy political influence of the coffee growers in

Colombia contributed importantly to the government's decision to introduce

the crawling-peg exchange rate in 1967, a policy innovation which has been

instrumental in the past two decades in permitting Colombia to avoid the

worst ravages of currency overvaluation.

     Along a similar line, Urritia (in Sachs, 1988a) explains Colombia's

relative fiscal prudence during the l970s according to the unusual structure

of its politics:

     Finally, the government in 1974-78 had a large rural base of
     support, and the President had developed a strong commitment
     to promoting development in the rural sector and dismantling
     the import substitution model of development. He was against
     subsidizing organized labor and industrialists, was anti-
     bureaucracy, and had his urban support among the unorganized
     who suffered most from inflation. . . The main objective of
     the government in power between 1974 and 1978 was to control
     inflation, and with this objective, it carried out a tax
     reform in 1974, and also to control inflation, the government
     did not increase the foreign debt.

     In contrast, in the early eighties, another government, whose
     political base was largely the bureaucracy, increased debt
     and government expenditure rapidly. That policy created a
     mini-debt crisis in 1983-84, but Colombia was the only
     country in Latin America that adjusted successfully after
     1982. It did it by almost wiping out the fiscal deficit in

        The countries with at least one violent coup in the 1970s    are:
Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, Pen, Thailand, Portugal, and Turkey.

                                           22
     1984-85. not only by decreasing expenditures, but also by
     increasing taxation.



III. Empirical Implementation of the Probability Model



     We now turn to the empirical implementation of the probability models.

We run two basic equations: a probit model that estimates a probability

function for reschedulings with commercial creditors, and a tobit model that

estimates the size of the discounts on borrowing country debt sold in the

secondary markets. For each model, we use twodistiact samples: a sample of

the 24 countries for which the World Bank's outward-orientation variable is

available, and a more inclusive sample of 35 commercial borrowers.

     In order to include the outward-orientation variable in the large

sample, we follow a standard procedure (see for example Maddala (1977)). In

a first-stage regression, we regress the outward-orientation measure on the

other right-hand side variables in our sample of 24 countries. Using the

estimated coefficients, we then create a fitted measure of outward

orientation for the 11 missing countries, by applying the regression

coefficients to the right-hand-side values for the 11 countries. The new

synthetic outward orientation variable now has 35 observations, the 24

original observations and 11 fitted values.8

     8
       This procedure w411 improve the efficiency of estimation in that it
allows us to use a larger sample of data. However the use of the estimated
explanatory variable will introduce heteroskedasticity as well as additional
small sample bias. The net effect is uncertain. Furthermore the t-
statistics shown in the paper are calculated as if the estimated values were
the true ones. They should probably be corrected for degrees of freedom,
although of course these tests are only asymptotically valid anyway.
Finally, this procedure is consistent only for linear estimation, since the
expectation of a non-linear function is not equal to the function evaluated
at the expectation of its arguments. However to make a careful correction

                                        23
     The basic probit model attempts to explain the pattern of reschedulings

and no reschedulings according to four variables: the income distribution

(ratio of household income of top 20 percentiles over bottom 20 percentiles,

RATIO), outward orientation of policies during 1973-85 (0UT7385), the share

of agriculture in CNP during 1970-81 (Agv7OBl). and the level of per capita

GNP (in $tJ.S.)   in   1981 (CNPcB1). The last variable is included for several

reasons. First, higher-income countries may be less likely to reschedule

than poorer countries since the costs of rescheduling (a loss of access to

new lending on -normal market terms, a partial disruption of normal trade

relations, IMF surveillance, and so forth) would tend to be more onerous for

more advanced economies. Second, the high levels of per capita income may

reflect other characteristics of a country that would tend to reduce the

chances for debt rescheduling, e.g. more effective economic and political

institutions (controlling for income distribution, agricultural share of

CMI', etc.). Third, the other explanatory variables are also known to be a

function of per capita CMI'. It is thus especially important to verify that

income distribution and the agricultural share are not simply proxying for

the level of economic development, but are indeed reflecting a deeper

structural feature of the economy.

     In most of the regressions that follow, CMI' per capita is actually

entered as CMI' per capita squared, since some preliminary regressions

indicated that the nonlinear specification slightly improves the performance

of the model. The variable always enters with a negative sign, suggesting



for this problem would require very special assumptions about the
distributions. All this should serve to emphasize that our econometric
results are designed primarily to be descriptive of the data, not rigourous
statistical tests.

                                           24
that indeed higher income countries are less likely to reschedule that

poorer countries. Since the variable enters best as a squared term, we find

that the very high income countries in our sample are considerably less

likely to reschedule than the poorer countries. Indeed, none of the

countries with a per capita income above $5000 actually reschedules.

Venezuela, at $4220 per capita, is the country with the highest per capita

income to reschedule.

     The probit equation for the sample of 24 countries proves to be an

embarrassment of riches. Specifically, the four variables in the model

perfectly discriminate among the reschedulers versus the non-reschedulers.

What this means is that there exists a linear combination of the right-hand-

side variables such that a rescheduling probability of 1n than 0.5 is

assigned by the probit model for all countries that do not reschedule, and a

probability of 2reater than 0.5 is assigned for all countries that do

reschedule. Suppose that fi         is an estimated vector of coefficients with

that property (technically, Zfl is greater than 0.5 if and only if           —   1).
Then, any multiple of fi,   v *   fi for   v > 1, will also perfectly discriminate

among the reschedulers. Indeed, higher and higher values of v will raise

the estimated liktihood function, since higher v will assign probabilities

closer to 1.0 for countries that actually reschedule, and 0.0 for countries

that do not.

     The upshot of all of this is that because of the small sample, and the

"perfect" fit, we cannot actually estimate coefficients and standard errors

for the probic equation. We can, however, get an ordinal ranking of the

probabilities of rescheduling from "most likely" to reschedule to "least

likely" to reschedule. This list is shown in Table 4. As advertised, the


                                              25
                   Table 4
Countries In Order of Decreasing Predicted
     Probability of Rescheduling
          Name               Resc

          Peru               Yes
          Brazil             Yes
          Mexico             Yes
          Argentina          Yes
          Chile              Yes
          Costa Rica         Yes
          Ivory Coast        Yes
          Uruguay            Yes
          Yugoslavia         Yes
          Turkey             Yes
          Philippines        Yes
          Colombia             No
          Tunisia              No
                      -

          Kenya                No
     --   Indonesia            No
          Sri Lanka            No
          Malaysia             No
          Korea                No
          Thailand             No
          Taiwan               No
          India                No
          Hong Kong            No
          Singapore            No
          Israel               No


    Calculated from probit estimation
    on the sample of 24 commercial borrowers
    for which all data are available.
equation perfectly orders the countries: those that are "most likely" to

have rescheduled are exactly those at the top of the list, and those "least

likely" are on the bottom.

     The list itself is extremely illuminating. The "worst" case is Peru.

It is has a hifhly uneaual income distribution, a low share of atriculcure

in CNP, a low Der canita income, and an inward oriented trade Dolicy. It is

perhaps not surprising then that Peru's debt is also the lowest valued of

all the commercial borrower debt on the secondary market as of the end of

1987. For all of the- reasons that Peru- is likely to have rescheduled,

Israel escaped rescheduling: the income distribution is quite equal, the

agricultural share in CNP is large. per capita income is large, and trade

policy is outward oriented. Looking at the ranking of countries, it is

evident that the Latin American countries rank near the very top (with the

exception of Colombia). while the East Asian economies are near the bottom.



     The "hard" cases are the countries like Turkey, Tunisia, Philippines,

and Colombia, which fall in the middle of the probability distribution.

Interestingly, Turkey is probably the rescheduling country that has

recovered most vigorously from the debt crisis. Colombia, on the other

hand, narrowly escaped a debt crisis (remember that Urritia calls the period

1983-84 a "mini-debt crisis"). The presence of the Philippines in the

center of the distribution might appear as a bit of a surprise. On most of

the variables, however, the Philippines is not an extreme case: it is fairly

unequal in measured income distribution, especially in comparison with its

East Asian neighbors, but is not as extreme as many Latin American

countries; it has a large agricultural sector which at least in principle


                                        26
should offer the opportunity for a moderately stable, rural based

government. One is led to wonder whether the peculiar characteristics of

the Karcos regime, rather than the inherent structural problems of the

Philippines account for much of that country's economic crisis in recent

years.

     Interestingly, the "perfect" results are eliminated if we drop any of

the explanatory variables from the equation. In other words, each of the

variables is helping to account for the rescheduling experience. If income

distribution is dropped, for example, Tunisia and turkey are misclassified.

In Table 5, we show how each of the variables on the margin improves the

predictive accuracy of the model.

     The probit results for the sample of 35 countries is shown in

regression 6.1. Note that all of the variables are of expected sign: income

inequality raises the probability of rescheduling, while outward

orientation, agricultural share, and GNP per capita squared, all reduce the

probability .of rescheduling. The equation is no longer "perfect" in the

larger sample, so that we can estimate coefficients and standard errors of

estimate. Income distribution and Agriculture are statistically significant

at the 5 percent level (i.e. t-statistics are greater than 1.96). The

outward orientation variable is not significant in the large sample. Again,

remember that because of the procedures for concocting the outward-

orientation variable for the missing countries, that variable is measured

with error and should be e.pected to have a larger estimated standard error,

and a lower t statistic.

     The equation now properly predicts 89% percent of the cases (i.e. for

31 out of 35 countries, the probit model assigns a rescheduling probability


                                        27
                Table 5
     Failed Prediction. in Probit 6.2

Omitted        Predicted to   Predicted not
Variable        Reschedule     to Reschedule

Ratio          Tunisia        Turkey

Agv7081        Colombia       Chile
               India          Uruguay
               Keyna          Yugoslavia

0ut7385        Tunisia        Philippines

Gnpc8l         Colombia       Philippines
               Israel         Turkey
                                         table 6
                                 Basic Regression Results
                                       (Probita)

      Dependent      Constant Patio Out?365       Agv7081 tT837s      GNPc8I2 LeCaD       EaAsD   Percent
       Variable                                                                                   Correct


6.1         USC         6.64     0.190    •1.34     -0.272            -1.6E-07                       0.89
            (n—35)    (2.03)    (2.15)   (1.32)     (2.80)              (1.64)

6.2         USC         9.45     0.186    -1.77     -0.271   -2.17 -1.2E-07                          0.91
            (n—fl)     (1.16)   (1.92)   (1.49)     (2.67)   (1.16)     (1.34)

6.3         RESC       12.17     0.243    -2.58     -0.396            -2.4E-07   -0.67               0.91.
            (n—35)     (2.05)   (1.67)   (1.72)     (2.43)              (1.93)   (0.54)

6,4         USC        12.05     0.246    -2.61     -0,391            •2.1E-07   0.68*               0.91
            (n—35)     (2.05)   (1.62)   (1.69)     (2.35)              (1.61)   (0.55)

6.5         RESC        6.40     0.240    -1.03     -0.335            -2.5E-07                1.42 0.89
            (n—35)     (2.10)   (2.33)   (1.18)     (2.55)              (1.82)              (1.10)

6.6         USC        19.76     0.367    -4,09     -0.591            -4.7E-07                       0.87
            (n—23)     (1.63)   (1.58)   (1.57)     (1.75)              (1.00)


            Definitions and sources:
                 Resc: see table 2.
                 Ratio, 0ut7385, Agv7OSl: see table 2.
                 LaCad and Eaasd: see table 3.
                 TT837s: see table 8.

            Percent Correct: Fraction of the sample for which the difference between
                 between Resc and the predicted probability of rescheduling is less
                 than 1/2 in absolute value.

            *   Excludes Trinidad&Tobago from Latin American/Carribean countries.
of greater than 0.5 for countries that actually reschedule, and a

probability of less than 0.5 for countries that actually do not reschedule).

The countries that are incorrectly classified are: Mauritius, Portugal,

Turkey, and the Philippines. Table 7 presents fitted probabilies of

rescheduling for this sample. Note that Turkey and the Philippines are in

the small sample, and they are among the same countries that were estimated

to be in the center of the probability distribution in that sample. Table 8

presents the fitted probability of rescheduling for this regression.

     It is worthwhile to test the robustness of these estimates by including

other variables that have been mentioned by other anaLysts as structural

factors in the debt crisis. One key variable is the terms of trade of the

*developing countries in the l9BOs relative to the l97Os. Are the

reschedulers simply those countries whose export prices deteriorated more

significantly in the l980s, with our own candidate variables proxying for

the terms of trade decline? To test this possibility, we include as a

right-hand-side variable the terms of trade of the countries in 1983

relative to an average terms of trade in the l97Os (measured as the simple

average for 1970, 1975, and 1980). As seen in Table 8, most of the

countries experienced a terms of trade decline in the l980s, but there is

little evidence that the extent of the terms-of-trade deterioration in fact

played a major role in affecting which countries required rescheduling and

which ones did not. Many oil exporters (e.g. Venezuela), for example,

enjoyed a terms of trade improvement comparing the 1980s and the l970s, but

in fact succumbed to rescheduling, while many oil importers (such as Israel,

Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand) suffered a sharp terms-of-trade deterioration

without a rescheduling.


                                        28
                  Table 7
       Comparison of Fitted Probability of
         Rescheduling with Actual Event
           (from regression 6.2)

            Fitted Probability
Name        of Rescheduling      Rescheduler

Peru              1.000000            Yes
Ecuador           1.000000            Yes
Panama            1.000000            Yes
Brazil            0.999998            Yes
Argentina         0.999920            Yes
Mexico            0.999690            Yes
Chile             0.951620            Yes
Venezuela         0.934080            Yes
Ivory Coast       0.933460            Yes
Costa Rica        0.898180            Yes
Mauritius         0.886290             No
Morocco           0.774910            Yes
Uruguay-          0.728700        -
                                      Yei
Yugoslavit        0.615020            Yes
Portugal          0.537960             No
Colombia          0.464500             No
Turkey            0.399410            Yes
Philippines       0.274890            Yes
Kenya             0.116730             No
Egypt             0.109160             No
Tunisia           0.088340             No
Hong Kong         0.038940             No
Hungary           0.021690             No
Malaysia          0.019490             No
Singapore         0.013080             No
Israel            0.012420             No
Trinidad&Tobago   0.011230             No
Indonesia         0.006740             No
Sri Lanka         0.004700             No
Thailand          0.000450             No
Korea             0.000350             No
India             0.000150             No
Taiwan            0.000050             No
China             0.000006             No
Spain             0.000003             No
                          Table B
        Debt Service Ratios and Tense of Trade Data

Na.                 LODPX81       LODFUXB1       fl8375
                         latin America

Argentina               268.9           109.2      0.74
Brazil                  268.0            85.0      0.65
Chile                   272.8           93.1.      0.48
Coloebia                121.4           107.6      1.07
Costa Rica              185.4           131.6      0.92
Ecuador                 187.1           124.2      1.37
Mexico                  238.6            99.8      0.94
Panama                   26.3            15.6      0.78
Peru                    160.0           142.0      0.64
Trinidad&Tobago          19.3            14.6      1.04
Uruguay                 100.2            44.7      0.77
Venezuela               128.7            70.7      1.53

Average                 155.2            84.4       0,9

                                East Asia

China                    27.8            21.8        NA
Hong Kong                 NA                NA     1.11
Indonesia                50.6            53.5      1,41
Korea                    93.7            73.8      0.78
Malaysia                   NA               NA     0.91
Philippines             212.4           161.9      0.68
Singapore                  NA               NA     1.00
Taiwan                   34.4            11.9      0.74
Thailand                 82.5            73.5      0.59

Average                  83.6            67.1       0.9

                                Other

Egypt                   100.7           230.9      0.69
Hungary                  84.7            37.5        NA
India                    23.2           156.3      o.so
Israel                  110.4           128.9      0.73
Ivory Coast             177.0            92.4      0.85
Kenya                   100.3           118.5      0.86
Mauritius                36.9            76.6      0.60
Morocco                    NA               NA     0.64
Portugal                143.2            63.6      1.27
Spain                      NA               NA     0.70
Sri lanka                54.5           154.1      0.92
Tunisia                  48.4            74.4      1.05
Turkey                  126.0           234.5      0.69
Yugoslavia               97.8            49.2      LoB

Average                  91.9           119.7       0.9

Overall
  Average               119.4            95.9       0.9

  For definitions and   sources   see following page.
Definitions and sources for table 8:

17837. ii calculated as the terms of trad. index for 1983
     by the tarts of trade index for the 1970. calculated as av average
     of the index for 1970, 1975, and 19B0.
     Source for terms-of-trade indices is the World Bank(1987, 1983)
     and Taiwan Statistical Data Eook(1984).

LODPX81 i. the debt-export ratio for 1981, where all medium-and-long
     ten debt owed to private creditors is added to the short-ten debt
     to calculate the numerator.
     Source is World Eank(1987b), and the Taiwan Statistical
     Data ook(1984).

LODPtJX81 is the ratio of public and publicly guaranteed debt
     owed to private creditors to exports for 1981.
     Sources are as above.
     The probit model in the sample of 35 countries is estimated with the

terms of trade in regression 6.2. The terms of trade is statistically

insignificant, while the other variables maintain their earlier signs and

approximate magnitudes. The variables for income distribution and

agricultural shares remain significant. The weak finding on the terms of

trade is consistent with earlier studies, particularly Sachs (1985), who

showed the the differences in experiences of Latin American and East Asian

countries economies could not be explained by differing patterns in the

terms of trade.          -
                                            -                         -


     Since most of the rescheduling countries are in Latin America; and
since the Latin American economies are characterized by extremely unequal

income distributions, it is important to check whether the income

distribution variable is merely proxying for other characteristics of the

Latin American economies (note that 10 of the 12 economies in Latin America

and the Caribbean reschedule, while only 5 of the remaining 23 countries

reschedule). In other words, is the income distribution effect truly

structural, or is it merely a dummy variable for Latin America? To examine

this question, we introduce in regressions 6.3 and 6.4 two alternative dummy

variables for the region, depending on whether we count Trinidad and Tobago

as part of Latin America. (If the idea of the dummy variable is to measure

an effect specific to "Latin" societies, Trinidad and Tobago should be

excluded; if the idea is to capture a geographical effect in which the

creditor banks redline the developing economies of the Western Hemisphere,

then Trinidad and Tobago should be included in the dummy variable).

     Rather remarkably, the both versions of the Latin American dummy

variable are statistically insignificant, and while their introduction


                                       29
reduces the significance of income disribution, the magnitude of the

coefficient on income distribution increases and the dummy variable for

Latin America has the unexpected sign (lower probability of rescheduling.

controlling for the other variables)? In other words, once our structural

variables are included, the fact that a country is in Latin America does not

seem to have raised the probability of rescheduling. It is also worthwhile

to verify that the equation is not proxying for the East Asian economies. A

dummy variable for East Asia also is insignificant, has less effect on the

other variables (equation 6.5), and also has the unexpected sign. Adding

both the Latin American and East Asian dummy ,ariables yields similar
                                                   -     -
results (not shown).

     Another convincing way to verify that we are picking up something more
than a "Latin" effect in our regression model is to run the probit model for

the non-Latin   American sample. There are, of course,    a yy small number of

countries   that   remain in the sample, but as seen in regression 6.6, all of

the structural variables maintain their signs and increase in magnitude in

the non-Latin sample of countries. Given the small size of the sample, the

statistical significance of the explanatory variables is reduced, but the

income distribution variable remains near the 10 percent level of

significance.

     The next step in our investigation is to estimate a Tobit model of the

size of the discount on each country's debt in the secondary market. The

idea of the Tobit model is as follows. We assume that the discount on the

debt is a non-linear function of the explanatory variables that we have

already introduced, with the non-linearity arising from the fact that the

discount on the debt can be positive or zero, but never negative (the


                                           30
discount measures the percentage difference in the par value of the debt and

the secondary market value). For a range of creditworthiness, the debt will

sell at par, i.e. with a zero discount. If the creditworthiness falls below

a certain threshhold, then the discount on the debt becomes positive.

      The specific model is as follows. Let D*i be a latent

creditworthiness variable for country i, that is a function of the

explanatory variables        and a random error term v distributed normally,

so that:



                                                                             -


(4) D*j_ Zfi ÷ v

where      is a vector of coefficients. Higher D' signifies lower

creditworthiness. For          less than or equal to zero, the actual discount

Di is equal to zero, while for D*i greater than zero, the actual discount

Di. is set equal to D*i. That is,



(5)     Di —    0     for   D*i <   0

        Di —    D*i   for   D*j > 0


In general, D*i represents a threshold for rescheduling. For countries

that have not rescheduled, the discount is zero (or very close to zero).

while for countries that have rescheduled1 the discount tends to be

positive.

      In practice, this last observation may be violated. For example,

Colombian debt sold at a 60 percent discount at the end of 1987, despite the

fact that Colombia never rescheduled. For        countries that have not


                                         31
rescheduled, the secondary market price of the debt is not publicly quoted

(e.g. by the investment banks, that send newsletters on secondary market

prices). For those countries, we assume in the tobit regressions that

follow that the actual market discount is equal to zero. This is probably a

good assumption, since if the country's debt in fact traded at a discount,

the secondary market price of the country's debt would tend to be quoted.

      It is our basic assumption that the variables that conduce to

reschedulings are the same ones that lead to low secondary market prices for

a country's debt. This conclusion is borne out by the battery of tobit

regressions reported in Table 9. As usual, regression results are reported

for samples of 24 arid 35. In both cases, the income distribution variable

is always positive (higher inequality leads to a greater discount on the

debt), while the outward-orientation variable, the agricultural share

variable, and CNP per capita squared, are always negative (higher values

tend to decrease the secondary market discount). In most regressions, all

of the explanatory variables are statistically significant.

      Consider the basic regression over the sample of 24 countries, reported

as equation 9.1. For those countries with a reported secondary market

discount, the actual and fitted values of the debt are reported in Table

10.   Note that among countries with a discount on the debt, Peru has the

largest fitted discount, and the largest discount actually reported in the

data, while the fitted discount on Colombia is the lowest among the

countries with a positive discount. It is instructive to consider the

sources of the fitted discount on Peru as compared with the fitted discount

on a hypothetical average East Asian country. Peru's fitted discount is

actually above 100 percent, at 105 percent, versus the discount of about -2


                                        32
                                            ThbIs 9
                                 Basic    Regression Result.
                                          (Tobit.)

      Dependent       Constant Ratiol      0ut1385 AgvlOBl G1WC81A2 LaCeD        EaAsD TT831,
      Variable

9.1         DISC          1.11    0.012       -0.23   -0.030 -I.8E-08
            (n—35)      (4.43)   (2.61)      (3.13)   (4.21)   (1.80)

9.2         DISC          1.15    0.014       -0.20   -0.031 •2.6E-08
            (n—24)      (5.43)   (2.81)      (3.53)   (5.18)   (2.12)

9.3         DISC          1.23    0.011       -0.23   -0026 -L.8E-08                        •0.15
            (n—33)      (3.96)   (1.8?)      (2.43)   (3.90)   (2.14)                      (0.88)

9.4         DISC          4.19    0.013       -0.20   -0.031 -2.6E-08                       -0.02
            (n—24)      (6.19)   (2.62)      (3.50)   (4.85)   (2.08)                      (0.11)

9.5         DISC          1.00    0.00?       -0.20   -0.024 -2.4E-08    0.20
            (n—35)      (3.74)   (1.3?)      (3.10)   (3.47)   (2.6?j   (1.77)

9.6         DISC          0.94    0.011       -0.18   -0.024 -2.2E-08    0.15
            (n—24)      (3.82)   (2.24)      (3.34)   (3.68)   (1.58)   (1.46)

9.7        DISC           0.92    0.007       -0.20   -0.220 -1.9E-08    0.20*
            (n—35)      (3.53)   (1.45)      (3.16)   (3.20)   (1.89)   (1.84)

9.8        DISC           1.0?    0.014       -0.23   -0.036 -2.1E-08              0.044
            (n—35)      (4.20)   (2.95)      (2.86)   (4,06)   (2.02)             (0.31)

9.9        DISC           1.15    0.016       -0.02   -0.031 -2.6E-08              0.003
            (n—24)      (5.43)   (2.74)      (3.66)   (5.07)   (2.13)             (0.03)


           Definitions and sources:
              Disc: see table 1.
              Ratio, 0ut7385, AgvlO8l: see table 2.
              LaCad and Eaasd: see table 3.
              TT837s: see table 8.
              *   signifies the exclusion of Trtnidad&Tobago from the
                  countries designignated to be Latin American.
                     Table 10
Fitted and Actual Discounts from Regression 9.2


                           Discount

Name              Fitted   Actual Residual

Argentina           0.63      0.53    -0.10
Brazil              0.47      0.45    -0.02
Chile               0.30      0.33     0.03
Colombia            0.10      0.19     0.09
Costa Rica          0.29      0.67     0.38
Ivory Coast         0.25      0.40     0.15
Mexico              0.53      0.47    -0.06
Peru                1.05      0.89    -0. 16
Philippines         0.12      0.33     0. 21
Uruguay             0.17      0.32     0. 15
Yugoslavia          0.22      0.3G     0. 08
percent for 'East Asia'9. Of this difference of 107 percentage points, 31

can be attributed to Peru's worse income distribution; another 31 can be

attributed to the lower level of agriculture in Peru; another 44 can be

attributed to the greater outward orientation of 'East Asia'; and, finally,

a negligable amount can be attributed to Peru's lower level of per capita

income.

     The tobit model is also an appropriate model for testing the role of

terms of trade shocks, and dummy variables for Latin America and East Asia.

Various results are reported in Table 9. We find that the terms of trade

has even less effect in accounting for the size of the discount on the debt.

While the dummy variables for Latin America and East Asia are always small

and insignificant once we control for the structural variables in our model,

the Latin American dummy variable does have more power than in the probit

regressions.

     Many earlier studies have shown that the probability of debt

rescheduling is a positive function of the debt-export ratio. It is

therefore worthwhile to ask whether our variables help to account for the

debt-export ratio, or whether our variables work through some alternative

mechanism (in which case the debt-export ratio might be an additional

explanatory variable).   We conclude this section by examining this issues.

(Table 8 presents the debt-export ratio data)

     As shown by regression 11.1 and 11.2, it is the debt owed to private

creditors rather than public creditors that poses the greatest risk of

forcing the country into a rescheduling or reducing the secondary market


       The 'predicted discount' cannot actually be negative, of
course, but the prediction for the average of the region is near enough to
zero that no great violation is done.

                                        33
                                            Table 11
                  Th.   Debt/Service Ratio and Structural Variables

  Dependent             Constant LodPux8l LodPxSl Ratiol        0ut7385 AgvlOBl Gnpc8li         Percent
   Variable                                                                                     Correct



11.1    RESC               -1.91 -0.0059      0.0215                                               0.80
        (rt—30)           (2.66)   (1.02)     (2.91)

11.2    DISC               0.16 -00016 0.0016            0.01      -0.22    -0.02 -7.3E-09
        (n—30)            (2.82)   (1.50)     (2.58)   (3,42)     (3.28)   (2.59)   (0.79)
                                                                                                    RA2
11.3    LODPX8I           253.44                         1.48     -15.16    -5.17 -4.3E-06         0.24
        (n—30)            (3.14)                       (0.99)     (0.80)   (2.73)   (1.78)

11.4    LODPX8I           241.26                         3.68     -15.16    -5.63 -2.4E-06         0.45
        (n—21)            (3.09)                       (2.15)     (0.91)   (3.03)   (0.75)
                                                                                                Percent
                                                                                                Correct
11.5    RESC                4.49              0.0218     0.23      -1.22    -0.34- -l.7E-07        0.90
        (n—30)            (0.73)              (1.66)   (0:98)     (0.66)   (1.38)    (1.08)--


11.6    DISC                0.72              0.0013     0.01      -0.21    -0.02 -9.9E-09
        (n—30)            (2.76)              (2.34)   (3.17)     (3.33)   (3.50)    (1.14)

11.7    DISC                0.87              0.0010     0.01      -0,18    -0.02    -2E-0S
        (n—21)            (3.33)              (1.47)   (2.17)     (3.29)   (3.71)    (1.51)


          Definitions and sources:
               LodPuxBI, LodPx8l: see table 8.
               Ratiol, 0ut7385, AgvlO8l, Grtpc8l: see table 2.
value of the country's debt (not shown). Note for example that the ratio of

debt to private creditors relative to exports is a highly significant

predictor of reschedulings, while the debt owed to foreign official

creditors, as a proportion of exports, does i help to explain

reschedulings and even has the wrong sign. The relative importance of debts

to private creditors rather than official creditors reflects the fact that

the interest rates on most of the private debt were set on a variable rate

basis, and thus rose sharply when U.S. interest rates increased after 1979.

The interest rates on debts owed to official creditors rose far more slowly

in the early l9BOs.

     According to regression 11.4, our set of explanatory variables accounts

well for the cross-country differences in debt-export ratios (note that we

now restrict our atte.ion to debt owed to private creditors). As per our

earlier political arguments, higher income inequality and a lower

agricultural share in GNP are associated with higher levels of debt relative

to exports. The. relationship is not particularly robust, however, since the

statistical significance of the link between income distribution and the

debt-export ratio disappears when we move from the small sample of

countries to the larger sample (regression 11.3).

     According to the probit and tobit equations in regressions 11,5 -    11.7,
the effects of income distribution, agriculture, and outward orientation on

the probability of rescheduling and the discount on the debt are fairly

strongly mediated by the debt-export ratio. Even after controlling for the

debt-export ratio, the key variables of our model remain significant in the

tobit analysis. The debt-export ratio itself is statistically significant

once these other variables are included in the regressions. Thus, while


                                        34
high income inequality tends to raise the country's debt-export ratio, it

also seems to reduce the country's capacity to deal, with any particular

level of the debt. Given this, however, the level of the debt-export ratio

seems to have some independent effect.



IV. Additional Variables in the Probability Model



     There are many additional variables that have been suggested in the

literature as having played a role in the debt crisis. To our rather

considerable surprise, most of the variables had little explanatory power in

the probit and tobit equations either by themselves or in conjunction with

our other variables. We examined, without success, the following variables

for a possible contribution to our models

     the share of manufacturing exports in total exports (expected
     to reduce the probability of rescheduling)

     the share of fuels, mineral, and metals in total exports
     (expected to raise the probability of rescheduling)

     the rate of population growth between 1970-85

     the size of the population in 1981

     the commodity concentration of exports (expected to raise
     the probability of rescheduling, because of increased
     vulnerability to terms of trade shocks, and increased
     difficulty in short-term export promotion)

     the rate of national savings (expected to lower the
     probability of rescheduling)


Only the last two variables came at all close to adding to the explanatory

power of the model, but neither variable reached statistical significance.




                                          35
10
     The regressions with the additional variables are reported in Table 12,

the data in Table 13.



V. Towards an Interpretation of the Linkage of Economic Inequality and
Foreign Debt Management


     We have identified four key structural variables that help us to

explain which of the developing countries succumbed to debt crises in the

l9SOs, and we have suggested some of the linkages between the structural

varibles and the outcomes of debt management. In this section we discuss

further the possible linkages between income inequality and the quality of

debt management.

     In terms of formal empirical analysis, we have so far made little

headway in measuring the direct linkages between high income inequality,

political and social instability, and external debt crises. We suspect, but

have not yet proved, that the observed correlations of income inequality and

debt rescheduling can be accounted for by two kinds of linkages, operating at

a more basic level: between income inequality and political instability; and

between income inequality and the choice of macroeconomic policies.

     We have pointed out that income inequality is likely to affect

political stability in several different ways, making a test of the role of

income inequality for political stability exceedingly difficult to quantify.

In some countries, the income gap between strongly competing social groups

may lead to a coup (as in many Latin American countries, when the government

has been captured by populist forces); in other cases, the same kind of

     10
        The share of fuels, minerals, and metals in total exports came in
significantly in the smaller sample, but with a netative sign (a larger
share reduced the predicted probability of rescheduling).

                                        36
                                                Table 12
                                    Alternative Structural Variables

       Dependent             Constant Ratiol       0ut7385 Agv7081 GNPC8IA2
        Variable
                             Fuels, Metals   and   Minerals as   percent   of Export., 1980

                                                                                 FMMPE8O
    12.1     DISC                1.19    0.011       -0.222       -0.03 -2.1E-08 -0.00146
             (n—33)            (5.12)   (2.69)       (3.49)      (4.74)   (2.26)   (1.04)

    12.2     DISC                1.53    0.011       -0.185      -0.040 -0.0000 -0.0049
             (n—24)            (4.62)   (2.53)       (4.03)      (4.29)    (1.82)     (2.33)

                             Population Growth, average annual rate, 1965 to 1980

                                                                                    PopG6S8O
    12.3     DISC                1.06    0.007       -0.209      -0.034 -0.0000       0.0848
             (n—35)            (4.44)   (1.26)       (3.04)      (4.44)    (2.22)     (1.69)

    12.4     DISC                1.15    0.013       -0.198      -0.032 -0.0000  0.0115
             (n—24)            (5.43)   (2.26)       (3.53)      (4.93)  (2.20) (0.243)
                         -

                             Commodity Concentration of Exports, 197-0 to 1980
-
                                                                           CC7080
    12.5     DISC               1.06     0.013    -0.206   -0.031 -0.0000    0.1480
             (n—24)            (4,54)   (2.83)       (3.44)      (5.15)    (1.61)     (0.78)

                             Population in 1981
                                                                                    Pop8l
    12.6      DISC               1.15    0.014       -0.196      -0.030 -0.0000 -0.0000
             (n—24)            (5.80)   (2.99)       (3.43)      (4.96)    (2.21)      (1.07)

                             Percentage of Labor Force in Services, 1977
                                                                                    PlfSv77
    12.7      DISC               0.95    0.014       -0.194      -0.028 -0.0000       0.0033
             (n—24)            (3.13)   (2.92)       (3.43)      (4.08)    (2.15)      (0.85)

                     -


                             Percentage Point Growth in Urban Population, 1965 tà 1985
                                                                                    UrbG6S8S
    12.8     DISC                1.03    0.010       -0.218      -0.029 -0.0000       0.0051
             (n—34)            (3.98)   (1.78)       (2.73)      (3.88)    (1.56)     (0.59)

    12.9     DISC                1.16    0.017       -0.187      -0.031 -0.0000 -0.0069
             (n—23)            (5.60)   (2.66)       (3.29)      (5.33)    (2.11)      (0.78)

                             Manufacturing as Percent of Exports, 1980
                                                                                    MaPE8O
    12.10     DISC               1.09    0.015       -0.199      -0.031 -0.0000       0.0022
             (n—23)            (5.17)   (3.00)       (3.79)      (5.41)    (2.28)     (1.02)

                             National Saving as Percent of aMP, 1970 to 1981 average
                                                                                    S ny708 1
    12.11    DISC                 1.2    0.133       -0.202      -0.031 -0.0000 -0.0026
             (n—24)            (4.72)   (2.73)       (3.56)      (5.15)    (2.16)     (0.38)


    Sources: sFMMpE8O, CC7080, Pop8l, 5nY7081: World Bank (1983,1976)
             PlfSvc77: World Bank(1979)
             Urb6S8Spch: World Bank(l987) and Taiwan Statistical Data Book(1985)
                                Table 13
                      Alternats Structural Variables

Name         cc7080 snylO8l     pop8l. popg6S8O u6S8Spch mape8O fmmpe8o plfsvl7

                              Latin America

Argentina      28.7    23.9     28174.        1.6     8.0   23.2    5.6   57
Brazil         33.3    17.1    120507         2.5    23.0   38.6   11.2   38
Chile          62.0    10.9     11292         1.8    11.0   20.2   58.6   52
Colombia       65.3    23.0     26425         2.2    13.0   20.3    3.1   46
Costa Rica     60.7    13.4      2340         2.8     7.0   34.3    0.7   41
Ecuador        71.0    20.1      8605         3.1    15.0    2.7   56.1   29
Mexico         45.4    22.7     71215         3.2    14.0   39.6   38.6   41
Panama         43.3    21.0      1877         2.6     6.0    8.9   23.9       52
Peru           43.5    13.2     17031         2.7    16.0   17.0   63.5   40
Trin&Tob       36.8    34.7      1185         1.3    34.0    5.0   92.9       50
Uruguay        37.2    10.9      2929         0.4     4.0   38.2    0.7       56
Venezuela      64.1    34.0     15423         3.5    13.0    1.7   97.9       52

Average        51.1    20.1      25348        2.4    14.2   20.6   40.7   45

-                             Last Asia               -                   -


China          18.0    30.6     991300        2.2     4.0     NA     NA       13
Hong Kong       0.6    27.6       5154        -2.2    4.0   96.5    1.6       41
tndonesia      73.4    20.9     149451        2.3     9.0    2.4   75.8       28
Korea           2.4    23.0      38880        1.9    32.0   89.9    1.3       22
Malaysia       50.7    26.6      14200        2.5    12.0   19.1   34.9       36
Philippines   39.8     23.9      49558        2.8     7.0   36.9   21.2       34
Singapore       4.6    29.8       2444        1.6      NA   30.5   27.7       66
Taiwan          4.8    26.6      18136        3.2     3.0     NA    8.3       39
Thailand       35.1    20.8      47966        2.7     5.0   28.1   13.7       15

Average        25.5    25.5     146343        2.4     9.5   43.3   23.1       33

                              Other

Egypt          57.9    17.8      42289        2.4     5.0   11.0   66.7       23
Hungary         6.8    29.3      10712        0.4    12.0   65.8    9.0       23
India          16.2    20.1     690183        2.3     6.0   58.6    6.9       16
Israel          8.3     3.1       3954        2.8     9.0   82.2    2.2       55
Ivory Coast   67.3     21.4       8505        5,0    22.0    8.4    4.8       14
Kenya          51.2    16.0      17363        3.9    11.0   12.2   35.9       12
Mauritius      75.1    18.0        971        1.7    17.0     NA     NA       NA
Morocco        52.6    14.6      20891        2.5    12.0   23.5   45.4       28
Portugal        3.6     9.0       9826        0.6     7.0   71.7    7.1       37
Spain           6.5    19.9      37973        1.0    16.0     NA    8.2       39
Sri Lanka      67.8    12.0      14988        1.8     1.0   18.6   16.2       31
Tunisia        55.7    22.0       6528        2.1    16.0   19.2   56.1       34
Turkey         31.6    20.3      45529        2.4    14.0   26.9    8.5       24
                9.0    27.9      22516        0.9    14.0   73.2    9.1       26
Yugoslavia

               36.4    18.0      66588        2.1    11.6   39.3   21.2       28
Average

Overall
  Average      38.0    20.7      73038        2.3    11.8   33.0   27.7       36

Sources and definitions: See table 12.
competition may lead to a fruitless and debilitating alternation of power

between populists and orthodox politicians. In still other cases, a

government may be able to hold on to power for a considerable period but

only by "bribing" the organized opposition, at the expense of fiscal

discipline.

     Through these effects, and others as well, we suspect that high income

inequality hinders the adoption of needed policy changes on a timely basis.

The basic decisions to liberalize trade or to cut budget deficits become too

risky to bear in an environment of high income inequality.- Wiçh regard to

trade policy, for example, the shift away from inward-oriented growth

towards outward-oriented growth seems to require an initial large real

devaluation and sharp reduction in real wages, as demonstrated by several

historical examples: Korea in the early 1960s, Brazil in the mid-l960s,

Chile in the 1970s, and Turkey in the early l980s. It may be the case that

income inequality must be sufficiently modest at the beginning of such

experiments in order to carry out and sustain oolitically a major change of
             11
this sort.

     Similarly, the maintenance of realistic exchange rates and balanced

budgets is probably more difficult the greater is the income inequality.

Unfortunately, because of the absence of good cross-country data on budget

deficits we have not yet made any formal tests of the links of income

inequality and budget deficits. It is our intention to piece together




     Il
        It is our guess that at least some of the staying power of the
outward orientation model in East Asia results from the relative equalities
of income in the region. In Latin America, shifts in the trade regime
towards outward orientation have been tried many times, and have repeatedly
failed, under the weight of political protest by aggrieved workers.

                                        37
better data on a country-by-country basis as a prelude to such a testj2

     Our analysis remains much too sketchy to attempt to draw any strong

policy implications from our findings. The evidence presented in this paper

says little about how to adapt policy recommendations to the political

constraints that arise from the structural factors we have discussed. If the

causal mechanisms we discuss are important, however, then successful

policies, in particular sucessful stabilization and structural adjustment

programs, will take into account distributional consequences.

     While the evidence suggests that low- income inequality is a precious

asset for an economy, we have not yet investigated the efficacy of different

kinds of redistributive policies as ways to enhance the long-term political

stability, and the effectiveness of economic management, in developing

countries. In the absence of an improved distribution of income, however,

we might pessimistically conclude that many Latin American economies will be

faced with continuing cycles of political and economic instability.




     12
        Similarly, measures of fundamental exchange rate misalignment, such
as those presented in Edwards(1988), might allow a direct test of the
importance of exchange rate misalignment and its relation to our structural
variables.

                                        38
                             List of References

Adelman, trna and Sherman Robinson. 1987. "Income Distribution and
Development: A Survey," in H.B. Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan (eds.), Handbook
of Develoøment Economics. Amsterdam: North Holland. forthcoming.

Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini. 1987. "External Debts, Capital Flight,
and Political Risk," unpublished.

Balassa, Bela. 1982. "structural Adjustment Policies in Developing
Countries," World Develooment, (January), pp. 23-38

Balassa, Bela. 1984. "Adjustment Policies in Developing Countries: A -
Reassessment," World Development, Volume 12 (September), pp. 955-972
Bradford, Cohn. 1987.   "The NICe and tne Next-Tier NICs as Transitional
Economies," in C. Bradford and W. Branson (eds.), Trade and Structural Change
In Pacific Asia. Chicago: Chicago University Press

Callier, Philippe. 1985. "Further Results on Countries' Debt-Service
Performance; The Relevance of Structural Factors", Weltwirtschaftliches
Archives, 121, pp. 105-115

Cline, William. 1984. International Debt: Systemic Risk and Policy Response.
Washington, D.C.: Institute o International. Economics, July

Council for Economic Planning and Development. Various Years. Taiwan
Statistical Data Book. Taipei, Republic of China

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Y. C. Park. 1987. "Korean Growth Policy",
Brpokin2s Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2, pp. 389-454

Edwards, Sebastian. 1988. "Real and Monetary Determinants of Real Exchange
Rate Behavior, Theory and Evidence from Developing Countries", forthcoming.

Feder, Cershon and Richard Just. 1977. "A Study of Debt-Servicing Capacity
Applying Logit Analysis," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 4, no. 1,
March

Huizinga, Harry, and J. Sachs. 1987. "U.S. Commercial. Banks and the
Developing Country Debt Crisis", National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper #2455, December

Huntington, Samuel. 1968. Political Order in Changing Societies. New Haven:
Yale University Press

Jam, Shail. 1915. The Size Distribution of Income: A Coioilation of Data.
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank
Jodice, D.A., and C. Taylor. 1983. World Handbook of Political and Social
Indicators. Third Edition. New Haven: Yale University Press

Krueger, Anne 0. 1978. Foreian Trade Recimes and Economic Development:
Liberalization Attempts and Consequences. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger

Kuznets, Simon. 1955. "Economic Growth and Income Inequality," American
Economic Review, vol. 45, no.1, pp. 1-28

Lin, Ching-yuan Lin. 1985. "Latin America and East Asia: A Comparative
Development Perspective", unpublished manuscript, International Monetary Fund

Little, Ian M. 0., M. Scott, and T. Scitovsky. 1970. Industry and Trade in
Some Developing Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press

Maddala, C. S. • 1977.   Econometrics. New York: McGraw-Hill

McFadden, Daniel, R. Eckhaus, C. Fader, V. Hajivassiliou, and S. O'Connell.
1985. in J. Cuddington and C. W. Smith (eds.), International Debt and the
Develoi,inz Countries, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank

Pyo, Hak-Kil. 1987. "External Dependence and Economic Growth: An Empirical
Inquiry," in K. D. Kim (ed), Dependency Issues in Korean Development.
Seoul: Seoul National University

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1985. "External Debt and Macroeconomic Performance in Latin
America and East Asia", Brookings Pacers on Economic Activity, vol. 2, pp.
523- 573

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1987. "Trade and Exchange Rate Policies in Growth-Oriented
Adjustment Programs," in Vittorio Corbo, M. Goldstein, and M. Khan (eds.),
Growth-Oriented Adjustment Programs. Washington, D.C.: International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1988a. (ed.) Foreign Debt and Economic Performance: The
Summary Volume, National Bureau of Economic Research. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1988b. (ed.) Foreign Debt and Economic Performance: The
Country Studies, National Bureau of Economic Researc. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming

Sigelman, Lee and H. Simpson. 1977. "Cross-National Test of Linkage Between
Economic Inequality and Political Violence", Journal of Conflict Resolution,
21(1), pp 105-128

United Nations, Department of International Economic and Social Affairs.
1981. A Survey of National Sources of Income Distribution Statistics,
Statistical Papers Series M, No. 72. New York: The United Nations
United Nations, Department of International Economic and Social Affairs.
1985. National Accounts Statistics: ComDendium of Income Distribution
Statistics, Statistical Papers Series M, No. 79. New York: The United
Nat ions

Williamson, Jeffrey C. 1988. "Capital Deepening Along the Asian Pacific Rim",
Harvard Institute for Economic Research, Discussion Paper No. 1363, January

The World Bank.   1987a. World Develoornent Retort. Washington, D.C.
                  1987b. World Debt Tables. 1986-87 Edition. Washington,D.C.
                  1986. World Debt Tables. 1985-86 Edition. Washington, D.C.
                  1983. World Tables. 3rd Edition. Washington, D.C.
                  1979. World Develotment Retort. Washington, D.C.
                  1976. World Tables. 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
