NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEDERAL RESERVE BEHAVIOR SINCE 1980:
A FINANCIAL MARKETS PERSPECTIVE

William C. Melton
and
V. Vance

Roley

Working Paper

No. 2608

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1988

We are grateful to Thomas Mayer and Gordon Sellon for helpful conunents, to
Steven R. Thorley for research assistance, and to the National Science
This paper was
Foundation (Grant No. SES-8408603) for research support.
of
American MoncttL
The
Political
Economy
for
Thomas
(ed.),
Mayer
prepared
This research is part of NBER's research program in Financial
Policy.
Narketa and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of t.o
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2608
June 1988

Federal Reaerve Behavior Since 1980:
A Financial Marketa Perapective
ABSTRACT

The financial
market's understanding of Federal Reserve behavior is used to examine recent changes in
monetary policy.

Changes in the level of interest rates in response to specific types of economic

information are primarily considered- Differences in the volatility

of interest

rates across periods

provide additionalevidence on changes in monetary policy regimes. The results indicate that monetary
desire to
policy changed several times since 1980 with respect to either the Federal Reserve's targets, its
achieve its targets, or its operating procedures. The different regimes correspond to Federal Reserve

statements about changes in policy. In this context, then, the evidence- suggests that policy was
credible.

William C. Meltnn
IDS Financial Services,
IDS Tower 10
Minneapolis, MN 55440

Inc.

V. Vance Roley
Department of Finance 0.1-10

University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

FEDERAL RESERVE BEHAVIOR SINCE 1980:
A FINANCIAL MARKETS PERSPECTIVE*
William C. Melton and V. Vance Roley

Knowledge of actual Federal Reserve behavior is important in studies of monetary policy and
financial markets for

at least two reasons. First, the

monetary policy process may be marred

if they

interpretation of variables chosen to represent the

do not correspond to variables actually used by the

Federal Reserve to implement monetary policy or to gauge its performance. Accordingly, the Federal
Reserve's choices regarding targets, intermediate targets, and instruments may play
research design.1

a key

role in

Unfortunately, information regarding these choices is not always easy to obtain.

Relevant Federal Reserve policy statements, such as the FOMC policy directive, are released with a
substantial delay and often are ambiguous.2

Thus, additional knowledge regarding actual Federal

Reserve behavior may have a methodological payoff.3
Second, the recurrent issue of policy credibility requires an assessment of the extent to which
Federal Reserve statements find a reflection in the beliefs and behavior
credibility potentially has a variety

of economic agents.

While

of interpretations, all would seem to require that a shxft in stated

policy objectives and instruments be associated with at least some change in market behavior. Thus,
additional knowledge regarding Federal Reserve behavior, and the financial market's reaction to it,
may help illuminate the credibility issue.
This paper examines actual Federal Reserve behavior from

a financial

markets perspective.

Movements in interest rates are used as the metric in this exercise. The underlying presumption is that
financial market participants fully understand Federal Reserve behavior. This position is sensible for
two reasons.

First, many financial market participants are former Federal Reserve officials and

economists. Second, given the key role
the short-run, market participantshave

of the Federal

Reserve in influencing interest rates in

at least

a strong incentive to study Federal Reserve behavior.

Following this introductory section, a framework for examining monetary policy is presented in
the first section.

Within this framework, several different types

of

monetary policy regimes are

distinguished.

In the

second section, the implications

of the

different monetary policy regimes on the

hehavior of interest rates are discussed. The third section presents empirical resolD

u sotual Federal

Reserve behavior. The period beginning in 1980 and ending in early 1987 is considered, This period is
interesting in that Federal Reserve statements indicate that monetary policy changed several times.

Thus specific instances of Federal Reserve behavior can be analyzed in terms of the credibility of
pohcymakers. The main conclusions are summarized in the final section.

I.

The Monetary

jic Frawrk

Several aspects of monetary policy are reviewed in a stylized framework in this section

The

long-run objectives of monetary oolicy are first considered. These long-run objectives involve both the

targets and intermediate targets of policy over a gwen year. Next, several features pertaining to shortrun rr.onetary policy are discussed.

it is

argued that to interpret Federai Reserve behsvior correctly.

the short-run impemertation of monetary policy must be examined.

Different types of' short-run

policies are distinguished both by the type of operating procedure implemented by the Federal Resent

and by the desire to offset deviationsfrom the targets
A. Monetary Policy

Qçjives

The uncertainties facing the Federal Reserve make monetary policy a particularly challenging
task, even apart from outside political pressures. The first choice facing .poticymskers is to decide
whetF.sr policy should be based directly on

inflation, and foreign exchange rates,

or on

a set of ultimate targets, such
an intermediate target.

as output, employment.

Potential intermediate targets

include monetary and credit aggregates, as well as other indicators from financial markets, including
interest rates.
In the mid to late 1970s, the intermediate target procedure was progressively made more of a
formal part of Federal Reserve policy. Coinciding with this adoption, the Federal Reserve initiated a
series of annual targets for monetary and credit aggregates. This procedure was formalized further
under the Humphrey-Hawkins Act in 1978, which imposed

a single

non-overlapping calendar year

policy period on the Federal Reserve.
By the early 1980s, the intermediate target procedure was firmly entrenched .Nevertheless,

2

some ambiguities were apparent. One area of ambiguity involved the appropriate weights to be placed
on the various intermediate targets, particularly MI and M2, in formulating policy. A second area
involved uncertainties about the proper definition

of the narrowly

defined money stock, MI. Despite

erratic MI
problems in determining an appropriate definition for Ml, and the related problem of
velocity, Ml was the main focus of monetary policy. One reason for the use of Ml was

its timeliness.

data on broader
Preliminary Mi data are available weekly with a lag of about 1-1/2 weeks, while
monetary aggregates are available only monthly. Many of the components
are, however, available weekly.

A second was

of the

broader aggregates

that Ml was the traditionally preferred monetary

aggregate because of its intended link with transactions balances. Another reason was that the reserve
requirements applied to non-Mi components of the broader aggregates are either zero or very low,
implying a potentially loose relationship between reserves and the broader aggregates.
Because of the continuing erratic behavior of Ml velocity, the Federal Reserve virtually
abandoned its intermediate target procedure by the mid-1980s. In the record of policy actions at the
November 2, 1987 FOMC meeting, for example, the FOMC's domestic policy directive listed the
behavior of the monetary aggregates last among four items that could cause the Federal Reserve to

charge current pressure on reserve positions. The first three items were the strength of the business
expansion, inflationary pressures, and developments in foreign exchange markets. Thus. policymakers
were looking directly

at measures of economic performance. It also

is noteworthy

that the items in this

list occasionally change order. Developments in foreign exchange markets, for example, had been listed
first a few months earlier,
The above is clearly a casual interpretation of monetary policy objectives in the 1980s.

It does,

nevertheless, suggest several hypotheses about Federal Reserve behavior. These hypotheses are tested
in the third section.

However, to interpret Federal Reserve behavior more precisely, the short-run

implementation of policy must be considered.
B. Short-Run Monetary

j]j

The Federal Reserve's short-run monetary policy can be described in terms of two factors. The

first concerns the rate at which the Federal Reserve attempts to offset any deviation from its target or

3

intermediate target. The second is the type of operating procedure adopted. This latter area involves
the choice of an instrument, or operating target, to conduct monetary policy.

The view of monetary policy advanced here is that the Federal Reserve does not initiate short-.
run shocks to the monetary aggregates; it merely reacts to them.

This view seems particularly

appropriate prior to Fehruary 1984, when contemporaneous reserve requirements (CRR) were adopted.
Under the lagged reserve requirement (LRR) system in effect from 1968 to that time, there was no
direct link between hank reserves and MI in

a given week,

As a consequence, the money stock was

essentially demand determined, and monetary shocks reflected shifts in the public's demand for
money.4
Given that observed monetary shocks represent new information to

boththe

public and the

Fcderal Reserve, the relevant issue for policymakers is to determin the desired adjustment toward the
monetary target. Casual evidence suggests that this adjustment speed may have changed at least twice
since the late 1970s. In particular, the Federal Reserve committed itself more ciosely to Ml targets in
October 1979, implying that any deviation from the monetary targets would be offset more quickly

than before. In October 1982, the Federal Reserve de-emphssized its monetary targets, implying slower
adjustment speeds.

At the same time that the Federal Reserve changes adjustment speeds, it may also change its
operating procedures. The choice of operating procedures, however, is logically independent
desired rate of adjustment. That is. any
the federal funds

of the three most prominent types of operating

of the

procedures --

rate, nonborrowed reserves, and borrowed reserves procedures -- can potentially yield

virtually the same rate of adjustment.5

Nevertheless, the adoption of a federal funds rate, or money

market conditions, operating procedure is frequently interpreted as

an

abandonment

of monetary

targets. Similarly, the adoption of the nonborrowed reserves, or reserves aggregate, procedure in
October 1979 is often viewed as being consistent with a greater desire to offset monetary shocks. As
discussed in the next section, actual interest rate behavior can be used to infer both the type

of

operating procedure adopted by the Federal Reserve and the desired rate at which monetary shocks are
offset.

4

II,

Imolications for Interest

Bii

Market interest rate data are used to represent the actions of financial

arket participants. It

is further assumed that market participants fully understand Federal Reserve behavior.

As a

consequence, the Federal Reserves reaction function can be inferred under this rational expectations
assumption.

Moreover, changes in the estimated reaction function can be used

to

infer changes in

monetary policy regimes.

Three aspects of interest rate behavior are considered here. These are the volatility of interest
rates, the response of interest rates to weekly MI announcements, and the response of interest rates to
new information about inflation, economic activity, and exchange rates. Differences in the volatility of
interest rates in different periods are used to infer changes in Federal Reserve operating procedures.
Similarly, changes in the response of interest rates to Ml announcements also are used to infer changes
in operating procedures as well as different degrees of emphasis on Ml targets. Finally, the response of
interest rates to other economic information is used to infer the targets of monetary policy during

a

particular period.
A.

Volatility of Interest

EI

The volatility of the federal funds rate depends on disturbances affecting the market for
reserves, Federal Reserve intervention in the reserves market through open market operations, and the

market's perception of the type of operating procedure being used,

If the

market believes that the

Federal Reserve will offset shocks affecting the reserves market through open market operations, and
the shocks are in fact offset fairly quickly, the federal funds rate will be relatively stable over a short
period, such as a week. If disturbances in either the demand for or supply of reserves are not expected

to

be offset, however,

the federal funds rate will move quickly to clear the reserves market. Different

operating procedures imply different behavior for the federal funds rate through these channels.6
Under the federal funds rate procedure, the Federal Reserve offsets most shocks affecting the
reserves market to keep the federal funds rate relatively stable over a given period, such
Even under this procedure, however, the federal funds rate would be expected

)

as a

week.

to exhibit some volatility

over time. In particular, to offset deviations in money growth from its target, the Federal Reserve may

initiate discretionary changes in the rate,

Nevertheless, in comparison to the other operating

procedures discussed below, the federal funds rate should be relatively more stable under this procedure.
Under the nonborrowed reserves procedure, moat disturbances affecting the reserves market,
and therefore the federal funds rate, are not offset.

Instead, the nonborrowed reserves path is

maintained over a given period and the federal funds rate fluctuates in response to shocks either
demand fur

or supply

to the

of reserves, As a result, the federal funds rate would be expected to be more

volatile under this procedure.

The final procedure considered is the borrowed reserves procedure. Under this procedure, the
Federal Reserve can be. characterized as attempting to' achieve a certain level of discdunt window
borrowing over a given period. In this case, unanticipated changes in either required or excess reserves
are accommodated by changing nonborrowed reserves, If the demand for required reserves is higher

than expected, fur example, the federal funds rate rises initially and borrowing increases to equate
supply and demand in the reserves market. To offset the increase in borrowing, nonborrowed reserves
are increased until the federal funds rate falls to its previous level. In contrast, if a shock originating in

the demand for borrowed reserves occurs in

which borrowing is higher

than expected at every level of

the federal funds rate, this disturbance is at most partially offset and the federal funds rate falls. The
decline in the federal funds rate serves to reduce the demand for borrowed reserves. So, this source of
disturbances in the reserves market causes fluctuations in the federal funds rate. In comparison with

the other procedures, the borrowed reserves procedure implies more short-run volatility in the federal
funds rate than the federal funds rate procedure and less volatility than the nonborrowed reserves
procedure.7
The volatility of other interest rates, such as the 3-month Treasury bill yield, also depends on
the type of operating procedure employed by the Federal Reserve, although to a lesser extent. The 3month Treasury bill yield depends on both the current federal funds rate and the rate expected in
future weeks. If the curreot week's federal funds rate fluctuates, then some of this volatility is reflected
in the Treasury bill yield.

Treasury bill yields also fluctuate if financial market participants change their assessments

about the

federal

funds rate in future

weeks.

Monetary targets are important in examining this link.

If new information about either money or the economy suggest8, for example, that the future level of
the money stock will be higher than previously expected, the Treasury bill yield may rise if the market
expects the Federal Reserve to offset this increase. In this instance,

the market expects the

Reserve to attempt to achieve a particular monetary target, and the magnitude

of the

Federal

increase

in

interest rates reflects the desired speed of short-run adjustment.back to the target level. Alternatively,

if the Federal Reserve places little or no weight on a particular monetary target, the market will expect
future levels of the federal funds rate to be

as

previously predicted.

So, for

a

given monetary

disturbance, the greater the Federal Reserve's commitment to achieve a particular monetary target, the
greater the coinciding fluctuation in longer term yields.
B.

Response to

g

Economic Announcements

The response of interest rates to money and economic announcements provides futher
evidence on the type of operating procedure adopted by the Federal Reserve, as well

a.s

the

degree of

emphasis placed on various targets and intermediate targets of policy. In particular, the response of
the federal funds

rate depends on the

type of operating procedure. The response of longer-term yields

depends somewhat on the operating procedure, but
target or target of policy. The responses to

it

depends more importantly on the intermediate

Ml announcements and other economic announcements are

considered separately below.

First, consider the response to the federal funds rate to weekly Ml announcements.

Th

response depends directly on the type of operating procedure employed by the Federal Reserve, In

particular,the response depends on whether the corresponding shock to the market for reserves is offset.
The reserves market is affected by unanticipated announced changes in Ml initially through the

market's assessment of the demand for required reserves. Under the LRR system in effect before
February 1984, required reserves depended on the level of the money stock two weeks previously, the

statement week corresponding to the current week's money announcement data. Under the CRR
system adopted in February 1984, required reserves depend on the current money stock, with

a lag of

two days.8

As

a consequence, the money announcement data under

current reserves periods. Unanticipated announced changes in

CRR do not coincide with the

Ml may

still affect the demand for

reserves, however, if the unanticipated changes have persistent effects on future levels of the money
stock,

That is, the current week's demand for reserves would he affected if

a

positive money

announcement surprise causes market participants to raise their assessments of the current week's
money stock.
Under the federal funds rate procedure, the federal funds rate should not respond to money
announcement surprises, in this case, market participantsexpect the Federal Reserve to accommodate
the implied shock in the reserves market, In contrast, the federal funds rate should increase in response
to a positive money announcement surprise under the nonborrowed reserves procedure. This rise is due
to a higher assessment of the demand for reserves that is not expected to be accommodated through
Federal Reserve open msrket operations. Similar to the federal funds rate procedure, the federal funds

rate should not respond to money announcement surprises under the borrowed reserves procedure. This
behavior follows because the Federal Reserve accommodates shocks to the demand for reserves under
this operating procedure.

The response of Treasury bill yields and other longer term yields to money announcement
surprises depends partly on the response of the federal funds rate.

Most of the response. however,

depends on the extent to which the market expects the Federal Reserve to offset the shock in the

future. In particular, the response

is greater

the more quickly the Federal

Reserve acts

to offset the

money surprise. So, the response to the Treasury bill yield to money announcement surprises can be
used tn determine whether the Federal Reserve is perceived to he attempting to achieve its Ml target.9
The response of Treasury bill yields to unanticipated announced changes in economic activity

and inflation may operate through the same channels as money announcements if these other economic
announcements provide information useful in predicting money demand. In particular, if either real
economic activity or inflation is higher than expected, the market may raise
current and future week's demand for money.

its assessment

of the

interest rates, then, wnuld be expected to rise in

response to this new information about the domestic economy

8

if the

market does not expect the

Federal Reserve to accommodate the increased demand. A 8imilar direct link between exchange rate
movements and the demand for money is not evident.
The primary effect of new information about economic activity, inflation, and foreign exchange
rates on interest rates is likely due to the direct value of this information. That is, if policymakers are
placing more weight on their targets, and less weight on their intermediate monetary targets, new
information about the economy and exchange rates may cause immediate interest rate movements. If
inflation is announced to be higher than expected, for example, policymakers may adopt more
restrictive policies, causing interest rates to rise immediately.

The effect could be the same for an

unexpectedly large increase in economic activity, especially during the later stages

of an

economic

expansion when concern about future inflation is growing. Moreover, if the Federal Reserve is focusing
directly on the value of the dollar in currency markets, new information about exchange rates may lead

to immediate interest rate movements. Depending

on the Federal Reserves

ernphass on this type of

direct information about its ultimate targets, the response of interest rates may have varied over
different periods.

Ill.

Empirical Results

The various aspects of interest rate behavior discussed in the previous section are used below to
test hypotheses about the behavior to the Federal Reserve in conducting monetary policy. Three
separate periods are examined since 1980. The first actually begins in October 1979, when the Federal
Reserve announced

a new

operating procedure along with an increased emphasis on the monetary

aggregates. This new procedure corresponds to the nonborrowed reserves procedure discussed in the
previous section. The second period begins in October 1982, when the Federal Reserve announced the
abandoned the nonborrowed reserves procedure in favor of the borrowed reserves operating procedure.
At that time, somewhat less emphasis also may have been placed on the monetary aggregates
specifically

Ml --

as intermediate targets. The

—

third period begins in February 1984, coinciding with

the implementation of CRR. Because of the uncertainties regarding the effects of CRR among other
factors, the Federal Reserve may have dc-emphasized the role of the monetary aggregates further in

9

this period.10

Another period, beginning in October 1977 and ending in October 1979, also is

examined to compare the monetary policy regimes in the 1980s with monetary policy in the late 1970s.

Prior to October

1979,

the federal funds rate procedure was in effect.

A. Volatility of Interest
The volatility

of the

federal funds rate and the 3-month Treasury hill yield is examined

over four periods in Table 1. As is apparent in the table, the weekly volatility of the federal funds rate

TABLE I

is consistent with the changes in operating procedures hypothesized previously.

in particular. in

cbntparisun tu the pre-October 1979 period, the standard deviation of weekly percentage changes in the
federal funds rate was about four times as large in the October 1979 - October 1982 period. This
behavior is consistent with

a switch to the nonhorrowed

reserves procedure from the federal funds rate

procedure. The volatility then declined to about half that of the October 1979 - October 1982 period in
both of the periods after October 1982. Despite this decline, the volatility since October 1982 is
significantly larger than that experienced prior to October 1979, suggesting that the Federal Reserve
did not return to the federal funds rate procedure.1'
adoption

Instead, the evidence is consistent with the

of the borrowed reserves procedure.

Similar to the volatility of the federal funds rate, the volatility

of the

3-month Treasury bill

yield also increased significantly following October 1979. In contrast to the federal funds rate, however,
volatility after October 1982 returned

to pre-October

1979 levels. While some portion of the volatility

of the Treasury bill yield should reflect the volatility of the federal funds rate, a larger part can be

attributed to changes in the market's expectation about future monetary policy, As a result, the
increased volatility

of the

Treasury bill yield in the October 1979 - October 1982period is consistent

with a greater commitment of the Federal Reserve to offset a given shock affecting the money stock,
while the decline in volatility after October 1982 suggests the opposite.

10

Other evidence, however,

allows more direct inference about this possible shift.

B. Response to MQ!

Economic Announcements

To provide further evidence on changes in monetary policy operating procedures,
hypotheses discussed in the previous section about the response of the federal funds rate to money
announcement surprises are first tested. Then, to determine the market's assessment

of the

Federal

Reserve's targets and intermediate targets, the response of the 3—month Treasury bill yields to money
and other economic announcements is examined empirically.

The usual efficient markets model

is used

rate and the 3-month Treasury bill yield.

to estimate the responses of both the federal funds

This model relates daily changes in interest rates to

unanticipated announced changes in money and other economic variables. With the exception of the
exchange rate variable, unanticipated changes are measured as the difference between announced and
expected values. The expected values are taken from

a survey

conducted by Money Market Services.

Inc. The survey data are further adjusted, however, to take into account information from the time of
the survey to the time of the announcement.'2
views new information about

a particular

If the Federal Reserve -- and therefore the market --

variable as being relevant for policy, the estimated response

of interest rates should be significant.
The estimated response of the federal funds rate to the unanticipated component of weekly Ml
announcements is reported in Table 2. The only statistically significant response occurs in the January
TABLE 2
198Q

- October 1982 period, consistent with the nonborrowed reserves procedure.13 In the two post-

October 1982 periods, the response is insignificantly different from zero, consistent with either the
federal funds rate or borrowed reserves procedures. Although estimates are not reported here, previous
studies find that the response also is insignificantly different from zero prior to October 1979 [e.g.,
Roley and Walsh (1985)].

Combined with the evidence from Table 1, the results support the

hypothesis that the Federal Reserve operated under

a federal

funds rate procedure prior to October

1979, and then implemented the nonborrowed reserves procedure

11

during the October 1979 -

October

1982 period. After October 1982, the combined evidence from

Tablss 1 and 2 suggests that the Federal

Reserve adopted the borrowed reaerves procedure.

To determine the relative importance of various targets and intermediate targeta of monetary
policy, the response of the 3-month Treasury bill yield to a set of economic variables is estimated in
Table 3.

In addition to weekly Ml announcements, the unanticipated components

of

monthly

annnuncements of the producer price index, consumer price index, industrial production. and the
unemployment rate are considered. Daily changes in the yen/dollar exchange rate also are included to
estimate the significance of foreign exchange rate factors. Yen/dollar rate changes are measured as the
difference in ciosing and opening quotes in the Tokyo market each day. Thus, such movements in the
Tokyo market cao be regacded as news to traders in New York, since these movements are recorded
when the New York idarket is ciosed.
TABLE 3
The results in Table

three periods since

3

indicate that the role of Ml targets successively diminished over the

1980. and the differences across periods

are significant at the 5 percent level.

Moreover, since February 1984, the response of the 3-month Tressury bill yield to weekly Ml
announcements is insignificant!y different from

zero'4

While the role of Mi has decreased, the reeulte

suggest that the effect of direct information about the domestic economy has increased over time. As
indicated by the reported

F-statistics, the hypothesis that new information about inflation,

unemployment, and output does not affect interest rates can be rejected
February 1984

- September

at the

5 percent level in the

1986 period. The most significant variable during this latter period is

industrial production, suggesting that the Federal Reserve was looking directly at the performance of

the economy in conducting policy. Finally, yen/dollar exchange rate movements are not estimated to
have had significant effects overall, though intermittent effects cannot be ruled

12

out.'

IV.

Conclusions
This paper exploited the financial market's understanding of Federal Reserve behavior in

considering changes in monetary policy. In particular, both interest rate volatility and the financial

market's perception of the Federal Reserve's reaction function were osed to examine several monetary
policy regimes over the last decade. One regime began in October 1979, when the Federal Reserve

a nonhorrow"d

adopted

October 1979, the

reserves operating procedure and placed greater emphasis on Ml.

fedrai funds rate operating

Prior to

procedure was to effect. In October 1982, monetary

policy shi1ted to a borrowed reserves operating procedure and

a diminished

role for Mi. Finally, in

February 19k4, stil less weight was placed on Ml as an intermediate target of policy, with more weight
placed directly or. the performance of the domestic economy These d,fferent periodc correspond to
Federal Reser.e start-ri.rnts about changes in policy, and, as a whole, the evidence suggests tha actual
changes wet" n.ade. To that extent. tne evidence suggests that piliry was credible.

To anayce the motives surrounding the Federal Reserre's formulation and inplcnientation of
niooetary 1eAtry, it seems particularly worthwhile to study these specific episodes on a case study basis.
Such a sun> nay reseal the relative importance placed on political and economic factors influencing
Federal lleser'.e behasior. In brief, it appears that both factors are important. 'The change in policy in
October 197

for exa'nple. was drisen by the desire to ncrcase interest rates to defend the dollar in

foreign eamhange narkets and to reduce inflation in the U.S. A slowdown in the growth

of the

monetary aggregates also was desired to reduce infiatioo in the future. Under the federal funds rate
procedure in effect prior to October 1979. the Federal Reserve would be blamed for
interest rates.

a sharp

rise in

To deflect such criticism, policymakers adopted a procedure in which "the market

determines rates," the nooborrowed reserves procedure. At the same time, there was some hope that

this procedure would allow closer control of Ml and hence reduce the prospects of continued high
inflation.
Similar economic and political choices were made in 1982. In particular, by October 1982, the
behavior

of both Ml

and the economy was seemingly becoming more unpredictable, and the Federal

Reserve's independence was being threatened by the Congress. Policymakers decided to weakeo the

13

link between Ml and interest rates, thereby reducing interest rate volatility

Nevertheless the

advantage of some interest rate volatility due to market factors was the lack of blame attached to the
Federal Reserve for

a

particular level of interest rates.

As a consequence, the borrowed reserves

procedure was adopted, in which the federal funds rate fluctuated in response to errors in the
borrowings function.
targeting

In this sense, the Federal Reserve could continue to claim that it was not

a particular level of interest

rates. A macroeconomicjustification for the borrowed reserves

procedure is not, however, readily apparent, as the added volatility of interest rates created by random
shifts in discount window borrowing creates no clear benefit.16

The third regime in the I980s appears to have
based on the uncertainties

f

been due primarily

to an economic decisioo

the economic environment, Jo particular, the implementation

of CRR

in

February 1984 had the potential of affecting the behavior of an already unpredictable money stock as
well as altering the previous rslatiooships between reserves aod money. This change was a delayed
product of the nonborrowed reserves regime,

as closer monetary

control was more likely under CRR

than LRR. Because of the added uncertainties surrounding CRR and the continuing erratic behavior of
Ml velocity, policymakers dc-emphasized their monetary targets further, and the borrowed reserves
procedure was maintained.
In

sum..t e behavior

of the Federal Reserve in conducting monetary policy is best described by

considering the Federal Reserve's operating procedures, targets, and desire to achieve its targets.
Changes in these factors led to at least three different policy regimes in the 1980s.'

Jo these regimes

the importance to the Federal Reserve of tight monetary control increased initially and subsequently
became negligible. The lasting inheritance of the regime shift that began in October 1979 is the
Federal Reserve's substantiallygreater willingness to tolerate interest-rate volatility. Regardless of the
specific details of the operating procedures adopted, there apparently has been no reversion to the
federal funds rate procedure employed in the late 1970s.

14

FOOTNOTES
*

We are grateful to Thomas Mayer for helpful comments, to Steven

R. Thorley for research

assistance, and to the National Science Foundation (Grant No, SES-8408603) for research
support.

1.

The terminology used here for targets, intermediate targets, and instruments of policy

follows

B. Friedman (1975).
2.

Mayer

(l97) and

Goodfriend (1986) discuss issues relating to the disclosure of the FOMC's

policy directive in detail.

3.

One example among many possible illustrations, wo.ild be the avoidaoce of confusion between
use of an interest rate instrument to achieve a particular policy target and interest rate
targeting where the level of an interest rate itselfis the policy objective.

4.

For further discussion on tins issue, see LeRoy (1979. Hetcel (1982), and Roley (1987).

5.

The nonborrowed reserves procedure is potentially slightly faster because of federal funds rate
moserncnts in the current week. This property is discussed further in the next section. Also
see Roley 1987).

6.

For a more detailed discussion of these operating procedures, see Roley (1987).

7.

A variant of the federal funds rate procedure which apparently was introduced following the
sharp decline of the stock market on October

19, 1987

is intermediate between the federal

funds rate procedure described above and the borrowed reserves procedure. In contrast to the
earlier funds rate procedure, in which the Federal Reserve entered the reserves market almost

daily to add or drain reserves in order to keep the funds rate close to target, open market
operations under the variant procedure are relatively sparse and generally limited to adding or
draining reserves, but not both, during

a reserves maintenance

period.

variant resembles the borrowed reserves procedure. The main difference

In this regard, the
is

that there

is no

explicit target for borrowed reserves, so that shocks to banks' demand for borrowed reserves do

not (in principle) affect the funds rate. Some market participantshave described the variant

15

procedure as a "fuzzy" funds rate target, since the allowable deviation

the target

is larger

of the

actual rate from

than under the earlier funds rate procedure. The Federal Reserve has

announced its intention to revert to the borrowed reserves procedure

at some

point in the

future.
8.

Also, reserve computation

and maintenance periods are two weeks in length, while they lasted

one week under LRR. The response under 2-week CRR is examined in detail by Roley (1987).
9.

Considerable evidence suggests that the response of Treasury bill yields to Ml announcements
is

a response in the real rate, not expected inflation. One type of evidence is from the response

of foreign exchange rates to Ml

announcement surprises. In particular, the dollar appreciates

in response to positive money announcement surprises. See, for example, Cornell (1982), Engle
and Frankel (1984), and Flardouvelis (1984).
10.
-

The introduction of CRR introduced
describing

at least two uncertainties.

First, the previous relationship

the demand for reserves changed, leading to uncertainties about the effects of

various shocks on the federal funds rate. Second, the stochastic behavior of the money stock

itselfwas potentially affected, as it was no longer entirely demand determined in a given week.

Ii.

The test of the hypothesis that the two post-October 1982 periods have the same volatility as

the pre-October

1979 period yields F-statistics of 3.88 (64, 100) and 5.29 (154, 100), which are

significant at the 5 percent level,
12.

The change in the Treasury bill yield over the previous five business days is used as a proxy for

this information. See Roley (1983).
13.

The results are qualitatively the same when the estimation period starts in October 1979
instead of January 1980. See Roley and Walsh (1985). To conform with the results in Table
3, the January 1980 starting period was used. This date was chosen because of the availability
of data for the exchange rate variable used in Table 3.

14.

In a specification analogous to that used in Table 2, the response of the Treasury bill yield to
money announcement surprises also was examined over additional subperiode. In particular,

starting with September

29, 1977, the response was estimated for overlapping 26 week periods,

16

beginning every 13 weeks. The first two estimation periods, for example, were September 29,
1977

-

March 23, 1978 and December 29, 1977 - June 22, 1978, respectively. The results from

these regressions generally support the beginning and ending dates of the subsarnplea used in
the tables.

In particular, all responses after the June 1982 - December 1982 period were

estimated to be smaller than those of this period. Moreover, the responses in both the June
1983 - December 1983 and September 1983

at

March 1984 periods were statistically significant

the 5 percent level, but the esttrnated responses starting with the Decerriber 1983

1984 period were

not significant. This result

is consiscent with

- June

a change in thc response around

the beginring of 1984,
15.

Positive ar,d negative movements also were considered separately, but the statistical
significance of the revolts did

16.

nt clang"

The borrowed reserves procedure was implemented under LRR.

Under CRR, hos,eer, this

procedure -nay be capable of offsetting shocks from money and factors supplying reserves. See,
for example, Roth and Seibert '1983).
17.

And, as noted in footnote 7, a fourth regime may have begun following the October 19, 1987
stock-market crash.

17

REFERENCES

Cornell, Bradford, "Money Supply Announcements, Interest Rates, and Foreign Exchange,"
International

and Finance,

1

Mth1 91

(August 1982), 201-208.

Eogie, Charles, and Jeffrey Frankel. "Why Interest Rates React to Money Announcements:
Explanation from the Foreign Exchange Market"

of

ar

An

Economics, 13

(January 1984). 13-39.

Friedman; Benjathin M., "Targets, Instruments and Indicators of Mooetary Policy,"

1913m91 of

Monetary Economics; 1 (october 1975), 443-473.

Secrecy and Central Banking," Journal 91 Monetary

Goodfriend, Marvin, "Monetary Mystique:
Economics,17 (January 1986), 63-82.

Hardouvelis, Olkas, "Market Perceptions

of

Federal Reserve Policy and the Weekly Monetary

Announcements," Journal of Monetary Economics. 14 (September 1984), 225-240.

jt

Hetrel, Robert F., "The October 1979 Regime of Monetary Control and the Behavior of the Money
Supply in 1980," Journal of Money,

and

fijün

.

14

(May 1982), 234-251.

LeRoy, Stephen F., "Monetary Control Under Lagged Reserve Accounting,"

1l

Q3jrn

Economic

(October 1979), 460-470.

Mayer, Thomas, "Disclosing Monetary Policy," Saloman Brothers Center for the Study of Financial
Institutions, New York University, Monograpri 1987-1.

IS

Roth, Howard L. and Diane Seibert, 'The Effects of Alternative Discount Rate Mechanisms on
Monetary Control," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic

68 (March 1983),

16-29.

Roley

V

Vance.

The Response of Short-Term

Announcements," Journal of Money.

Ro1e

V. Vance, "The Effects

Procedures,'

Role

Jpa of

V. Vance, and Carl E.

of

(Supplement

to

Weekly Money Supply

and Banking, 15 (August 1983), 344-354.

of Money Announcements under Alternative Monetary Control

Money,

and Bankme,

Wah, "Monetary

Interet Rate to

Interest Hates

Money

19 (August 1987), 292-307.

Poitcy Regimes, Expected Inflation, and the Response

Announcements," Quarterly

19135), 1011-1039.

19

Journal

of

Economics. 100

TABLE 2
Response of the Federsl Funds Rate to Ml Announcements

Coeffioient Estimates

Estimation

UM1

41

0.0994*

—0.0121

Period

Constant

jan, 1980—
Oct. 1982

(0.0515)

Oct. 1982Feb. 1984

0.0413

0.0137

0.0016

(0.0272)

(0.0128)

(0.0122)

_0.O872*

0.0103

-0.0089

(0.0191)

(0.0103)

(0.0055)

0.0277

Feb. 1984Feb. 1987

Notes:

(0.0228)

Summary Statistics
—

R2

SE

OW

0.11

0.59

2.70

-0.01

0.20

1.76

F(m,c)

(0.0291)

10.71*
(1,203)

0.01

0.22

1.97

0.04
(1,219)

5

The preoise estimstion period dstes are: Jsnusry 1, 1980 — October
1982; Ootober 6, 1982 — Februsry 1, 1984; and February 2, 1984 — February
28, 1987. Obsenstions in the last week of each year are deleted to avoid
the influence of excessive year end interest rate movements. Numbers in
parentheses sre stsndsrd errors of estimated coefficients. Equations sre
estimated in the form:
LRFF

0 b.

where b
term.

,

,

t

=b0 +b1

and b

2

UM1

t

+bEMl
+e t
2
t

are estimated

coefficients

and e
8

ía a random error

*
Srgnificant at the 5 percent level.
= change in the fedaral funds rate from the day of the
money announcement
4RFFt
to the next business dsy.
UM1

8l,

money announcement surprise, defined as Ml —
where Mi is the anncunccd
change in the narrowly defined money stock, in billions of dollars.

SE

= expected announced chsnge in the
narrowly defined money stock, based cc the
survey measure provided by Money Market Services, Inc.
= multiple correlation coefficient corrected for
degrees of freedom.
standard error.

OW

= Ourbin—Wateon statistic.

F(m,m)

F—statistic
with (m,:) degrees of freedom for the hypothesis that the
response coefficient, b1, is the same ss that estimated in the previous period.
In this tet, the estimated equations sre weighted by
their standard errors.

20

TABLE 1
Volatility of Interest Rates

Standard Deviations of Weekly Percentage Changes
Oct. 1982—
Feb. 1984—
Oct. 1979—
Oct. 1932
Feb. 1984
Feb. 1937

Interest Rate

Oct. 1977—
Oct. 1979

Federal Fonda rate

0.019

F(m,n)

0.077
*
16.89
(150,

p—value
3—month

euty

4.36

(150, 64)
0.1

a

l02

0.043
1.37

*

(154, 64)

0.05
0.021

0.05:
4,62

0.02:

99

'150, 64)

(150,

u.2 a L0

p—value

5.08

0.

s

10-15

1.53

'54,

154)

a

The intereat rate quote on the day following each week's money announcement
The number in the f'rst row and
is used to form weekly percentage changes.
first coiumn, for example, denotes s standard dewiation of weekly percent—
age cionges of 1.9 percent. The last weekly observat:on of each year is
deleted to avoio the Influence of excessive year end interest rate movenenta.

Significant at the
F(m,n)

*

0.027

F(m,n)

Notes:

99)

0.00

0.037

5

percent level.

F—statistic with

degrees of freedom for the hypothesis that the varithat in the previous period.

(m,n)

ance is the same as

21

Ml
YEN

j2
SE

0.02 0.08 1.89 21.95*
(1,992)

0.0019 —0.0069

(1,1026)

——

(4,662)

4,85*

1.34
(4,330)

(4,694)

0.48

F2(m,n)

Tests _____
F1(m,n)

(0.0029) (0.0443) (0.1066) (0.0431) (0.0689) (0.0043) (0.0051)

0.1820* —0.0800

0.0305 —0.1964
1.70

DW

Statistics

percentage of labor force unemployment.

percentage change in the industrial production index.

percentage change in the consumer price index.

F--statistic with (m,n) degrees

F2(m,n)

on day t.

of

freedom

for the

hypothesis that b1

h2

=

b4

0.

with (m,n) degrees of freedom for the hypothesis that the response coefficient, b5, is the
same as that estimated in the previous period. The relevant estimated equations are weighted by their
standard errors,

F—statistic

= change in the yen/dollar exchange rate from open to close in the Tokyo market

=

change in 3—month Treasury bill yield from 3:30 p.m. to 33O p.m. on auccessive business days
= percentage change in the producer price index,

F1(m,n) =

YEN

UNEM

IP

CPI

RTBt
PPI

where the U's indicate that only the unanticipated components of the data are included. Unanticipated values
of the first five variables are calculated using survey data provided by Money Market Services, Inc.

ARTB = b0 + b1 UPPI + b2 UCPIL + h3 un + b4 UUNEMt 1- b5 UMl + b6 YENt +

Notes: See the notes in Table 2. The last period ends on September 29, 1986, due to the availability of yen/dollar
exchange rate data. Equations are estimated in the form:

Sept.1986

lINEN

SuTy

0.11 0.09 1.55 16.59*

IP

0.0033 —0.0921 —0.2048 0.0558 —0.1758 0,0346* 0.0100
(0.0047) (0.0763) (0.1651) (0.0751) (0.1358) (0.0055) (0.0067)

0.0290 —0.2048

Feb. 1984— 0,0058 —00075 —0.0056

Feb. 1984

Oct. 1982—

CPI

—_Unantic4dChaifn
0.07 0.28

PPI

0.0842* 0.0029
(0.0107) (0.1620) (0.1929) (0.1084) (0.2438) (0.0109) (0.0112)

Constant

1980— —0.0079

Oct. 1982

Jan.

Period

Estimation

Response of the 3—month Treasury Bill Yield to New Economic Information

TABLE 3

