NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADVANCE NOTICE PROVISIONS IN PlANT
DO THEY MATTER?
CLOSING LEGISlATION:

Ronald G. Ehrenberg
George H. Jakubson

Working Paper No. 2611

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1988

Our research was supported by grants to Ehrenberg from the National Science
Foundation and the W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research and this
paper summarizes material that will appear in a forthcoming Upjohn Institute
Without implicating them for what remains, we are grateful to
monograph.
Robert McKersie and Sherwin Rosen for their comments on an earlier draft.
This research is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER

Working Paper #2611

June 1988

ADVANCE NOTICE PROVISIONS IN PLANT CLOSING
LEGISLATION: DO THEY MATTER?

ANSTRACT

This paper evaluates the cases for and against plant closing
legislation. In spite of the growth of legislative efforts in the area,
there has been surprisingly little effort devoted to analyzing what the

effects are of existing plant closing legislation,

of provisions in

privately negotiated collective bargaining agreements that provide for
advance notice in case of plant shutdowns and/or layoffs, and of voluntary
employer provision of advance notice.
previous research,

The paper summarizes the results of

and our own empirical

analyses that used the January

1984 Bureau of Labor Statistics Survey of Displaced Workers, on the
effects of advance notice on displaced workers' durations of nonemployment
and post-displacement earnings. Based upon these findings,

implications

for public policy are drawn.

Ronald C, Ehreriberg
School of Industrial and
Labor Relations
Cornell University
Ithica, NY 14851-0952

George H. Jakubsori
School of Industrial and
Labor Relations
Cornell University
Ithica, NY 14851-0952

I.

Introictlon
Most European nations have some form of legislation relating to plant

closings or large 5cale layoffs.l

Thy employers and

Typically they call for advance notice

for employer negotiations with employees and government

over whether the closing can be averted.

Often they require severance pay

for displaced workers and sane, for example Sweden, have detailed programs
of labor market services (retraining, placement, public works, wage
subsidies) to facilitate adjustments. In Canada, both federal and
provincial legislation similarly require advance notice.

In many of these

countries small establishments with less than one hundred employees are
rite of
exempt from the requirements, perhaps due to the greater failure
small

businesses or the belief that a shutdown of a small business does

not have a substantial

effect on a crinuaity.

Plant closing legislation in the United States is much more modest.
As of early 1988, there is no federal

law and only a few state laws.

Three states, Maine, Wisconsin and Hawaii, require advance notice of plant
shutdowns or large scale layoffs (with size class exemptions), and Maine
also requires one week's severance pay per year of service for workers
with greater than three years' tenure.
are low

in

The penalties for noncompliance

Maine (3500 per establishment) and Wisconsin ($50 per

employee), but high
off worker).

in

Hawaii

(three months wages and benefits per laid

Connecticut does not require advance notice, but does

benefits
require nonbankrupt firms to maintain health insurance and other
for workers unemployed by plant shutdowns for up to 120 days.
Massachusetts, Maryland and Michigan all.have voluntary programs in which
firms are urged to provide advance notice and/or continue benefits.
weeks
Finally, South Carolina requires employees to give workers two

2
notice before shutting down bit only in situations where employees are
requIred to give similar notice prior to quittlng
Interest in plant closing legislation in the United States has

grn

since the deep recession of the mid-1970s and the relatively large number
of plant closIngs and permanent layoffs in major manufacturing industries

L

since then, undoubtedly stimulated this interes

During the 1975—83

period over 125 bills reiating to plant closings were Introduced In 30
states; the majority in the northeast and mlthest, gore than 90 percent
of these bills had provisions requiring advance notice of shutdowns while
substantially moalier percentagesrequired severance pay or econanic
assistance to either workers, employers, local governments, or-potential
buyers
At the federal level, over 40 bills have been introduced into
Congress since 1979

In April of 1988. Congress voted to include an

arnenthent In the annibus trade bill that would have required employers of
100 or more workers to give 60 days advance notice to workers and local

government officials of a plant closings or a layoff that was planned to
last at least six months that involved at least 500 workers or one—third

of the employer's workforce, Numerous exemptions were included In this
bill that was vetoed by President Reagan.
Proponents of advance notice legislation argue that advance notice
provisions will ease displaced workers' shock and facilitate their search
for alternative sources of employment or training.

alljs

Such notice also

employers, workers and the crnunity to see If ways exist to save

the jobs, such as wage concessions, tax concessions, or seeking new

nership,

including the possibility of employee

nersh1p2

3
Opponents of the legislation argue that, In addition to restricting
the free mobility of capital, advance notice legislation would have a
number of other adverse effects on firms.

They claim It would increase

worker turnover and decrease productivity, as those productive workers

with the best opportunitLes elsewhere would leave and the morale of
remaining workers would suffer.

It

also would decrease the likelihood

that buyers of the plant's prodGt would place new orders, that banks

would supply new credit, that suppliers would continue to provide
services, and that the firm could sell the plant to potential buyers,
Finally, it would depress corporate stock prices.

Such a provision, as

well as others that directly increase the costs of plant shutdowns,
effectively increase the cost of reducing employment and thus should
encourage firms

, to

expand operation or to substitute overtime hours

for additional employment in states where such laws are in effect.
In evaluating the case for advance notice legislation, it

to stress the divergence between private and social costs.

s

useful

nployers

currently do not bear the full social costs of plant shutdowns, both
because unemployment insurance is imperfectly experience rated and because
the costs these actions impose on cc*mnunitles are not taken Into account
by them.

As such, imposing a

'tax'

on plant closings, or large scale

layoffs, either in the form of advance notice provisions, severance pay
requirements, or maintenance of benefits requirements would offset the
3

difference between the social and private costa of plant closings.

These

efficiency considerations suggest the need for federal, rather than state-bystate rules, to reduce the possibility that locational decisions by firms would

4
be Influenced by

tax

price' differences. Critics, however, would stress

that such legIslation might encourage the flight of jobs overseas.
In spite of the growth of legislative efforts, there has been
surprisingly little effort devoted to analyzIng what the effects are of
existing plant closing legIslation, of provisions in privately negotiated
collective bargaining agreements that provide for advance notice in case
of plant shutdowns and/or layoffs, and of voluntary employer provision of
advance notIce.

The next section sursnarizes what previous studies have

found, while section iii briefly discusses our own research.
-

concluding

II,

remarks appear in section.

Some

iV

vfl'

-

Lazear (1987) used annual aggregate data for twentythree countries
over a 29 year period (1956 to 1984) to estimate what the affects of
iegaiiy mandated severance pay and advance notice provisions for

biue

collar workers were on the aggregate employment/populationratio,
unemployment rate, and average weekly hours In manufacturing. Simple
fixed-effects models (to control for countrrspeclfic omitted variables)
were estimated and a snail set of control variables (e.g., a linear time
trend, cyclical factors, demographic factors) were included In the
analysis, He found that Instituting an advance notice requirement of 60
days (2 months), oeterls paribus, would decrease the employment/population
ratio by about

.003 (the U.S. average was .40 during the period), and

Increase average weekly hours by about 0.7, although these effects were
not statistically significantly different frcc zero.

He argued that

apparently advance notice requirements encourage employers to substitute

5
additional hours

for

additional

employment;

cost of expanding employment. One must

countries

In Lazear's sample,

changes

once or twice during the period.

they act like a quasi—fixed

caution,

hoever, that In most

occurred In these requirements only

Hence, the effects he attributed to

advance notice legislation may In actuality reflect only nonlinear
trends.
Foibre, Leighton and Roderick (1984) is the only
study of U.S. data

that examined the effects of advance notice of plant
closings on local
area unemployment rates and labor force size.

They

xarnined the

effects

of major plant closings (those involving more than 100
workers) in Maine
In the period prior to advance notice becning
mandatory in the state, and

oluntpry provision by a firm

of at least one month's advance

notice to displaced workers significantly

diminished the closing's Impact

found that

on

the local area unemployment rate in the month of
closing, While this

reflect more rapid reemployment of displaced workers In the presence
of advance notice, their results also suggest that advance
notice was
associated with a significant reduction in the size of the local labor
force in the month of the closing.

The latter reflects either labor force

withdrawal or outmigration (and Possible reemployment
elsewhere); they are
unable to ascertain which occurred.
Another study, Weber and Taylor (1963), focused on
32 plant closings

in the late 1950s and early 1960s and found that
voluntarily provided
advance notice rarely led to increased quit

rates

or decreased

productivity of workers. Still a third study, Holen, Jehn, and Trost
(1981) studied the experiences of 9,500 displaced workers
that closed and found that
provision

fr 42 plants

of advance notice was associatedwith

6
workers; at first glance a
iarstz earnings losses for the displaced
smnewhat paradoxical

result.

(and most of those discussed
In each of the latter three studies
as exogenous and this may
below) provision of advance notice was treated
For example, those

effects.
bias the authors' estimates of the policy's

face increased quit rates prior to the
employers who perceive they would
advance notice, may not
shutdown date If they provide their workers with
who perceive they would not face
provide notice, while those employers
that these perceptions are
increased turnover may do so. To the extent
correct, only low 'expected increase in turnover'

firms would provide

turnover
notice and one would notobsere increised
notice was provided. (Weber and Taylorts iinding).

in

these firms after

However,

this would not

of mandated advance notice.
tell us anything about the affects
if advance notice were to arise primarily
employment

Similarly,

in situations in which the

were the worst, a
prospects faced by displaced workers

cparison of

with notice to the
the earnings losses suffered by workers

would show that the
losses incurred by those who failed to receive notice
former lost more (Holen, et

aL's

results).

However,

this would not imply

would make workers worse off.
that legally mandated advance notice
data fran the Bureau of Labor
Recently seerai studies have analyzed
a supplement to
Statistics January 1984 3ziY gL.flhiaicttMQtkLa
is a
The
(1985)).
the cranLE2glL1AllQa_Zlian(see Flaim and Sehgal
sample of households that was
special supplement to a national probability

(),

$

the 1979—84 period
aäninistered to workers permanently displaced during
contains information on whether
due to a plant shutd.'n or layoff and it
or expected their displacement.
the individuals received advance notice

7
the notice was formal
It contains no information on whether
advance it was given.

or

how

far

in

This is a crucial omission, since the effectiveness

on how far
of advance notice policies presumably depend at least partially
in advance notice is given.

The various studies yield somewhat mixed findings.
(forthcoming,

Howland

of the
1988) lImited her analyses to a snail subsample

displaced workers located in SMSAs

who had been displaced from

manufacturing jobs due to a plant shutdown.

She found that on average

not benefit from the
displaced workers who received advance notice did
to have shorter
advance notice, although white—collar workers did appear
durations of nonempLoyment.
workers who

received advance

In addition, the approximately
notice who

then

10 percent of

quit prior to displacement

fewer weeks of nonemployrnent.
appeared to suffer snaller wage losses and
on
Addison and Pedro (1986; 1987a) concentrated their attention

workers displaced due to plant shutdowns and found that, ceteris paribus,
durations of
the presence of advance notice was associated with

nonemployment that were some 35

percent shorter.

For workers who received

(which meant, given UI
unemployment insurance (UI) after displacement

rules in most states, those with more than one week of unemployment)

the

was found only for
negative association of advance notice and duration
white-collar employees.

For both white and blue—collar workers who failed

to receive UI after displacement,

a negative association between advance

notice and duration of nonemployment was found.
surprising;

if

This latter result Is not

advance notice helps some workers to find employment

without an intervening spell of unemployment,
eligible for UI benefits.

Put

another way,

these workers will never be

the presence of advance notice

8
may increase the probability that displaced workers fa1l to receive UI.
While Addison and Pedro (1986) treated the receipt of UI as
endogenous
they did not allow advance notice to Influence

Podrsky

it,

and Swaim (1987a) restrIcted their attention to those

workers displaced durIng the

1979-'Bi

period,

Using a

sliiy different

set of control variables than Addison and Pedro (1987a) they found that
advance notice significantly redaced nonemployment durations
only for
white-collar females.

Podrsky

and Swaim (1987W sidied the

determinants of postdisplacement earnings for workers who were
subsequently employed full'-time at the survey date,

They found no effects

of advance notice, suggesting that such policies have, at best,
-

transitional effects,

Finally,

Addison and Portugal (i987b) found that a 10 percent

increase in ouration of unemployment decreased post-displacement
wages by
about 1 percent,

Since their results in this paper (which focused on laid

off displaced workers, as well as those displaced
by plant closings) also
indicate

that advance notlce reduced duration of
unemployment by about 25

percent, one can infer that advance notice increases post—displacement
wages by about 2,5 percent. One must caution, however, that their
estimated duration-wage relationship is conditional on a displaced
worker's having remained in the same industry and occupation and
they did
not permit advance notice to have a direct effect on
post—displacement

wages.

9

IlL

n

Research

Our own

research,

ir

to be reported in detail in a

data making a number

Institute monograph, reanalyzes the
methodological innovations.

First,

forthcing Upjohn

in the

of

absence of formal legislation

requiring advance notice, one can view advance notice as an explicit or
implicit contract provision and ask if workers must pay for this provision
in the form of lower predisplacement wages?

That is, we ask if

ccnpensating wage differentials exist for advance notice provisions?
the answer is yes, it is straightiorward to show that people who

If

receive

advance notice will appear, ceteris paribus, to suffer oaller earnings
losses, even if advance notice has no true effect on post—displacement
-

wages.

Second, as noted

above, the presence of an advance notice provision

is likely endogenous and depends upon both employers' willingness to
supply and employee demand for such provisions. We attempt to formally
model

the determinants of advance notice, including

the magnitude of the

compensating wage differential, and then test if treating advance notice
as endogenous influences subsequent results.
Third, previous researchers have not

stressed

that about 10 percent

of the males and over 15 percent of the females in the
spell

suffered

g

of nonemployment after displacement. We estimate separately what

the effect of advance notice was on the probability of a displaced
worker's finding a job without any spell of nonemployment and what it was
on the duration of nonemployment (conditional on a spell existing). We
also estimate what the effects of advance notice were on survey date
wages.

10

Fourth, since the

Z

contains data on whether workers who received

advance notice quit prior to displacement, we estlmate the determlnants of
-predisplacement turnover and ascertain If there is any evidence that
turnover among firms' most productive workers occurs

Finally, all of our

analyses are done separately for four groups (male/shutdown,
female/shutdown, male/layoff, female/layoff) to see

if

such policies have

differential affects across groups
Our results Indicate that there is very little evidence that workers
who receIve advance notice pay for it in the form of lower predisplacement
wages.

They also suggest that

1tis

difficult to explaln which displaced

workers receive advance nttlce prior to dislacement using data on

characteristics

-

of the Individuals, data on characteristics of the

workforce in the industries in which they were employed, and data on
employment growth and unemployment in the areas and areas/inoustries in
which they were employed.

While some variables prove significant In

formal probit models of the probability of receiving advance notice (and

the equations do have some predictive power),
patterns are observed across the four groups.

in the main few consistent

These results, together

with the results of exogeneity tests we performed, suggest that analyses
of the effects of advance notice provisions that use the
legitimately treat the existence of advance notice as exogenous.
Our analyses do suggest that having advance notice does significantly
Increase the probability that a displaced worker will experience

g spell

of nonemployment. The largest increase is for males displaced due to a
shutdown and the major beneficiaries within this group are white—collar
workers.

In contrast, once an individual experiences any nonemployment,

11
the presence of advance notice has no effect on the ultimate total

duration of nonemployment,4 Advance notice thus seems to help displaced
workers in the

sample only if the individuals can fInd employment

prior to displacement.5
Analyses of the effects of advance notice on survey data earnings
echo the flnd1ngs of Podursky and Swaim (1987b) that, on average, receIpt
of advance notice has no affect on subsequent earnings once reempioyed

On1

for wlnte—cuilar females who had been displaced-due to a layoff was

there any

ed€rce

that advance notice ieads to higher survey data weekly

earnings and this group makes up less than 15 percent of the
The major eftect of advance notice on workers in the

SN sample.

sample then

s

through decreasig the probabihty of observing positive nonemployment

sp&

I

lengths.
Finally, for the

peope

in the

samp1e who receive advance notice,

we find no systenatic evioence that observea variables that might be
proxtes for product,v;ty (job tenure, age, education, previous earnings)
systematically are assoc,ated with the probability that a worker will quit
prior to displacement. Thus, we find no evidence that advance notice wili
leao a firm's most productive workers to quit, thereby disrupting a firm's
operations in its final weeks.

IV.

A number

of studies

suggest

that

there

are large private costs of

displacement to displaced workers but that these costs are of tn transitory
in nature.

While sane fraction of these costs may represent the

dissipation of rents,

a

substantial part represents true social costs

12
(Hamermesh (1987)). Often these costs are transitory
the fact that earnings of displaced workers In the

in

nature ——

witness

who were reempioyed

_at the survey date were, on average within 5 percent of their predis
placement earnings.
the

However, sine costs are iongiasting; many people In

were not reemployed at the survey date.
Our own research and the literature surveyed above suggests that

advance notice may well facilitate labor market adjustments by allowing
displaced workers to find employment prior to their date of displacement.
Advance notice appears to reduce the probability that displaced workers
suffer any-spell of nonemployment andthus also may well moderate
tempcrary increases in area unemployment rates.

In both a number of the

surveyed studies, and our own, advance notices included notice of very
short duration and thus their results may understate the effects of
mandated notice of longer duration.

The individual worker based data used

in all of the underlying studies also did not permit analyses of whether

advance notice of pending displacements can lead to actions (e.g.,
reorganization, wage concessions, employee ownership) that help

avert

displacements,
Although opponents of advance notice cite potential costs of such
poiicies, empirical studies have found no evidence that advance notice
causes firms' most productive workers to leave and that the productivity
of the remaining workers suffers.

Moreover, save for Lazear (1987), which

we have criticIzed above, no systematic empirical evidence has been
provided on the other potential adverse effects of advance notice that
opponents have enumerated,

13
While at first glance, this discussion suggests that federally
mandated advance notice for displaced workers may be an idea whose time

has come,

several

oautions are in order,

provision of advance notice

in

First, the effects of voluntary

situations where workers expect Impending

displacement anyway may be very different from the effects of mandated
advance notice

n

situations where the impending displacement is

canpletely unexpected by workers,6

,

Indeed,

one should recall that the

which our research and most of the research we surveyed was based

upon, asked only if workers received advance notice

a expected

their

displacement.
Future researchers wilj have access to the January 1988 QLY_g.yj

D2Qlaceok

which

specficaJy asks

received formal advance notice and,

if so,

displaced workers if they
how long the notice was.

However, even with these data, to adequately estimate the effects of
advance notce per se will require researchers to try to model what

dspiaced workers' expectations of displacement would have been in the
absence of advance not,ce.

Put another way, researchers need to estimate

if formal advance notice actually crrnunicates new information to workers.

Second. the observation that the voluntary provision of advance
notice appears to reduce the probability a displaced worker will suffer
any spell of noneniployment does not necessarily imply that mandated
advance notice will increase employment and decrease unemployment rates.
Indeed, one can conceive of situations in which displaced workers compete
for a fixed number of vacant positions that only
obtain.

a

fraction of them can

Advance notice gives those workers who receive notice an

advantage; it increases their probability of finding one of these Jobs

14
prior to displacement.

Hever,

If the number of vacant positions is

truly fixed, by necessity the probability that workers who failed to
receive notice find Jobs would have to go down,

In this case, the gains

to those workers who received notice would come solely at the expense of
There would be no social

those workers who failed to receive notice.

gains from advance notice In the sense that, on average, it would not
influence aggregate employment levels and/or unemployment rates.
Studies that use individual—based data sets, such as our own and the
others that used the

5,

displacement effects.

can not test for the possibility of such

The only study of U.S, data that addressed this

issue, Folbre, Leighton and Poderick (1984) did find evidence that
voluntary provision of advance notice led
in area unemployment rates,

toaller

temporary increases

However, Lazear's (1987) cross—ccuntry study

found no significant effects of mandated advance notice on national
employment levels and unemployment rates,

Clearly more studies that focus

on the affects of advance notice on area economic outoomes are needed,
Suppose for a moment, however, that all voluntarily provided advance
notice actually does is 'reshuffle Jobs among displaced workers from
those people who fail to receive notice to those people who do receive

IL

in fact, evidence of this might QtrsflQthln the case for government
mandated advance notice if the people who reoelve notice voluntarily are
the ones least in need of such assistance.

For example,

,jj

high wage

unionized workers were more likely to receive notice than comparably
skilled lower wage nonunion workers, implementation of federal

legislation

would allow the latter a thetter shots at competing with the former for
the available Jobs when they are displaced,7

One thus might be in favor

Is
of

advance notice legislation because of its potential redistributlve

affects, even if one believes It will have no net affect on employment or
unemployment.
Ultimately, given all the evdence presented and cIted above, the
position one takes towards advance notice legislation will depend heavtly
on one's preconceptions as to how labor markets function
labor markets in the

man

belevee

are competitIve and Qperate primarily in an

efficient manner, one m.ght argue that the onus is
government

if one

o

those who propose

ntervention to document empr.caliy what the benefits of the

proposed leg:satior are and to document that its adverse side effects
will be nall.

Given such a vIew, one might argue that the evidence

presented here does not support governtent intervention; there are too
many results whose impLcations are ambiguous and too many yet unanswered
questIons.
if, on the other hand, one oelieves that labor markets in the main

are not conpetitive and/or that important externalities exist when workers
are displaced, one will find the results presented here very supportive of
some form of intervention, perhaps in the form of advance notice
legislation.

Such individuals may claim that we have documented at least

sane private benefits that advance notice seems to produce, without
uncovering any evidence of its costs,
It is important when designing an intervention, however, to be clear
about the source of public concern,

if the major concern is the

externality imposed on a local connunity

ae

to a plant closing or large

scale layoff, then public policy should specifically address this concern.
Such a concern may argue for advance notice legislation. However, in this

16
case, exemptions based on absolute size, inoluding current proposals,
address this problem as well as exemptions based on size relative
local labor market.

do not

to the

In contrast, if the source of concern is the private

costs workers suffer from displacement,

then severence pay provisions

may-

be a viable alternative and/or addition to advance notice legislation.
We conclude from the existing evidence that the social costs of worker
to
displacement would be substantially reduced by a federal policy relating
advance notice.

There are several policy options.

The federal government

could reduce the costs to firms of providing such notice by funding a share
of the unemployment benefits received by notified workers and/or by reducing
the firms' income tax rates.

Another alternative is experimental adoption of federal legislation
that provides for advance notice of plant closings or permanent layoffs.
Well-designed

research during the experimental period could be used to

more adequately address issues relating to the macro labor market effects
of the legislation, including whether advance notice of impending displacement can serve to help prevent displacement from occurring,
of the legislation often assert.

as proponents

Since so much of prior resesrch hss

focused on the potential benefits of advance notice legislation,

during the experimental period might also profitably seriously

studies

research

issues that opponents have been concerned about, relating to the costs of
the legislation.

17

ddIson,

3, and P. Portugal, 'The Effect

of

Advance NotifIcation of plant

Closing on Unemployment,' ThaztraLnjabnc2dAtionsRtna

41.

October 1987, 3—16 (198'a)
Aodison, 3. and?, Portugal, 'Job Dispacerent, Relative Wage Changes and
Duration of Unemployment,' mimeo Unuersity of South Carolina,
August 1987 (1987b),

Addison,

J. and P. Portuga', 'The

R&e ot

Uneoployuert Insurance in WhIte

and Ble—Coi tar Unemoloyment Duration ?ollowlng Displacement,' mlmeo,
University of South Carol,n, 1986
Threnberg, P. and P. Schumann,

LQn2enllQr&grMortJobI(Ithaca, NY

ILR Press, 1982).

Ehrenoerg, P. and 6. Ja<ubson

La2ia,gtmn (Uçohn
Flab,

P. and F.

Sehga, 'Dispacea Wor?ers of

They Fared?,'
Folbre,

L,

3.

insLt,te, Kaiamazoo, Mich1gan,

gji

Lebton

T

rjaw, Ia

and N. Roderick

1979-83:

forthcaoing).

H

Wel: Have

1985, 3—15.

'Plant Clos1ngs and Their

Regulation in Maine, 1971-1982,'
3?, January 1984,

185-196.

Noien, A,, C. Jehn and P. Trost, 'Earnings Loss of Workers Displaced by
Plant Closings,' mimeo, Center for Naval Analysis,

December 1981.

Nl and, M., E1nu1oin2ainLW2cker.flhicerntnfl..1ht1taILini,jn
(Upjohn Institute, Kalasnzaoo, Mich,, forthcsing),

18
Howland, M., 'The Impact of Prenotlflcation

on the Reemployment Success of

Displaced ManufacturingWorkers,' mimeo, University of Maryland,
March 1988.
Lazear, E., 'Job Security and Unemployment,' mimeo, University of
Chicago, May 1987.
Podgursky,

M. and P. Swaim, 'The Duration of Joblessness Following

Displacement,'

,

Podgursky, M. and P. Swaim,

Job

41, October 1987,

17-29 (1987a),

Displacement and Earnings Lcss

Evidence

From the Displaced Worker Survey,'
-

kyj, 26

Fall 1987

U987b)

-

Swaim, P. and M.Podgursky, 'Athance Notice and Job Search:

The Value of

an Early Start,' mimeo, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, March
1988.

19

Ftnotes
1.

In sThat follows often we use 'plant c'oslng' as a shorthand for

piant cosing anWor

large scale

ring

iayoff,

the 1979-1983 perlod

approximately 49 percent of permanently displaced workers were displaced
due to plart closings (see Flalm and Senga' (1985) for example).
2.

If worrers are displaced,

the

proi,de needed service for Ind;vduals

,,,a

nenance of health

drng

a per,od when stress leads

to inrreased incidence of phys,ca ano merta: ailments.
to the cmrrnuntes

insurance

Payments by firms

n which shut plants were lorated would help al'eviae

the extra demanos placed on these ccanunit,es

for socia services that the

shutdowns cause, demands tnat would ar,se at the same time that oca!
property and

sees

3,

Lne

This

tax

rerene were being

reduced,

of reascnng suggests that the case for mandated

advance notice is stronger when tne dspiared wureers represent
share of the

:ca

relatively staIr

iaoon force,

coisturtity

The uicpJa:',en

is liKely to ropresent

a large

of 100 workers in a
mucr.

sore of an

externality thar a srmriar size d:splacemen: in a large city. Siewhat
surprs1ngi1, netner existing ncr proposec leçslation takes thIs into
account,
4.

The 5DM data do not permit us to difrerentlate multiple spells of

nonemployment, nor to distinguish between unemployment and nonpartIcipation

Our conclusions therefore

apply to total nonemployment

time

froit

the date of drspiacement to the survey date
5,

Swaim and ?odgursky (1988) reach a simi1ar conclusion In recent

researcn that uses data from both the

3

and a similar supplement that

was part of the January 1986 cMtrenL?g2JjI,tJgnjQry.

Their paper c,tes

2O
an earlier version of our paper.
6.

We are grateful to Sherwin Rosen for stressing this point to us.

7.

See Ehrenberg and Jakubson (forthcaning) for evidence that

than
displaced unionized workers are more lIkely to receive advance notice
displaced nonunion workers.

