                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DETERIORATION OF THE TERMS OF TRADE AND
                  CAPITAL ACCUMULATION: A REEXAMINATION OF
                         THE LAURSEN-METZLER EFFECT




                                 Partha Sen

                            Stephen J. Turnovsky




                           Working Paper No, 2616




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June 1988




This research is part of NBER's program in International Studies, Any
opinions expresssed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research,
                                                   NBER   Working    Paper No. 2616
                                                   June 1988


                         DETERIORATION OF THE TERMS OF TRADE AND
                        CAPITAL ACCUMUlATION: A REEXAMINATION OF
                                THE LAURSEN-METZLER EFFECT


                                                TRACT



    This paper analyzes     the effects of both a permanent and a temporary deterioration in the terms
of trade on   a small   open economy. The model, based on intertemporal optimization, emphasizes
the labor—leisurechoice and the role of capital accumulation. There are two main conclusions to be
drawn from the analysis. The first is chat in all cases the   transitional   dynamics depends critically

upon the long—runresponse of the capital stock to the deterioration in the terms of trade. This has
been shown to consist of a substitution effect, which is negative, together with an income effect,

which is positive. Secondly, since the steady state equilibriumdepends upon the initial conditions
of the   economy,   a temporary shock, by altering these initial conditions for some later date when
the shock ceases, leads to a permanent effect on the economy.
    In the case where the substitution effect dominates,   a deterioration in the terms of trade leads
to a short—run reduction in investment and      a short—run current account surplus, contrary to the
Laursen—Metzler effect.

    However, when the long—runincome effect dominates, the deterioration in the terms of trade
leads to a short—run investment boom,        accompanied by      a short—term current account deficit.
The Laursen—Metzler effect prevails, although it     is driven   by investment, rather than by savings
behavior.



Partha Sen                                          Stephen J. Turriovsky
Department    of Economics                          Department      of Economics
University of Illinois at                           University of Washington
     Urbana Champaign                               301 Savery Hall
330 Commerce West                                   Seattle, WA 98195
Champaign, IL 61820
INTRODUCTION

     The effect of a deterioration in the terms of trade faced by a small open economy has been the
subject of some controversy since the early 1950's when Laursen and Metzler (1950) and Harberger
(1950) developed what has become known in the literature as the Laursen—Metzter effect. This

predicted that a worsening of the terms of trade lowers real income, thereby lowering savings, and
given investment, leading to a deterioration of the current account balance.

     This proposition has recently been the subject of considerable scrutiny within      a neoclassical
framework, The focus has shifted away from the static Keynesian savings and investment functions,

towards an analysis based on intertemporal optimization. The reappraisal was initiated by Obstfeld

(1982) and has been further pursued within a variety of related frameworks by a number of authors,
see e.g., Svensson and Razin (1983), Persson and Svensson (1985), Bean (1986).
     One conclusion to emerge from this literature is that the validity or otherwise of the Laursen—
Metzler proposition depends critically upon the assumptions and specifications of the model. For

example, Obstfeld (1982) showed how, if the rate of time preference depends positively upon
utility, then a deterioration in the small country's terms of trade leads it to save more and to run
a current   account surplus, thereby contradicting the Laursen—Metzler proposition. On the other

hand, one can show if the rate of time preference is taken to he constant, a permanent terms of
trade shock causes the economy to jump immediately to its new steady state there is no effect
on the current account. By contrast, temporary and articipated future terms of trade shocks still

generate nondegenerate current account dynamics due to intertemporal consumption smoothing
and price speculation.t

     Using a two—period framework, Svensson and Razin (1983) demonstrate that a priori, the
effects of a rise in the price of importables is ambiguous. Extending their mi.,del to      an infinite
horizon they show how if the discount rate is Increasing in utility, then the Obstfeld (1982) results
are confirmed.
     More recently, Persson and Svensson (1985) have analyzed the effect   of a terms of trade shock
within an overlappinggenerations model, They demonstrate how the effect depends critically upon
whether the shock is temporary or permanent on the one hand, and whether it         is   anticipated or
unanticipated on the other. The response of the economy is very different, depending upon the
duration of the shock and when the news of the shock      is received.

     The present paper analyzes the effects of a terms of trade shock within an infinite horizon

utility maximizingframework. Two key features of the model stand out and should be stressed.
First, we allow for the labor—leisurechoice, thereby endogenizing employment, and incorporating
an aspect which has been ignored by previous authors, with the exception of Bean (1986). Secondly,

and equally importantly, we allow for capital accumulation and derive a q—theoretic investment

function as in Abel and Blanchard (1983) and Hayashi (1982). Our analysis therefore focuses on

the dynamics of employment, capital accumulation,and output. These are obviously critical, but
have received little attention from previous authors.

    Three types of disturbances in the terms of trade are analyzed, namely an unanticipated

permanent, an unanticipated temporary, and a future anticipated permanent shock. The main
result to emerge   is   that in all cases, the short—run dynamics of the economy depends critically

upon the long—run response of the capital stock to the deterioration in the terms of trade. This
in turn is shownto consist of a negative substitution effect, together with a positive income effect.
The resulting behavior depends upon which effect dominates and neither one possibility, nor the

other, can be ruled out a priori.

    In the case which we suggest below to be more plausible—namely,       where the substitution effect

dominates—we show how irrespectiveof whether the terms of trade deterioration is permanent or

temporary, anticipated or unanticipated, the current account goes into surplus when the news of
the shock arrives. This is contrary to the Laursen—Metzler proposition and is the consequence of

a fall in investment. By contrast, in the case where the income effect dominates, the news of such
shocks generates an investment boom, driving the current account into deficit. While in this case

the Laursen—Metzler effect on the current account is vindicated, the action is coming primarily
from the investment side of the model     rather than from savings   as they originally argued.

    Other authors have recently adopted variants of the q—theoretic investment function to analyze
various macroeconomic disturbancesin an intertemporal optimizingframework. Before proceeding,

it is usefulto note their contributions and to relatethe present paper to this literature. For example,
Brock (forthcoming) uses this type     of approach to analyze alternative fiscal policies in a    model

which has both traded and nontraded goods, with         the role   of the latter being solely to install

                                                   2
capital. Also, Matsuyama (1987) introduces the Hayashi type cost of adjustment into              a finite
lifetime Blanchard (1985) model in order to analyze the macroeconomic effects of oil price shocks.

In a subsequent paper Matsuyama (1988) he considers a terms of trade shock in an overlapping

generations model using a Heckscher—Ohlinproduction specification.

       The present model differs from these contributions in several key ways. First, of these three

papers only \Iatsuyama (1988) deals with changes in the terms of trade, which are the focus of
this paper. The lleckscher-Ohlinframework that it adopts emphasizes very different aspects and
offers very different insights into the adjustments following a terms of trade shock. Specifically, it

focuses cii the role of sectoralcapital intensity, while our model emphasizes the relative importance

of the income and substitution effects resulting from the change. Most importantly, the existing

literature focuses on inelastic labor, while our model endogenizes labor through the labor—leisure
choice   .Not only are the   aggregate employment effects of terms of trade changes of interest per
Se.   but the endogeneity of labor turns out to be crucial to the dynamics of the adjustment. For
reasons which will be discussed below, without it the dynamics would degenerate; instead, the
steady state adjustment would occur instantaneously.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section   2   sets out the model, and the following
oction snals zes is equilibriumdynamics. Section 4 examines the long—run effects of a terms of trade

shock, while Section 5 examines its short run and dynamic effects. Conclusions are summarized
in Section   fi.




2. THE FRAMEWORK

       The economy produces and consumes a domestic good and in addition, imports another good
from abroad. The relative priceof the imported good is taken as given. The economy has access to

the world capital market, where it can borrow or lend as much as it wants at a given interest rate,

though subject to an intertemporal budget constraint. Domestic firms are assumed to            be owned
by domestic consumers.

      The representative consumer'sdecisions are determined by solving the following intertemporal
optimization problem:

                                                   a
                                           Mazf U1V(z,y),tje6dt                                           (la)

subject to the flow budget     constrint


                                       pb=we+±ipb—z—py                                                    (Ib)

and initial condition


                                                   g(Q) =                                                 (Ic)

where
      =      consumption of the domestically produced good,
    p =      consumption of the imported good,

    p =      relative price of the imported good, taken to be parametrically given to the small open

             economy,
     £   = labor supplied,
     b   =   real stock of foreign assets held by the household,

     w   =   real wage rate,
         =   real profits distributed to the household,

     5       consumer's discount rate,
         = given world rate of interest.

     The instantaneous utility function U         is assumed     to be weakly separable in V and   1;   i.e., in

goods and leisure (which is      I — t, where 1 is the total endowment of time).         The function U is

increasingand strictly concave in goods and leisure, i.e.,


                        U > 0, U < 0; U <0,                U11   <0, UU11 — U > 0                         (2a)

Similarly, V is increasing and concave in the two goods



                        v > 0,    V5   >   0,   V <0, %' <0,                —
                                                                                V>   0                     (26)


We also assume that the     two goods are Edgeworth complementary,as are goods and            leisure, i.e.,

                                                       4
                                                 + UVVZVV          >O         U.e < 0.                        (2c)

     In   determining his optimal plans for x,yt, and b,               the   representative consumer is assumed to
take p, ir, w as given. These decisions are made subject to the budget constraint (ib), which is

expressed in flow terms, This relationship is straightforward; the only point worth noting is                that
for simplicity, v,e abstract from all forms of taxation.
     The current—value Hamiltonianfor the household maximizationproblem is given by


                                UV(x,y),fj[wer-ipb--z—py                                                       (3)

where A is the costate variable associated with the accumulation equation (ib). The first order

optimality condition with respect to the decision variables x, y, and                 ,   are respectively



                                                              =A                                              (4a)



                                                  UV5 = pA                                                    (4b)




                                                      =    —isA                                               (4c)

In addition, the costate variable     A   evolves according to



                                                                                                              r4d)

Itis well known (and can be seen from (4d)) that as long as S and i are both assumed to be
constant, the ultimate attainment of a steady state is possible if and only if S — Henceforth we   t.
assumethis to be the case.     It then follows from (4d) that A = 0, for all t, so that A is always at its
long—runequilibrium value      A   = A.
     Finally,   there is the transversality condition


                                                Iim   be'          =   0                                      (4e)

                                                          3
This ensures that in the presence of perfect capital matkets, consumers cannot borrow indefinitely
to repay past debt.
       The representative firm produces domestic output z by means of a production function with

capital k and labor as inputs. This function is assumed to have the usual neoclassical properties
of positive, but diminishing, marginal products and constant returns to scale; i.e.,

                                z=   f(k,)
                                         fk>O,     f>O
                                                    [
                                                                                                        (5)

                                   fkk < 0,      < 0, fkk ía —       =        0
Profit net of investment expenditure at time i say, is defined to be


                                         (t) = f(k, £) - - C(I)                                         (6)

where
       I   = rate of investment.
The function C(I) represents the installationcosts associatedwith the purchase of [ units of new

capital. It    is assumed   to be an increasing, convex function of I; C' > 0,C" >     0.   In addition, we
assume



                                             C(0) = 0,       C'(o) = 1
so   that the total cost of zero   investment is zero, and the marginal cost of the initial installation is

unity. This formulation of the installation function follows the original specification of adjustment
costs introduced by Lucas (1968), Gould (1968) and Teadway (i969). More recent work by

Hayashi (1982) and Abel and Blanchard (1983) postulates an installation function whi'h depends
upon k, as well as I. This modification makes little difference to our analysis and for sv         c1ty we
retain the simpler specification.
      Thus the firm's optimization problem is to


                     Maximize
                                   f    z(t)etdt f[f(k,f) —              —
                                                                             C(I)Je'tdt               (7a)

subject to

                                                         6
                                                  k=I                                                (7b)

 and the initial condition




                                                k(O)=k0                                             (7c)

Two points should be noted about the formulation           of the   firm's problem, First, equation (7b)
abstracts from depreciation. This simplifies the dynamics considerably, without much loss of

generality.     Second, for expositional simpiioty, (7a) assumes      that the firm finances investment
through retained earnings. This assumption is unimportant, since as is well known, in a model such
as this, which abstracts from taxation, all   forms of financing yield the same optimality conditions.
     The current—value Ilamiltonian for the firm maximization problem          is




                                       f(k, £) — w — C(I) f. qt

a here q is the costate variable associated with (7b). The relevant optimality conditions for firms
with respect to £ and I are



                                                        w
                                                                                                   (So)




                                               C'(f) = q                                            (Sb)

while   q   evolves according to



                                              q=iq—fk                                              (8c)

In addition there is the accumulation equation (7b), the initial condition (7c), as well as the

transversality condition


                                                qke = 0                                            (Sd)

                                                   7
      The macroeconomic equilibrium we consider is defined to be one where the planned demand
and supply functions derived from the optimizations,consistent with the accumulationequations,

clear all markets   at all points of time.   By combining    the optimality conditions for households
                                                                                               (4a)
-   (4e), and for firms     -
                        (8a) (Sd), together with the accumulationequations (Ib), (6), (7b), we can
write the equilibrium conditions for the economy as follows:4


                                        U(V(x,y),t)V(x,y) =                                             (9a)




                                        U(v(z,y),)V5(x,y)        =p                                     (95)




                                        U(V(z,y),t)          —f(k,                                      (9c)




                                                 C'(I)   =   q                                          (9d)




                                              qiq—fk(k,1)                                               (9e)




                                                                                                        (9!)



                                      = f(k,e) + 1       —i — py — C(I)                                 (9g)


The costate variable    A   remains constant over time    at and is determined by the steady state of
the economy.

      Equations (9a) - (9c) are    the usual static equilibrium conditions. Pairwise, these equations


may be divided to equate the marginal rate of substitution between goods to their relative price
and the marginal rate of substitution between leisure and any good to the product wage, where
the real wage in terms of the domestic good, equals the marginal physical product of labor. These
three equations may be solved for x,y, and 1, in terms of         ,k, and p,5
                                                     8
                                z = z(,k;p)            ZX     < 0,    z <0 z, > 0                             (lOa)




                                y = y(,k;p)           y     < 0,     Ilk   < 0, y,, < 0                       (101)




                                 = ,k:p)              t >0,          £,>0,      ,   >0                       (lOc).




Intuitively,    an increase in the marginal utility of consumption (of the domestic good), X, shifts the

consumption leisure tradeoff against the consumption of both goods and in favor of labor, A rise
in the capital stock, by raising the real wage rate, does the same. Given the marginal utility of
consumption ,, an increase in the relative price of the imported good p leads to a substitution away
from the imported good in favor of the domestic. This stimulates domestic production, which,with
capital fixed in the short run, leads to an increase in employment, However, this describes only the
partial effect of a    short—run change in p. In      addition, it generates a jump in        A,   thereby inducing
further responses. The complete short—run responses consist of a combination of these two effects
and these will be discussed in Section      5   below.

       The partial denivaties summarizedin (lOs) - (lOc) depend critically upon certain aspects of
our specification. For example, the parallel responses of the two goods and leisure to changes in

q   and k reflect the assumption of complementarityin (2c). More importantly, it is evident from

(9a), (9b) that the dependence of        and y on capital, and therefore their time dependence, occurs

because of the assumptions:       (i) employment is variable, (ii)             U      0. If instead, employmentis

fixed   or      = 0, i.e., goods and labor enter the utility         function in an additively separable manner,

then    r and   y   would be independent of k. In that case, they would depend upon A and                    p   and

would remain at their steady state levels        at   all times. By contrast, under our assumptions, the

gradual accumulationof capital generates serial correlation in consumptions,despite the existence
of perfect capital markets.
       Equation (9d) equates the net marginal cost of capital to the shadow price of investment                   q.

This relationship may be solved to yield

                                                          9
                                              1=1(q)        I'>O
which is essentially a Tobin q theory of investment,6

       The final three equations describe the dynamics. Substituting (1Cc) and (11) into (9c) and

(Cf)    we obtain    a pair of autonomous differential equations in k          and q. These constitute    the
core of the dynamics. Finally, equation (9g) equates the economy's current account surplus to
the accumulation of foreign assets. This equation may be reduced to an autonomous differential

equation in   b,   after substituting the solutions for q and k (see next section).


3. EQUILIBRIUM DYNAMICS
       Consider first equations (9e) and (9f), which upon substitution of           (bc) and   (11) may be
written as




                                          4 = 1q — fk(k,f(A,k;p))

Linearizing this pair of equations, yields


                          I k)
                              4)
                                 -(             0
                                          -[fkk+fkegI
                                                              I) -    ( k
                                                                           q
                                                                                -
                                                                                -   5)
                                                                                                          (S-)
where    k,5 denote the    steady—state values of k and q.    The determinant of the matrix of coefficients
in (12) is



                                            D       Ljfkk +

which can be shown to be negative. The eigenvalues are say pi < O,jz > 0, so that the long—run

equilibrium is a saddlepoint. It is clear that while the capital stock always evolves gradually, the
shadow price of capital, q, may jump instantaneouslyin response to new information.

       Starting from an initial capital stock k0, the stable dynamic time paths followed by         /c   and q

are

                                                       10
                                            k=      + (k0 —                                            (13a)



                                                                                                       (13b)

To deterrnme the dynarncs of the current account, consider (9g),



                      p& =                  - z(,k) - py(,k) - C[I(q)J                    ipb
Linearizing this equation around steady state yields



                   pb = (fk + fetk —          —
                                                  pyk)(k    —
                                                                k) —   15(q
                                                                              —
                                                                                  ) + 1p(b    —
                                                                                                  b)

where we are using the fact      that C' = 1 at steady state, when I = 0. But from (13a) and (13b),


                                                                                                        (14)

so that



                      pb = (fk +      fss —       —
                                                      PYk —     1)(k —        + 1p(b         b)        (15)

Defining



                                   c2wfk+fek—zk—pyk—,2l>0
and substituting the solution for k — k from (13a) into (15), we obtain


                                       —
                                           1b) = D(k0 — k)et — ibp                                     (15')

Assuming that the economy     starts out with an initial stock of traded bonds 1(0) = b, the solution
to (15') is


                     =       +              e't + p(bo      —
                                                                 )   —
                                                                                  i (k   —



Invoking the intertemporal budget constraint for the economy, (4e), implies

                                                       11
                                            pb0=pb+Jko—k)                                         (16)



so   that the solution for 1(t), consistent with long—run            solvency, is



                                         p1(t)   = ph +                 — k)eC                    (17)


    From equation (4b), we saw that A is always equal to its steady—state value      A.   The complete

steady state of the economy is summarized by the following set of equations
S tea dy—St ate


                                                                         =A                      (ISo)



                                                                        =   Ap                    (181)



                                                            = -AF(k,t)                            (iSa)




                                                                                                  (1Sd)




                                                      fk(k, 1)   =                                (lSe)




                                             f(k,f)——pQ+ipbU                                      (1Sf)



                                             pbs   = pb —             (ko
                                                                            —
                                                                                k)                (18g)

determine: i,    ,   1, Ic, A,   j, 5.
       This long—run equilibriumis straightforward, although several aspects merit comment. Note

that the steady—state value of q is unity, consistent with the Tobin q theory of investment. The
                                                            12
steady—state marginal physical product of capital is equated to the foretgn interest rate. Equation

(1Sf) asserts   that in steady state equilibrium, the balance of payments on current account must
be zero; the trade balance must offset net interest earnings on the traded          bonds. Equation (ISg)

describes the equilibrium relationship between the change in the equilibrium stock of capital and
the change in the equilibrum net credit of the economy. Specifically,


                                            pdb     —.        dk
from the definitionof 12 we can show

                                                    Il        >1
                                                 I. —   /21

so   that any unit   increase in   the stock   of capital leads to a greater decrease in the net credit

position of the domestic economy (as measured in terms of domestic currency). Note further, that
the steady state depends upon the initial conditions k0 and 5o• This has important consequences
fur the effects   of temporary shocks   in the terms of trade,     as we will discuss below.
      The rest of the model   is also summarized below.


Short—Run;


                                        U5[V(z,y),t)V(z,y)         =A                               (192)




                                        U[V(z,y),t1V5(r,y)         = Ap                              (19b)




                                        U[V(z,y),tJ            —Af(k,t)                              (19c)




                                                  C'(I)       =q                                     (19d)


determine:   z,y, < I in terms of A,x, and q.
Dynamics:
                                                         13
                                            k = k + (k0 —     k)e                                       (20o)



                                                                                                        (2Cm)




                                                                                                        (20c)

determine: time paths for kgb.

       The short run has been discussed in Section    2.    Equations (19) highlight the fact that it depends
directly upon the steady state through      .   Finally, the stable adjustment paths are described by the
linear relations in (20), From these equations it is seen that the accumulation of capital (k > 0)         is

accompaniedby a current account deficit (pb <          —1    < 0).

4. LONG-RUN RESPONSE TO TERMS OF TRADE SHOCK
       Since the analysis is based on the assumption of perfect foresight, the transitional adjustment
is   forward looking and    is therefore determined   in part by the expectations of the long—runsteady
state, It   is   therefore convenient to begin with a consideration of the     long—run   equilibrium effects
of a deterioration in the, terms of trade.

       Consider the equilibriumrelationships (ISa) - (i8g). Sincethe world interest rate          is assumed

to remain uiaed the marginal product condition (ISe) implies that the long—run capiea—iahur ratio

(kL) is a constant, independentof p. Capital and labor therefore change in the same prcportions,
so that the marginal physical product of labor and hence the real wage also remain constant. It
is clear from     these equilibriumrelationshipsthat any change resulting from a deterioration in the
terms of trade p can be broken down into a substitution effect (the change originating in (ith) and

(lSc)) and an income effect (due to changes in (1Sf) and (18g)). In the case of Q Lie, and  ,              ,
this latter effect is inversely proportional to   (   —
                                                          1b0). On the one hand, any rise in p reduces real
income,   to the extent that it is spent   on the imported good y. At the same time, the increase in p

raises real interest income earned from abroad (assumingb0 > 0). For the sake of being concrete
we shall assume that the import good effect dominates (i — i60 > 0), so that any increase in p

lowers   total real domestic   income.

                                                      14
    Table I summarizesthe qualitative effects of the substitution and income effects on a number

of key variables. Turning first to the substitution effects, the following intuitive explanations for

these results may be given. An increase in the relative price p causes a substitution away from the

imported good, in favor of the domestic good. Giventhe assumptionthat goods are complementary
in utility(U   > 0), these two adjustments both lead to a reduction in the marginal utility of

consumption   .   With the real wage being constant (independent of p), this raises     U (i.e., makes it
lees negative), which in turn implies   that equilibriumemploymentfalls. Capital falls in the same
proportion, as does output. From i8g) it then follows that the negative substitution effect in
capital gives rise to a positive substitution effect in the stock of trade bonds.
    To consider the steady state trade balance, we may rewrite (1Sf) as


                                        = f(k, f) —    —      =   —i'p&

which together with (18g) implies


                                        =   -ibop              (k0   -)                                (21)


so that the negative substitution effect implies a corresponding negative substitution effect for the

equilibrium balance of trade.
     We turn now to the income effects. With y         —
                                                           ib0 > 0, an increase iii p lowers real income,
hich with z and y being normal goods, reduces their consumption. The lower income raises the
marginal utility of consumption, X, which lowers U (i.e., makes it more negative). Employment
therefore rises, as does capital and output. From (21). the trade balance is subject to two sources
of income effects. The first operates through the equilibrium stock of capital and is positive; the

second is in the decrease in pb0 and is negative. On          the other hand,   from (l8g)   it is seen that
although the stock of bonds is also subject to two sources of income effects, to the first order, the
positive income effect in capital dominates, and gives rise to a negative effect in b.
    From Table 1 it is apparent that in most cases the substitution and income effects go in

opposite ways. One exception is the obvious one; the imported good y, in which both effects act
to reduce its consumption. It is also likely, but not necessary, that the negative component of the
income effect in the balance of trade is the dominant one, in which case, the long—runequilibrium

                                                      15
trade balar'ce deteriorates unambiguously   as well. In all other cases, the ultimate long—run response

depends upon whether the substitution effect or the income effect dominates. This           is   particularly
important with respect to capital, since as we will discuss in the next section, the long—run response
of capital has an important bearing on the short—run transitional dynamics of the system.


5. TRANSITIONAL DYNAMICSIN RESPONSE TO TERMS OF TRADE SHOCK
     We turn now to a consideration of the transitional dynamics following a worsening of the

economy's terms of trade (i.e., an increase in the relative price p). As noted previously, the
dynamics of q and k are described by a saddlepoint in k — q space. The stable arm XX is given by



                                          q=1+(k—c)
and is negatively sloped; the unstable arm YY      is   described by



                                          q=l+(k-)
and is positive sloped. The phase diagram is illustrated in Fig.        I.
     As long as no future shock is anticipated, the system must lie on the stable locus           XX. The
initial jump in g(O), following an unanticipated permanent increase in p         is




                                                                                                        (on
                                            dp           Idp
The short—run response of q depends upon the       long—run        behavior of the capital stock, which as
we have seen depends upon whether the income effect or the substitution effect of the terms of
trade change dominates. In principle,either outcome        is   possible,depending upon the nature of the
underlying utility function. For example,if the utility function is taken to be additivelyseparable
in goods and leisure (rather than weakly separable), then we can show that, with the imposition
of the additional rather mild restriction U +        > 0, the substitution effect will dominate.
However, the complementarityof leisure and consumptionwhich we have been assuming, tends to

strengthen the income effect and if this is sufficiently large, it is then possible for this to dominate
instead.

                                                  16
       Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the dynamic adjustment paths in response to a deterioration in the
terms of trade p. The former illustrates the case where the coritractionary substitution effect of p
on the long—run capital stock dominates; the latter deals with the other situation, namely, where
the   long—run income effect prevails.   Each figure in turn consists of two parts. Part A describes the
dynamics of q and k, while part B illustrates the time path of the stock of traded bonds. Various
types of disturbances are illustrated and shall be discussed in turn.
       We shall   focus our remarks primarily on the case illustrated in Fig. 2, the other case being

essentially anul.z         Suppose that the economy is      ntaiiy in steady state equilibrium at the
point P on the stab,e arm XX and that an unanticipated permanent increase             In   the terms of trade

p occurs. With the long—run substitution effect dominant, the new steady stats is             at the point Q,
having a lower equilibrium capital stock k, with an unchangedequilibrium shadow price of capital

q   = 1.
      In the short run, q drops from P to A on the new stable locus X'X'. From             (Ii) it is seen that
the decrease in q has an immediate contractionary effect on investment, so that the capital stock

immediatelybegins to decumulate,
      The initial effects of change in the terms of trade on consumption and employment are given
by


                                         dx(O)   —
                                                 —
                                           dp        dp   8Adp


                                           dp
                                                 —
                                                     a      3dp                                           (23b)




                                           dp
                                                 —
                                                     ap    aap                                            (2c)
each of which can be seen to comprise two effects. The first represents the direct effects associated

with the change. These come into operation when the shock actually occurs. As discussed in

connection with equations (lOs) - (lOc), the direct effect of an increase       irs   the relative price of
the imported good is to shift demand away from that good, towards the domestic good, thereby

stimulating employment. But any terms of trade shock also affects the steady-state marginal utility

                                                     17
     thereby exercising a second channel of influence on short—run consumption and employment.
Thie too comes into effect only when the shock occurs and the current steady state changes. Thus
wLle in our model        is a jump variable and may appear to be analogous to an information variable
it is not forward looking. Instead, it reacts to current changes as they occur, and this has important
implications for announcement effects to be discussed below.7
       Qualitatively, these second effects depend upon how p affects              ,   and as discussedin Section

4, this too has a substitution and an income effect. In the special case where the utility function
is   additively separable in consumption and leisure, so that            U = 0, we have
                                                      dX,               dk
                                            sgn (—) =             sgn
                                                                        (7)
in this case, the substitution and income effects of Y will be qualitatively the same as the corre-

sponding long—runeffects for capital. Hence, in the case being illustrated in Fig. 2. where the
iong—run substitution effect causes k to fall, X falls as well. For expositionalconvenience, we shad
consider this to be the case, although it need not be precisely so with the more general utility
function.
       Thus under the present assumption, the               second effect of the increase in the relative price p

is to lower the constant marginal utility of the domestic good                .   This raises the consumpuon of

that good, which given the complsmsntarity of goods and Isisurs, raises the consumption if the

imported good and reduces orlc (employment). It is immediately apparer.t that both the oh sr.r."ls
act to   increase the consumption of the domestic good, while the effects on                th import good and
labor are offsetting. However, in the latter case it can be shown that the second effert dominates,

causing short—run employmentto fall as wdll.
       Taking   the differsntiai   of (Ye), we find



                                           d(0) = rdq(o) — fktdt(0)

In fact, the initial fall in employment islufficiently large to reduce the marginal physical product

of capital below    r, so that following its initial decline, q immediately begins to rise. The economy
thus begins to move continuously along the locus AQ towards the                   new steady state, Q.

                                                             I8
     The crucial role played by the endogeneity of employment in these adjustments can be seen

by considering the steady state relationships(is). Under the assumptionof fixed employment,the

oprimality condition (18c) is no longer applicable, while the marginal product of capital condition

(l8e) now implies that the steady—state stock of capital k, rather than the capital—labor ratio, is
determined solely by the foreign interest rate i and is therefore independentof the terms of trade
p. Since the short—run dynamics are driven by changes in the steady—state stock of capital k, it
follows from (20s), (20b) that in the absence      of such   changes both k and   q   remain constant over

time. Output therefore also remains fixed. All that happens is that the consumptionsof the two
goods adjust instantaneouslyto the change in the relative price.

    One reason why the dynamics does not degenerate in either the Matsuyama (1987) model or
the Brock (forthcoming) model, even though employment is fixed, is because of, in both cases, the
inclusion   of a third factor in the productionfunction      In the Nlatsuyarna model it is imported oil;
in the Brock model    it is land   In either case, the macroeconomic shock causes a shift in this third

factor of production, which in turn requires a corresponding change in the steady—state stock of

capital, in order for the equilibrium marginal product of capital condition to be maintained. In
addition, although labor is fixed in the aggregate in the Brock model, it is mobile across sectors
and this fact also permits changes in the steady—state capital stock Given adjustment costs, these

changes occur ..,ver time.
    Part B illustrates the relationship between b and k, which combning (20a) and (20c)            is



                                           -   =   -          (k - k)

This too is negatively sloped and is denoted by        ZZ. Since neither b   nor k are jump variables, an

increase in p leads to a counterclockwise rotation of the ZZ line around the point L. The movement
along .4 and Q in Part A is translated to a movement along LM on Z'Z' in Part B. From this figure
it is immediately seen that a worsening     of the terms of trade leads to an immediate accumulation

of foreign bonds. With the level of net indebtednessb being given instantaneously,this is brought

about by an improvement in the trade balance which in turn is a consequence of the fact that the
initial reduction in investment more than outweighsthe initial reduction in output stemming from
the reduced employment,together with any increase in consumption,S

                                                       19
      Over time, this initial improvement in the trade balance is reversed. This occurs through
deoreasing employment and capital decumulation, leading to further reductions in output, together
with increasingconeumption.

      Consider now a temporary deterioration in the terms of trade. Specifically, suppose that at
time 0, p increases, but is expected to he restored to its original level at time T. The transitional

adjustment is now as follows.9 As soon as the increase in p occurs, the stable arm XX will drop
instantaneously (and temporarily) to X'X', while the shadow price qfalls to the point B, which
lies above X'X'. At the same time, the marginal utility of consumption            A will   increaseby precisely

the same (constant) amount as if the shock were permanent. Initial consumptionand employment
therefore respond by precisely the same amounts as indicated in (23a) - (23c). On the other
hand, since che fall in the shadow price q(0)      is only   to the point B, the fall      in initial investment

is   moderated. As    a result of the initial fail in q, capital begins to decumulate and           q   begins to

rise, for analogous reasons to those noted in connection with the permanent shock. Moreover,

the decurnulation of capital is accompanied by an accumulation of traded bonds. Immediately
following the initial jump, q and k follow the path BC in Fig. 2.A, while k and b follow the

corresponding path LH in Fig. 2.B. At time T, when the relative price p is restored to its original
level, the stock of capital and traded bonds will have reached a point such as H in Fig. 2.B. Tue
accumulated stocks of these assets, denoted by        kT     and   2'   respectively, will now serve as initial
conditions for the dynamics beyond time T when p reverts permanently to its original level. As
noted in Section 3, they will therefore in part determine the new steady state equilibrium. With no
new information being reoeived       t
                                 time T (since the temporary nature of the shock was announced
at the outset), and no further jumps, the stable locus relevant for subsequent adjustments in q
and k beyond time T is the locus X"X", parallel to XX which passes through the point k =

Likewise, the relevant locus linking the accumulation of capital and traded bonds is now                   Z"Z".
Note that since the relative price has now been restored to its original level, this is parallel to ZZ,
the original curve.

      After time T,   q   and k follow the stable locusCR in Fig. 2.A to the newsteady state equilibrium

at R, while   correspondingly k and b follow the locus       HN in Fig. 2.3 to the      new equilibrium point

N One can establish formally that X"X" lies below the original stable locus XX, while Z"Z" lies
                                                      20
above ZZ, as these curves have been drawn. In the new steady state, the shadow price q reverts
to 1, but with a lower stock of capital and a higher stock of traded bonds than originally The

striking feature of the adjustment is that the temporary deterioration of the terms of trade leads to
a permanent reduction in the stock of capital, accompanied by a higherstock of traded bonds. This
is because during the transitional adjustment period, during which the higher terms of trade is in
effect, the accumulation of capital and bonds will influence subsequent initial conditions, which in
turn 'a ill affect the subsequentsteady state.

     As the figures are drawn, C lies below R and H lies below N, respectively. The complete ad-

justment paths BCR and LYN are therefore monotonic. We are unable to rule out the possibility
of C lying above R and H ly.ng above N, in which case, the accumulationof capital and accumu-

lation of bonds would be reversed at some point during the transition. In any event, the temporary
increase in the terms of trade generates an initial current account surplus, which continues as long
as capital   is being   decumulated.

     One further point, in this case of a temporary shock (as in Obstfeld (1983)), the anticipation of

the future change in the term of trade (when the latter is expected to revert to its original level),
will lead to a discontinuity in consumption, even if the utility function is additively separable

in goods and leisure, This is due to an "intertemporal price speculation effect." That is, an
anticipated future improvement in the terms of trade will make the relevant rate of interest for
con,iumotion fall       at the moment when the   improvement is expected to occur and hence induce

agents to postpone consumption. In our model, the interest rate also have an effect on           q   The

interest rate relevant for discounting future marginal product of capital is i   +      (from (Sc)). If
this is expected to fall,    then the jump in q is moderated.

     As a thirddisturbance,we briefly consider a future permanent increase in p which is announced
at time 0, to take       effect at time T. This is not illustrated in the figure. At   the   time of the

announcement, q drops instantaneously to a point such as B, which lies above A on X'X'. This
reduction in q implies a smaller initial decumulationin the capital stock, than when the permanent
deterioration occurs instantaneously.

     Since neither      p change immediately, there is no initial response in consumption or
                           nor

employment at the time of the announcement. The marginal physical product of capital remains

                                                    21
fixed instantaneously.    It therefore follows from (9e) that after its initial decline,   q immediately
continues to fall. Thus following the announcement,both q and k decline, while foreign bonds are
accumulated. At time T, when the announced increase in the relative price p occurs, the stocks of
capital and bonds at that time kT, bp will determine the stable paths X"X" and Z"Z" relevant
for the subsequent adjustments, beyond time T. Note, because of the changed initial conditions at

time T, from time 0, these paths will not coincide with  X'X', Z'Z', the correspondingpaths for
unannouncedchanges. In particular, the locus      X"X" can be shown to lie above X'X' in Fig. 2,A,
implying    that the ultimate reduction in the steady state capital stock resulting from     an increase

in p   is less when this shock   is announced, than when   it is unanticipated.
       We conclude by briefly referring to Fig. 3, which illustrates the other case where the steady-

state income effect of the incress in p on the      long—run    capital stock dominates.    In this case,

as discussed previously, the new steady state is one with a higher stock of capital. The time

paths following the disturbances are seen to be mirror images of those we have been discussing.
Specifically, a permanent increase in the relative price p—either anticipated       or unanticipated—
leads to a steady accumulation of capital, accompanied by a current account deficit, leading to a

steady decumulation of traded bonds, A temporary increase in p will now lead to             a permanent
increase in the stock of capital, accompanied by a permanent reduction in the stock of traded
bonds.



6. CONCLUSIONS

       This paper has analyzed the effects of a deterioration in the terms of trade on a small open

economy. The model, based on intertemporal optimization, has emphasized the labor—leisure
choice and   the role of capital accumulation. Three types of disturbancesin the terms of trade have
been considered:     (i) unanticipated permanent; (ii) unanticipated temporary; (iii) anticipated

permanent. There are two main conclusions to be drawn from the analysis. The first is that in
all cases the transitional dynamics depends critically upon the long—run response          of the capital
stock to the deterioration in the terms of trade. This has been shown to consist of a substitution

effect, which is negative, together with     an income   effect, which is positive. Secondly, since the

steady state equilibrium depends upon the initial conditions of the economy, a temporary shock,

                                                   22
by altering these initial conditions for some later date when the shock ceases, leads to a permanent
effect on the economy.

     In the case where the substitution effect dominates, a permanent deterioration in the terms of

trade leads to a   long—run reduction in   the stock of capital. This in turn gives rise to a short—run
reduction in the shadow price of capital, leading to a short—run reduction in investment and a
short—run current account surplus, which of course is contrary to the Laursen—Metzler effect. The

same applies with respect to a temporary change, although the subsequent effects are mitigated.
     If on the other hand, the  long—run income effect dominates, the deterioration in the terms

of trade leads to a   long run accumulation in the stock of capital. This leads to s short—run
investment boom, accompanied by a short—run current account deficit, The Laursen—Metzler
effect is in existence, although it is driven by investment, rather than savings behavior,




                                                  23
                                 TABLE   I
                STEADY-STATE EFFECTS OF PERMANENT
                  DETERIORATION IN TERMS OF TRADE


                                             Substitution   Incomc
                                             Effect         Effect




Consumption of Domestic Good x                    +          -

Consumption of Imported Goody                     -          -

Employment I                                      -          +
Capiul-LaborRatiok'I                             0           0
Capitalk                                          -          ÷
Output:                                           -          --
Balanceof Trade                                   -          ?
Stock of Trade Bondsb                             +          -
                      Y




'1'


                          k


        Figure   1



      Phase Diagram
q




     x,.




q1




                                                               k




b




b2



                                                         emporary deer!oratuon

           permanent deterroraUon




b


                                                               k
                              Figure 2.B

                 Deterioration of Terms    of Trade:
                 Long—Run Substitution Effect Dominant
q



      x.                                              permanent deterioration




q1
     temmpOmar   de rCra


                                                                            x



                            k   k   12
                                         Figtre 3.A

b


                                                            permanent detarOiatorr
       temmrpQ'ary
     d,teroraton




b1




                                                                           z




                           Figure 3.B

            Deterioration of Terms of Trade:
            Long-Run Income Effect Dominant
                                             FOOTNOTES


        We are grateful to the referee for drawing   s   attention to the              papers   of Philip
Brock and K. Matsuyama.

    5Specifically, Obstfeld (1983) shows how a temporary deterioration of the terms of             trade
leads to a current account deficit for the duration of the adverse movement in the terms of trade.

Eventually, the current account moves into surplus, when the terms of trade shock ceases and the
economy returns to its initial long—run equilibrium level.

     2Throughout the paper we shall adopt the following notational convention. Where appro-
priate, primes shall denote derivatives, subscripts shall denote partial derivatives,and a dot shall
denote a derivative with respect to time.
   3Note that this specification implies that in the case where disinvestment may occur, I <

O,C(I) < 0 for low rates of disinvestment. This may be interpreted as reflecting the revenue
obtained as capital     is sold off.The possibility that all changes in capital are costly can be incor-
porated by      introducing sufficiently large fixed costs, so that C(0) > 0. This does not alter our
analysis in any substantive way.
       4For simplicity and without essential loss of generality we shall abstract from a government

sector. Its conclusion would be straightforward and would not alter our analysis in any essential
way.

       3The details of these calculations and others are omitted from the paper, but are available
from the authors.

       51n   the case where the installation costs are specified by C(I/k), the investment function (11)
is modified to



                                                 =I(q).
       71n   other models when    ) is not a constant it can react to future shocks   (as q does in this

analysis).
       5Letting T denote the trade balance, equation (9g) can be written as
                                          •   T
                                          b = —+t    6.
                                              p
From this equation it is clear that the accumulation of foreign bonds resulting from the increase
in p must be due to an increase in the trade balance T.
    5The formal derivaticoof these adjustment paths are available from the authors on request.
                                        REFERENCES


Abel,   LB. and 0.1 Blanchard (1983), "An lnterternporal Model of Saving and Investment."
    Econometrica 51, 673-692.

Bean, CR. (1986), "The Terms of Trade, Labor Supply, and the Current Account," Economic
    Journal Supplement96,     38—46.

                                                                                   Goods in
Brock, P.L., "Investment, the Current Account,and the Relative Price on Non—Traded
    a Small Open Economy," Journal of International Economics (forthcoming).

Could, J.P. (1968), "Adjustment Costs in the Theory of Investment of the Firm,"
                                                                                Review of

    Economic Studies 35, 47—56.

Harberger, A.C. (1950), "Currency Depreciation, income and the Balance of Tre,"
                                                                                Journal of

    Political Economy 58, 47—60.

Hayaahi, F. (1982), "Tobin's q, Rational Expectations, and Optimal Investment Rule," Economet.
    rica 50, 213—224.
Laursen, S. and L.A. Metzler (1950), "Flexible Exchange Rates and the Theory of Employment,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics 32, 281—299.

Lucas, RE. (1967), "Adjuetment Costs and the Theory of Supply," Journal of Political Economy
    75, 32 1—334.
                                                                             Journal of In-
Maysuvamna, K. (1987), "Current Account Dynamics in a Finite Horizon Model,"
     ternational Economics 23,   299—313.

                                                                                     a
Matouyama, K. (1988), "Terms of Trade, Factor Intensities and the Current Account in       Life—


     Cycle Model," Review of Economic Studies 55, 247—262.

Obstfeld, M. (1982), "Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: is There a Laursen—Metzler
        Effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 97, 251—270.

Obetfeld,NI. (1983), "Intertemporal Price Speculations and the Optimal Current—Account Deficit,"
    Journal of International Money and Finance 2, 135—145.
                                                                                     of Trade:
 Persson, T. and L.E.O. Svensson (1985), "Current Account Dynamics and the TErms
     Harberger—Lauraen—Metzler Two Generations Later," Journal of Political Economy 93,
                                                                                        43—65.


 Svensson,    LEO. and A. Razin     (1983), "The Terms of Trade and the Current Account: The
    Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Effect," Journal of Political Economy 91, 97—125.

Treadway, A. (1969), "On Rational Entrepreneurial Behavior and the Demand for Investment,"
    Review of Economic Stud*es 36, 227—24O
