                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHO CHOOSES COMMITMENT? EVIDENCE AND WELFARE IMPLICATIONS

                                       Mariana Carrera
                                       Heather Royer
                                         Mark Stehr
                                        Justin Sydnor
                                      Dmitry Taubinsky

                                     Working Paper 26161
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26161


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 2019


A previous version of this paper circulated under “How are Preferences for Commitment
Revealed?” We are grateful to seminar and conference participants at Harvard, Wharton, UC San
Diego, University of Zurich, Dartmouth, Claremont Graduate University, Erasmus University, the
Economics Science Association conference, the American Society of Health Economists
conference, Hebrew University, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, and the Stanford-
Berkeley mini conference for helpful comments and suggestions, as well as to Doug Bernheim,
Stefano DellaVigna, David Molitor, Matthew Rabin, Gautam Rao, Frank Schilbach, Charles
Sprenger, Séverine Toussaert, and Jonathan Zinman for helpful comments. Paul Fisher, Max Lee,
Priscila de Oliveira, and Afras Sial provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful for
funding through NIH grant R21AG042051 entitled “Commitment Contracts for Health Behavior
Change.” Taubinsky also thanks the Sloan Foundation for financial support. This study was
approved by the IRB at Case Western Reserve University and the University of California-Santa
Barbara. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Mariana Carrera, Heather Royer, Mark Stehr, Justin Sydnor, and Dmitry Taubinsky.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Chooses Commitment? Evidence and Welfare Implications
Mariana Carrera, Heather Royer, Mark Stehr, Justin Sydnor, and Dmitry Taubinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 26161
August 2019, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. C9,D9,I12

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops an approach for estimating people’s perceived and actual self-control
problems in the field, and for investigating whether offers of commitment contracts are well-
targeted tools for addressing self-control problems. In an experiment on gym attendance
(N=1,248), we estimate a model of partially naive quasi-hyperbolic discounting, and we study (i)
how commitment contract take-up relates to structural estimates of people’s perceived and actual
self-control problems and marginal benefits of behavior change, (ii) if commitment contract take-
up is in part due to boundedly-rational understanding of incentives, and (iii) whether commitment
contracts increase welfare, and how they compare to linear subsidies or taxes. We find high take-
up of commitment contracts to increase gym attendance, which translates to significant increases
in exercise. However, contract take-up is not positively related to estimates of actual or perceived
self-control problems. A novel test suggests that this may be partly explained by boundedly-
rational take-up decisions: many individuals are willing to take up commitment contracts both for
higher gym attendance and for lower gym attendance, and there is a significantly positive
correlation in people’s propensity to take up both types of contracts. Our estimated model of
quasi-hyperbolic discounting and gym attendance implies that offering our commitment contracts
lowers consumer surplus and is less socially efficient than utilizing linear incentive schemes that
achieve the same average change in behavior. We estimate an optimal exercise subsidy of $7.54
per attendance.

Mariana Carrera                                  Justin Sydnor
Department of Agricultural Economics             Wisconsin School of Business, ASRMI Department
and Economics                                    University of Wisconsin at Madison
Montana State University                         975 University Avenue, Room 5287
P.O. Box 172920                                  Madison, WI 53726
Bozeman, MT 59717                                and NBER
mariana.carrera@montana.edu                      jsydnor@bus.wisc.edu

Heather Royer                                    Dmitry Taubinsky
Department of Economics                          University of California, Berkeley
University of California, Santa Barbara          Department of Economics
2127 North Hall                                  530 Evans Hall #3880
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                          Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                         and NBER
royer@econ.ucsb.edu                              dmitry.taubinsky@berkeley.edu

Mark Stehr
Drexel University
LeBow College of Business
Ghall 10th Floor
3220 Market Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
stehr@drexel.edu
       One of the central insights from economic models of time inconsistency and limited self-control
is that people should desire incentives and mechanisms that help them alter their own future be-
havior (Strotz, 1955; Laibson, 1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999; Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2009).
Although this insight has a number of economic implications, the most prominent focus in the field-
experimental literature has been on demand for commitment contracts—reductions of opportunity
sets through choice-set restrictions or self-imposed penalties for certain (mis)behaviors.1 As shown
in Table 1, there are thirty-three empirical studies of commitment contract take-up as of the writing
of this paper, spanning domains such as savings, health, and work effort, with all but two written
in the last ten years.
       The high take-up rates (see Table 1) and significant effects on behavior documented in the
literature suggest that commitment contracts could be welfare-enhancing, but this is not guaranteed
(e.g., Heidhues and Kőszegi, 2009). Nor do existing results shed light on whether other approaches
to behavior change, such as taxes or subsidies (e.g., Gruber and Kőszegi, 2001; O’Donoghue and
Rabin, 2006), might be more or less efficient.
       In this paper, we develop an approach for estimating people’s perceived and actual self-control
problems in the field, and for using those estimates to evaluate the benefits of commitment contracts
versus other mechanisms for counteracting failures of self-control. Our approach allows us to answer
three key research questions. First, “who” takes up the commitment contracts? Specifically, how
does take-up of commitment contracts relate to people’s actual and perceived time inconsistency and
marginal benefits of behavior change? What are the causal effects of increasing people’s awareness of
their time inconsistency on their demand for commitment contracts? Second, do other factors—such
as stochastic valuation errors in perception of incentives (see, e.g., Woodford, 2019, for a review)—
affect take-up of commitment contracts? The existence of these other factors may help reconcile
the high take-up rates observed in practice with the low take-up rates predicted by theory (see, e.g.,
Laibson, 2015). Third, taking into account all of the drivers of commitment contract take-up, do
commitment contracts increase consumer surplus and social welfare? Are commitment contracts
more or less efficient than the kinds of tax instruments studied by, e.g., Gruber and Kőszegi (2001)
and O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006)?
       We address these questions through a combination of theory and empirical findings from a field
experiment on gym attendance with 1,248 participants. Our approach has three novel features.
First, we directly assess how commitment take-up relates to reduced-form and structural estimates
of both perceived and actual time inconsistency. In addition to offering commitment contracts, we
utilize a separate experimental elicitation to estimate people’s perceived and actual time inconsis-
tency, as well as the marginal benefit of behavior change. Second, we utilize a novel approach to
detecting stochastic valuation errors or other confounds in take-up of commitment contracts. We
offer individuals commitment contracts both for going to the gym more and for going to the gym
less, and we study the correlation in people’s propensity to take-up both types of contracts. Third,
   1
    An example of a penalty-based commitment contract is as follows. An individual places X dollars at stake to
reach a future goal. If the individual is unsuccessful, the X dollars are lost and if successful, the X dollars are
returned to the individual.


                                                        1
our rich experimental data allows us to estimate a structural model of quasi-hyperbolic discounting
and partial naivete (Laibson, 1997; O’Donoghue and Rabin, 1999, 2001), and to validate it with
out-of-sample tests—one of the first such estimates using field-experimental data. We then use this
model to study the key question of whether it is more socially efficient to use commitment contracts
or linear tax instruments to counteract failures of self-control.
    Section 2 fleshes out our approach to estimating models of time inconsistency. The empirical
content of models of time inconsistency consists of three objects: (i) how people desire to behave
in the future, (ii) how people expect to behave in the future, and (iii) how people actually behave
in the future. If people are time-consistent, then all three objects are identical. If people are time-
inconsistent but fully sophisticated, then (ii) and (iii) will be equal but differ from (i). If people are
time-inconsistent and are partially aware of their self-control problems, then all three objects will
differ.
    Objects (ii) and (iii) can be estimated directly by measuring people’s forecasts and actual at-
tendance at different levels of attendance incentives. We show that the wedge between (i) and
(ii) can be elicited by extending the insights from DellaVigna and Malmendier (2004) and Acland
and Levy (2015). Intuitively, the Envelope Theorem implies that a person who believes herself to
be time-inconsistent, and forecasts say 8 attendances over the experimental period at an incentive
of $p per attendance, should value a marginal $dp per attendance increase in incentives by $8dp.
Valuations above $8dp indicate that the person values the behavior change induced by the incen-
tive increase—i.e., that the person’s forecasted behavior does not align with the person’s desired
behavior. We call the deviation from the time-consistent benchmark the behavior change premium.
    A key feature of the behavior change premium is that it is a continuous measure of perceived
time inconsistency. Thus, although individual-level estimates of the behavior change premium may
be noisy, we show that the average of the estimates is an unbiased measure of the mean behavior
change premium in the population. In contrast, we show that because commitment contract take-up
is a coarse, discontinuous measure of time inconsistency, it is neither a lower nor upper bound on
people’s time inconsistency when (i) people are not fully aware of their time inconsistency, (ii) there
is a nontrivial benefit to flexibility because of uncertainty about the future, or (iii) take-up is partly
affected by boundedly-rational stochastic valuation errors or perceived social pressure.
    We show that in a model of quasi-hyperbolic preferences, incorporating meaningful levels of
uncertainty and stochastic valuation errors generates two predictions about take-up of commitment
contracts. First, increasing the level of sophistication about one’s time inconsistency should reduce
the take-up of penalty-based commitment contracts. Second, people will take up commitment
contracts that not only target doing more of an activity with delayed benefits, but also contracts
that target doing less of that activity. And if stochastic valuation errors are a strong enough driver
of take-up, there will be a positive correlation in demand for the “more” and “less” contracts.
    Our experimental design, summarized in Section 3, allows us to test these predictions, to pro-
vide reduced-form evidence for perceived and actual time inconsistency, and to provide structural
estimates of a model of quasi-hyperbolic discounting. The experiment involved 1,248 members


                                                    2
of a fitness facility in a large city in the midwest of the United States, and consisted of an online
elicitation followed by four weeks of observed gym attendance under different attendance incentives.
       Following the measurement approach laid out in Section 2, we first elicited people’s forecasted
attendance over the next four weeks at different levels of piece-rate incentives that ranged from
$0 to $12 per attendance. We then used an incentive-compatible procedure to elicit participants’
willingness to pay (WTP) for different piece-rate incentives. Finally, we randomly assigned different
piece-rate incentives to a subset of the subjects and measured the impact on actual gym attendance.
       To study commitment contract take-up, we elicited demand for commitment contracts tied to
attending the gym at least 8, 12, or 16 times over the next four weeks. For each of these thresholds,
participants chose between an unconditional payment of $80 and a conditional payment of $80 that
they received only if their attendance met or exceeded the threshold. We also asked participants to
choose between receiving $80 unconditionally or conditional on going to the gym fewer than 8, 12,
or 16 times over the next four weeks.
       Finally, to estimate the causal effects of increasing participants’ awareness of time inconsistency,
we included a randomized information treatment prior to the elicitations, aimed at reducing over-
estimation of gym attendance.2 The treatment provided participants with information about their
past gym attendance and highlighted (truthfully) that members of this gym tended to overestimate
how often they would use the gym.
       In Section 5, we report reduced-form results on people’s forecasted, desired, and actual atten-
dance. On average, people overestimate their future gym attendance, although there is a highly
positive correlation between forecasted and actual attendance. At the same time, we estimate a
significantly positive average behavior change premium, which implies partial awareness of time
inconsistency, on average. The estimates imply that, on average, participants valued increasing
their future selves’ gym attendance by $1.78 to $3.00 per visit. Reassuringly, the individual-level
measures of the behavior change premium correlate positively with simple proxies for sophistication.
We also find that our information treatment significantly increased the behavior change premium.
       In Section 6, we report results on commitment contract take-up. We find high take-up of com-
mitment contracts to attend the gym more, consistent with the take-up rates observed in other
studies with similar designs (64% for 8+ visits, 49% for 12+ visits, and 32% for 16+ visits). We
also find that participants who were randomly assigned to receive the conditional $80 incentive
for 12+ visits increased their attendance by 3.51 visits. These kinds of results are often inter-
preted as evidence for wide-spread awareness of time inconsistency, as well as the welfare benefits
of commitment contracts.
       However, we present a range of evidence that suggests that such inferences may be inappro-
priate in the absence of additional evidence. First, we find that there is no relationship between
the individual-level measures of the behavior change premium and take-up of the commitment con-
   2
    As we describe in Section 3, in our first wave of the experiment we had a simpler information treatment that
only provided information about past visits at the gym and found that this did not meaningfully affect beliefs. The
second two waves of the experiment used an enhanced information treatment, which we show in Section 5 significantly
reduced expectations of gym visits.



                                                        3
tracts. Second—and in contrast to our results about the behavior change premium—our proxies
for awareness of time inconsistency are on net unrelated to commitment contract take-up, while
the information treatment significantly decreased the take-up of commitment contracts for higher
gym attendance. Third, we find that 27-34% of participants chose commitment contracts to attend
the gym less, and that the take-up of “more” and “less” contracts at each threshold is significantly
positively correlated.3 This is inconsistent will all take-up of commitment contracts reflecting a
self-control strategy, but is consistent with our theoretical predictions about the consequences of
stochastic valuation errors. This finding helps explain why commitment contract take-up is unre-
lated to the behavior change premium or to proxies for sophistication.
       In Section 7, we combine our empirical results with a structural model to evaluate the welfare
effects of commitment contracts, taking into account that at least some of the take-up reflects
mistakes. We first use our data on piece-rate incentives to estimate a structural model of quasi-
hyperbolic preferences with partial sophistication. We assume that all future utility is discounted by
an additional β ≤ 1, which we refer to as present focus in the language of Ericson and Laibson (2019).
Following O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001), we parametrize misprediction of time inconsistency by
allowing people to believe that their future selves behave as if their present focus is β̃. We estimate
an actual average present focus parameter of β̂ = 0.55 and an average perceived present focus
              ˆ
parameter of β̃ = 0.84. We estimate a (perceived) long-run benefit of exercise of b̂ = $9.66 per
attendance, which sits comfortably in the range of health benefits estimated in the public health
literature. These estimates imply an average internality—the harms people impose on themselves
due to present focus—of (1 − β̂) · b̂ = $4.39.
       We also find meaningful heterogeneity. Past attendance is positively correlated with health
benefits b and the present focus parameter β, although it is not related to people’s awareness of
present focus, as measured by Augenblick and Rabin’s (2019) awareness statistic, (1 − β̃)/(1 − β).
                                                                              ˆ            ˆ
Our information treatment lowered the perceived present focus parameter from β̃ = 0.86 to β̃ = 0.78
                                                    ˆ                           ˆ
and increased awareness of present focus from (1 − β̃)/(1 − β̂) = 0.30 to (1 − β̃)/(1 − β̂) = 0.49.
Commitment contract take-up, however, is largely unrelated to any of the model parameters.
       We show that our estimated model accurately predicts how the threshold incentive schemes
from commitment contracts affect people’s behavior, which serves as an out-of-sample test because
these incentives were not used to estimate our model. Turning to welfare implications, we estimate
that people who take up commitment contracts are on average made worse off. On average, con-
sumers who take-up the 8+, 12+, and 16+ commitment contracts incur losses equivalent to −$7.91,
−$18.69, and −$10.51 per person, respectively. Although the commitment contracts induce people
who don’t exercise enough to exercise more, this is counteracted by two other forces. First, a sub-
stantial fraction of people fail to meet the contracts’ thresholds and incur financial losses. Second,
   3
    We present a range of robustness checks for these results. We show that take-up is not concentrated only on
participants who think these contracts will not be binding for them: those whose expected attendance in the absence of
incentives is well above the contract threshold are almost as likely to take up the contracts as those below the contract
threshold. We also rule out other explanations for our results, such as participants simply confusing the “fewer visits”
contracts for the “more visits” contracts, or participants simply disengaging and not taking their decisions seriously.



                                                           4
the nonlinear incentives of commitment contracts induce inefficient patterns of gym attendance,
where present-focused individuals attend the gym too little at the beginning of the four-week pe-
riod due to procrastination, but then attend the gym too much toward the end in an effort to avoid
the financial penalty.
    Of course, the fact that people who take up the contracts on average lose surplus does not
imply that the contracts lower social welfare, since the revenue collected from people’s penalty
payments can be “recycled” to benefit people in other ways. We estimate that the contracts lead
to modest gains in social welfare. However, these gains pale in comparison to the effects of linear
per-attendance incentives that are offered to the entire population and scaled to match the average
attendance increases generated by commitment contracts. We show that this is because commitment
contracts are not well-targeted.
    Our study fleshes out a number of mechanisms for why take-up and behavior change are not
sufficient statistics for evaluating the efficacy of commitment contracts, and provides methods for
assessing the importance of these mechanisms in other domains. This is illustrated by our specific
results about how our commitment contracts are suboptimal tools for both measuring and addressing
self-control problems in our exercise setting. Of course, this need not be true for all other domains
of behavior or other types of contracts. In Section 8, we summarize a number of caveats to our
specific results, and also discuss how extensions of our methods can be usefully utilized for related
questions about data-driven incentive design for present-focused individuals.


1    Related literature
First, we contribute to work estimating structural models of time inconsistency, particularly in field
settings. While there is a growing set of papers estimating the present focus parameter in the
field after assuming either naivete or sophistication,4 there is, to our knowledge, only a handful
of papers that provide more complete and direct identification by estimating both people’s actual
and perceived present focus: Augenblick and Rabin (2019), Bai et al. (Forthcoming), Chaloupka
et al. (2019), Skiba and Tobacman (2018), and Allcott et al. (2020). With the exception of Bai
et al. (Forthcoming)—who use commitment contract take-up to estimate present focus—our paper
is unique in additionally offering people commitment contracts and examining how the structural
estimates vary with take-up decisions. Our estimation approach is most similar in spirit to that
of Augenblick and Rabin (2019), who provide direct estimates of people’s desired, forecasted, and
realized effort in a laboratory experiment with college students. But unlike Augenblick and Rabin
(2019), our approach does not rely on the assumption that future effort costs are deterministic,
and can be tractably applied in many field settings. For example, Allcott et al. (2020) extend our
approach to study present focus among payday loan borrowers—a complex decision environment
    4
      For field estimates, see, for example, Laibson et al. (2018), Fang and Silverman (2004), Mahajan, Michel, and
Tarozzi (2020), Paserman (2008), Martinez et al. (2020), and Shui and Ausubel (2005). There is also a large laboratory
literature focused almost exclusively on estimating actual but not perceived time inconsistency; see, e.g., the review
in Ericson and Laibson (2019) or the meta-analysis in Imai et al. (2020) on the convex time budget approach of
Andreoni and Sprenger (2012) and Augenblick et al. (2015).


                                                          5
with non-separable payoffs and high uncertainty, non-quasilinearity in money, and potentially low
financial literacy of experimental subjects. Our approach is also similar to, and builds on the
early working-paper version of Acland and Levy (2012), but produces estimates of both β and β̃,
and develops our behavior change premium statistic to provide a model-free test of perceived time
inconsistency that is not tied to specific parametric assumptions.
       Second, we contribute to a small set of papers studying the welfare effects of commitment
contracts. Heidhues and Kőszegi (2009) show theoretically that partially naive individuals can
harm themselves by taking up commitment contracts. John (2019) offers support for this prediction
by studying how proxies for naivete relate to commitment contract take-up and the likelihood of
failure. Sadoff et al. (2019) investigate how commitment contract take-up relates to intertemporal
preferences reversals. Bai et al. (Forthcoming) estimate a parametrized distribution of β and β̃
from commitment contract choices under two assumptions that we relax: that individuals are in
a fully deterministic environment and that no individuals take up commitment contracts due to
stochastic valuation errors or perceived social pressure. Relative to these papers, we are the first
to use empirical moments that are separate from contract take-up to directly estimate β, β̃, and
internalities both for individuals who take-up the contracts and for those who do not. This is crucial
for examining whether the contracts are well-targeted. Our welfare evaluation of commitment
contracts is also the first to allow both a non-deterministic decision environment and stochastic
valuation errors in take-up decisions.
       Third, we contribute to a slightly broader set of papers that analyze drivers and correlates of
commitment contract take-up. Although some studies have explored correlations between commit-
ment contract demand and proxies for perceived present focus (e.g., Ashraf et al., 2006; Augenblick
et al., 2015; Kaur et al., 2015; John, 2019; Sadoff et al., 2019), our study is the first to report
a causal estimate.5 Our study also provides a uniquely detailed analysis of correlates, relating
take-up to both a set of reduced-form proxies as well as to structural estimates of internalities and
perceived and actual present focus. Augenblick et al. (2015) relate take-up to an estimate of one of
the structural parameters, while the other papers focus on reduced-form proxies.
       Relatedly, our paper is the first to directly investigate the possible role of stochastic valuation
errors and perceived social pressure in commitment contact take-up.6 Only seventeen of the thirty-
three studies in Table 1 ever even mention potential confounds, and only eight discuss the confounds
in depth as potential drivers of take-up.7
   5
      This prior evidence on correlations is mixed, with some studies finding positive correlations between measured
impatience and commitment demand (Ashraf et al., 2006; Augenblick et al., 2015; Kaur et al., 2015) but others
finding negative correlations (Sadoff et al., 2019; John, 2019).
    6
      Toussaert (2019) reports results consistent with stochastic valuation errors, finding that only one third of the
participants in her experiment are fully consistent with any model of time-inconsistency or costly self-control, and
that 25% are at least two violations away from all possible models.
    7
      We coded a study as discussing confounds if it used the keywords experimenter effects, demand effects, alternative
considerations, alternative explanations, confusion, noise, desirability bias, or Hawthorne effects. Eight discuss such
effects but consider them to be relatively minor determinants of commitment take-up, and another eight mention
that they may play an important role. For example, Exley and Naecker (2017) discuss demand effects, John (2019)
discusses intrahousehold conflict, Brune et al. (2016) discuss the desire to shield savings from one’s social network,
Bonein and Denant-Boemont (2015) discuss the role of peer pressure, and Kaur et al. (2015) and Schilbach (2019)


                                                           6
2     Theoretical predictions and measurement techniques
In this section, we set up and characterize the predictions of a model of quasi-hyperbolic discounters
facing a task with stochastic immediate costs and deterministic delayed benefits. We first lay
out our direct approach to assessing awareness of time inconsistency, then discuss implications for
commitment contracts, and end by studying the implications of stochastic valuation errors.

2.1    Model setup
We consider individuals who in periods t = 1, . . . , T have the option to take an action at ∈ {0, 1}.
Choosing at = 1 generates immediate stochastic costs ct realized in period t as well as deterministic
delayed benefits b realized in period T + 1. We assume that c > 0 with positive probability, but
don’t preclude the possibility of draws c < 0. For concreteness, we will often refer to at = 1 as
attending the gym and at = 0 as not attending the gym, with the understanding that our results
apply to the general model presented here and not just gym attendance.
   For ā = Tt=1 at , we consider incentive contracts that pay out in T + 1, denoted as (y, P (ā)),
            P

that consist of a fixed transfer y (which could be negative), and a contingent reward P (ā) for certain
levels of gym attendance. The contingent component P (ā) is non-negative, with minā∈[0,T ] P (ā) = 0.
We assume for simplicity that utility is quasilinear in money, given the relatively modest incentives
involved in our experiment.
    A simple piece-rate incentive contract with per-attendance incentive p has y = 0 and P (ā) = pā.
Penalty-based commitment contracts for attending the gym at least r times are (−p, P ), with
P (ā) = p · 1ā≥r . Conversely, a contract (−p, P ), with P (ā) = p · 1ā<r , is a penalty-based contract
for not going to the gym r times or more.
      We assume that individuals have quasi-hyperbolic preferences given by U t (ut , ut+1 , . . . , uT , uT +1 ) =
δ t ut +β Tτ =t+1
         P +1 τ
                  δ uτ , where ut is the period t utility flow. By construction, ut = −at ·c for 1 ≤ t ≤ T
and uT +1 = y + bā + P (ā). Following O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001), we allow individuals to mis-
predict their preferences: in period t, they believe that their period t + 1 self will have a short-run
discount factor β̃ ∈ [β, 1]. For simplicity, we set δ = 1 given the short time horizons involved in
our experiment. We use V (y, P ) to denote the individual’s subjective expectation (given beliefs β̃)
about utility under contract (y, P ).

2.2    Measuring time inconsistency and the behavior change premium
Figure 1 illustrates the framework motivating our experimental design and analysis of time incon-
sistency. The x-axis is the agent’s attendance, and the y-axis is incentives for that behavior, which
for simplicity of illustration we consider to be linear per-attendance incentives. There are three
attendance curves: actual, forecasted, and desired. These curves are meant to depict averages over
all realizations of c, meaning that, e.g., they correspond to the actual, forecasted, and desired prob-
abilities of attending the gym in the one-period model with T = 1. We draw the curves as linear
discuss both perceived social pressure and confusion.


                                                        7
for graphical illustration, but our formal results do not require linearity. We use α̃(p) to denote an
agent’s forecasted attendance at incentive level p.
   In the absence of present focus (β = β̃ = 1), these curves are identical. For a fully sophisticated
agent (β̃ = β), the forecasted and actual curves are identical, while for a fully naive agent (β̃ = 1),
the forecasted and desired curves are identical. The three curves intersect at incentive p = −b,
because at this point the net future benefit of the action (p + b) is zero, hence the different discount
factors are irrelevant, and behavior is governed solely by the stochastic costs of effort. We assume
for our graphical illustration that c ≥ 0, so that attendance is zero at p = −b.
   The actual and forecasted attendance curves can be measured directly at the population level by
randomizing incentives. The desired attendance curve can be inferred from the agent’s willingness
to pay (WTP) for a change in the incentive level. In the figure, we consider an increase from p = p0
to p = p0 + ∆. At incentives p0 , the person’s perceived total surplus is denoted by the area of
ABCD in the graph—the difference between marginal benefits p0 and marginal costs, integrated
between 0 and α̃(p0 ). As the incentive increases by ∆, the agent’s perceived surplus rises to AEFG.
The difference between AEFG and ABCD consists of two trapezoids: BEFC and DCFG. The area
BEFC corresponds to the increase in total surplus that the agent would receive if she were time-
consistent (with actual attendance given by α̃(p)). The area DCFG is what we call the behavior
change premium: the additional increase in surplus that results from the fact that the agent would
be willing to pay to motivate her future self to attend the gym more because her desired attendance
is above her forecasted attendance.
   The area of DCFG can be backed out from the forecasted attendance curve and an agent’s WTP
for an increase from p0 to p0 + ∆. The area of trapezoid BEFC is simply a function of the agent’s
forecasts, and is given by ∆ · (α̃(p0 ) + α̃(p0 + ∆))/2. The WTP for the incentive increase ∆ is simply
the area of BEFC and DCFG. Thus, the area of DCFG is obtained by differencing out the area of
BEFC from the WTP.
   Importantly, the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model provides a tight parametrization of the
wedges between the curves—which enables our structural estimates in Section 7. Roughly speaking,
the wedge between the actual and forecasted curves is proportional to β̃ − β. The wedge between
the forecasted and desired curves is proportional to 1 − β̃, which we show formally below can be
backed out from the behavior change premium.
   Formally, consider a piece-rate contract that pays the agent p every time she chooses at = 1.
Define an individual’s willingness to pay for the contract, wi (p), to be the smallest y such that she
prefers a sure payment of y over this contract. We then have the following:

Proposition 1. Assume that the costs in each period t are distributed according to smooth density
functions, and that terms of order ∆3 and ∆2 α̃00 (p) are negligible. If β̃ = 1, then

                                w(p + ∆) − w(p)   α̃(p + ∆) + α̃(p)
                                                =                                                   (1)
                                      ∆                   2
If β̃ < 1 and the costs are distributed independently, then


                                                   8
            w(p + ∆) − w(p)   α̃(p + ∆) + α̃(p)                         α̃(p + ∆) − α̃(p)
                            =                   + (1 − β̃)(b + p + ∆/2)                                              (2)
                  ∆           |       2
                                     {z       }   |                 {z         ∆        }
                                   Surplus if time-consistent             Behavior change premium

       The assumptions about negligible terms in Proposition 1 are essentially the same as those in the
canonical Harberger (1964) formula of the dead-weight loss of taxation: the change in incentives is
not too large, particularly relative to the degree of curvature in the region of the incentive change.
Plainly, these assumptions always hold in the limit of ∆ → 0, where the left-hand-side of (1) and
(2) approaches w0 (p) and (α̃(p + ∆) − α̃(p))/∆ approaches α0 (p).
       The proposition formally shows that the WTP for an increase in incentives consists of two
terms, as in our graphical argument. The first term is the surplus, per dollar of incentive change,
that an individual would obtain if she were time-consistent and behaved according to her forecasts.
As shown in equation (1) of the proposition, the WTP for individuals with β̃ = 1 has a simple
characterization under general conditions that only require “smooth” behavior—the payoffs in each
period t need not be identically or independently distributed. This characterization is a corollary of
the Envelope Theorem, and analogs of this expression hold in any stochastic dynamic optimization
problem, as shown in extensions by Allcott et al. (2020). Thus, deviations from this expression,
which we label
                                              w(p + ∆) − w(p) α̃(p + ∆) + α̃(p)
                            BCP (p, ∆) :=                    −                  ,                                    (3)
                                                    ∆                 2
indicate that β̃ 6= 1. In particular, BCP > 0 implies that β̃ < 1. We call this reduced-form measure
the behavior change premium per dollar of financial incentives. It is the WTP for a change in
behavior that is induced by a $1 increase in piece-rate incentives. As equation (2) of the proposition
shows, if costs are distributed independently (but not necessarily identically), the BCP is a linear
function of perceived time inconsistency (1 − β̃)—a feature we use in our structural estimation.8

2.3      Commitment contracts are often unattractive when costs are uncertain
The behavior change premium is a monotonic function of 1 − β̃, and is in fact a linear function
under additional plausible assumptions. However, here we show that the take-up of commitment
contracts is not related to β̃ (and plainly β) in any straightforward way, and need not even be a
monotonic function of β̃. We can illustrate this point by returning to Figure 1. For concreteness,
suppose now that there is a single period of action (T = 1), so that the attendance curves in Figure
1 give the probability of a = 1. Given a CDF F of the costs, the actual, forecasted and desired
attendance (probability) curves are given by F (β(b + p)), F (β̃(b + p)),and F (b + p), respectively. We
let the vertical line running through points H and I to correspond to the point where the individual
attends the gym with probability 1.
   8
    Quasilinearity in money is an important assumption for identification of β̃, and is plausible for the relatively
modest incentive sizes that are offered in field experiments such as ours. If participants are non-negligibly risk averse
over small amounts of money, then the statistic in (3) underestimates the WTP for behavior change, and leads to
overestimates of β̃ (see Allcott et al., 2020, for further details).




                                                            9
       In the one-period model, a commitment contract for attending the gym is then a contract of
the form (−p, pa), where the individual loses money p if she does not go to the gym. Binding
commitment contracts are special cases with p = ∞.
       Consider a commitment contract where the individual puts an amount ∆ at stake that is returned
if and only if the agent chooses a = 1. This is equivalent to the individual receiving an increase
∆ in attendance incentives, while also having to pay ∆ non-contingently. The surplus loss from
an non-contingent payment of ∆ is the large rectangle BEHI in the figure. Thus, a commitment
contract is perceived to be valuable if the behavior change premium DCFG exceeds the loss CFHI.
In general, this need not be the case, and as the figure illustrates, this is particularly unlikely to be
the case when the probability of attendance is non-negligibly below 100%. The perceived value of
commitment contracts also does not increase with perceived present focus 1− β̃: as perceived present
focus increases, the forecasted attendance curve rotates to the left, which increases the financial loss
CFHI without necessarily increasing the behavior change premium (since the width CZ shrinks).
Moreover, the actual benefits of a commitment contract may be smaller than the perceived benefits,
for the same reason that a leftward rotation of the forecasted curve can increase the financial costs
more than it increases the behavior change premium.
       In Appendix A.2 and A.4 we derive two general results about the demand for commitment con-
tracts when costs are uncertain. First, we show that for a broad class of stochastic cost distributions,
the quasi-hyperbolic model predicts that there should not be demand for any commitment contract
when there is at least a moderate chance that costs exceed delayed benefits. Second, when there
is enough uncertainty to make commitment contracts unattractive, the perceived harms of a com-
mitment contract, given by the difference between CFHI and DCFG in the figure, are increasing in
perceived present focus 1 − β̃.9 That is, people who perceive themselves to be more present-focused
will find commitment contracts less attractive (i.e., more harmful).
       There are two key conditions on the distribution of cost draws under which the value of com-
mitment contracts is eroded. First, the chances of getting a cost draw under which it is suboptimal
to take the action (c > b) are at least as high as the chances of getting a cost draw under which the
time t = 0 individual thinks she should choose a = 1 but thinks that her time t = 1 self will not do
so (c ∈ [β̃b, b]). Second, the cost draws exceeding b are not all concentrated in a small neighborhood
of b.
       As a simple illustration for the case of T = 1, Figure 2 summarizes commitment contract demand
for the case in which c is uniformly distributed on [0, 1]. For the uniform case, the attendance curves
are linear and the predictions are simple. Individuals prefer binding contracts over penalty-based
contracts, and they want them if and only if b + (1 − β̃)b ≤ 1.10 The figure shows little demand for
commitment. For example, no individuals with β̃ ≥ 0.8 desire any kind of commitment contract
   9
     Heidhues and Kőszegi (2009) and John (2019) present results implying that the value of commitment contracts
will be non-monotonic in β̃, with individuals with either low or high β̃ choosing not to take up contracts. We replicate
this result formally in Appendix A.2 and A.4 in our setting, but show that it only holds for cases where there is little
uncertainty about the costs of action.
  10
     Since particularly high draws of c are what make commitment contracts particularly costly, the thin-tailed uniform
distribution overstates the amount of uncertainty it would take to erode demand for commitment.


                                                          10
when the costs of attendance exceed the benefits at least 20% of the time—an arguably modest
degree of uncertainty.

2.4      The consequences of stochastic errors and perceived social pressure
In light of the results above—which replicate and extend points previously made by Laibson (2015)
and others—a natural question is why we see so much demand for commitment in behavioral
economics experiments. One possible reason is that because evaluating incentive schemes may be
complicated, individuals may do so imperfectly. This is in line with a long intellectual history of
measuring and modeling stochastic valuation errors in individuals’ decisions, starting from Block and
Marschak (1960), continuing with Quantal Response Equilibrium (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995), and
recently gaining prominence in a variety of new approaches to bounded rationality (e.g., Woodford,
2012; Wei and Stocker, 2015; Khaw et al., 2017; Natenzon, 2019). We refer to this mechanism as
imperfect perception. Another reason is that some individuals simply like to say “yes” to offers, feel
pressure to do so (DellaVigna et al., 2012), or falsely trust that the authority offering the contracts
must be offering something valuable. We refer to this possibility as perceived social pressure.
       To formalize, our reduced-form econometric model of these effects supposes that for a given
decision j, individual i behaves as if her forecasted utility under contract (y, P ) is

                                      Vb (y, P ) = β̃i y + εij V (0, P ) + ηi 1P 6=0                                   (4)

where E[εij ] = 1 and 1P 6=0 is an indicator that at least some contingent incentives are involved. The
εij term captures “stochastic valuation” leading to imperfect perception of contract value, which we
assume does not affect the certain incentive y.11 The ηi term, which need not be positive, captures
perceived social pressure. We model this term as additive to reflect the common intuition that
social motives such as social desirability bias have a smaller percentage effect at larger stakes. For
simplicity, we assume that ηi and εij are unrelated to βi and β̃i . For short, we refer to the choice
implied by (4) as the imperfect perception model.12

2.4.1      Commitment contract take-up is systematically biased by imperfect perception

The take-up of commitment contracts is a particularly problematic measure with imperfect percep-
tion because binary take-up decisions are biased by even mean-zero valuation errors (Aigner, 1973;
Hausman, 2001). Even if the errors are symmetric—say 10% of the individuals always choose the
  11
    We model error terms εij as multiplicative to reflect that, setting aside social motives, individuals are likely to
have fairly accurate valuations of contracts in which the contingent incentives are small, and are not likely to perceive
contracts with no financial downside as harmful. But, our results hold for any type of  h mean zero
                                                                                                 i     errors around V ,
including errors that are more substantial at smaller stakes. Formally, we just need E Vb (r, P ) = V (r, P ) + ηi 1P 6=0 .
  12
    Note that this reduced-form model, which is most similar to the Quantal Response Equilibrium models, is not
consistent with all types of seemingly irrational choices. The individual would never turn down a contract with only
financial upsides that incentivizes choosing at = 1. This property of the model is in line with our data: almost no
individuals choose “obviously dominated” incentive structures like “$0 for sure” instead of “$20 for sure.”




                                                            11
wrong option—binary choice data will typically introduce bias. For example, if 10% of choices are
mistakes, then in a world in which only 5% actually want option A, 14% will end up choosing it.
       As we show formally in Appendix A.2 and A.4, the imperfect perception model generates three
predictions for penalty-based commitment contracts, where an individual loses an amount p unless
she attends the gym at least a certain number of times:

   1. Individuals will demand commitment contracts to both exercise more and to exercise less.

   2. There will be a positive correlation between take-up of commitment contracts to exercise more
         and take-up of commitment contracts to exercise less.

   3. Increasing individuals’ sophistication about their present focus will decrease their demand for
         commitment contracts to exercise more.13

The intuition for the first prediction is that imperfect perception or perceived social pressure can
lead individuals to choose undesirable contracts.
       The second prediction can result from two different mechanisms. First, if some individuals just
like to say “yes” (ηi > 0) and some do not, then the individuals who like to say “yes” will tend to
take up both types of contracts, while the other individuals will tend to not take up any kind of
contract. Second, if commitment contracts would generally look unappealing to individuals in the
absence of valuation errors, then individuals with the highest variance in the stochastic valuation
term ε will be the most likely to take up both types of contracts.
       The intuition for the third prediction is that under moderate to large uncertainty, the perceived
harms of a commitment contract are decreasing in β̃ in the standard quasi-hyperbolic model (see
Appendix A.2 and A.4). Although in the standard quasi-hyperbolic model these conditions would
lead individuals to never choose a commitment contract, in our imperfect perception model indi-
viduals still choose the contract, but with a propensity that is decreasing in the expected harms in
the standard model.
       We emphasize that these predictions hold even under our plausible assumption that E[εij ] = 1—
i.e., that the stochastic valuation errors are mean-zero—and even when ηi = 0 for all individuals.

2.4.2      Estimates of the behavior change premium are more robust

Our measure of the behavior change premium is robust at the population level, because it is a
continuous variable that preserves the mean-zero nature of people’s valuation errors. Specifically,
let the subscript i denote each individual i’s WTP w, beliefs α, and so forth. Then the results of
Proposition 1 can be restated as population averages:

Corollary 1. Under the assumptions in Proposition 1 and the imperfect perception model, if β̃i = 1
for all i and p > 0 then
  13
    Interestingly, the converse does not hold for commitment contracts for a = 0. That is, it does not hold that
the likelihood of choosing a commitment contract for a = 0 is decreasing in β̃. Intuitively, this is because a lower β̃
dampens the impact of financial incentives in both cases, and thus makes penalty-based contracts potentially more
harmful in both cases.


                                                          12
                                                                                    
                                      wi (p + ∆) − wi (p)        α̃i (p + ∆) + α̃i (p)
                              E                             =E                                                     (5)
                                              ∆                            2

and if β̃i < 1 for some i and costs are independent across time then
                                                                                                  
   wi (p + ∆) − wi (p)        α̃i (p + ∆) + α̃i (p)                            α̃i (p + ∆) − α̃i (p)
 E                       =E                         + (1 − β̃i )(bi + p + ∆/2)                         (6)
           ∆                            2                                               ∆

         We condition on p > 0 in the corollary because that allows the fixed terms ηi to be differenced
out. The formula also continues to hold if individuals’ elicited beliefs are a noisy function of their
true beliefs, as long as the noise is mean-zero.14 Core to our result is that WTP can range from
below to above expected earnings, meaning that the measure of WTP for behavior change can
range from negative to positive.15 Having some, but not full, continuity in a commitment measure
is insufficient.16
         Variations of our imperfect perception model in which valuation errors are not mean-zero, or in
which perceived social pressure rises with stakes, would invalidate the methodology we propose here,
along with using commitment demand as a measurement tool, and all other approaches to mea-
surement of time inconsistency. Fortunately, the key assumptions behind Corollary 1 are testable:
individuals who expect no change in behavior (α̃i (p + ∆) − α̃i (p) = 0), should have an average
behavior change premium equal to zero when p > 0. If instead ηi increased with p, or if E[ij ] > 1,
then we would estimate a positive behavior change premium even for individuals who expect no
behavior change. We implement this test in our reduced-form results in Section 5.4.


3            Experimental design
Our study recruited members of a fitness facility in a large city in the Midwest U.S. The facility is
affiliated with a private university, offering subsidized memberships to graduate students, faculty,
and staff, but is also open to the public.17 The university has a separate facility for undergraduates.
         Members of the facility were recruited to participate in a study that consisted of an online
component followed by four weeks of observation of gym attendance. Appendix Table A20 shows
    14
     Systematic over-statement of true beliefs would make this a particularly conservative test, as this would bias
against us finding a demand for behavior change.
  15
     Note that even though our experiment imposed a lower bound of $0 for WTP for a piece-rate incentive, the
multiplicative nature of errors in our model implies that the perceived valuations for a piece-rate incentive cannot be
below zero. Intuitively, individuals should not perceive the value of a positive piece-rate incentive as negative.
  16
     For example, restricting WTP for a commitment contract, as in Milkman et al. (2014), would mechanically lead
to an upward bias in valuations, since negative draws of errors in valuation would be censored at 0 while positive
draws of errors would be uncensored. Similarly, presenting experimental participants with a continuous commitment
contract range of many possible penalties or targets as in, e.g., Kaur et al. (2015), would lead to bias if the range
only allows participants to commit to doing more of something, but not less of something.
  17
     There are three membership types at the gym: regular, graduate student, and members through a wellness
program offered by their health insurance company. Graduate students have a subsidized membership fee by semester,
included by default with their tuition and fees. Members of a health insurer’s wellness program are also able to obtain
heavily subsidized memberships. Regular members pay an initiation fee and a monthly membership fee, which varies
based on their affiliation with the university or other local employers.



                                                           13
the ordering of all parts of the online component of the study, which we summarize in more detail
below. Enrollment was limited to people over the age of 18 who had held memberships over the
past eight weeks. The study was open for three recruitment periods starting in October 2015 and
ending in March 2016. During each recruitment period, the study was advertised through email
invitations and flyers posted near the gym. Waves 1, 2, and 3 had 350, 528, and 414 participants,
respectively.18
       A key feature of the design is that we elicit preferences for commitment contracts and valua-
tions of linear attendance incentives from all participants in an incentive-compatible manner, while
at the same time generating random assignment of contracts and attendance incentives for most
participants.

Information treatment Before answering any of the questions described below, participants
were assigned to receive an information treatment with 50% chance. In wave 1 of the study, the
information treatment consisted of a graph showing the number of visits made by the participant in
each of the past twenty weeks (Figure 3a). In waves 2 and 3, we enhanced the information treatment
in two ways. First, participants were asked to enter their best estimate for the average number of
weekly visits they had made, while viewing the graph of their past visits. We anticipated that this
would prompt them to pay more attention and better process the information. Second, participants
were informed that participants from the prior wave of the study had on average overestimated their
future attendance by 1 visit per week (Figure 3c).
       Participants randomized into the no-information control group proceeded directly to the elici-
tations described below.

Forecasted attendance and WTP for incentives All participants were asked to give their
“best guess” of the number of days they would visit over the next 4 weeks (starting the Monday
following the date of the online component), their goal number of visits over that period, and their
perceived probability of meeting their goal.
       Additionally, participants were asked to consider six different incentive contracts for the four
weeks starting the Monday after they completed the online component. The incentives were $1/day,
$2/day, $3/day, $5/day, $7/day, and $12/day. Each incentive was presented on a separate page,
and the order of these pages was randomized.
       For each incentive, participants were first asked to estimate how many days (0-28) they expected
they would visit the gym over the next four weeks under each incentive. On the same page, they
used a slider to indicate their willingness to pay (WTP) for this incentive; i.e., the largest possible
fixed payment over which they would prefer to receive the piece-rate incentive. Importantly, this
WTP could be as low as $0 and thus substantially below the expected earnings from the incentive.
  18
    Because many gym members are university students or employees, we scheduled the four-week incentive periods
so as to avoid long breaks in the academic calendar. Thus, the first wave of the online component was in the fall
semester, the second wave was in the spring semester preceding spring break, and the third wave was in the spring
semester following spring break.



                                                       14
If participants indicated the maximum WTP allowed by the slider (i.e., positioned it all the way
to the right), they were taken to a fill-in-the-blank question where they entered their willingness to
pay.19 Consistent with our theoretical model, all financial rewards were paid out after the four-week
period.
       The WTP elicitation used the incentive-compatible Becker-DeGroot-Marschak (BDM) mecha-
nism: at the end of the online component, participants would learn which of the questions had been
randomly chosen to apply to them, and which randomly chosen fixed payment would be compared
to their WTP to determine their outcome. If their WTP was above the randomly chosen fixed
payment, they would receive the piece-rate incentive. If their WTP was below the randomly chosen
fixed payment, they would receive the randomly chosen fixed payment.
       We devoted several screens to developing participants’ understanding of how to use a slider to
indicate WTP and why truth-telling was incentive compatible. We also included two questions
testing participants’ comprehension of the slider. Participants who answered one or both of these
questions incorrectly were given another chance to answer correctly before moving to the next
section of the online component. See Appendix D.1 for details.
       We did not incentivize accuracy of people’s attendance forecasts because according to standard
models of time inconsistency, individuals with β̃ < 1 could use these forecasts as a means of commit-
ment: stating a forecast higher than one’s actual belief would incentivize additional attendance.20
Truth-telling is strictly dominant in the absence of financial incentives if people have even a small
aversion to lying.

Commitment contracts In the next section, participants were presented with commitment con-
tract options targeting both more and fewer visits over the same four-week period. In all three
waves, participants were given the “more visits” commitment choice shown in Figure 4(a) and the
“fewer visits” commitment choice shown in Figure 4(b). The “more” and the “fewer” contract choices
were presented on separate pages, with the order randomized.
       In waves 1 and 2, participants made a series of binary choices between an unconditional $80
payment and $80 conditional on making “8 or more,” “12 or more,” “16 or more,” “7 or fewer,” “11 or
fewer,” and “15 or fewer” visits to the gym (i.e., a series of 6 choices). In wave 3, this section of the
online component was modified. Participants were only asked to consider commitments to visit “12
or more” and “11 or fewer” days, but they were also asked for their beliefs about their probabilities
of meeting these commitments.21
  19
      The minimum value on each slider was zero, and the maximum was the value of the per-day incentive multiplied
by 30 so as to include (slightly more than) the maximum possible expected earnings. 7.4% of responses were at the
slider maximum. Of the subsequent fill-in-the-blank responses, half indicated a willingness to pay that was actually
below the maximum, 23% indicated a willingness to pay equal to the maximum, and 27% indicated a willingness to
pay that was above the maximum.
   20
      Although Augenblick and Rabin (2019) show that this inflation is theoretically small for small incentives in
deterministic environments, this is not generally true in environments featuring some uncertainty, such as ours.
   21
      After observing the surprising patterns in commitment demand in wave 1 (i.e., many participants chose both
“fewer” and “more” contracts), we sought to replicate the patterns in wave 2 with no changes to the commitment con-
tract component. After the wave 2 replication, we altered our design in wave 3 to further investigate the mechanisms



                                                        15
Incentive-compatibility and assignment of attendance incentives One question was ran-
domly chosen to determine each participant’s attendance incentive. When the selected question
involved a piece-rate incentive, the participant’s WTP for that incentive was compared against a
randomly drawn fixed payment. Fixed payments were drawn from a mixture distribution with two
components: a uniform distribution from $0-$7 (mixture weight = 0.99), and a uniform distribution
from the full range of slider values (mixture weight = 0.01). The rationale for this distribution
was to avoid the endogenous assignment of incentives to participants with higher WTPs for those
incentives.
    Given this design, incentives were exogenously assigned, with the exception of two rare cases.
The first case is when the fixed payment draw exceeded $7 (n=12). The second case is when a
participant indicated a WTP value within the $0-$7 range from which our fixed payments were
heavily drawn (n=32). In these two cases, participants with higher WTP values are more likely to
receive an attendance incentive, which would bias our estimation of incentive effects on gym visits
due to selection. These 44 observations are excluded from the analyses throughout.
    We targeted a small number of questions with high probabilities of selection in order to power
our comparisons of the incentive effects. In wave 1, the questions about the $2 and $7 piece-rate
incentives were each assigned a 0.33 probability of being chosen. To create a group that did not
face any incentive to visit the gym, the study also included a choice between a $0 per day incentive
and a $20 fixed payment, and this question was also chosen with 0.33 probability. The remaining
1% was a random draw from all six piece-rate incentives and commitment contract questions.22
    The targeted incentives were varied to document the effects of different incentive sizes.23 In
wave 2, we shifted half of the probability mass at the $7 piece-rate incentive to the $5 piece-rate
incentive to better understand the curvature of attendance as a function of the linear incentives.
This shift resulted in the following incentive assignment probabilities: 33% for the $0 incentive; 33%
for the $2 incentive; 16.5% for the $5 incentive; 16.5% for the $7 incentive.
    In wave 3, we added a group that would receive $80 conditional on making 12 or more visits,
an attendance incentive equivalent to receiving one of the commitment contracts. Participants in
this group would receive the $80 conditional payment as long as they had chosen option (a) for the
question: “Which do you prefer? (a) $80 incentive you get only if you go to the gym at least 12 days
over the next four weeks or (b) $0 fixed payment – no chance to earn money.” 24 Since an incentive
of commitment contract demand. We elicited beliefs about the likelihood of meeting the thresholds stipulated by the
“more” and “fewer” contracts to rule out some alternative hypotheses not consistent with the model we propose in
Section 2.4. This also motivated us to randomize some participants into actually receiving the commitment contracts,
to make sure that we could replicate previous findings that the commitment contracts do alter behavior (thereby also
confirming that participants were not confused about the terms ex-post)—we discuss this randomization below.
  22
     We informed the participants about this randomization scheme in the instructions by clarifying “To keep within
our grant budget, incentives and fixed payments with lower amounts are more likely to be randomly selected, but
every incentive and fixed amount we ask you about has some chance of being selected.”
  23
     Our initial plan to target only two distinct incentive levels was based on conservative estimates of the number of
participants our budget would support and the potential variance of the incentive effects.
  24
     Note that this is different from the question we used to elicit demand for commitment contracts, in which
participants chose between a fixed payment of $80 and the $80 conditional payment. This enabled us to observe
behavior under the incentive among both the participants who would and would not select into commitment contracts



                                                          16
of $80 for 12 visits equals $6.67 per visit, we determined $7 to be the most comparable piece-rate
incentive. Thus, our assignment probabilities in wave 3 were 33% for the $80 incentive to make 12
visits, 33% for the $0 incentive, and 33% for the $7 piece-rate incentive, to allow us to compare
their effects.
    Although the variation of incentive scheme assignments across waves is not ideal for some of our
analyses, we find that the participant pools look similar across waves, as shown in Appendix D. We
further include wave fixed effects in relevant analysis below.

Announcement and disbursement of incentives In the final section of the online component,
participants learned which incentive, if any, they would receive in the next four weeks. Participants
received an email upon completion of the online component that confirmed their incentive and
reminded them that the four week incentive period would begin on the Monday after they completed
the online component. Afterwards, participants were notified via email of their total number of visits
and the total payment they had earned. Final payments were disbursed via mailed checks.


4    Data
Attendance data Our measure of attendance is computed from participants’ swiping into the
gym using their membership ID cards. Gym login records are potentially problematic if participants
enter and leave the gym to earn incentives without exercising. We do not believe this possibility is
a major concern because this behavior includes many of the costs of attending the gym (e.g., travel)
but excludes some benefits (e.g., exercise). We also introduced a new checkout procedure partway
through the study (in February 2016). Participants after that time were required to swipe out after
attending the gym for at least 10 minutes in order to get credit for a visit toward their incentive.
Introducing this procedure did not change visit patterns or the estimated incentive effects in the
study and the swipe-out records reveal that the vast majority of gym visits lasted substantially
longer than 10 minutes.

Sample Table 2 summarizes characteristics of our sample. The participant pool is 61% female
with a mean age of just under 34 years. 57% of the participants are either part- or full-time students,
57% work either part- or full-time, 27% are married, just under half hold an advanced degree, and
household income averages fifty-five thousand dollars. Participants averaged 6.9 visits over the past
four weeks.
    Column 3 shows the p-values for a test that the information treatment group mean equals that
of the information control group for wave 1. Column 5 shows the analogous p-values for waves 2
and 3. Overall, the results are consistent with good balance between treatment and control groups.
    Compared to samples in other field experiments on commitment contract demand—particularly
those involving low-income populations—our sample is more educated and numerate due to being
on their own. All but five individuals (1.2% of wave 3 participants) who were asked this question chose the $80
incentive over $0.


                                                      17
affiliated with a university. For example, 95.2% of our sample correctly answered two numeracy
questions from Lusardi and Mitchell (2007), which is significantly higher than the rate in the broader
U.S. population.25 Given this high numeracy, it does not seem likely that our sample is more sus-
ceptible to imperfect perception than the typical sample in commitment contract field experiments.

Attention checks We have a few measures that proxy for engagement and attention to our online
elicitations. First, as described in Section 3, we had two questions that offered a binary choice in
which one of the choices, $0, was clearly dominated by the other. Only 1.8% of participants chose
a dominated option. Second, we had an attention check question that presented a multiple-choice
question to the participants but instructed them to click the “next” button without filling out one of
the choices, with the explanation that this would indicate their attention to the question prompts.
Only 3.5% of participants failed the attention check. Finally, we had two comprehension checks
about the WTP elicitations (see Appendix D.1 for details) and can use failing both as an additional
indicator of lack of engagement. We find that only 4.3% of participants failed these comprehension
checks twice. Taken together, these statistics suggest that attention and engagement were high, and
compare favorably with most other lab-in-the-field studies.


5         Actual, forecasted, and desired attendance
5.1        Actual and forecasted attendance
Figure 5 summarizes the forecasted and actual attendance curves, as introduced in Section 2.2.
Both forecasted and actual attendance increase significantly with incentives, and there is a sizeable
gap between the two, consistent with naivete (β̃ > β). On average, participants forecasted 11.5
visits in the absence of incentives and 17.7 visits with the $7 incentive during the four-week study
period. In reality, participants’ attendance was 7.2 visits in the absence of incentives and 13.3 visits
with the $7 incentive.
         Figure 6 presents a binned scatter plot of actual attendance versus expected attendance for the
(randomly assigned) incentive people actually received. Although participants are over-optimistic
about their attendance, the Figure shows a tight relationship between forecasted and realized at-
tendance.26
         Figure 7 shows how the information treatments affected expectations and actual visits, splitting
the sample into information treatment and control groups. Our simple wave 1 information treatment
had no effect on either expectations of visits or realized visit patterns, as shown in panel (a). By
    25
     The percentage calculation question asks, “If the chance of getting a disease is 10 percent, how many people out
of 1,000 would be expected to get the disease?” The lottery division question asks, “If 5 people all have the winning
number in the lottery and the prize is 2 million dollars, how much will each of them get?” For comparison, in a
sample of 1,984 adults aged 51-56 in the 2004 HRS, the percentages answering each question correctly were 83.5%
(the percentage calculation) and 56% (the lottery division) (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007).
  26
     The fact that first point does not lie below the 45-degree line does not imply that some people are under-
optimistic. This is consistent with mean-zero noise in stated beliefs generating a form of mean-reversion between
actual and forecasted behavior.



                                                         18
contrast, the enhanced information treatment in waves 2 and 3 had a significant effect on beliefs
that partially reduced participants’ overoptimism, as seen in panel (b). This evidence shows that
expectations are malleable, and this “first-stage” allows us to study the causal effects of sophistication
on the behavior change premium and commitment contract take-up.

5.2      Willingness to pay for incentives
Figure 8 presents binned scatter plots of how WTP for the incentives varies with people’s forecasts
about attendance given those incentives. As would be implied by standard models, there is a tight
relationship between WTP and both the size of the incentive and people’s forecasted attendance
with that incentive. Moreover, the size of the incentive changes not only the level of WTP, but also
its slope with respect to forecasted attendance.
       Figure 9 plots the average WTP for piece-rate incentives elicited from our participants for each
of the six different piece-rate levels. The figure also shows the average subjective expected earnings
at that piece-rate—i.e., the piece-rate multiplied by the participants’ forecasted attendance. The
WTP is above participants’ subjective expected earnings for low incentives. For example, under
a $1 per-visit piece-rate, participants believed that they would attend an average of 12.92 times
but had an average willingness to pay for a $1 piece-rate incentive of $18.30, $5.38 more than their
subjective expected earnings. The fact that people are willing to pay more for small incentives than
they expect to earn is consistent with the theoretical predictions for agents that are aware of present
focus (i.e., β̂ < 1). We also observe that the WTP is below the expected earnings on average for
high incentives. This is consistent with the implication of equation (2), given moderate perceived
present focus (E[β̃i ] reasonably close to 1).27

5.3      The behavior change premium
The seven different incentive levels for which we elicited WTP and forecasts allow us to produce
a precise estimate of the average behavior change premium. Formally, order the incentive levels
p0 = 0, p1 , . . . , pK in ascending order. For each pair of adjacent incentives, pk and pk+1 , we can
construct an estimate of the behavior change premium according to equation (3), applied to p = pk
and ∆ = pk+1 − pk . We then take the (unweighted average) across all participants and all incentive
pairs. We focus primarily on the average, rather than individual differences, because according to
Corollary 1, the average statistic is the unbiased measure of the mean behavior change premium
in the presence of imperfect perception. Consistent with our conjecture of imperfect perception of
contract values, we find substantial variation in these valuation measures at the individual level.28
  27
     To see this formally, note that the derivative of expected earnings with respect to the incentive level p is given
by E[αi (p) + αi0 (p)]. Thus as long as E[(bi + p)(1 − β̃i )] < 1, which will be the case for moderate levels of perceived
                d
present focus, dp  E[wi (p)] < E[αi (p) + αi0 (p)].
  28
     For example, we observe that the estimated value of behavior change is negative for 34 percent of the individual
valuation measures. If we took those negative measures at face value, it would imply that participants have a desire
to reduce their gym use at some incentive levels 34 percent of the time. However, these negative values more likely
represent valuation errors in participants’ decisions about willingness to pay and/or their estimates of visit rates.



                                                           19
   Figure 10 shows the average value across six incentive levels, as well as the average excluding
the valuation of increasing the piece-rate from $0 to $1, along with 95% confidence intervals. On
average, participants exhibited a behavior change premium of $2.01 per $1 of incentive increase.
However, this valuation is driven in part by an especially large premium assigned to the $1 incentive.
As Corollary 1 shows, if there are fixed social pressure effects (ηi , in the notation of that section)
influencing willingness to pay for contingent incentives, the more robust measure of the behavior
change premium is calculated only from changes in positive piece-rate levels. This more conservative
average is $1.20 per dollar of piece-rate increase, and is also statistically significant.
   A linear regression of expected attendance on the piece-rate incentives shows that partici-
pants expect that, on average, a $1 change in piece-rates will increase attendance by 0.67 visits
(participant-cluster-robust s.e. 0.014). This implies that our two measures of the behavior change
premium translate to values of $3.00 per attendance when we include WTP for the $1/visit incentive
and $1.78 per attendance using the more conservative estimate that excludes WTP for the $1/visit
incentive.

5.4   Correlates and determinants of the behavior change premium
Table 3 examines the relationship between proxies for people’s perceived present focus and the
behavior change premium. One proxy for people’s beliefs about their present focus is the gap
between their stated goal for attendance over the study period and their stated beliefs about how
often they will go to the gym without incentives during the study period. A larger gap indicates
a larger difference between people’s desired and forecasted attendance. In column 1 of Table 3 we
regress the more conservative measure of the behavior change premium (i.e., excluding the $1/visit
incentive) on a standardized measure of the gap between goal and forecasted attendance. The
results show that a one standard deviation increase in the gap between stated goal and expected
visits is associated with a $0.68 increase in the behavior change premium, compared to an overall
mean of $1.17.
   Our second measure of people’s awareness of present focus is the difference between participants’
actual attendance under the incentive they were randomly assigned and their expected attendance
under that incentive. This difference is negative on average, reflecting participants’ over-optimism,
so a larger number would imply a smaller gap between actual and expected behavior. Column 2 of
Table 3 shows that this measure of awareness of present focus is also strongly related to the behavior
change premium. A one standard deviation decrease in the gap corresponds to a $0.50 increase in
the behavior change premium.
   Of course, these patterns could be confounded by a range of issues that emerge when analyzing
proxies for constructs like sophistication. Our experimental information treatment allows us to es-
timate a causal relationship between the behavior change premium and beliefs about present focus.
In column 3 of Table 3 we regress the behavior change premium on indicators for the information
treatments. Consistent with the strong first stage documented in Section 5.1, the enhanced infor-
mation treatment significantly increased the average behavior change premium, raising the measure


                                                   20
by $1.36 from the information control group average of $0.66. Consistent with the null first stage
documented in Section 5.1, the wave 1 information treatment had no effect on the behavior change
premium. Column 4 shows that the point estimates are unchanged when including both proxies for
sophistication and the information treatment dummies in the regression. In Section 7 we present
additional evidence that the information treatment is primarily acting on people’s beliefs β̃, rather
than through other channels that might change their forecasts of future attendance.
         Finally, in Appendix B.1, we regress the behavior change premium on people’s expected change
in behavior. Consistent with the Proposition 1, we find that it is strongly related to the expected
change in attendance. Moreover, when excluding the $1/visit incentive, the constant term in column
1 of Table A1 implies that the behavior change premium is indistinguishable from zero for individuals
who expect no change in behavior. By contrast, the behavior change premium is significantly positive
for the $1/ visit incentive for individuals who expect no change in behavior (constant term in column
3 of Table A1). These results are consistent with the presence of fixed effects ηi that are differenced
out from the estimated behavior change premium when the $1/visit incentive is excluded.
         In summary, we find that the behavior change premium is small in the control group, is signifi-
cantly affected by the information treatment, varies strongly with proxies for sophistication, varies
strongly with individuals’ subjective beliefs about behavior change, and is approximately zero for
individuals not expecting behavior change. Taken together, these results provide strong support for
the assumptions of Corollary 1.


6         Take-up of commitment contracts
6.1        Take-up of “more” commitment contracts
Participants in our study had high take-up of commitment contracts to visit more than 8, 12, or 16
times. The take-up rates were 64% at the 8 visit threshold, 49% at the 12 visit threshold, and 32%
at the 16 visit threshold. These take-up rates fit comfortably in the literature. As Table 1 shows,
while take-up rates are lower for studies that require participants to put their own money at stake,
take-up rates are much higher for studies like ours that feature “house money” or other currency like
course grade points.29 Most similar to our contract options, Schilbach (2019) also offers participants
a choice between money for sure versus the same amount of money only if participants stay sober,
and finds take-up rates ranging from 31% to 55% for the commitment options.
         Consistent with the existing literature, we find that commitment contracts had a substantial
effect on behavior. Recall that in wave 3, we randomized some participants into receiving the
commitment contracts, and that for most participants this assignment was exogenous to their stated
desire to take up the contract. We find that assignment of a “12 or more” visits contract increased
attendance by 3.51 visits (p-value < 0.01) for those participants who wanted the contract, and by
    29
    Overall, the take-up rates for penalty-based contracts that do not require participants to put up their own money
range from 36% to 73%, with an average of 44% for house money. The take-up rates for contracts that feature removal
of options that do not affect transactions with own money are even higher.



                                                         21
4.04 visits (p-value < 0.01) for those who did not. At the same time, and also consistent with prior
work, we find that a substantial fraction of participants who took up the contract subsequently
failed to reach the target (35%).
   Our results, like those in prior studies, would typically be interpreted as clear evidence of
widespread awareness of present focus. However, we show that such inference may not be war-
ranted without additional stress tests.

6.2   Commitment contract take-up correlates only weakly with the behavior
      change premium
We find only a weak correlation between take-up of commitment contracts and the behavior change
premium. In Table 4 we regress take up of commitment contracts against the individual-level
measured behavior change premium. A one standard deviation increase in the behavior change
premium is associated with around a 2 percentage point increase in the take-up of commitment
contracts. Appendix Table A2 shows that this association is even smaller for the control group who
did not receive the information treatments.
   One potential reason for the lack of association between the behavior change premium and
commitment contract take-up could be that both measures are noisy and there is attenuation bias
in the relationship. However, the analysis in Table 3 showed very strong associations between
the behavior change premium and our proxy for sophistication, suggesting the measure is not so
noisy as to attenuate all relationships. Moreover, the average pairwise correlation of the individual-
level behavior change premium at different incentive levels is 0.17 (bootstrapped cluster-robust
s.e. 0.06) and the average pairwise correlation of demand for the different “more” contracts is 0.49
(bootstrapped cluster-robust s.e. 0.02).
   Next, we examine how take-up of “more” commitment contracts correlates with our proxies for
sophistication introduced in Section 5.4. Table 5 shows that the the gap between goal and expected
attendance is possitively associated with take-up of commitment contracts. However, in contrast
to the relationship with the behavior change premium, the association with commitment contract
take-up is relatively small in magnitude: a one standard deviation increase in the gap between
goal and expected attendance is associated with a 3.9 percentage point increase in the take up of
commitment contracts, from an average take-up rate of 0.49. Moreover, and in starker contrast to
our results on the behavior change premium, column 2 shows that participants who are more over-
optimistic about their gym attendance are actually more likely to take up commitment contracts
for higher gym attendance.
   Finally, Section 2 introduced the prediction that if there is enough uncertainty about the costs
and benefits of future gym attendance, then the perceived harms of commitment contracts will be
increasing in the degree of perceived present focus (1 − β̃). Thus, if contract demand is influenced
by imperfect perception, an (exogenous) increase in sophistication should decrease the take-up of
contracts to attend the gym more. Consistent with this prediction, column 3 of Table 5 shows
that the enhanced information treatment decreased the take-up of “more” commitment contracts by


                                                 22
8.0 percentage points. This is in stark contrast to the strong positive effect that the information
treatment had on the measured behavior change premium. Consistent with a null first stage, the
wave 1 information treatment had no effect on commitment contract take-up.
   Collectively, these results are consistent with the hypotheses introduced in Sections 2.3 and 2.4—
that commitment contracts might be most unattractive to those with stronger perceived present
focus, or that their take-up may be influenced by noisy valuation and perceived social pressure.
The next section provides a more direct test of whether stochastic valuation errors are affecting the
take-up of commitment contracts.

6.3   Commitment contract take-up appears to reflect imperfect perception
To test for potential noisy valuation and perceived social pressure, we use our novel design feature
of offering people “fewer visits” commitment contracts. Table 6 summarizes take-up of both “more”
commitments and “fewer” commitments at each of the visit thresholds. Column 2 shows that
approximately one-third of participants selected the “fewer visits” contracts. Under the standard
interpretation of commitment contracts as indicating a desire to influence one’s future behavior,
take-up of these “fewer visits” contracts would be interpreted as a reasonably large share of the
population having either awareness of future bias or perceiving visits to the gym as having immediate
benefits and delayed costs.
   However, the imperfect perception model in Section 2.4 not only predicts that some participants
will select the “fewer visits” contracts, but also makes the stronger prediction that some participants
will select both types of contracts at the same threshold. Our within-subject design allows us to
examine this prediction. Columns 3 and 4 in the table show the shares of participants selecting
each type of contract conditional on selecting the other contract type for each threshold. Many
participants selected both the “more visits” and the “fewer visits” contracts at the same threshold.
In particular, among participants who selected “more visits” contracts at each threshold, nearly half
also selected the “fewer visits” contract at the same threshold. Choosing both contracts at the same
threshold is inconsistent with decisions driven by awareness of present focus, and thus a strong
indicator that stochastic valuation errors or perceived social pressure are prevalent in commitment
contract take-up.
   An even stronger prediction of our imperfect perception model is that not only will some par-
ticipants select both types of contracts, but that there will be a positive correlation in the take-up
of the two types of contracts. Consistent with this, the last two columns of Table 6 show that
participants who chose the “fewer” commitment contracts were significantly more likely to choose
the “more” commitment contracts, and vice versa. Appendix Table A3 shows that these patterns are
consistent in both our information control group and the group receiving the enhanced information
treatment.
   While these results suggest the presence of stochastic valuation errors or social pressure effects,
they do not imply that all take-up of commitment contracts is explained by these confounds. For
example, just over half of the participants who selected “more visits” commitments at each threshold


                                                  23
did not select the fewer visits contracts and conversely for participants who selected “fewer visits”
contracts. These patterns could be consistent with some participants truly wanting to commit
to attending the gym more, and some participants wanting to commit to attending the gym less.
However, in Appendix Table A4 we investigate the association between the measured behavior
change premium and taking up “more” commitment contracts but not also “fewer” contracts and
do not find any positive association. This suggests that it may not be possible to reliably identify
the behavior change premium by simply restricting to individuals who take-up “more” contracts but
not “fewer” contracts.

6.4     Robustness of commitment contract results
6.4.1    Participants don’t confuse “fewer visits” for “more visits” contracts

Although the reported patterns of behavior are consistent with the imperfect perception model
in Section 2.4, one could argue that an asymmetric error process could make take-up of “fewer
visits” contracts noisy while not affecting take-up of “more visits” contracts. For example, people
could mistake “fewer visits” contracts for “more visits” contracts. But the fact that some people
select “fewer visits” contracts without also selecting “more visits” speaks against this possibility as
an explanation for all choices. Moreover, the experimental instructions made a clear distinction
between the two types of contracts, presenting them together with the differences underlined for
emphasis (see Figure 4). For example, at the 12-visit threshold, the “more visits” contract description
underlined “at least 12” and the “fewer visits” contract description underlined “11 or fewer.”
    Another strategy for assessing whether asymmetric errors can fully account for the observed
patterns in take-up of “more visits” and “fewer visits” contracts is to look at the correlates of take-
up. If participants were simply confusing “fewer” contracts for “more” contracts, then any variable
that is positively correlated with perceived success in or take-up of a “more” contract should also
be positively correlated with perceived success in or take-up of a “fewer” contract.
    Table 7 shows that participants differentiated between questions about perceived likelihood of
success in a “more” contract versus a “fewer” contract.30 Participants who expected to attend
the gym frequently in the absence of incentives were more likely to believe that they would meet
the terms of a “more” contract, and less likely to believe that they would meet the terms of a
“fewer” contract. Moreover, the positive and negative coefficients are not identified off of different
subgroups: when restricting to the subgroup who both chose “more” and “fewer” contracts, the
coefficients remain essentially unchanged, as shown in column 4. This implies that at least in
answering the forecasting questions, participants were not simply misreading the “fewer” contract
to be the “more” contract. In Appendix 6.4.1, we continue to build on this analysis and present
correlations of commitment contract take-up with (i) perceived likelihood of success under “more”
commitment contracts (Appendix Table A5), (ii) subjective expected attendance in the absence of
incentives (Appendix Table A6), (iii) past attendance (Appendix Table A6), and (iv) desired goal
  30
     For Table 7, we restrict our analysis to wave 3, the only wave for which we elicited beliefs about the likelihoods
of meeting the commitment contract thresholds.


                                                          24
attendance (Appendix Table A6). Each of these variables is significantly positively correlated with
take-up of “more” contracts, and significantly negatively correlated with take-up of “fewer” contracts.

6.4.2      Results are not a consequence of disengagement from the study

In Section 4 we summarized results from attention and comprehension checks, which suggest strong
engagement and attention. When we exclude the small percentage of participants who failed a com-
prehension check or attention check or chose a dominated option, overall demand for the “fewer”
contracts falls from 31% to 30%, and this exclusion has no effect on demand for the “more” con-
tracts. While these proxies cannot be guaranteed to identify all individuals who disengaged or
misunderstood some portion of the study, the lack of correlation between the proxies and demand
for commitment contracts implies that disengagement or misunderstanding is unlikely to drive our
results.

6.4.3      Results are not driven by participants for whom the contracts are not binding

Because our commitment contract offers are only weakly financially dominated, one concern might
be that some of our take-up is driven by individuals for whom the contracts are not really binding.
For example, individuals who choose the 11 or fewer visits contract could be individuals who would
already attend the gym 11 or fewer times in the absence of any discouragement. Such patterns
of choice appear to be prevalent in some studies, such as Augenblick et al. (2015), who find that
demand for choice-set restrictions drops decreases substantially when a small price is introduced.
However, other studies, such as Schilbach (2019), do not find this phenomenon.
       In our data, it does not appear that much of the take-up is driven by individuals for whom
the contracts would be inconsequential. As shown in Appendix 6.4.3, individuals whose expected
attendance exceeds the “fewer” threshold by 2 or 4 visits are nearly as likely to select the “fewer
visits” contracts as the full sample. The same pattern holds for the “more visits” contracts. Perhaps
most importantly, the positive correlation between take-up of “more” and “fewer” contracts remains
unchanged when restricting to a subset of participants for whom either the “more” or the “fewer”
contract would be at least moderately binding (Appendix Table A8).31

6.5      Summary of reduced-form results
Sections 5 and 6 provide a core set of reduced-form results. First, participants in our study perceive
themselves to be time-inconsistent. Second, participants appear to be only partially aware of their
time inconsistency, as they overestimate their future gym attendance. Third, take-up of commitment
  31
    At the same time, results such as those of Augenblick et al. (2015) could be an indicator of the kind of im-
perfect perception that we model in Section 2.4. If commitment contracts offer approximately no perceived value
to individuals and if the variance of the stochastic valuation error term ε is small, then many individuals would
choose commitment contracts at no price, but would abruptly stop choosing them at a positive price. However, if the
variance of the stochastic valuation error term ε is non-negligible, then commitment contract demand would decline
much less rapidly with the price. Thus, while results such as those of Augenblick et al. (2015) are consistent with
imperfect perception of contract value, they by no means constitute a thorough test.



                                                        25
contracts is not strongly related to perceived present focus and appears to be influenced by stochastic
valuation errors or perceived social pressure. This suggests that commitment contracts are unlikely
to be a well-targeted tool for addressing time inconsistency in this setting. In the next section
we estimate the parameters of the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model, and we use the model to
evaluate the welfare effects of commitment contracts.


7         Structural estimates and welfare implications
In this section, we first estimate the model of present focus introduced in Section 2.1, examining
heterogeneity by commitment contract choice and several other covariates. We then use the esti-
mated model to evaluate the welfare effects of commitment contracts, and compare them to the
welfare effects of linear financial incentives.

7.1        Parameter estimates
7.1.1        Summary of methodology

We estimate the model of present focus introduced in Section 2.1 using our data on forecasted and
actual attendance, and the WTP for the piece-rate incentives. We estimate the model both by
pooling over the full population, as well as for various subsamples to incorporate heterogeneity. For
simplicity, we assume that once people have financial incentives in place, their daily gym attendance
decisions are not biased by stochastic valuation errors, although our welfare results do incorporate
people’s possible errors in contract take-up decisions. We discuss this assumption in detail in Section
7.3.
         We assume that each day corresponds to a period, and we thus set T = 28 to correspond to
the four-week study period. We assume the attendance costs in each period are distributed inde-
pendently and identically according to the exponential distribution with rate parameter λ.32 This
assumption implies that the costs of attending the gym are always non-negative, which, together
with the fact that all membership contracts did not involve per-attendance fees, implies that in-
dividuals never experience immediate pleasure from attending the gym. We discuss robustness to
variations of this assumption in Section 7.3, but also show that this assumption is most consistent
with our data.
         The free parameters in our model are the perceived and actual present focus parameters β̃ and β,
the (perceived) delayed health benefits b, and the rate parameter λ.33 The parametric assumptions
                                  average attendance at incentive p are given by 28 · 1 − e−λβ(b+p)
                                                                                                   
imply that
        h actual and forecasted
                       i
and 28 · 1 − e−λβ̃(b+p) , respectively.
         Because we have rich information about the perceived and actual attendance curves and the be-
havior change premium, and because these objects are functions of only four parameters (β, β̃, b, λ),
    The CDF of an exponential distribution with rate parameter λ is F (x) = 1 − e−λx .
    32
    33
    Formally, people’s behavior is determined by their perceptions of the per-attendance health benefits, not the
actual health benefits. If the two are different, our methodology identifies the perceived health benefits.



                                                       26
identification of our parametric model follows straightforwardly from the logic introduced in Section
2.2. More detailed algebraic intuition is as follows. First, note that the intercepts at p = 0 of the
forecasted and actual attendance curves are determined by λβb and λβ̃b, respectively, and the slopes
of the curves are determined by λβ and λβ̃, respectively. Thus, if λβ is identified from the slope
of the actual attendance curve and λβb is identified from the intercept, then the health benefits b
are identified as well. More generally, as depicted in Figure 1, the health benefits b correspond to
the projected level of attendance disincentives at which the forecasted and actual attendance curves
intersect. Second, note that Proposition 1 shows that the behavior change premium is a linear
function of (1 − β̃)b. Thus, since we can identify b, we can also identify β̃. Third, note that the
vertical wedge between the forecasted and actual attendance curves is (β̃ − β)(b + p). Thus, since we
can identify b and β̃, the wedge between the two curves identifies β. In sum, we have four param-
eters, and we have five sets of moments identifying them: the average behavior change premium,
the intercepts of the forecasted and actual attendance curves, and the slopes of the forecasted and
actual attendance curves.
   Formally, we estimate the parameters using the generalized method of moments (GMM), with
the moment equations and the estimation procedure detailed in Appendix C.1. Since the forecasted
attendance curve and the behavior change premium utilizes multiple observations per person, we
cluster all standard errors at the subject level. In Appendix C.2 we show that, to a first order, our
parameter estimates can be regarded as estimates of population averages, under the assumption
that the health benefits b and the cost parameter λ are independent of each other, and independent
of actual and perceived present focus parameters β and β̃. We provide empirical evidence for this
in the results we summarize below.

7.1.2   Results

Table 8 presents our parameter estimates. Column 1 presents our estimate of the (average) present
focus parameter β, column 2 presents our estimate of the (average) perceived present focus param-
eter β̃, and column 3 presents our estimate of the (average) perceived health benefits b. Columns
4-6 present three key functions of these parameters. Column 4 presents our estimate of the average
internality (1 − β)b, which is the wedge between forecasted and desired attendance, in units of
marginal utility. Column 5 presents our estimate of the perceived internality, (1 − β̃)b. Column 6
presents a measure—introduced by Augenblick and Rabin (2019)—of the degree to which people
are aware of their present focus: (1 − β̃)/(1 − β). A value of 1 corresponds to complete awareness,
and a value of 0 corresponds to complete naivete.
   Row 1 presents our estimates for all participants in the study. We estimate actual and perceived
                                         ˆ
present focus parameters β̂ = 0.55 and β̃ = 0.84, respectively, and health benefits b̂ = 9.66. Our
estimates of (β, β̃) are approximately in the middle of the range of estimates from studies estimating
both parameters: (0.31, 0.73) in Mahajan et al. (2020), (0.37, 0.8) in Bai et al. (Forthcoming), (0.67,
0.85) in Chaloupka et al. (2019), (0.74, 0.77) in Allcott et al. (2020), and (0.85, 1) in Augenblick
and Rabin (2019). As reviewed in Appendix C.8, our estimate b̂ of health benefits is close to the


                                                  27
middle of the range of public health estimates.
      Rows 2 and 3 present parameter estimates for participants in the information control group and
participants who received the enhanced information treatment. Consistent with our interpretation
that the information treatment affects awareness of present focus, the two rows show a significant
                             ˆ
difference in the estimated β̃, but essentially identical estimates β̂ and b̂. The remarkable similarity
of the β̂ and b̂ estimates across the two rows would be a highly unlikely coincidence if our model
were misspecified—e.g., if overestimation of future attendance was due to underestimation of future
cost shocks, but we incorrectly modeled that overestimation as coming from naivete about present
focus. If this were the case, the information treatment would not change the behavior change
premium. Thus, the reduced gap between forecasted and actual attendance would be interpreted
as the information treatment increasing β and/or decreasing b, which would lead the estimates β̂, b̂
to be significantly impacted by the information treatment.
      Rows 4 and 5 explore heterogeneity by gym attendance over the past four weeks. Past attendance
is highly predictive of future attendance, suggesting that there are stable “attendance types”: the
regression coefficient from a regression of realized attendance on past attendance is 0.685 (robust
s.e. 0.028). Here, there are significant differences in β̂ and b̂. Consistent with economic intuition,
lower β and lower b are associated with lower past attendance. On the other hand, there is no
theoretical reason to expect that past attendance should be related to awareness of present focus,
                                       ˆ
and correspondingly, we find that (1− β̃)/(1− β̂) is remarkably stable across the two past attendance
groups.
      In rows 6-8, we estimate the model for the subsamples of participants who indicated that they
wanted the 8+, 12+, and 16+ contracts, respectively. Consistent with our reduced-form results, we
find slightly lower estimates of β and β̃ for these individuals, but the differences are economically
small. We find no evidence that commitment contracts are chosen by those with particularly high
perceived or actual self-control problems, or those with particularly high internalities (1 − β)b.
      Row 9 explores the potential bias that might result from ignoring heterogeneity. We assume that
there are eight types of individuals corresponding to eight subgroups: below- or above-median past
attendance, crossed with receiving either the enhanced information treatment or no information
treatment, crossed with willing to take-up the 12+ commitment contract.34 We exclude individuals
who received the ineffective information treatment in wave 1, although treating these individuals
as being in the information control group leads to essentially identical results. We estimate the
parameters separately for these eight groups, and then report the average, with each group weighted
in proportion to its size. As rows 2-5 show, there is significant heterogeneity along these dimensions.
However, the estimates in row 9 show that averaging over these eight subgroups produces essentially
the same estimates as in row 1. Of course, there is likely additional heterogeneity not captured by
the subsample splits in row 9, but the exercise illustrates the econometric result from Appendix C.2
that our estimates can be regarded as sample averages.
      Figure 11 shows the in-sample fit of our model to the actual and forecasted attendance curves.
 34
      We focus on the 12+ commitment contract since the other contracts were offered only in the first two waves.



                                                         28
Panel (a) uses the representative agent specification from row 1 of Table 8, while panel (b) allows for
eight different types as in row 9 of Table 8. As can be seen, our estimates produce a tight in-sample
fit under either specification. The fact that the in-sample fit is nearly identical in both panels is
consistent with the Appendix C.2 result that our parameter estimates can be regarded as sample
averages.

7.2      Implications for commitment contracts
Appendix C.3 presents the derivations for how present-focused individuals behave in the presence of
commitment contracts, and how commitment contracts affect their period 0 surplus. To summarize,
the threshold incentives of the commitment contracts generate payoffs that are non-separable over
time, and we solve for individuals’ equilibrium strategies by backwards induction—formalized as
the Perception Perfect Equilibrium by O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001). Given an incentive scheme,
a person’s perceived and actual expected utility of starting out in period t with ht prior attendances
can be computed recursively. These value functions allow us to conduct welfare analysis, and to
obtain analytic solutions for a person’s strategy in each period t. Our welfare analyses take the
long-run preferences of present-focused individuals as the normative criterion, which is a common
but not uncontroversial assumption (Bernheim and Rangel, 2009; Bernheim, 2016; Bernheim and
Taubinsky, 2018).

7.2.1      Out-of-sample validation tests

Before turning to welfare implications, we show that our model delivers accurate out-of-sample
predictions about the effects of commitment contracts on gym attendance. Recall that in wave
3, we elicited preferences for commitment from all participants, but only a subset of participants
were randomized to actually receive the 12+ contract. This allows us to empirically estimate how
commitment contracts affect those who want them.
      Row 1 of Table 9 reports our empirical estimates of how the 12+ commitment contract affects
the behavior of those who want it. Column 1 reports the change in average attendance, column 2
reports the likelihood of attending 12 or more times with the contract, and column 3 reports the
likelihood of attending 12 or more times without the contract. Column 4 reports the difference
between columns 3 and 2: the impact of the commitment contract on the likelihood of attending
12 or more times.
      Rows 2-5 report our model’s predictions under different assumptions about heterogeneity, still
restricting to those individuals who chose to take up the contract offer. These are out-of-sample
predictions in the sense that information about commitment contracts was not used in the structural
estimation of model parameters. Row 2 assumes homogeneity conditional on taking up the 12+
contract, which is analogous to the specification in row 7 of Table 8. Row 3 allows for more heteroge-
nous parameters, allowing them to vary by the attendance and information subgroups considered
in Row 9 of Table 8.35 Rows 4-6 consider robustness to alternative heterogeneity assumptions—in
 35
      Note that because Table 9 studies individuals who take up the 12+ contract, there are four rather than eight


                                                        29
particular, heterogeneity by median past attendance only, by quartile of past attendance only, or
by quartile of past attendance crossed with receipt of the information treatment.
    Table 9 shows that while all specifications accurately predict the impact on average attendance,
more realistic heterogeneity assumptions are required to match the impact of the 12+ commitment
contract on the likelihood of attending the gym 12 or more times. When individuals are assumed
to be homogeneous, the model predicts that individuals who take up the contract almost always
meet its 12-visit threshold—in contrast to the 35% failure rate we observe in the data. These
homogeneous individuals are also unlikely to exceed the 12-visit threshold in the absence of any
incentives, given their baseline attendance of 7.2 visits. Allowing for heterogeneity substantially
changes the predictions, because individuals with high β and b are likely to attend the gym 12 or
more times both with and without the commitment contract, while individuals with low β and b are
unlikely to attend the gym 12 or more times both with and without the commitment contract. Thus,
allowing heterogeneity in attendance decreases the predicted impact of the commitment contract,
in line with our empirical estimates. As illustrated by the similar predictions of rows 4-6, the exact
modeling of heterogeneity is largely inconsequential, as long the model allows for both “low”- and
“high”-attendance types.

7.2.2    Welfare implications

Table 10 presents our welfare estimates for different types of incentive schemes. We conduct these
calculations under the assumption of eight heterogeneous types, as in row 9 of Table 8. The welfare
results are similar for other assumptions about heterogeneity, and are reported in Appendix C.5.
The results for the 8+ and 16+ contracts, which were offered only in waves 1 and 2, are also very
similar, and reported in Appendix C.4.
    Note that our procedure does not require us to use our model to predict who will take up the
contracts—take-up decisions are directly obtained from our data, and are directly incorporated into
our construction of eight heterogeneous types. We only use our model to predict how the contracts
affect the welfare of those who choose them.
    Column 1 of Table 10 reports the predicted impact on average gym attendance. Column 2
reports the average impact on individuals’ long-run utility. Column 3 reports the average impact on
health benefits. Specifically, if ∆k is the average impact on attendance of type k individuals who have
                                                                          P           P
delayed health benefits bk , then the average impact on health benefits is k ∆k bk / ( k ∆k ). Column
(4) reports the average increase in attendance costs that results from an increase in attendance. Any
incentive scheme that increases the likelihood of attendance each day must mechanically increase the
incurred attendance costs. Column 5 reports the difference between columns 3 and 4. The number
reported in column 5 is the social surplus from an incentive scheme, and corresponds to a standard
utilitarian welfare criterion, such as the one used in Gruber and Kőszegi (2001) or O’Donoghue and
Rabin (2006).36 All of the results reported in the table are averaged over all participants in the
heterogeneous types considered in row 3.
  36
     Here, we make the implicit assumption that the marginal cost to the gym of an additional attendance is negligible.



                                                          30
study and not just, e.g., those who take-up the contracts.
    The difference between individual surplus (column 2) and social surplus (column 5) is due to how
the individuals’ financial outcomes are treated. Financial losses or gains affect individual surplus,
and thus are included in the statistics reported in column 2. However, the statistic in column
2 is an inappropriate measure of social surplus because, e.g., the penalty payments incurred by
individuals who take up commitment contracts are not “burned.” These penalty payments are a
financial transfer from individuals taking up the contract to the provider of the contracts (e.g., a
public organization). Analogously, subsidies mechanically increase individual surplus, but they are
costly. Our social surplus measure incorporates these considerations, focusing on the efficiency of
behavior change: the impact on health benefits minus the impact on attendance costs.
    Our social surplus measure corresponds to several commonly used metrics. First, it corresponds
to a utilitarian objective function, where provider and consumer incomes are weighted equally.
Second, it corresponds to a consumer surplus metric when providers fund the subsidies through
lump-sum taxes or fees and return commitment contract penalties through lump-sum rebates. For
example, employers might provide gym attendance subsidies at the ultimate expense of less generous
bonuses or other benefits, such that on net, the subsidies only change behavior and do not create a
financial transfer between employees and employers.37
    Row 1 presents the estimated surplus of offering a commitment contract for 12 or more gym
attendances. Offering this commitment contract lowers individuals’ private surplus, as shown in
column 2. Indivuduals who take-up this contract incur a surplus loss of −$18.69 per person. Aver-
aging over all participants (not just those who take-up the contract), this implies that offering this
contract lowers overall consumer surplus by an average of −$9.23 per person.
    Although individuals are made worse off by taking up the contract, the increased gym attendance
generated by this contract—2.47 for those who take it up, 1.22 averaged over all participants—
increases social efficiency. However, the 12+ contract is not the most efficient means of generating
the average 1.22 visits increase. As reported in row 2, a gym attendance subsidy of $1.90 per
attendance generates the same change in average attendance, but in a more socially efficient manner.
This subsidy generates both a higher increase in health benefits and a smaller increase in attendance
costs, leading to a net social surplus gain of $4.39 per person.38 The fact that this subsidy generates
If the gym incurs non-negligible costs from additional attendances, the social efficiency criterion in column 5 would
need to be modified to include those costs as well.
   37
      For example, our social surplus metric is identical to the utilitarian criterion in O’Donoghue and Rabin (2006),
where the provider is the government, which balances its budget with lump-sum transfers. That is, exercise subsidies
would be funded by a lump-sum income tax, while the revenues from commitment contract penalties would be
redistributed through a lump-sum tax refund. Thus, the assumption of lump-sum revenue recycling mechanically
guarantees that pure monetary transfers between individuals and the provider have no effect on social welfare.
   In principle, there may be cases where provider revenue is weighted more heavily than consumer incomes. Such
cases push against subsidies and toward commitment contracts. However, such cases also push most strongly toward
Pigovian taxes. E.g., “sin taxes” would compare particularly favorably to commitment contracts in, e.g., the case
of reducing sugary drinks consumption. Thus, a high marginal value of provider funds does not mechanically favor
using commitment contracts as a policy tool.
   38
      Additionally, column (3) of Table 10 reveals that a linear attendance subsidy not only minimizes costs, but is
also more targeted to people with the highest estimates of health benefits bi . This is because the subsidy targets
individuals with higher bi . This is not a general property of subsidies, and is not true for the 16+ contract, as shown


                                                          31
higher surplus to individuals is mechanical and not economically interesting.
    The results are similar for the 8+ and 16+ contracts, as reported in Appendix C.4. Both
contracts lower individuals’ private surplus, and both generate positive but small increases in social
efficiency. In both cases, linear attendance subsidies that generate the same average increase in
attendance are far more socially efficient.
    Row 3 considers the per-attendance subsidy that maximizes social surplus, which approximately
equals the average value of (1 − βi )bi /βi . We calculate this subsidy to be $7.54 per attendance, and
we find that the subsidy increases social surplus by $9.36 per person. We do not compare to the
“optimal” commitment contract because theory does not provide clear guidance about what this
would be, particularly in light of our findings about stochastic valuation errors. By contrast, the
optimal subsidy is straightforward to calculate and implement, and is estimated to yield large social
gains. This illustrates the potential benefits of using structural estimates to inform the design of
simple incentive schemes.
    Linear incentives are estimated to be more socially efficient than commitment contracts for
two basic reasons. First, although commitment contracts are not more likely to be taken up by
those with the largest internalities (1 − βi )bi , they nevertheless change behavior unevenly across
people. Mechanically, only those who take up the contracts increase their attendance. However,
the efficiency gains from behavior change are concave: it is more efficient to increase everyone’s
attendance by 1.5 visits than to increase half of the population’s attendance by 3.0 visits, if that
half of the population does not differ from the broader population. The intuition is simply that
if c∗i is the marginal cost draw at which a person is indifferent between attending the gym or not,
then a marginal change in this person’s motivation to attend the gym generates social benefits of
bi − c∗i . Thus, the more motivated a person is to attend in the first place, the higher is c∗i , and thus
the lower are the social benefits of providing this person with additional motivation to exercise.
    Second, commitment contracts change behavior unevenly across time. By definition, a linear
attendance subsidy increases a person’s motivation to attend the gym by the same degree each
day. Commitment contracts, however, introduce time-varying incentives because financial rewards
are discontinuous at the threshold.39 The incentives to attend the gym are relatively small at the
beginning, when there are many remaining opportunities for meeting the threshold. Moreover,
present-focused individuals will “procrastinate” on fulfilling the threshold requirement. As shown in
Figure A1 in Appendix C.6, our structural model predicts that on average, commitment contracts
will have a limited effect on behavior at the beginning of the four-week period and a large effect
on behavior at the end of the four-week period. Appendix Figure A2 shows that this prediction is
borne out in the data: the 12+ commitment contract has a larger effect on people’s behavior at the
end of the four-week period. For reasons summarized above, this unequal distribution of treatment
effects over time is less efficient than the constant effects of linear attendance subsidies.
    Both of these principles apply to non-stationary cost distributions, including situations where
in Appendix Table A9.
  39
     A similar argument would apply to financial rewards that are kinked at the threshold, as in, e.g., Kaur et al.
(2015).


                                                        32
costs might decreases or increase over time. More generally, it is most efficient for incentives for
behavior change to be distributed evenly.

7.3   Further robustness considerations
Alternative assumptions about the cost distribution We have assumed that the smallest
value of a cost draw c is zero. That is, that the “good” days are those on which attending the gym
is not immediately unpleasant. We consider robustness to this assumption in Appendix C.7, where
we consider a model in which c ∼ −$5 + X or c ∼ $10 + X, where X is exponentially distributed
with rate λ. The first assumption corresponds to the gym being immediately pleasurable on some
“good” days, while the second assumption corresponds to the minimal hassle cost being equivalent
to $10.
   As Appendix C.7 shows, our conclusions about individual and social surplus are largely the
same under these alternative assumptions—commitment contracts on net harm those who take
them up, and linear incentives are a more efficient means of changing behavior. The parameter
estimates naturally change—but in a manner that worsens both the in-sample and out-of-sample
fit of the model. Higher mean costs lead to a higher estimate of perceived health benefits b; this,
in turn, leads to lower estimates of (1 − β̃) and (1 − β) because the wedges between the actual,
forecasted, and desired attendance are functions of (1 − β)b and (1 − β̃)b. The in-sample fit to
the actual and forecasted attendance curves does not suffer when we assume the higher cost-draw
distribution, but it worsens significantly when assume the lower cost-draw distribution, as shown in
Appendix Figure A4. The out-of-sample fit to the effects of the 12+ commitment contracts worsens
dramatically for both assumptions. The higher distribution of cost draws leads the model to predict
that commitment contracts have too high of an effect on the probability of attending the gym 12 or
more times, while the lower distribution of cost draws leads the model to predict that commitment
contracts have too small of an effect on both average attendance and the probability of attending
the gym 12 or more times.

Imperfect perception of incentives on the “intensive” margin Although we have allowed
for stochastic valuation errors in people’s choice of incentives, we have assumed that stochastic
valuation errors are not present in people’s daily gym attendance decisions once the chosen incentives
are instituted. This assumption is plausible for at least the linear piece-rate incentives, where a
person’s daily attendance decision involves comparing the costs c to the benefits b + p for a single
day, and does not involve any kind of complex aggregation over a longer horizon. This assumption is
also consistent with our model’s tight fit to various moments of the data. For example, the stability
of our estimates of b and β in rows 2 and 3 of Table 8, or the out-of-sample validation in Table 9,
would be less likely in a misspecified model.
   At the same time, this assumption may be less realistic for the dynamic incentives generated by
the threshold incentives of commitment contracts, since reacting to these incentives requires people
to solve the dynamic programming problem detailed in Appendix C.3. If this complexity injects


                                                 33
noise in people’s decisions about gym attendance, it would strengthen our qualitative results about
commitment contracts’ negative effects on consumer surplus, and the greater social efficiency of
simple linear subsidies.


8    Concluding remarks and implications for future work
Better understanding how present-focused individuals make choices between various incentives, in-
cluding commitment contracts, informs both positive and normative analysis. In addition to produc-
ing new estimates of present focus and new evidence about who takes up commitment contracts, the
insights from this study can help inform policy design aimed at counteracting limited self-control.
For example, while economists have long-studied “sin taxes” (e.g., O’Donoghue and Rabin, 2006;
Allcott et al., 2019), there is little work on when the optimal policy mix should involve such taxes
instead of commitment contracts, or when the two tools are complementary. Our theoretical results
suggest that commitment contracts can be a well-targeted policy tool if people are sophisticated,
have limited uncertainty about the desirability of target actions, and their decisions are not affected
much by stochastic valuation errors or perceived social pressure. Sin taxes are a more blunt policy
tool because they affect everyone, not just those who are present-focused. Yet our results suggest
that in settings with uncertainty and stochastic valuation errors, commitment contracts are not
well-targeted. Our results illustrate how sin taxes can be more socially efficient in these settings,
even when there is high take-up of commitment contracts that have significant effects on behavior.
    Of course, our results come with many caveats and leave open many questions. First, our
estimates are local to the participants of our fitness center. Even within the exercise domain, it will
be valuable to apply our methodology to other populations. More broadly, it will be valuable to
extend our methods to other domains of behavior, such as food choice, education, and saving and
borrowing decisions. For example, Allcott et al. (2020) extend our method for estimating present
focus parameters to consumer lending markets, though they do not examine offers of commitment
contracts.
    Second, our analyses focus on a particular set of commitment contracts, and it will be important
for future work to apply our methodology to evaluate other types of commitment contracts. Al-
though our results illustrate that high take-up and high treatment effects on behavior do not imply
that commitment contracts are welfare-enhancing, our results do not preclude the possibility that
commitment contracts different from ours may be more beneficial.
    Third, although we theoretically clarify the important role that uncertainty about future costs
plays in commitment contract demand, we do not explore it empirically. In part, this is because
the initial focus of our design was on obtaining estimates of present focus using WTP for piece-
rate incentive data. In addition, eliciting uncertainty about future hassle costs using simple and
transparent survey questions is challenging. Yet results from settings with naturally occurring
differences in uncertainty, like Kaur et al. (2015), are clearly in line with our theoretical results.
Future work should hone in on this comparative static.


                                                  34
   Fourth, it is natural to expect that in the presence of noisy valuation and other frictions such
as perceived social pressure, stakes will matter. Although our $80 stakes were not low relative to
many other commitment contract experiments, settings like those of Ashraf et al. (2006), Kaur
et al. (2015), and Schilbach (2019) feature larger stakes. Although the participants in those studies
are likely to be significantly less numerate than the participants in our study, and thus presumably
more susceptible to valuation errors, it is possible that the larger stakes in those studies lead to
less noise than what we observe. Analyzing the impact of stakes, holding the sample constant, is
another important question for future research.
   Fifth, our analyses assume the long-run criterion is the normative standard, which has been chal-
lenged by Bernheim and Rangel (2009) and others. Exploring welfare implications under alternative
criteria—as in, e.g., Sadoff et al. (2019)—could be fruitful.
   Sixth, we evaluate the welfare effects of only several types of incentive schemes. Our structural
estimates can be used to explore the welfare effects of other types of incentive schemes.
   These open questions and caveats illustrate the need for further testing, refinement, and cri-
tiquing of our approach. Our results illustrate the potential value of theoretically-grounded quanti-
tative methods such as ours in helping improve incentive design for people with limited self-control.




                                                  35
References
Acland, Dan, and Vinci Chow. 2018. “Self-Control and Demand for Commitment in Online Game
 Playing: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Journal of the Economic Science Association 4 (1): 46–62,
 https://ideas.repec.org/a/spr/jesaex/v4y2018i1d10.1007_s40881-018-0048-3.html.

Acland, Dan, and Matthew R. Levy. 2012. “Naiveté, Projection Bias, and Habit Formation in Gym
 Attendance.” Working Paper: GSPP13-002.

Acland, Dan, and Matthew R Levy. 2015. “Naiveté, Projection Bias, and Habit Formation in Gym
 Attendance.” Management Science 61 (1): 146–160.

Afzal, Uzma, Giovanna D’Adda, Marcel Fafchamps, Simon R Quinn, and Farah Said. 2019.
  “Implicit and Explicit Commitment in Credit and Saving Contracts: A Field Experiment.” NBER Working
  Paper 25802.

Aigner, Dennis J. 1973. “Regression with a Binary Independent Variable Subject to Errors of Observation.”
  Journal of Econometrics 1 49–60.

Alan, Sule, and Seda Ertac. 2015. “Patience, self-control and the demand for commitment: Evidence
  from a large-scale field experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 115 111–122.

Allcott, Hunt, Joshua Kim, Dmitry Taubinsky, and Jonathan Zinman. 2020. “Are High-Interest
  Loans Predatory? Theory and Evidence from Payday Lending.” Working Paper.

Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2019. “Regressive Sin Taxes, with
  an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3): 1557–1626.

Andreoni, James, and Charles Sprenger. 2012. “Estimating Time Preferences from Convex Budgets.”
 American Economic Review 102 (7): 3333–3356.

Ariely, Dan, and Klaus Wertenbroch. 2002. “Procrastination, Deadlines, and Performance: Self-Control
 by Precommitment.” Psychological Science 13 (3): 219–224.

Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin. 2006. “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence From a
 Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2): 635–672.
  10.1162/qjec.2006.121.2.635.

Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger. 2015. “Working Over Time: Dynamic
 Inconsistency in Real Effort Tasks.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3): 1067–1115, https://
 econpapers.repec.org/article/oupqjecon/v_3a130_3ay_3a2015_3ai_3a3_3ap_3a1067-1115..htm.

Augenblick, Ned, and Matthew Rabin. 2019. “An Experiment on Time Preference and Misprediction
 in Unpleasant Tasks.” The Review of Economic Studies 86 (3): 941–975. 10.1093/restud/rdy019.

Avery, Mallory, Osea Giuntella, and Peiran Jiao. 2019. “Why Don’t We Sleep Enough? A Field
  Experiment among College Students.” IZA Discussion Paper, No. 12772.

Bai, Liang, Benjamin Handel, Ted Miguel, and Gautam Rao. Forthcoming. “Self-Control and De-
 mand for Preventive Health: Evidence from Hypertension in India.” Review of Economics and Statistics.


                                                   36
Bernheim, B. Douglas. 2016. “The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: A Unified Approach to Behavioral
  Welfare Economics.” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 7 (1): 12–68.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel. 2009. “Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic
  Foundations for Behavioral Welfare Economics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (1): 51–104.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2018. “Behavioral Public Economics.” In The Handbook
  of Behavioral Economics, edited by Bernheim, B. Douglas, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson Volume
  1. New York: Elsevier.

Beshears, John, James J Choi, Christopher Harris, David Laibson, Brigitte C Madrian, and
  Jung Sakong. 2020. “Which Early Withdrawal Penalty Attracts the Most Deposits to a Commitment
  Savings Account?” Journal of Public Economics 183 Article 104144.

Bhattacharya, Jay, Alan M Garber, and Jeremy D Goldhaber-Fiebert. 2015. “Nudges in Exercise
 Commitment Contracts: A Randomized Trial.” NBER Working Paper 21406.

Bisin, Alberto, and Kyle Hyndman. 2020. “Present-Bias, Procrastination and Deadlines in a Field
  Experiment.” Games and Economic Behavior 119 339–357.

Blair, Steven N., Harold W. Kohl, Ralph S. Paffenbarger, Debra G. Clark, Kenneth H. Cooper,
  and Larry W. Gibbons. 1989. “Physical Fitness and All-Cause Mortality A Prospective Study of Healthy
  Men and Women.” Journal of the American Medical Association 262 (17): 2395–2401.

Block, H.D., and Jacob Marschak. 1960. “Random Orderings and Stochastic Theories of Response.” In
  Contributions to Probability and Statistics. Essays in Honor of Harold Hotelling, edited by Olkin, Ingram,
  Stanford University Press.

Bonein, Aurélie, and Laurent Denant-Boèmont. 2015. “Self-Control, Commitment and Peer Pressure:
 A Laboratory Experiment.” Experimental Economics 18 (4): 543–568.

Brune, Lasse, Eric Chyn, and Jason T Kerwin. 2018. “Pay Me Later: A Simple Employer-Based
  Saving Scheme.” Northwestern University Global Poverty Research Lab Working Paper.

Brune, Lasse, Xavier Giné, Jessica Goldberg, and Dean Yang. 2016. “Facilitating Savings for
  Agriculture: Field Experimental Evidence from Malawi.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 64
  (2): 187–220.

Casaburi, Lorenzo, and Rocco Macchiavello. 2019. “Demand and Supply of Infrequent Payments as a
 Commitment Device: Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic Review 109 (2): 523–55.

Chaloupka, Frank J., Matthew R. Levy, and Justin S. White. 2019. “Estimating Biases in Smoking
 Cessation: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 26522.

Chow, Vinci YC. 2011. “Demand for a Commitment Device in Online Gaming.” Unpublished.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A List, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2012. “Testing for Altruism and Social
 Pressure in Charitable Giving.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (1): 1–56.

DellaVigna, Stefano, and Ulrike Malmendier. 2004. “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and
 Evidence.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 353–402. 10.1162/0033553041382111.

                                                    37
Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson. 2013. “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence from
 Health Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review 103 (4): 1138–71.

Ek, Claes, and Margaret Samahita. 2019. “Pessimism and Overcommitment.” UCD Centre for Economic
  Research Working Paper.

Ericson, Keith M., and David Laibson. 2019. “Intertemporal Choice.” In Handbook of Behavioral Eco-
  nomics, edited by Bernheim, B. Douglas, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson Volume 2. Elsevier.

Exley, Christine L., and Jeffrey K. Naecker. 2017. “Observability Increases the Demand for Commit-
  ment Devices.” Management Science 63 (10): 3262–3267. 10.1287/mnsc.2016.2501.

Fang, Hanming, and Dan Silverman. 2004. “Time Inconsistency and Welfare Program Participation:
  Evidence from the NLSY.” July, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 1465.

Fudenberg, Drew, and David K. Levine. 2006. “A Dual-Self Model of Impulse Control.” American
  Economic Review 96 (5): 1449–1476.

Gine, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2010. “Put Your Money Where Your Butt Is: A
  Commitment Contract for Smoking Cessation.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (4):
  213–235. 10.1257/app.2.4.213.

Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Kőszegi. 2001. “Is Addiction Rational? Theory and Evidence?” Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics 116 (4): 1261–1305.

Gul, Faruk, and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. 2001. “Temptation and Self-Control.” Econometrica 69 (6):
 1403–1435.

Hall, Alistair R. 2005. Generalized Method of Moments. Oxford University Press.

Hansen, Lars Peter. 1982. “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Estimators.”
 Econometrica 50 (4): 1029–1054.

Harberger, Arnold. 1964. “Taxation, Resource Allocation, and Welfare.” In The role of direct and indirect
 taxes in the Federal Reserve System, 25–80, Princeton University Press.

Hausman, Jerry. 2001. “Mismeasured Variables in Econometric Analysis: Problems from the Right and
 Problems from the Left.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (4): 57–67.

Heidhues, Paul, and Botond Kőszegi. 2009. “Futile Attempts at Self-Control.” Journal of the Euro-
 pean Economic Association 7 (2): 423–434, https://academic.oup.com/jeea/article-lookup/doi/
 10.1162/JEEA.2009.7.2-3.423.

Houser, Daniel, Daniel Schunk, Joachim Winter, and Erte Xiao. 2018. “Temptation and Commit-
 ment in the Laboratory.” Games and Economic Behavior 107 329–344.

Imai, Taisuke, Tom Rutter, and Colin Camerer. 2020. “Meta-Analysis of Present-Bias Estimation
  Using Convex Time Budget.” April, Working Paper.

John, Anett. 2019. “When Commitment Fails: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Management Science.



                                                   38
Karlan, Dean, and Leigh L Linden. 2017. “Loose Knots: Strong Versus Weak Commitments to Save for
 Education in Uganda.” NBER Working Paper 19863.

Kaur, Supreet, Michael Kremer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2015. “Self-Control at Work.” Journal
 of Political Economy 123 (6): 1227–1277. 10.1086/683822.

Khaw, Mel Win, Ziang Li, and Michael Woodford. 2017. “Risk Aversion as a Perceptual Bias.”
 10.3386/w23294, NBER Working Paper 23294.

Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112
  (2): 443–478.

Laibson, David. 2015. “Why Don’t Present-Baised Agents Make Commitments?” American Economic
  Review 105 (5): 267–272.

Laibson, David, Peter Maxted, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2018. “Estimating Dis-
  count Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle.” Working Paper.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of
  Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary Economics 51 (1): 205–224.

Mahajan, Aprajit, Christian Michel, and Alessandro Tarozzi. 2020. “Identification of Time-
 Inconsistent Models: The Case of Insecticide Treated Nets.” NBER Working Paper 27198.

Martinez, Seung-Keun, Stephan Meier, and Charles Sprenger. 2020. “Procrastination in the Field:
 Evidence from Tax Filing.” Working Paper.

McKelvey, Richard D., and Thomas R. Palfrey. 1995. “Quantal Response Equilibria for Normal Form
 Games.” Games and Economic Behavior 10 (1): 6–38. 10.1006/game.1995.1023.

Milgrom, Paul, and Ilya Segal. 2002. “Envelope Theorems for Arbitrary Choice sets.” Econometrica 70
 (2): 583–601.

Milkman, Katherine L., Julia A. Minson, and Kevin G. M. Volpp. 2014. “Holding the Hunger
 Games Hostage at the Gym: An Evaluations of Temptation Bundling.” Management Science 60 (2):
 283–299.

Natenzon, Pauolo. 2019. “Random Choice and Learning.” Journal of Political Economy 127 (1): 419–457.

Neumann, Peter J., Joushua T. Cohen, and Milton C. Weinstein. 2014. “Updating Cost-
 Effectiveness: The Curious Resilience of the $50,000 per-QALY-Threshold.” The New England Journal of
 Medicine 371 (9): 796–797.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Doing It Now or Later.” American Economic Review
  89 (1): 103–124. 10.1257/aer.89.1.103.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2001. “Choice and Procrastination.” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 116 (1): 121–160.

O’Donoghue, Ted, and Matthew Rabin. 2006. “Optimal Sin Taxes.” Journal of Public Economics
  90 (10): 1825–1849, https://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeepubeco/v_3a90_3ay_3a2006_3ai_
  3a10-11_3ap_3a1825-1849.htm.

                                                 39
Paserman, M Daniele. 2008. “Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation and Policy
  Evaluation.” The Economic Journal 118 (531): 1418–1452.

Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor. 2015. “Incentives, Commitments, and Habit Forma-
 tion in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune-500 Company.” American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics 7 (3): 51–84. 10.1257/app.20130327.

Sadoff, Sally, and Anya Samek. 2019. “Can Interventions Affect Commitment Demand? A Field Exper-
  iment on Food Choice.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 158 90–109.

Sadoff, Sally, Anya Savikhin Samek, and Charles Sprenger. 2019. “Dynamic Inconsistency in Food
  Choice: Experimental Evidence from a Food Desert.” Review of Economic Studies 1–35.

Schilbach, Frank. 2019. “Alcohol and Self-Control: A Field Experiment in India.” American Economic
  Review 109 (4): 1290–1322. 10.1257/aer.20170458.

Schwartz, Janet, Daniel Mochon, Lauren Wyper, Josiase Maroba, Deepak Patel, and
  Dan Ariely. 2014. “Healthier by Precommitment.” Psychological Science 25 (2): 538–546. 10.1177/
  0956797613510950.

Shui, Haiyan, and Lawrence M. Ausubel. 2005. “Time Inconsistency in the Credit Card Market.”
  Working Paper.

Skiba, Paige Marta, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2018. “Payday Loans, Uncertainty, and Discounting:
  Explaining Patterns of Borrowing, Repayment, and Default.” Working Paper.

Strotz, R. H. 1955. “Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization.” The Review of Economic
  Studies 23 (3): 165–180.

Sun, Kai, Jing Song, Larry M. Manheim, Rowland W. Chang, Kent C. Kwoh, Pamela A.
  Semanik, Charles B. Eaton, and Dorothy D. Dunlop. 2014. “Relationship of Meeting Physical
  Activity Guidelines with Quality Adjusted Life Years.” Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism 44 (3):
  264–270.

Toussaert, Séverine. 2018. “Eliciting Temptation and Self-Control Through Menu Choices: A Lab Exper-
  iment.” Econometrica 86 (3): 859–889. 10.3982/ECTA14172.

Toussaert, Séverine. 2019. “Revealing Temptation Through Menu Choice: Field Evidence.” Unpublished.

Wei, Xue-Xin, and Alan A. Stocker. 2015. “A Bayesian Observer Model Constrained by Efficient Coding
 Can Explain Anti-Bayesian Percepts.” Nature Neuroscience 18 1509–1517.

Woodford, Michael. 2012. “Inattentive Valuation and Reference-Dependent Choice.” Unpublished.

Woodford, Michael. 2019. “Modeling Imprecision in Perception, Valuation and Choice.” Annual Review
 of Economics 12 579–601.

Zhang, Qing r Ben Greiner. 2020. “Time Inconsistency, Sophistication, and Commitment–An Exper-
  imental Study.” Vienna University of Economics and Business, Department of Strategy and Innovation
  Working Paper No. 12.


                                                 40
                             Table 1: Summary of commitment contract studies
                   Type of contract
                   Authors (year)                                               Take-up rate        At stake

                   A. Penalty-based:

                   Gine, Karlan, and Zinman (2010)                                 11%             own money
                   Royer, Stehr, and Sydnor (2015)                                 12%            earned money
                   Bai et al. (Forthcoming)                                        14%             own money
                   Bhattacharya, Garber, and Goldhaber-Fiebert (2015)              23%             own money
                   John (2019)                                                     27%             own money
                   Kaur, Kremer, and Mullainathan (2015)                           36%             own money
                   Schwartz et al. (2014)                                          36%            house money
                   Bonein and Denant-Boèmont (2015)                                42%                other1
                   Beshears et al. (2020)                                         39-46%2         house money
                   Toussaert (2019)                                               21-65%          house money
                   Schilbach (2019)                                               31-55%          house money
                   Exley and Naecker (2017)                                       41-65%          house money
                   Avery, Giuntella, and Jiao (2019)                               63%            house money
                   Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002)                                   73%                other3


                   Average take-up rates (Penalty-based contracts)
                     Own money at stake                                             22%
                     House money at stake                                           47%
                     Other stakes                                                   42%

                   Overall                                                          37%

                   B. Removing options:                                                        Restricted access to

                   Brune et al. (2016)                                              6%            own money
                   Afzal et al. (2019)                                             4-9%           own money
                   Zhang r Greiner (2020)                                         16-31%             other
                   Sadoff and Samek (2019)                                        20-50%             other
                   Ek and Samahita (2019)                                          27%4              other
                   Ashraf, Karlan, and Yin (2006)                                  28%            own money
                   Sadoff, Samek, and Sprenger (2019)                              33%               other
                   Acland and Chow (2018)                                          35%               other
                   John (2019)                                                     42%            own money
                   Karlan and Linden (2017)                                        44%            own money
                   Toussaert (2018)                                                45%               other
                   Bisin and Hyndman (2020)                                       31-62%             other
                   Houser et al. (2018)                                            48%               other
                   Brune, Chyn, and Kerwin (2018)                                  50%            own money
                   Beshears et al. (2020)                                          56%5          house money
                   Augenblick, Niederle, and Sprenger (2015)                       59%               other
                   Milkman, Minson, and Volpp (2014)                               61%4              other
                   Dupas and Robinson (2013)                                       65%            own money
                   Alan and Ertac (2015)                                           69%          house chocolates
                   Chow (2011)                                                     79%               other
                   Casaburi and Macchiavello (2019)                                93%            own money


                   Average take-up rates (Option removal contracts)
                     Own money at stake                                             42%
                     House money/object at stake                                    63%
                     Other stakes                                                   43%

                   Overall                                                          45%
                   1                                                 4
                       Points in a two-part experiment                   Percent of participants with WTP>0
                   2                                                 5
                       Fraction of endowment put into account with       Fraction of endowment put into account with
                       early withdrawal penalty                          early withdrawal prohibited
                   3
                       Grade points

Notes: This table reports the take-up rates for (weakly) dominated commitment contracts offered at no cost.
We include studies appearing in Table 1 of Schilbach (2019) or Table 1 of John (2019) as well as six more
recent studies. Panel A represents contracts that imposed a penalty when the commitment threshold was
not reached, i.e. non-binding contracts, while Panel B represents fully binding commitments. For studies
that reported take-up rates from different waves or treatment groups, the range of relevant take-up rates is
shown. At the bottom of each panel, we report unweighted averages across the studies of each type.

                                                                 41
                                   Table 2: Demographics and balance

                                                                          Difference in Means:
                                             Overall Mean                 Treatment − Control

                                               Waves 1-3       Wave 1     P-value     Waves 2-3     P-value
                                                 (1)            (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)
  Female                                          0.613         –0.043      0.41        –0.042        0.20

  Agea                                            33.51         –0.47       0.73        –0.83         0.42

  Student, full-time                              0.569         –0.089      0.09        0.004         0.91

  Working, full- or part-time                     0.571         0.141       0.01        –0.004        0.91

  Married                                         0.272         0.082       0.08        –0.004        0.89

  Advanced degreeb                                0.457         0.045       0.40        –0.002        0.94

  Household incomea                              55,139         1,637       0.74        –4,399        0.21

  Visits in the past 4 weeks, recorded            6.91           0.21       0.74        –0.10         0.79
                                                                  166 Control             456 Control
  N                                               1,248           174 Treated             452 Treated
a. Imputed from categorical ranges.
b. A graduate degree beyond a B.A. or B.S.
Notes: This table shows the means of demographic variables elicited in our online survey, as well as differences
in treatment and control group means. In wave 1 of the experiment, the treatment group received the
basic information treatment (see Figure 3a). In waves 2 and 3, treated participants received the enhanced
information treatment (see Figures 3b-c). The table also summarizes data on past visit frequencies to the
gym. Recorded visits are obtained from the fitness center’s log-in records.




                                                      42
     Table 3: Association between the behavior change premium and proxies for sophistication

                                                               Behavior change premium
                                                           (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)
          Goal − exp. attend. (z-score)                   0.68**                       0.73**
                                                        (0.28)                       (0.29)
          Actual − exp. attend. (z-score)                           0.50**             0.49**
                                                                  (0.21)             (0.22)
          Basic info. treatment                                               0.30     0.43
                                                                            (0.56)   (0.56)
          Enhanced info. treatment                                            1.36**   1.30**
                                                                            (0.57)   (0.59)
          Dep. var. mean:                                 1.17      1.17      1.17     1.17
                                                        (0.22)    (0.22)    (0.22)   (0.22)
          Dep. var. mean, info. control group:            0.66      0.66      0.66     0.66
                                                        (0.24)    (0.24)    (0.24)   (0.24)
          Wave FEs                                         Yes       Yes       Yes      Yes
          N                                              1,126     1,126     1,126    1,126
Notes: This table reports the association between the estimated behavior change premium (calculated ex-
cluding the $1 incentive) and proxies for sophistication. Goal − exp. attend. is the standardized (z-score)
difference between participants’ goal attendance and their subjective expectations of attendance in the ab-
sence of incentives (unstandardized mean: 3.34, SD: 3.64). Actual − exp. attend. is the standardized
(z-score) difference between participants’ actual attendance and their subjective expectations of attendance
for the incentive assigned to them (unstandardized mean: −4.17, SD: 6.61). Basic info. treatment and En-
hanced info. treatment are dummies for whether participants received the basic information treatment (see
Figure 3a) or the enhanced information treatment (see Figures 3b-c), respectively. Each column presents
coefficient estimates from OLS regressions with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses.
Dependent variable means, with standard errors in parentheses, are reported for the full sample and infor-
mation control group. The sample excludes participants in wave 3 assigned a commitment contract (122
participants) rather than a piece-rate incentive, since the Actual − exp. attend. proxy cannot be computed
for those participants. ** denotes a statistic that is statistically significantly different from 0 at the 5% level.




                                                        43
   Table 4: Association between take-up of “more” contracts and the behavior change premium

                                                    Take-up of “more” visits contract
                                             8+ visits 12+ visits 16+ visits       Pooled
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
             Behavior change premium           0.019*      0.020*      0.026*       0.022**
             (z-score)                       (0.011)    (0.012)      (0.013)      (0.010)
             Dep. var. mean:                    0.64        0.49        0.32         0.49
                                              (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.02)       (0.01)
             Wave FEs                            Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
             Contract FEs                         No          No          No          Yes
             N                                   849       1,248         849        2,946
             Clusters                            849       1,248         849        1,248
Notes: This table reports the association between the take-up of “more” commitment contracts and the
estimated average behavior change premium (calculated excluding the $1 incentive and expressed as a z-
score; unstandardized mean: 1.20, SD: 7.08). Each column reports coefficient estimates from OLS regressions.
Dependent variable means with standard errors in parentheses are also reported. In columns 1, 2, and 3,
the dependent variables are the take-up of the “more” visit contract with a threshold of 8, 12, and 16 visits,
respectively. In column 4, the dependent variable is the take-up of a “more” visit contract, with observations
pooled across the three contracts, controlling for commitment contract threshold fixed effects (i.e., 8, 12,
16 visit thresholds). Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-robust in columns 1-3, and are clustered at the
subject level in column (4). *,** denote statistics that are statistically significantly different from 0 at the
10% and 5% levels respectively.




                                                      44
Table 5: Association between take-up of “more” commitment contracts and proxies for sophistication


                                                          Take-up of “more” visits contracts
                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)
      Goal − exp. attend. (z-score)                 0.039***                               0.036***
                                                  (0.013)                                (0.013)
      Actual − exp. attend. (z-score)                           –0.045***                 –0.041***
                                                               (0.013)                   (0.014)
      Basic info. treatment                                                  –0.022       –0.012
                                                                            (0.041)      (0.041)
      Enhanced info. treatment                                               –0.080** –0.071**
                                                                            (0.031)      (0.031)
      Dep. var. mean:                                0.49         0.49         0.49         0.49
                                                   (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
      Dep. var. mean, info. control group:           0.52         0.52         0.52         0.52
                                                   (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)
      Wave FEs                                        Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
      Contract FEs                                    Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
      N                                             2,824        2,824        2,824        2,824
      Clusters                                      1,126        1,126        1,126        1,126
Notes: This table reports the association between take-up of a “more” visits commitment contract and proxies
for sophistication. We pool the data by participant and include commitment contract threshold fixed effects
(i.e., 8-, 12-, 16-visit thresholds). The independent variables in this table are defined exactly as in Table 3.
Each column presents coefficient estimates from OLS regressions with standard errors, clustered by subject,
in parentheses. Dependent variable means, with standard errors in parentheses, are reported for the full
sample and information control group. The sample excludes participants in wave 3 assigned a commitment
contract (122 participants) rather than a piece-rate incentive, since the Actual − exp. attend. proxy cannot
be computed for those participants. **,*** denote statistics that are statistically significantly different from
0 at the 5% and 1% level respectively.




                                                      45
                    Table 6: Take-up of “more” and “fewer” commitment contracts

                                                       Chose “more”      Chose “fewer”
                  Chose “more”      Chose “fewer”       given chose       given chose
                    contract          contract            “fewer”           “more”           Diff       Diff
    Threshold          (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)         (3)-(1)    (4)-(2)
     8 visits         0.64              0.34                0.89              0.47         0.25***    0.13***
     12 visits        0.49              0.31                0.67              0.43         0.18***    0.12***
     16 visits        0.32              0.27                0.50              0.43         0.18***    0.15***

Notes: Column 1 reports take-up rates of commitment contracts to visit the gym at least 8, 12, or 16
days over the next four weeks (i.e., take-up of the “more” contract). Column 2 reports take-up rates of
commitment contracts to visit the gym less than 8, 12, or 16 days over the same period (i.e., take-up of the
“fewer” contract). Columns 3 and 4 shows the take-up rates of each type of commitment contract conditional
on having chosen the other type of commitment contract, for each threshold. Columns 5 and 6 display the
difference in the take-up rates of column 3 versus column 1 and the difference in the take-up rates of column
4 versus column 2, respectively. Over three study waves, all participants faced the choice of a commitment
contract at the 12-visit threshold (N=1, 248) while the 8-visit and 16-visit commitment contracts were only
presented in the first two waves (N=849). *** denotes differences that are statistically significantly different
from 0 at the 1% level.




       Table 7: Correlation between perceived success in contracts and expected attendance

                                         Subjective expected attendance without incentives
                                            (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
            Subj. prob. succeed in         8.46***                9.17***    9.68**
            “more” contract              (1.31)                 (1.17)     (3.79)
            Subj. prob. succeed in                    –3.96*** –4.64*** –9.97***
            “fewer” contract                         (0.91)     (0.85)     (3.10)
            N                               399         399        399         76
            “More” − “Fewer”                                     13.81*** 19.64***
                                                                (1.37)     (6.02)
Notes: This table reports the association between subjective beliefs about commitment contract success and
expected attendance with no incentives. Each column presents coefficient estimates from OLS regressions
with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. Subj. prob. succeed in “more” contract is
participants’ subjective expectations of attending the gym 12 or more days during the 4-week incentive
period, coded as a probability between 0 and 1. Subj. prob. succeed in “fewer” contract is participants’
subjective expectations of attending the gym fewer than 12 times during the 4-week incentive period, coded as
a probability between 0 and 1. The dependent variable is participants’ subjective expectations of attendance
in the absence of any incentives. The “More” − “Fewer” row shows the estimated difference between the
coefficient on the probability of success under the “more” contract versus the coefficient on the probability
of success under the “fewer” contract. The sample in columns 1-3 consists of all participants in wave 3, the
only wave in which we elicited the probabilities of contract success. The sample in column 4 is restricted to
participants in wave 3 indicated that they wanted both the “more” and “fewer” contract with a threshold of
12 visits. **,*** denote statistics that are statistically significantly different from 0 at the 5% and 1% level
respectively.




                                                      46
                                      Table 8: Parameter estimates

                                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                     ˆ                                               ˆ               ˆ
                                                                                                                  (1−β̃)
                                     β̂             β̃              b̂         (1 − β̂) · b̂   (1 − β̃) · b̂      (1−β̂)

     All                            0.55          0.84            9.66            4.39            1.58            0.36
 1
     (N=1, 126)                 (0.51, 0.58)   (0.80, 0.88)   (9.05, 10.28)    (4.02, 4.77)    (1.20, 1.96)    (0.29, 0.43)
     Information control            0.54          0.86            10.03           4.63            1.38            0.30
 2
     (N=560)                    (0.50, 0.58)   (0.82, 0.90)   (9.13, 10.93)    (4.15, 5.11)    (1.00, 1.75)    (0.22, 0.37)
     Enhanced information           0.54          0.78            9.83            4.49            2.19            0.49
 3
     treatment (N=392)          (0.47, 0.62)   (0.69, 0.87)   (8.77, 10.89)    (3.73, 5.26)    (1.32, 3.06)    (0.35, 0.63)
     Below median past              0.38          0.78            7.07            4.39            1.57            0.36
 4
     attendance (N=550)         (0.33, 0.43)   (0.70, 0.86)    (6.45, 7.68)    (3.92, 4.86)    (1.04, 2.09)    (0.25, 0.46)
     Above median past              0.68          0.88            12.57           4.08            1.46            0.36
 5
     attendance (N=576)         (0.63, 0.72)   (0.84, 0.92)   (11.45, 13.69)   (3.54, 4.63)    (0.98, 1.94)    (0.26, 0.45)
     Chose 8+ visit                 0.54          0.84            9.16            4.23            1.50            0.36
 6
     contract (N=546)           (0.49, 0.59)   (0.77, 0.90)    (8.34, 9.98)    (3.70, 4.76)    (0.90, 2.11)    (0.24, 0.47)
     Chose 12+ visit                0.50          0.81            9.62            4.84            1.79            0.37
 7
     contract (N=556)           (0.45, 0.54)   (0.75, 0.88)   (8.78, 10.47)    (4.31, 5.38)    (1.17, 2.40)    (0.26, 0.47)
     Chose 16+ visit                0.47          0.75            10.30           5.46            2.63            0.48
 8
     contract (N=275)           (0.39, 0.55)   (0.63, 0.86)   (8.94, 11.67)    (4.57, 6.34)    (1.50, 3.75)    (0.33, 0.64)
     Averaging heterogeneity        0.55          0.85            10.24           4.21            1.39            0.35
 9
     (N=952)                    (0.52, 0.58)   (0.81, 0.89)   (9.50, 10.98)    (3.83, 4.59)    (1.05, 1.74)    (0.27, 0.42)

Notes: This table reports parameter estimates and respective 95% confidence intervals for various subsamples.
The subsamples are determined by the participants’ days of attendance over the 4 weeks prior, selection into
the enhanced information treatment group, and their take-up of the various commitment contracts for more
visits. Section 7.1 describes how the parameter estimation was performed. The present focus parameter is
denoted by β, the perceived present focus parameter is denoted by β̃, and people’s (perceived) health benefits
of a gym attendance are denoted by b. Row 9 averages estimates across eight subsamples corresponding to (i)
assignment to either the enhanced information treatment or the information control group, crossed with (ii)
whether days of attendance over the 4 weeks prior to the experiment is below or above the median, crossed
with (iii) take-up of the more-visit contract with a threshold of 12 visits. Over the three study waves, only
participants in waves 2 and 3 (N=908) were eligible for random assignment to the enhanced information
treatment group, and thus row 9 excludes participants assigned to the “basic” information treatment in wave
1. Inference for the statistics in columns 4-6, and for the averages reported in row 9, is conducted using
the Delta method. All participants faced a take-up decision about a commitment contract with a 12-visit
threshold (N=1, 248), while the 8-visit and 16-visit commitment contracts were only presented in the first
two waves (N=849). The samples exclude participants in wave 3 assigned a commitment contract (122
participants), rather than a piece-rate incentive, as our structural estimates only make use of data about
how participants behave under piece-rate incentives.




                                                         47
                      Table 9: Estimated impact of 12+ contract on attendance

                                         (1)             (2)                (3)                   (4)
                                                   Pr(att. ≥ 12)      Pr(att. ≥ 12)
                                     ∆ in att.                                            ∆ in Pr(att. ≥ 12)
                                                   with contract     without contract

                                        3.51             0.65              0.22                   0.42
 1   Empirical
                                    (1.38, 5.65)    (0.52, 0.78)        (0.10, 0.35)          (0.26, 0.58)

 2   Homogeneous                        3.05             0.91              0.15                   0.76
     Heterogeneous by median
 3                                      2.47             0.74              0.34                   0.40
     past att., info. treatment
     Heterogeneous by
 4                                      2.61             0.74              0.33                   0.41
     median past att.
     Heterogeneous by
 5                                      2.74             0.73              0.31                   0.41
     quartile past att.
     Heterogeneous by quartile
 6                                      2.65             0.73              0.32                   0.41
     past att., info. treatment

Notes: This table assesses our estimated models’ predictions about how the “12 visits or more” contract
affects the behavior of participants who indicated that they would take it up. All calculations are for the
four-week period in our experiment. Row 1 reports empirical estimates from OLS regressions with wave fixed
effects, with 95% confidence intervals in parentheses. In row 2, we assume that participants are homogeneous
conditional on taking up the 12+ contract. Thus, row 2 assumes that there are only two types of individuals:
those who take up the 12+ contract and those who don’t. In row 3, we estimate a heterogeneous model, as in
row 9 of Table 8. In rows 4-6, we consider alternative heterogeneity assumptions. Row 4 divides individuals
only according to their median past attendance. Row 5 divides individuals by quartile of past attendance.
Row 6 divides individuals by quartile of past attendance crossed with receiving the enhanced information
treatment.




                                                    48
            Table 10: Estimated welfare effects of piece-rates and commitment contracts

                                           (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)
                                       Avg. ∆ in     ∆ Agent      ∆ Health     ∆ Attendance       ∆ Social
                                       attendance     surplus      benefits         costs         Surplus

  1   12+ visits contract                 1.22        −$9.23        $10.88          $9.68           $1.21
  2   Linear incentive, p = $1.90         1.22         $22.95       $12.45          $8.06           $4.39
      Optimal linear incentive,
  3                                       4.38        $106.71       $44.46         $35.10           $9.36
        p = $7.54

Notes: This table reports the estimated effects of three different incentive schemes, averaged over the full
population, using the heterogeneity assumptions from row 9 of Table 8. Row 1 reports the estimated effect
of offering individuals the 12+ commitment contract. All calculations are for a four-week period, as in our
experiment. The numbers reported in row 1 are averages over those who take-up the contract (and thus
affected by it) and those who do not. Row 2 reports the estimated effects of a linear per-attendance subsidy
of p = $1.90, which has the same impact on average population attendance as does the 12+ contract. Row 3
reports the effects of the optimal per-attendance subsidy. The formula for this subsidy is derived in Appendix
C.3.3.




                                                     49
         Figure 1: Illustration of the behavior change premium for a present-focused agent




                                                                                                   Actual
             Incentive (𝑝𝑝)




                                                                                                        Forecasted




                              E                                                        F                              H
          𝑝𝑝𝑝 + Δ
                                  Change in Total Surplus if                                                Desired
                                  Time Consistent
                                                                                               Z
                        𝑝𝑝𝑝 B                                    C   Behavior change                                  I
                                                                     premium               G
                                                                D
      𝑝𝑝! + 𝑏𝑏


          𝑝𝑝 = −𝑏𝑏 A
                                                               𝛼𝛼(𝑝𝑝𝑝)
                                                                (              𝛼𝛼(𝑝𝑝𝑝
                                                                                ( + Δ)                                    Attendance




Notes: This figure gives a representation of actual, forecasted, and desired attendance curves as a function
of incentives. See Section 2.2 for a detailed description of this figure.




                                                                         50
              Figure 2: Commitment contract demand for uniform distribution of costs




Notes: This figure illustrates the commitment contract demand for the case in which costs are distributed
uniformly on the unit interval (c ∼ U [0, 1]). Commitment contract demand is a function of delayed benefits b
and perceived short-run discount factor β̃. As can be seen, for β̃ ≥ 0.75 and b ≤ 0.8, individuals do not want
any commitment contract. In that case, the perceived damages from a commitment contract are increasing
in the degree of perceived present focus, 1 − β̃. When individuals do want a commitment contract, they
prefer that it is binding, a sharp result that holds for uniform distributions but is not generally true.




                                                     51
                                    Figure 3: Information treatment
             (a) Basic information treatment                (b) Enhanced info treatment - first screen




                                 (c) Enhanced info treatment - second screen




Notes: Panel (a) shows the basic information treatment of the history of past attendance shown to partic-
ipants. Panels (b) and (c) show the enhanced information treatment. Panel (b) displays the first screen
of the enhanced information treatment, which was similar to the basic information treatment but also in-
cluded a question asking participants what they thought their average past weekly attendance was in the
last 20 weeks. Panel (c) shows the second screen, which informed that participants in the first wave of the
experiment overestimated their attendance.




                                                     52
         If you were to receive this incentive ($80 only if you to the gym at least 12 days over the next four weeks), what do y
         think is the percent chance that you would visit the gym at least 12 days over the next four weeks?


               Figure 4: Screenshots of “more visits” and “fewer visits” commitment choices
   3/24/2016                                0        10      20       30    Qualtrics
                                                                               40         50 Software
                                                                                      Survey       60     70   80   90   100
                                                (a) “More visits” commitment contract
          Which Percent
                do youchance
                        prefer?
                             I will
                visit the gym at least 12
                             days (regardless of how often you go to the gym)
                $80 fixed payment
            O $80 incentive you get only if you go to the gym at least 12 days over the next four weeks

                                                (b) “Fewer visits” commitment contract
         Which
         If you do
                wereyou
                      toprefer?
                         receive this incentive ($80 only if you to the gym at least 12 days over the next four weeks), what do y
         think is the percent
           O $80 fixed paymentchance   that youofwould
                                  (regardless          visit the
                                                  how often  you gym
                                                                 go toatthe
                                                                          least
                                                                            gym)12 days over the next four weeks?
           o    $80 incentive you get only if you go to the gym 11 or fewer days over the next four weeks

Notes: This figure provides screenshots    0         of the commitment
                                                    10      20       30   contracts
                                                                             40     offered
                                                                                    50      to
                                                                                             60 participants.
                                                                                                      70       Panel (a)
                                                                                                              80     90    100
provides an example of a commitment contract to attend the gym more (i.e., the “more visits” contract).
Panel (b)If provides
            you werean    to receive
                             example
                  Percent chance
                                        this incentive ($80 only if you to the gym 11 or fewer days over the next four weeks), what do
                                   I will of a commitment contract to attend the gym less (i.e., the “fewer visits”
        you
contract).    think
               visit the gym at least 12 chance that you would visit the gym 11 or fewer days over the next four weeks?
                       is the percent
                                    days



                                            0        10      20       30        40        50        60    70   80   90   100


          Which Percent
                do youchance
                        prefer?
                             I will
                     visit the gym 11 or
            O $80 fixed fewer days (regardless of how often you go to the gym)
                         payment
            o   $80 incentive you get only if you go to the gym 11 or fewer days over the next four weeks


         Which
         If you do
                wereyoutoprefer?
                          receive this incentive ($80 only if you to the gym 11 or fewer days over the next four weeks), what do
         you  think is the percent(regardless
           O $20 fixed payment      chance thatofyou
                                                  howwould
                                                       often visit
                                                             you the   gym
                                                                   go to the11 or fewer days over the next four weeks?
                                                                            gym)
           O $0 incentive -- no chance to earn money.

                                            0        10      20       30        40         50        60   70   80   90    100

         We just asked whether you preferred:
                   Percent chance I will
                     visit the gym 11 or
                   a) $20 fixed      payment
                              fewer days         (regardless of how often you go to the gym)
         or
                   b) $0 incentive -- no chance to earn money

         You selected option b) which gives you no money. Is that right?
         Which do you prefer?
          o Yes, I prefer to get nothing if this question is chosen for payment.
          O No,
          O  $20 I fixed payment
                    prefer         (regardless
                           to get $20           of howisoften
                                      if this question        youfor
                                                         chosen   go payment.
                                                                     to the gym)
            O $0 incentive -- no chance to earn money.

         What is your age:
         We just asked whether you preferred:
          0 18-30
                     a) $20 fixed payment (regardless of how often you
   https://qtrial2014.az1.qualtrics.com/WRQualtricsControlPanel/Ajax.php?action     go to the gym)
                                                                                = GetSurveyPrintPreview

          or
                   b) $0 incentive -- no chance to earn money

          You selected option b) which gives you no money. Is that right?
            o   Yes, I prefer to get nothing if this question
                                                            53is chosen for payment.
            O No, I prefer to get $20 if this question is chosen for payment.
              Figure 5: Actual attendance and subjects’ expected attendance by incentive



                    20



                    15
           Visits




                    10



                    5



                    0
                         0   1     2     3     4       5     6      7        8   9   10   11    12
                                                   Per-visit incentive ($)

                                                      Average expected visits
                                                      Average realized visits


Notes: This figure reports the means and 95% confidence intervals for participants’ subjective expectations
of gym attendance (“Best guess of days I would attend over the next four weeks”) and realized attendance,
for different levels of piece-rate incentives. Subjective expectations are averaged over all participants in the
analysis sample, while average realized visits are based on the subsets of participants who were randomized
to receive each incentive. Section 3 describes how different incentive levels were probabilistically targeted in
each of the three study waves. Because the incentive levels shown here were not all targeted in every wave,
the sample sizes underlying the average realized visits statistics differ (N=413 ($0); N=293 ($2); N=75 ($5);
N=342 ($7)).




                                                        54
      Figure 6: Actual attendance versus participants’ subjective expectations of attendance

                              30


                              25


                              20
          Actual attendance




                              15


                              10


                              5


                              0
                                   0   5            10          15         20             25   30
                                           Expected attendance under assigned incentive


Notes: This figure shows a binned scatterplot comparing participants’ actual attendance to their subjective
expectations of gym attendance under the incentives they received. A dashed 45-degree line is included for
reference. The sample excludes participants in wave 3 assigned a commitment contract (122 participants)
rather than a piece-rate incentive.




                                                           55
Figure 7: Effect of information treatments on actual attendance and subjective expectations of
attendance
                                          (a) Impact of basic information treatment


                               20


                      Visits   15


                               10


                               5


                               0
                                    0     1    2       3    4       5     6      7        8   9   10   11   12
                                                                Per-visit incentive ($)

                                                   Average expected visits, information control
                                                   Average realized visits, information control
                                                   Average expected visits, basic information treatment
                                                   Average realized visits, basic information treatment



                                        (b) Impact of enhanced information treatment


                               20


                               15
                      Visits




                               10


                               5


                               0
                                    0     1    2       3    4       5     6      7        8   9   10   11   12
                                                                Per-visit incentive ($)

                                              Average expected visits, information control
                                              Average realized visits, information control
                                              Average expected visits, enhanced information treatment
                                              Average realized visits, enhanced information treatment



Notes: This figure presents the effects of the basic and enhanced information treatments on participants’
subjective expectations of attendance, as well as their actual attendance. Panel (a) presents results from
wave 1, where the basic information treatment was randomized. Panel (b) presents results from waves 2 and
3, where the enhanced information treatment was randomized. Subjective expectations are averaged over
all participants in the analysis sample, while average realized visits are based on the subsets of participants
who were randomized to receive each incentive. Section 3 describes how different incentive levels were
probabilistically targeted in each of the three study waves. Because the incentive levels shown here were not
all targeted in every wave, the sample sizes underlying the average realized visits statistics differ (Panel (a):
N=105 ($0), N=112 ($2), N=121 ($7); Panel (b): N=308 ($0); N=181 ($2); N=74 ($5); N=221 ($7)).




                                                                    56
      Figure 8: Willingness to pay versus participants’ subjective expectations of attendance

                                  300


                                  250
          WTP for incentive ($)



                                  200


                                  150


                                  100


                                  50


                                   0
                                        0   5       10            15           20        25   30
                                                         Expected attendance

                                                         Per-visit incentive ($)
                                                1        2      3       5      7    12


Notes: This figure presents a binned scatterplot comparing participants’ WTP for piece-rate incentives to
their subjective expectations of attendance under those incentives.




                                                             57
   Figure 9: Subjective expectations of earnings and willingness to pay for piece-rate incentives


                225

                200

                175

                150

                125
          $




                100

                 75

                 50

                 25

                   0
                           1      2     3      4       5     6      7        8   9   10     11    12
                                                   Per-visit incentive ($)

                                               Avg. subjective expected earnings
                                               Avg. WTP for that incentive


Notes: This figure compares participants’ WTP for piece-rate incentives to their subjective expected earnings
from the piece-rate incentives. For each incentive, subjective expected earnings are the product of the piece-
rate level and participants’ subjective beliefs about the number of days they would visit under that incentive.




                                                       58
                                          Figure 10: Estimated average behavior change premium




                                          Average across incentives




                                Average excluding $1 incentive




                                                                                           -1    -.5      0              .5        1         1.5           2            2.5
                                                                                                       Behavior change premium ($)

Notes: This figure shows the participants’ average behavior change premium per dollar of additional incentive,
as formalized in Sections 2.2 and 2.4.2. The top number averages across all incentive levels, while the
bottom number reports the average excluding the $1 incentive. 95% confidence intervals are obtained from
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.




   Figure 11: Structural models’ in-sample fit to participants’ forecasted and realized attendance
                (a) Homogenous structural parameters                                                                    (b) Heterogeneous structural parameters

           20                                                                                                      20



           15                                                                                                      15
  Visits




                                                                                                          Visits




           10                                                                                                      10



           5                                                                                                       5



           0                                                                                                       0
                0   1    2     3     4       5      6     7        8       9    10    11    12                           0    1    2     3     4       5      6     7        8       9    10    11    12
                                         Per-visit incentive ($)                                                                                   Per-visit incentive ($)

                        Predicted expected visits                      Prediction 95% CI                                          Predicted expected visits                      Prediction 95% CI
                        Predicted realized visits                      Prediction 95% CI                                          Predicted realized visits                      Prediction 95% CI
                        Average expected visits                        Average realized visits                                    Average expected visits                        Average realized visits




Notes: These figures assess the structural models’ fit to participants’ subjective expectations of attendance
and actual attendance. Panel (a) considers the specification in row 1 of Table 8. Panel (b) considers the
structural model with eight heterogeneous types, as in Row 9 of Table 8. The empirical estimates of realized
attendance and subjective expectations of attendance are as in Figure 5.




                                                                                                 59
Online Appendix                               Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


Part

Online Appendix

                  How are Preferences for Commitment Revealed?

   Mariana Carrera, Heather Royer, Mark Stehr, Justin Sydnor, and Dmitry Taubinsky




                                         60
Online Appendix                                              Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky




Table of Contents
    A Theory Appendix                                                                                                                                    62
      A.1 Proof of Proposition 1 . . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   62
      A.2 Formal results for T = 1 . . . . . . . .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   63
      A.3 Proofs of Propositions for T = 1 . . .     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   67
      A.4 Generalizations to the dynamic case .      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   73
      A.5 Generalizations to other environments      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   75

    B Further results and robustness tests for reduced-form                                  results                                                     81
      B.1 Additional results on the behavior change premium . . .                            . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   81
      B.2 Additional results for Section 6.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   81
      B.3 Additional results for Section 6.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   82
      B.4 Additional results for Section 6.4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . .                       . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   84
      B.5 Additional results for Section 6.4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . .                       . . . . .           .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   85

    C Structural estimation appendix                                                                                                                      86
      C.1 Details on GMM estimation of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                .   .   .   .   .    86
      C.2 Implications of heterogeneity for our parameter estimates . . . . . . . . .                                                .   .   .   .   .    87
      C.3 Details on equilibrium strategies, value functions, and simulated behavior                                                 .   .   .   .   .    88
      C.4 Welfare effects of other commitment contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                              .   .   .   .   .    91
      C.5 Welfare estimates for alternative specifications of heterogeneity . . . . . .                                              .   .   .   .   .    91
      C.6 How commitment contracts affect attendance over time . . . . . . . . . .                                                   .   .   .   .   .    93
      C.7 Alternative assumptions about the cost distribution . . . . . . . . . . . .                                                .   .   .   .   .    96
      C.8 Dollar value of exercise from public health estimates . . . . . . . . . . . .                                              .   .   .   .   .   101

    D Further study details and instructions                                                    103
      D.1 Elicitation of WTP for Piece-Rate Incentives - Instructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104




                                                   61
Online Appendix                                                 Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


A     Theory Appendix
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Let Ft and ft denote the CDF and PDF, respectively, of the cost draws in period t. When
the costs are distributed independently, we have

                                             Z
                  d          X        d X
                     V (0, p   at ) =                  (p + b − c)ft (c)dc
                  dp                  dp t c≤β̃(p+b)
                                      X                                     X
                                    =    Ft (β̃(b + p)) + (1 − β̃)(p + b)β̃   ft (β̃(p + b))
                                           t                                     t
                                                                    0
                                       = α̃(p) + (1 − β̃)(p + b)α̃ (p)



                     d2           X
                          V (0, p   at ) = α̃0 (p) + (1 − β̃)(p + b)α̃00 (p) + (1 − β̃)α̃0 (p)
                     dp2
                     d3           X
                        3
                          V (0, p   at ) = O(α̃00 (p))
                     dp

Consequently, if the terms ∆3 and ∆2 α̃00 (p) are negligible,

                  X                    X                d          X        (∆)2 d2         X
  V (0, (p + ∆)       at ) − V (0, p       at ) = (∆)      V (0, p   at ) +         V (0, p   at )
                                                        dp                   2 dp2
                                                    + O(∆3 , ∆2 α̃00 (p))
                                                                                      (∆)2
                                               = ∆α̃(p) + ∆(1 − β̃)(p + b)α̃0 (p) +        (2 − β̃)v 0 (p)
                                                                                       2
                                                  + O(∆3 , ∆2 α̃00 (p))
                                                                    
                                                           ∆ 0
                                               = ∆ α̃(p) + α̃ (p) + ∆(1 − β̃)(p + ∆/2 + b)α̃0 (p)
                                                           2
                                                    + O(∆3 , ∆2 α̃00 (p))
                                                    α̃(p + ∆p) + α̃(p)
                                               =∆                         + (b + p + ∆p/2)(1 − β̃)(α̃(p + ∆))
                                                            2
                                                    + O(∆3 , ∆2 α̃00 (p))

    Next, consider the case in which the costs are not distributed independently, but β̃ = 1. Here,
we regard a strategy as a mapping from cost vectors (c1 , . . . , cT ) to a set of actions (a1 , . . . , aT ).
                                                         P
The person’s expected utility under piece-rate p, V (0, p at ), will be differentiable in t as long as
the costs are smoothly distributed. Thus, Theorem 1 of Milgrom and Segal (2002) implies that

                                               d          X
                                                  V (0, p   at ) = α̃(p).
                                               dp



                                                           62
Online Appendix                                                   Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


Proceeding as above shows that
                              X                    X              α̃(p + ∆) + α̃(p)
              V (0, (p + ∆)       at ) − V (0, p       at ) = ∆                     + O(∆3 , ∆2 α̃00 (p))
                                                                          2



Proof of the Corollary

Proof. If p > 0, then wi (p + ∆) − wi (p) = Vi (0, (p + ∆))εij − Vi (0, p)εij , and thus
                                                                            X
                       E[wi (p + ∆) − wi (p)] = E[Vi (0, (p + ∆)                at ) − Vi (0, p)].

If p = 0,
                                                                  X
                        E[wi (∆) − wi (p)] = E[Vi (0, ∆               at ) − Vi (0, 0)] + E[ηi ].




A.2     Formal results for T = 1
A.2.1       Behavior in absence of stochastic valuation errors or perceived social pressure

In period 1, individuals choose a = 1 if β(p + b) − c ≥ 0, or equivalently if c ≤ β(p + b). This decision
rule says that for the person to act, the current costs of action have to be less than the discounted
future benefits plus contingent rewards from action. In period 0, an individual’s perceived expected
utility given contract (y, ap) is
                                                   "     Z                               #
                                  V (y, ap) = β y +                    (p + b − c)dF
                                                           c≤β̃(p+b)


   Assume p > 0. We call a contract (−p, ap) a commitment contract for a = 1 with penalty p,
which we denote by CC(p, 1). This contract is perceived as a dominated contract by an individual
who believes himself to be time-consistent. We call a contract (−p, (1 − a)p) a commitment contract
for a = 0 with penalty p, which we denote by CC(p, 0).

A.2.2       With uncertainty about costs, quasi-hyperbolic preferences rarely generate de-
            mand for commitment

Commitment contracts for a = 1 will be desired when β̃ < 1 and there is little uncertainty about
the action a = 1 being desirable from the period t = 0 perspective. For example, suppose that the
costs c are always smaller than the delayed benefits b, but that the individual thinks that because
of present focus she may sometimes choose a = 0. In this case, the individual will always want
a commitment contract with a high enough penalty p that guarantees that she will always choose
                                                                               (1−β̃)b
a = 1. In our notation, this is a contract (−p, p1a=1 ) with p ≥                 β̃
                                                                                         .



                                                             63
Online Appendix                                          Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


   More generally, when there is only a small chance that immediate costs will exceed the delayed
benefits, individuals with β̃ < 1 will want penalty-based contracts as long as β̃ is not too low. If β̃
is too low, then the penalties will lead to financial losses that are too large in magnitude relative to
the desired behavior change. This line of logic can be used to establish that when there is a small
chance that costs exceed benefits, there will be demand for commitment by some individuals, and
it will be non-monotonic in β̃.
   We define ∆V (p) = V (−p, pa) − V (0, 0).

Proposition 2. Suppose that P r(c > b) is positive for all realizations of c. Let p > 0.
   1. For a given p̄ > 0: there exist β > 0 and β̄ < 1 such that maxp∈[0,p̄] ∆V (p) ≤ 0 (i.e.,
commitment contract with penalty p for action a = 1 is undesirable) if β̃ < β or if β̃ > β̄.
   2. For a given p > 0: When the distribution of c is Bernoulli, there exist thresholds β ≤ β̄ such
that ∆V (p) > 0 if and only if β ∈ (β, β̄), with β̄ > β if P r(c > b) is sufficiently small.
   3. For a given p̄ > 0: When the distribution of c is Bernoulli, there exist thresholds β ≤ β̄ such
that maxp∈[0,p̄] ∆V (p) > 0 if and only if β ∈ (β, β̄), with β̄ > β if P r(c > b) is sufficiently small.

   Proposition 2 captures the intuition of non-monotonic demand for commitment, analogous to
the results of Heidhues and Kőszegi (2009), John (2019), and Schilbach (2019). Those with β̃ = 1,
due to either naivete or actual time-consistency, do not want commitment contracts. Those with
very low β̃ do not want commitment contracts because they perceive the contracts to be largely
ineffective. But those with intermediate levels of β̃ do want the contracts. The case in which the
support of c is Bernoulli, c ∈ {c, c̄}, is analogous to John (2019), who derives this non-monotonicity
in the context of consumption and savings. In line with Heidhues and Kőszegi (2009) and John
(2019), the results also generalize to the question of whether there exists any commitment contract
of size p ∈ [0, p̄] that is worthwhile.
   However, such results about (non-monotonic) demand for commitment depend on strong as-
sumptions about how much uncertainty there is about the costs of doing the action. We now show
that the standard quasi-hyperbolic model predicts that there should not be demand for commitment
when there is at least a moderate chance that costs exceed delayed benefits.
   We consider first whether for a fixed penalty p there exists any β̃ such that individuals will want
the contract. Second, we consider whether for a given β̃ there exists any commitment contract (in-
cluding fully binding ones) that will be desirable. Throughout, we will assume that the distribution
of costs can be characterized by a continuous density function f with support on [c, c̄].

Proposition 3. Fix p and assume that f (c2 )/f (c1 ) ≥ (c1 /c2 )2 for all c2 > c1 in some interval
[βb, β̄(b + p)]. Then ∆V (p) is strictly increasing in β̃ ∈ [β, β̄]. In particular, if β = 0 and β̄ = 1,
then ∆V (p) is strictly increasing in β̃ for all β̃, and thus no individual will want the contract.

   The economic content of the assumption in Proposition 3 is that in the region of cost draws
where individuals’ decisions can actually be affected by a financial incentive of size p, the amount of
uncertainty is not “too small.” In particular, the chances of a cost draw that exceeds the benefits do
not rapidly vanish to zero. The assumption is satisfied by, for example, a uniform distribution on

                                                    64
Online Appendix                                                 Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


[0, c̄], where c̄ ≥ b + p. For instance, suppose that c ∼ U [0, 1.5b], so that time-consistent individuals
do not want to take the action 33% of the time. In this case, there does not exist any β̃ for which
a commitment contract with penalty p < b/2 is desirable.
       In fact, the uniform distribution example overstates how big the probability of costs exceeding
benefits must be to erode demand for commitment. Proposition 3 shows that even if the density of
cost draws between b and 1.5b is decreasing at rate 1/x2 , individuals will still not want commitment.
       We complement our first result with a proposition that fixes β̃ and gives sufficient conditions
for there to exist no desirable commitment contract at any value of p. This includes commitment
contracts that simply restrict choice to a = 1 with infinite penalties p = ∞ for choosing a = 0.

Proposition 4. Fix β̃ and assume that (i) f is unimodal;40 (ii) c̄ > b + (1 − β̃)b; (iii) f (c2 )/f (c1 ) ≥
(c1 /c2 )2 for all c2 > c1 in the interval [β̃b, c̄); (iv) 1−F (b) ≥ F (b)−F (β̃b) if f does not have a mode
in [β̃b, b + (1 − β̃)b], and otherwise 1 − F (b) ≥ [F (b) − F (β̃b)]/β̃. Under these four assumptions,
there exists no value of p, including p = ∞, such that a penalty of size p for choosing a = 0 is
desirable.

       The economic content of the assumptions of Proposition 4 is again that there is at least some
meaningful uncertainty about the desirability of choosing a = 1. While assumption (i) is a technical
regularity condition, assumptions (ii)-(iv) provide bounds on uncertainty. The key assumption is
assumption (iv), which says that the chances of getting a cost draw under which it is suboptimal to
take the action (c > b) are at least as high as the chances of getting a cost draw under which the
time t = 0 individual thinks she should choose a = 1, but thinks that her time t = 1 self will not
do so (c ∈ [β̃b, b]). Assumptions (ii) and (iii) strengthen the content of assumption (iv) by ensuring
that the cost draws exceeding b are not all concentrated at a point only slightly higher than b.
       All four of the assumptions of Proposition 4 are satisfied by a uniform distribution with support
[0, c̄], where c̄ ≥ b + (1 − β̃)b. For example, with β̃ = 0.8, the assumptions are satisfied by a uniform
distribution with support [0, 1.2b]. For this distribution, a time-consistent individual would not
want to take the action only 17% of the time, and in those 17% of cases, the cost draws do not
exceed the delayed benefits by more than 20%. This is an arguably modest amount of uncertainty.
Yet this modest amount of uncertainty erodes demand for all possible commitment contracts.

A.2.3       Commitment take-up with imperfect perception and demand effects

To allow for some heterogeneity in the propensity for stochastic valuation, we assume that for a
fraction µ of individuals εij ∼ G is i.i.d. with G supported on [0, ∞) and EG [ε] = 1, while for a
fraction 1 − µ of individuals εij ≡ 1.41
       To characterize the new implications of the model, we begin with the observation that in the
standard quasi-hyperbolic model in Section A.2.1, no individuals would ever choose commitment
contracts for a = 0. This is simply because individuals would not choose to commit to take actions
  40
      Formally, there do not exist c1 < c2 < c3 such that f (c2 ) < min(f (c1 ), f (c3 )).
  41
      More generally, our results hold as long as there is between-person heterogeneity in the variance of the error term
εij , and we make this assumption only for notational simplicity.


                                                           65
Online Appendix                                                Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


that in effect have immediate benefits and delayed costs. However, choice of commitment contracts
for a = 0 can be consistent with our imperfect perception model in this section. As can be choice
of commitment contracts for a = 1 and a = 0 by the same person, even when the conditions of
Proposition 4 are met.

Proposition 5. Set p > 0.
    1. Assume that µ > 0 or P r(ηi > βi p) > 0. Then a positive mass of individuals will choose a
commitment contract for a = 1 with penalty p (i.e., contracts (−p, p)), even when β̃i = 1 for all i.
    2. Assume (i) that µ > 0 and (ii) that either there are some β̃i close enough to 1 or that
P r(ηi > βi p) > 0. Then a positive mass of individuals will choose a commitment contract for a = 0
with penalty. In this case, a positive mass of individuals would choose both commitment contracts
for a = 1 and for a = 0.
    3. Assume that E[β̃i ] is sufficiently close to 1. Then there will be a positive correlation between
demand for commitment contracts for a = 1 and commitment contracts for a = 0 if one of the
following conditions holds: (i) if µ = 1 and there are individual differences in ηi , (ii) if µ = 0 and
P r(ηi > βi p) > 0, or (iii) µ ∈ (0, 1) and for all individuals either ηi ≤ 0 or ηi > βi p.

    Parts 1 and 2 of Proposition 5 establish that imperfect perception and demand effects can lead
individuals to choose commitments contracts both for a = 0 and for a = 1, even when there is
significant uncertainty about the cost of doing the activity.
    Part 3 shows that in experiments in which individuals are faced with a number of decisions, with
only one decision randomly selected to be implemented, there can be a positive correlation between
demand for commitment contracts to do more of an activity and to do less of an activity. Intuitively,
there are two types of mechanisms that lead to the correlation. First, if some individuals just like
to say “yes” (ηi > 0) and some do not, then the individuals who like to say “yes” will tend to take up
both types of contracts, while the other individuals will tend to not take up any kind of contract.
Second, if commitment contracts would generally look unappealing to individuals in the absence
of imperfect perception, then only the fraction µ ∈ (0, 1) of individuals with imperfect perception
will be the ones who choose commitment contracts. But because these individuals choose both
types of contracts with positive probability, this induces a positive correlation between the choices
of contracts.42
    As we show below, the imperfect perception model also implies that with at least moderate
uncertainty about future costs, the likelihood of choosing a penalty-based commitment contract
for a = 1 will be monotonically increasing in β̃. This is in contrast to the more standard results
such as those of Heidhues and Kőszegi (2009) and John (2019), and our analogous derivation in
Proposition 2. The typical finding in the standard quasi-hyperbolic model is that if there is demand
for commitment, it is non-monotonic in β̃, and is decreasing in β̃ when β̃ is sufficiently high.
   42
      It is also helpful to note that even if individuals are observed to be more likely to choose commitments for a = 1
than for a = 0, that does not imply that there must be some individuals with β̃i < 1. Such an implication arises only
if individuals think they are unlikely to choose a = 1, so that choosing a commitment contract for a = 1 involves a
higher financial loss than choosing a commitment contract for a = 0.



                                                          66
Online Appendix                                                  Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


Proposition 6. Suppose that f (c2 )/f (c1 ) ≥ (c1 /c2 )2 for all c2 > c1 in the interval [0, b + p]. Then
the likelihood of choosing the contract (−p, p), for p ≥ 0, is increasing in β̃.

       This result is a corollary of Proposition 3, which shows that under moderate to large uncertainty,
the perceived harms of a commitment contract are decreasing in β̃ in the standard quasi-hyperbolic
model. Although in the standard quasi-hyperbolic model these conditions would lead individuals to
never choose a commitment contract, in our imperfect perception model individuals still choose the
contract, but with a propensity that is decreasing in the expected harms in the standard model.43
Intuitively, the less harmful the contracts would seem in the absence of noise and demand effects,
the less noise and demand effects it takes to generate take-up.

A.3       Proofs of Propositions for T = 1
A.3.1       Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. The perceived gains from a commitment contract are

                                            Z                               Z
                          ∆V /β = −p +                    (p + b − c)dF −             (b − c)dF
                                              c≤β̃(p+b)                       c≤β̃b
                                                                  Z   c=β̃(b+p)
                                  = −p(1 − F (β̃(b + p))) +                       (b − c)dF                         (7)
                                                                   c=β̃b


    Now −p(1 − F (β̃(p + b))) → −p as β̃ → 0 since F (β̃(p + b)) → 0 as β̃ → 0. For this same reason,
R c=β̃(b+p)
 c=β̃b
            (b − c)dF → 0 as β̃ → 0. Thus, ∆V /β → −p as β̃ → 0, which establishes that there exists
β such that ∆V < 0 for each p. Because β is continuous in p, there must also exist a β > 0 such
that maxp∈[0,p̄] ∆V < 0 if β̃ < β.
       Because ∆V is continuous in β̃, and because ∆V < 0 for β̃ = 1, we also have that there exists
a β̄ such that ∆V < 0 if β̃ > β̄. Again, the result generalizes immediately to maxp∈[0,p̄] ∆V as well.
       Next, suppose that c ∈ {c, c̄}, where c̄ > b and c < b. Let µ denote the probability of c = c̄. If
β̃(b+p) < c then clearly the commitment contract is perceived not worthwhile, since it only increases
penalties incurred. If β̃b > c then the commitment contract is also perceived not worthwhile, since
the individual already believes that she will choose a = 1 when c = c.
       The commitment contract has a chance of being worthwhile when β̃b < c < β̃(b + p). In this
case, if β̃(b + p) < c̄ then the individual incurs the cost p with probability µ. If β̃(b + p) > c̄ then
the individual incurs a utility loss of c̄ − b with probability µ. Either way, ∆V > 0 for small enough
µ and ∆V < 0 for large enough µ.
       Since there exist bounds β(p) and β̄(p) for each p ∈ [0, p̄], the union of the intervals I(p) =
(β(p), β̄(p)) over p ∈ [0, p̄] produces an interval (β, β̄) such that maxp ∆V > 0 iff β̃ ∈ (β, β̄).
  43
    Interestingly, the converse of Proposition 6 does not hold for commitment contracts for a = 0. That is, it does not
hold that the likelihood of choosing a commitment contract for a = 0 is decreasing in β̃. Intuitively, this is because a
lower β̃ dampens the impact of financial incentives in both cases, and thus makes penalty-based contracts potentially
more harmful in both cases.


                                                            67
Online Appendix                                                     Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


A.3.2    Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. We have


         d
            ∆V /β = p(b + p)f (β̃(b + p)) + (b + p)(b − β̃(b + p))f (β̃(b + p)) − b(b − β̃b)f (β̃b)
        dβ̃
                    = (1 − β̃)(b + p)2 f (β̃(b + p)) − (1 − β̃)b2 f (β̃b)                                     (8)

                                     f (β̃(b+p))          b2
The expression (8) is positive if       f (β̃b)
                                                    ≥   (b+p)2
                                                               .
   Since the condition implies P r(c > b) > 0 when β̄ = 1, β̃ = 1 individuals have ∆V < 0. The
first part of the Proposition then implies that ∆V < 0 for all β̃.

A.3.3    Proof of Proposition 4

We begin with a Lemma:

Lemma 1. Under the assumptions of the proposition, no individuals will want commitment contracts
that force a = 1.

Proof. To shorten equations, set γ = (1 − β̃)b. The perceived expected gains from a binding com-
mitment contract are given by
                                                        Z
                                           ∆V /β =                (b − c)f (c)dc.
                                                          c≥β̃b


                                      R
   The goal is thus to show that           c≥β̃b (b − c)f (c)dc     < 0 under the assumptions of the proposition.
   Case 1: Suppose that f is increasing on [b, b + γ]. Then by the single-peak assumption, f is
increasing on [b − γ, b + γ] . Then the value of the fully binding contract is


              Z     ∞                      Z   c=b+(1−β)b
                        (b − c)f (c)dc ≤                    (b − c)f (c)dc
                c=βb                        c=βb
                                           Z b                           Z   b+(1−β)b
                                      =             (b − c)f (c)dc +                    (b − c)f (c)dc
                                            c=βb                          c=b
                                           Z b                           Z b+(1−β)b
                                      ≤             (b − c)f (c)dc +                    (b − c)f (2b − c)dc
                                            c=βb                          c=b
                                           Z b                           Z b
                                      =             (b − c)f (c)dc −             (b − c)f (c)dc
                                             c=βb                         c=βb

                                      =0

where to get to the second-to-last line we perform a change-of-variable on the second integral via
the function ϕ(x) = 2b − x.


                                                             68
Online Appendix                                                           Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


   Case 2: Suppose now that f is decreasing on [b−γ, b+γ]. Define µ := F (b)−F (b−γ), and recall
                                                                               Rb
that the fourth assumption requires that 1 − F (b) ≥ µ. On the other hand, µ = x=b−γ f (x)dx ≥
Rb
 x=b−γ f (b)dx = γf (b).
   Now,


                Z    b                           Z   b                         Z   b
                          (b − c)f (c)dc =               (b − c)f (b)dc +                (b − c)(f (c) − f (b))dc
                   c=βb                           c=βb                           c=βb
                                                                    b
                                                 γ2
                                                                Z
                                             =        f (b) +            (b − c)(f (c) − f (b))dc
                                                 2               c=βb
                                                                Z b
                                                 γ2
                                             ≤      f (b) +              γ(f (c) − f (b))dc
                                                 2               c=βb
                                               γ2
                                             =    f (b) + (µ − γf (b))γ
                                                2
                                                      γ2
                                             = γµ − f (b)                                                            (9)
                                                      2

Intuitively, all of the mass that is in excess of a uniform distribution on [b − γ, b] with density
f (c) = f (b) is concentrated on the point adding the most to the mean: c = βb.
   Next,


            Z                            Z   b+γ                           Z
                    (b − c)f (c)dc =                 (b − c)f (c)dc +               (b − c)f (c)dc
             c≥b                          c=b                               c≥b+γ
                                         Z b+γ                             Z
                                   ≤                 (b − c)f (c)dc −                  γf (c)dc
                                          c=b                               c≥b+γ
                                         Z b+γ
                                   =                 (b − c)f (c)dc − γ(1 − F (b + γ))
                                          c=b
                                         Z b+γ
                                   =                 (b − c)f (c)dc − γ [(1 − F (b) − (F (b + γ)) − F (b))]
                                          c=b
                                         Z b+γ                               Z b+γ         
                                   ≤                 (b − c)f (c)dc − γ µ −          f (c)dc
                                          c=b                                           c=b
                                         Z b+γ
                                   =                 (b + γ − c)f (c)dc − γµ
                                          c=b
                                         Z b+γ
                                   ≤                 (b + γ − c)f (b)dc − γµ
                                          c=b
                                         γ2
                                   =          f (b) − γµ                                                            (10)
                                         2
                                 R b+γ
Intuitively, the quantity −     (b − c)f (c)dc is minimized when 1 − F (b) = µ and as much of the
                                  c=b                      R b+γ
mass µ as possible belongs to [b, b + γ]. So to minimize − c=b (b − c)f (c)dc, we need to maximize
the mass of F on [b, b + γ], and the way to do that is to let it be uniform on [b, b + γ], with
density f (c) := f (b). In this case, the rest lies on points c ≥ b + γ and has to integrate to at least

                                                                    69
Online Appendix                                                           Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


(µ − γf (b))γ.
                                                               R
    Putting (9) and (10) together shows that                       c≥β̃b (b   − c)f (c)dc ≤ 0.

    Case 3: Suppose that the mode of f lies in [b − γ, b] and that µ ≥ γf (b). Equation (10) holds
because as in Case 2, f is decreasing on [b, b + γ].
                                                                                                 Rb
    Next, we consider the maximum of the function A given by A(f ) :=                            c=β̃b (b   − c)f (c)dc, over
all f that have a mode on [b − γ, b]. Suppose for a given f that the mode is at c∗ > β̃b,
          Rb
and that c=β̃b (f (c∗ ) − f (c))dc > 0. Then consider f˜ given by f˜(c) = f (c) for c ≥ c∗ , and
               (f (c∗ )−f (β̃b))dc
           R
f˜(c) =                for c < c∗ . Since f is increasing on [β̃b, c∗ ], f stochastically dominates f˜.
                    c∗ −β̃b
Consequently, since b − c is positive and decreasing in c, A(f˜) > A(f ). This establishes that the f
that maximizes A must be decreasing almost everywhere on [β̃b, b] (except for a set of zero Lebesgue
                                                             Rb                              2
measure). We can then proceed as in Case 2 to establish that c=β̃b (b − c)f (c)dc ≤ γµ − γ2 f (b).

    Case 4: Suppose that the mode lies in [b − γ, b] and that µ < γf (b). As in Case 3, we have
shown that A is maximized when f is decreasing almost everywhere. But since µ < γf (b), this
means that f must be uniform almost everywhere, with density f (c) = µ/γ. Thus in this case
                                                Z   b
                                                         (b − c)f (c)dc ≤ γµ/2.                                         (11)
                                                 c=β̃b
                                     R
    Now the highest value of             c≥b (b − c)f (c)dc    is obtained by a density function f that puts as much
mass toward b as possible, and minimizes the value of f (b). That is, f (c) = (b/c)2 f (b) for c ≥ b,
                                                                 R
with c̄ = b + γ, and f (b) large enough to satisfy the constraint c≥b f (c) = µ/β̃. The constraint on
f (b) is


                                                               x=b+γ
                                                                          b2
                                                           Z
                                                 µ/β̃ ≤                      f (b)dx
                                                              x=b         x2
                                                               b2
                                                         = − f (b)|b+γ
                                                                     b
                                                           x
                                                                   b2
                                                                       
                                                         = b−            f (b)
                                                                  b+γ
                                                                   γ
                                                         = bf (b)
                                                                  b+γ




                                                                     70
Online Appendix                                                         Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


Now for k = 1 − β̃,

                               x=b+γ                          x=b+γ
                                                                            b2
                           Z                              Z
                       −               (b − x)f (c)dc =            (x − b) 2 f (b)dx
                             x=b                          x=b              x
                                                                 Z x=b+γ              
                                                         2                     1    b
                                                      = b f (b)                   −      dx
                                                                   x=b         x x2
                                                                             b b+γ
                                                                              
                                                         2
                                                      = b f (b) ln(x) +
                                                                             x x=b
                                                                                                   
                                                         2                          b
                                                      = b f (b) ln(b + γ) +              − ln(b) − 1
                                                                                  b+γ
                                                                                        
                                                         2                          k
                                                      = b f (b) ln (1 + k) −
                                                                                   1+k
                                                                         2
                                                                                     
                                                         2             k          k
                                                      ≥ b f (b) k −        −                                               (12)
                                                                       2        1+k
                                                                         2
                                                                   k + k − k k2
                                                                                      
                                                         2
                                                      = b f (b)                   −
                                                                      1+k            2
                                                                  2            2
                                                                                  
                                                                    k         k
                                                      = b2 f (b)          −
                                                                   1+k         2
                                                               2            2
                                                                               
                                                                  γ        γ
                                                      = f (b)          −
                                                                1+k        2
                                                               2           
                                                                γ (1 − k)
                                                      = f (b)
                                                                 2(1 + k)
                                                           β̃γ 2
                                                      =            f (b)
                                                        2(1 + k)
                                                        1        γ
                                                      = β̃γ          bf (b)
                                                        2 b+γ
                                                        β̃γ µ
                                                      ≥
                                                         2 β̃
                                                      = γµ/2                                                               (13)

To obtain (12), we need to show that log(1 + x) ≥ x − x2 /2 for x ≥ 0. To that end, note that
equality holds when x = 0. The derivatives of the left and right side side of the inequality with
                        1                                                                              1
respect to x are       1+x     and 1 − x, respectively, so it is enough to show that                  1+x   ≥ 1 − x. This holds
iff 1 ≥ 1 −   x2 ,   which follows because      x2   ≥ 0.
                                                                    R
   The combination of (11) and (13) implies that                        c≥β̃b (b   − c)f (c)dc ≤ 0.

    Case 5. Suppose that the mode is in [b, b + γ]. Since this implies that f is increasing on
                                         Rb
[b − γ, b], the highest possible value of c=β̃b (b − c)f (c)dc, given that F (b) − F (β̃b) = µ, is obtained
when f is almost everywhere uniform, with density f (c) = µ/γ. As in Case 4, this implies that
Rb                                                                  R
 c=β̃b (b − c)f (c)dc ≤ γµ/2. And as in Case 4, the highest value of c≥b (b − c)f (c)dc is obtained by
a density function f that puts as much mass toward b as possible, and minimizes the value of f (b).
That is, f (c) = (b/c)2 f (b) for c ≥ b, with c̄ = b + γ, and f (b) large enough to satisfy the constraint


                                                               71
Online Appendix                                                                      Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky

R
    c≥b f (c)   = µ/β̃. Proceeding as in that case establishes the result.

      With the Lemma in hand, we are ready to prove Proposition 4.

Proof of the proposition

Proof. Case 1: Suppose that c̄ = ∞. Then Proposition 3 implies that for any value of p, the value
of the commitment contract is increasing in β̃. But since ∆V < 0 for β̃ = 1 individuals, it must be
that ∆V < 0 for all β̃.
      Case 2: Suppose that c̄ < ∞. Set β † = min (1, c̄/(b + p)). If β † < β̃ then this commitment
contract generates the same utility as a fully binding commitment contract. The previous lemma
implies that it is undesirable. If β † > β̃ then Proposition 3 implies that an individual with perceived
present focus β † expects higher gains from this contract than an individual with perceived present
focus β̃. However, to an individual with perceived present focus β † , this is equivalent to a fully
binding commitment contract. It is thus enough to show that a fully binding commitment contract
is undesirable to an individual with perceived present focus β † .
      But a binding commitment contract is less attractive to this individual than to an individual
with perceived present focus β̃. Lemma 1 implies that a fully binding commitment contract is
undesirable to an individual with perceived present focus β̃. Consequently, it is undesirable to an
individual with perceived present focus β † .
      Moreover, if the choice of commitment contracts for a = 1 is primarily driven by noise rather
than a real demand for commitment, then there will be a positive correlation between demand for
CC(p, 1) and CC(p, 0).

A.3.4           Proof of Proposition 5

Proof. An individual will choose CC(p, 1) if
                              "Z                                                                        #
                                   β̃i (p+b)                             Z   β̃i b
                                               (p + b − c)dF (c) −                   (b − c)dF (c) εij ≥ p − ηi /βi                  (14)
                                 c=0                                      c=0


and will choose CC(p, 0) if
                 "Z                                                                                             #
                                                  Z   β̃i (b−p)                         Z   β̃i b
                                   pdF (c) +                      (b − c)dF (c) −                   (b − c)dF (c) εij ≥ p − ηi /βi   (15)
                    c≥β̃i (b−p)                    c=0                                   c=0

                R β̃i (p+b)                               R β̃i b
      Since      c=0          (p + b − c)dF (c) −           c=0 (b   − c)dF (c) > 0, condition (14) will be satisfied if either
ηi > βi p, or if the individual is prone to stochastic valuation errors and the draw εij is sufficiently
high.
      Similarly, (15) will hold in several cases. First, suppose that the left-hand-side of (15) is positive,
which will be the case for β̃ sufficiently close to 1, since this expression is positive for β̃i = 1. In this
case, the inequality holds if either ηi > βi p, or if the individual is prone to stochastic valuation errors


                                                                          72
Online Appendix                                           Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


and the draw εij is sufficiently high. Second, suppose that the left-hand-side of (15) is negative.
There then exists η̄ such that the individual chooses CC(p, 0) if ηi ≥ η̄ and εij ≡ 1. Alternatively,
if the individual is prone to valuation errors, she may choose CC(p, 0) for low draws of εij .
        To prove part 3, first suppose that β̃i = 1 for all individuals. In this case, the propensity to
choose either contract is strictly increasing in ηi . Thus, if either µ = 0 or µ = 1, there will be
a positive correlation in take-up of contracts. Next, consider µ ∈ (0, 1). Among individuals with
ηi ≤ 0, then only individuals prone to stochastic valuation errors will take up either contract with
positive probability. Among individuals with ηi > pβi , everyone will take up the contracts with
probability 1, irrespective of whether they are prone to stochastic valuation errors or not. This
establishes a positive correlation in take-up of contracts for E[β̃i ] = 1. By continuity, the positive
correlation holds.

A.3.5        Proof of Proposition 6

Proof. Since the probability of choosing a commitment contract is increasing in ∆V, the result
follows if we show that ∆V is increasing in β̃i and in b. By Proposition 3, ∆V is increasing in
β̃i .

A.4        Generalizations to the dynamic case
We now consider a dynamic environment in which the individual can choose at ∈ {0, 1} in each
period t = 1, . . . , T , and chooses commitment contracts in period t = 0. The delayed benefit from
choosing at = 1 is b, which is realized in period T + 1. The costs ct for choosing at = 1 are drawn
from a distribution F (c|ht ), where ht is the history of actions up to period t. Commitment contracts
                                                            P
for more attendance involve a penalty p that is paid if        at < X, while commitment contracts for
                                                    P
less attendance involve a penalty that is paid if      at ≥ X.
        In the dynamic setting, the key condition for commitment contracts to be unattractive is that
the density of cost shocks in period t, conditional on any period t history of actions, does not
diminish too quickly toward zero, in the sense of Proposition 3. Under this condition, backwards
induction using repeated application of Proposition 3 establishes a result analogous to Proposition
3. One possible intuition, in the spirit of the Central Limit Theorem, is that uncertainty becomes
less of an issue when there are more opportunities to act. However, this is counteracted by the fact
that future selves’ misbehavior is also more of an issue in dynamic settings in which payoffs are not
separable in actions; this non-separability is generated by commitment contracts to meet a certain
threshold.

A.4.1        Generalization of Proposition 3

We generalize Proposition 3 by considering commitment contracts like those in our experiment,
which involve a penalty p if the individual does not choose at = 1 at least X ≤ T times.




                                                     73
Online Appendix                                                  Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


Proposition 7. Fix p and suppose that F (·|ht ) has a density function f (·|ht ) for each ht , which
satisfies f (c2 |ht )/f (c1 |ht ) ≥ (c1 /c2 )2 for all c1 < c2 < b + p. Then the perceived utility loss of a
                                                            P
commitment contract that involves a penalty p for              at < X is decreasing in β̃. Consequently, no
individuals should desire commitment contracts.

    Throughout, we use the following straightforward but useful extension of Proposition 3:

Lemma 2. Consider a density function f (c) such that f (c2 )/f (c1 ) ≥ (c1 /c2 )2 for all c1 < c2 < B.
Let the payoffs for choosing a = 0 and a = 1 be b0 and b1 , respectively, with B = b1 − b0 . Define
          R β̃(b −b )                         2W
W = b0 + 0 1 0 (b1 − b0 − c)f (c)dc. Then ∂∂β̃∂b  < 0, and consequently ∂W ∂b0 > 0.
                                                            0

                             ∂2W
Proof. The first part,      ∂ β̃∂b0
                                      < 0, is an immediate consequence of Proposition 3, since decreasing b0
                                                                                                         ∂W
is equivalent to instituting a penalty for choosing a = 0. The second part follows because               ∂b0   >0
clearly holds for β̃ = 1, and thus by the first statement must hold for any β̃ < 1.

    We now prove the proposition:
                                                                                                        Pt−1
Proof. Let Vt (ht ) denote the period 0 expectation of period t self’s utility, following ht =            τ =1 aτ
choices of aτ = 1. Note that Vt (ht ) is also the period t − 1 expectation of self-t utility, since both
period 0 and period t − 1 selves have the same beliefs about period t self’s behavior.
    Step 1. We first show that Vt (h + 1) ≥ Vt (h) for all h. We do this by induction. Consider
t = T . If h ≥ X or if h ≤ X − 2 then Vt (h + 1) = Vt (h), since in the former case the individual meets
the threshold regardless and in the latter case the individual fails to meet the threshold regardless.
If ht = X − 1 then Proposition 3 implies that Vt (h + 1) > Vt (h), since in the former case there is no
penalty for choosing at = 1 while in the latter case there is. Now suppose that Vt+1 (h) is increasing
in h. In period t, this means that the delayed payoffs from choosing at = 1 and at = 0, respectively,
are Vt+1 (ht + 1) and Vt+1 (ht ). Clearly, period t utility is increasing in Vt+1 (ht + 1). Lemma 2
establishes that period t utility must also be increasing in Vt+1 (ht ), the payoff from choosing at = 0.
And since Vt+1 is increasing in ht by the induction hypothesis, this establishes that Vt must also be
increasing in ht .
    Step 2. We now show that Vt (ht ) is increasing in β̃ for all ht . We again do this by induction.
Consider first t = T . If hT ≥ X or if hT ≤ X − 2, then the penalty does not matter. If hT =
                                                  ∂                         ∂2
X − 1 then Proposition 3 implies that             ∂p VT (hT )   < 0 and         V (hT )
                                                                          ∂ β̃∂p T
                                                                                          > 0 . Now suppose that
∂                             ∂2
∂p Vt+1 (ht+1 )   < 0 and          V (h )
                             ∂ β̃∂p t+1 t+1
                                                > 0. In period t, the delayed payoffs from choosing at = 1
and at = 0, respectively, are Vt+1 (ht + 1) and Vt+1 (ht ). The induction hypothesis implies that these
delayed payoffs decrease with p, which by Lemma 2 implies that Vt is decreasing in p. Moreover,
the induction hypothesis implies that these payoffs decrease the most for those with the lowest β̃.
Lemma 2 therefore also implies that Vt decreases the most in p for those with the lowest β̃.

A.4.2    Generalizations of Propositions 5 and 6

The generalizations of these propositions follow also verbatim. To establish the generalization of
Proposition 6 we only need the stronger assumptions that lead to Proposition 7.

                                                          74
Online Appendix                                                 Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


A.5       Generalizations to other environments
A.5.1       Summary of generalizations

Continuous choice We continue to explore the robustness of our Section 2.3 results about the
undesirability of commitment contracts in Appendix A.5.2. Another natural question is whether
the spirit of our results carries over to continuous choice, such as costly effort provision to generate
future earnings or saving for the future. In Appendix A.5.2 we verify that the spirit of our results
carries over to these contexts as well. For “continuous penalty” contracts that involve a penalty of
p(X − x) for all choices of x (effort, savings) below some threshold X (as in, e.g., penalties on early
withdrawal from a savings account), we derive the following striking result both for models of effort
provision and savings for the future: If there is a positive probability of states of the world in which
the period 0 self would desire a choice of x < X under the commitment contract, then the contract
is unappealing for any β̃ ∈ [0, 1], and its perceived damages are decreasing in β̃.
       For “discontinuous penalty” contracts that consist of a fixed penalty p that is paid whenever
x < X (as in, e.g., a stickk.com contract), we derive a condition similar to the one in our Bernoulli
model: If the density of cost shocks does not decrease “too quickly” in a region of cost shocks at
which individuals with β̃ ∈ [β̃, 1] are on the margin for choosing x = X, then the commitment
contract is unappealing to all individuals with β̃ in that region, and its perceived damages are
decreasing in β̃.44

Other models Finally, in Appendix A.5.3, we consider the robustness of our results about the
lack of demand for commitment contracts to alternative models of individual behavior that might
generate demand for commitment. We show that in models such as those of Fudenberg and Levine
(2006) and Gul and Pesendorfer (2001), penalty-based commitment contracts such as the ones we
consider can never be desired, and their expected damages are increasing in the (perceived) cost of
self-control, as in the quasi-hyperbolic model. On the other hand, choice-set restrictions are more
desirable in the costly self-control models than in the quasi-hyperbolic model,45 though uncertainty
about future costs erodes the benefits of those contracts as well.

A.5.2       Generalization to continuous choice

We now generalize our results about the (lack of) desirability of commitment contracts to continuous
choices. For “continuous penalty” contracts that involve a penalty of p(X − x) for all choices of x
(effort, savings) below some threshold X (as in, e.g., penalties on early withdrawal from a savings
account), we derive the following striking result both for models of effort provision and savings for
the future: If there is a positive probability of states of the world in which the period 0 self would
  44
     We recognize that with continuous choice, the space of possible commitment contracts is very large. A general
penalty-based commitment contract is a function π, π(x) ≥ 0, that prescribes a penalty for any possible choice x.
Analyzing this fully general space of contracts is beyond the scope of this paper but we doubt that the spirit of results
would be different for a more exotic choice of penalties than the one we analyze.
  45
     Intuitively, this is because a choice-set restriction eliminates a costly temptation even in states of the world in
which it would not have changed choice. See Toussaert, 2018 for further discussion.


                                                           75
Online Appendix                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


desire a choice of x < X under the commitment contract, then the contract is unappealing for any
β̃ ∈ [0, 1], and its perceived damages are decreasing in β̃.
   Formally, we consider two models.

Model I: Costly effort. We consider a costly effort model as in Kaur et al. (2015), generalized to
allow for uncertainty in effort costs. Workers earn future salary y = wx at some cost of effort C(x).
In period 0, workers believe that in period 1 they will choose x to maximize β̃wx − θC(x), where
θ ∼ F is an effort cost shock. However, in period 0 their preferred choice of effort is to maximize
wx − θC(x). For simplicity, we follow Kaur et al. (2015) in assuming an isoelastic cost of effort
function, which produces a constant elasticity of earnings with respect to the wage, denoted by ε.

Model II: Saving for the future. In the savings choice model, the individual chooses an amount
x to save for the future, given initial endowment Y . In period 0, individuals believe that in period
1 they will choose x to maximize θ(Y − rx) + β̃u(x), where θ ∼ F is the uncertainty in the need
for funds in period 1, and r is the price of period 1 consumption. However, their preferred level of
savings maximizes θ(Y − rx) + u(x). As before, we simplify by assuming a CRRA functional form,
which produces a constant elasticity of saving with respect to r, denoted ε.

Continuous penalties

We begin with contracts that specify a penalty p(X − x) for choices x below a target X (x ≤ X).

Proposition 8. Consider model I.
   1. If for a given commitment contract (p, X) there is a positive measure of θ for which the period
0 self would choose x∗ < X, then the commitment contract cannot be desired by anyone, and its
expected damages are decreasing in β̃.
   2. Let E[x(p)|x(p) < X] denote the average effort conditional on it being less than X, given
                                                                    X
penalty p for working less than X. If E[x(p)|x(p) < X] <         (1−β̃)ε+1
                                                                             for all p ∈ [0, p̄], then expected
utility under the commitment contract is decreasing in p ∈ [0, p̄]. Consequently, no commitment
contracts of the form (p, X), p ∈ (0, p̄] are desirable.

   An important implication of part 2 of the proposition is that what affects the possible desirability
of a commitment contract is not the likelihood that the individual will fail to meet it, but rather
the expected costs of failing to meet it. Intuitively, this is because a marginal change in the penalty
p has no effect on an individual’s utility in states of the world in which she does not fail to meet
the contract. Both the benefits—which derive from behavior change—and the costs—which derive
from paying the penalty—of the marginal change lie only in the region in which the individual fails
to meet it. Consequently, if conditional on failing to meet the contract the individual fails to meet
it by a lot, a marginal change in p decreases expected period 0 utility. If this is true for all marginal
changes between 0 and p̄, then integration of the marginal changes implies that no penalties in [0, p̄]
can be welfare enhancing.


                                                    76
Online Appendix                                                      Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


Proof. For a realization θ, suppose that the period 0 expected choice under the contract is x∗ (θ, p) <
X. Now for this taste-shock,

                        d                               dx∗
                           ((w + p)x∗ − θC(x∗ ) − Xp) =     (w + p − θC 0 (x∗ )) − (X − x∗ )
                        dp                               dp
                                                        dx∗
                                                      =     (w + p − β̃(w + p)) − (X − x∗ )
                                                         dp
                                                                        dx∗
                                                      = (1 − β̃)(w + p)     − (X − x∗ )
                                                                        dp
                                                             = (1 − β̃)x∗ ε − (X − x∗ )
                                                             = ((1 − β̃)ε + 1)x∗ − X                                 (16)

               dx       p+w
where ε =      dw   ·    x     is the elasticity of effort with respect to the wage. Clearly, increasing p has no
effect for states of the world in which x∗ ≥ X. Integrating over θ, the net impact of increasing p is
thus                                                                                 
                                        P r(x∗ < X) ((1 − β̃)ε + 1)E [x∗ |x∗ < X] − X

    Next, taking the derivative of (16) with respect to β̃ gives

                                                           dx∗                          x∗ ε
                                 −εx∗ + ((1 − β̃)ε + 1)        = −εx∗ + ((1 − β̃)ε + 1)
                                                           dβ̃                            β̃
                                                                     "                  #
                                                                       1 + (1 − β̃)ε
                                                               = εx∗                 −1
                                                                            β̃
                                                                >0

Taking expectations, this implies that the expected utility V (p, X) from the contract satisfies
 d2
dβ̃dp
      V   > 0 as long as there is a positive measure of states for which x∗ < X. This implies that if
at some value p = q there is a positive measure of states for which a β̃ = 1 individual would expect
                               d2
to choose x∗ < X,             dβ̃dp
                                    V   > 0 for all β̃ ∈ [0, 1] and p ≤ q. But since   d
                                                                                       dp V   < 0 for β̃ = 1, this implies
       d
that   dp V   < 0 for all β̃ ∈ [0, 1].

Proposition 9. Consider model II.
    1. If for a given commitment contract (p, X) there is a positive measure of θ for which the period
0 self would choose x∗ < X, then the commitment contract cannot be desired by anyone, and its
expected damages are decreasing in β̃.
    2. Let E[x(p)|x(p) ≤ X] denote the average effort conditional on it being less than X, given
                                                                              X
penalty p for working less than X. If E[x(p)|x(p) < X] <                   (1−β̃)ε+1
                                                                                       for all p ∈ [0, p̄], then expected
utility under the commitment contract is decreasing in p ∈ [0, p̄]. Consequently, no commitment
contracts of the form (p, X), p ∈ (0, p̄] are desirable.

Proof. For a realization θ, suppose that the period 0 expected choice under the contract is x∗ (θ, p) <



                                                                77
Online Appendix                                                    Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


X. Now for this taste-shock,

               d                                    dx∗ 0 ∗
                  (u(x∗ + θ(Y − (r + p)x∗ − pX))) =     (u (x ) − θ(r + p)) − θ(X − x∗ )
               dp                                    dp
                                                    dx∗ 1
                                                                               
                                                  =          θ(r + p) − θ(r + p) − θ(X − x∗ )
                                                     dp β̃
                                                                       dx∗
                                                  = (1/β̃ − 1)θ(r + p)     − θ(X − x∗ )
                                                                       dp
                                                           = (1/β̃ − 1)θx∗ ε − θ(X − x∗ )
                                                           = θ((1/β̃ − 1)ε + 1)x∗ − θX                             (17)

                 dx       r+p
where ε =        dr   ·    x    is the elasticity. Clearly, increasing p has no effect for states of the world in
which     x∗   ≥ X. Integrating over θ, the net impact of increasing p is thus
                                                                                
                                       θP r(x∗ < X) (1/β̃ − 1)E [x∗ |x∗ < X] − X

    Next, taking the derivative of (17) with respect to 1/β̃ gives

                                                         dx∗                                 x∗ ε
                          −εθx∗ + θ((1/β̃ − 1)ε + 1)            = −εθx∗ + ((1/β̃ − 1)ε + 1)
                                                        d(1/β̃)                               β̃
                                                                      "                    #
                                                                        (1/β̃ − 1)ε + 1
                                                                = εx∗                   −1
                                                                               β̃
                                                                   >0

Taking expectations, this implies that the expected utility V (p, X) from the contract satisfies
  d
dβ̃dp
      V   > 0 as long as there is a positive measure of states for which x∗ < X. This implies that if
at some value p = q there is a positive measure of states for which a β̃ = 1 individual would expect
                             d2
to choose x∗ < X,           dβ̃dp
                                  V   > 0 for all β̃ ∈ [0, 1] and p ≤ q. But since   d
                                                                                     dp V   < 0 for β̃ = 1, this implies
       d
that   dp V    < 0 for all β̃ ∈ [0, 1].

Discontinuous penalties

Proposition 10. Consider model I and fix a contract (p, X). Let θ† (β̃) be the taste-shock for which
an individual with perceived present focus β̃ is indifferent between choosing X versus some amount
x < X. If f 0 (θ)/f (θ) ≥ −1/θ for θ ∈ [θ† (β̃), θ† (1)], then the commitment contract cannot be desired
by anyone with β̃ > β̃, and its expected damages are decreasing in β̃. An analogous result holds for
model II.

Proof. Consider now contracts that specify a fixed penalty p as long as x < X. This means that in
model I, for each p and β̃, there is a “marginal” taste-shock θ† (p, β̃) satisfying

                                      β̃(wx(θ† ) − p) − θ† C(x(θ† )) = β̃wX − θ† C(X)                              (18)


                                                              78
Online Appendix                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


where x satisfies θ† C 0 (x) = β̃w. Differentiating (18) with respect to β̃ using the condition θ† C 0 (x) −
β̃w = 0 gives
                                              dθ†             dθ†
                                  wx − p −        C(x) = wX −     C(X)
                                              dβ̃             dβ̃
or equivalently

                                           dθ†    wX + p − wx
                                               =
                                           dβ̃   C(X) − C(x(θ† ))
                                              = θ† /β̃

                                                              dθ†
This implies that θ† is a linear function of β̃, and that     dβ̃
                                                                    is a constant; we define it to be γ. Now
the perceived gains from having β̃ increased are

                                     (1 − β̃)(wX + p − wx(θ† ))f (θ† )γ

These gains are increasing in p if (wX + p − wx(θ† ))f (θ† ) is increasing in p. Now (18) is equivalent
to
                              β̃(wX + p − wx(θ† )) = θ† C(X) − θ† C(x(θ† ))

The derivative of the right-hand side with respect to p is

                                    dθ†
                                                                  
                                                          † 0   dx
                                           C(X) − C(x) − θ C (x) †
                                    dp                          dθ

But since x is decreasing in θ† , this means that C(X) − C(x) − θ† C 0 (x) dθ
                                                                           dx
                                                                              † is positive. In particular,
                                                                              −C 0
differentiating the FOC yields C 0 (x) + θ† C 00 (x) dθ
                                                     dx
                                                        † = 0, or
                                                                    dx
                                                                    dθ†
                                                                          =   θ† C 00
                                                                                        = − θβ̃w
                                                                                             2 C 00 . Since
                                                                                                              dx
                                                                                                              dw   =    β̃
                                                                                                                       θC 00 ,   it
              dx
follows that   = − θw† dw
              dθ†
                       dx
                          = − θx† ε.
                                                                    dθ†
                 d
    Consequently dp (X + p − wx(θ† ))      has the same sign as     dp .   Now by the Envelope Theorem, the
derivative of (18) with respect to p is

                                                    dθ†         dθ†
                                       −β̃ − C(x)       = −C(X)
                                                    dp          dp

which shows that
                                       dθ†         β̃
                                           =                  >0
                                       dp    C(X) − C(x(θ† ))
Consequently,

                    dθ†                                 C(X) − C(x) + xεC 0 (x)
                                                  
                                          † 0   dx
                           C(X) − C(x) − θ C (x) † = β̃
                    dp                          dθ          C(X) − C(x)

and thus
                           d                       C(X) − C(x) + xεC 0 (x)
                              (wX + p − wx(θ† )) =                         ≥1
                           dp                          C(X) − C(x)



                                                      79
Online Appendix                                                    Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


By the chain rule, the condition for (wX + p − wx(θ† ))f (θ† ) to be non-decreasing in p is that


                          f 0 (θ† )     C(X) − C(x) + xεC 0 (x)        1        1
                                    ≥ −                         ·
                          f (θ† )           C(X) − C(x)           w(X − x) + p dθ†
                                                                                                 dp
                                    1 C(X) − C(x) + xεC 0 (x)
                                 =−
                                    β̃    w(X − x) + p
                                     1 w(X − x) + p + xεw
                                 =− †
                                    θ    w(X − x) + p

                                          f 0 (θ)
A sufficient condition is thus that       f (θ)     ≥ −1/θ.

A.5.3    Costly self-control

Finally, we consider whether our predictions about the impact of uncertainty on commitment de-
mand carry over to alternative models of self-control problems; in particular, models of costly
self-control, as in Fudenberg and Levine (2006) and Gul and Pesendorfer (2001). We assume that
the tempting option is to choose a = 0, which incurs no immediate costs, and we assume that the
self-control cost is linear (as in Gul and Pesendorfer, 2001, or Assumption 5’ of Fudenberg and
Levine, 2006). This means that in period 1, the individual’s utility in a contract with penalty p for
choosing a = 0 is given by −p + a · [b + p − (1 + γ)c] , where γ is the marginal cost of self-control.
The individual’s utility in period 1 when the choice-set is restricted to A = {1} is given by (b−c). In
period 0, the individual chooses the contract if it increases expected period 1 utility. The expected
utility from a p-penalty-contract is


                                      F (c† )(b + p − (1 + γ)E[c|c ≤ c† ]) − p
              b+p
where c† =    1+γ .By the Envelope Theorem, the derivative of that with respect to p is −(1 − F (c† )).
                                                     
                                                  b+p
Thus, utility is strictly decreasing in p when F 1+γ    < 1. This means that as long as there is some
chance that c < b/(1 + γ), a penalty-based contract can only decrease utility. Moreover, since the
loss (1 − F (c† )) is decreasing in c† , this means that penalties are least attractive to those with the
highest (perceived) costs of self-control.
    Consider now choice-set restrictions. The utility with a choice-set restriction is b − E[c], while
                         R
the utility without it is c≤b/(1+γ) (b − (1 + γ)c)dF (c). The impact of the restriction is thus

          Z                           Z                                   Z                  Z
                         γcdF (c) +                  (b − c)dF (c) ≤ γ           cdF (c) +            (b − c)dF (c)
             c≤b/(1+γ)                 c≥b/(1+γ)                           c≤b               c≥b


The inequality follows because γc ≥ b−c iff c ≥ b/(1+γ). To get a quantitative sense of this, suppose
                                                                                             c̄−1
that c is uniform on [0, c̄], and normalize b = 1. Then E[c|c > 1] − 1 =                       2      and E[c|c < b] = b/2.
                                                         c̄−1 c̄−1
Then the gains are negative if γ(1/2)(1/c̄) ≤              c̄   2 ,   or if γ ≤ (c̄ − 1)2 . For example, suppose that


                                                              80
Online Appendix                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


γ = 0.3, which is equivalent to weighting delayed benefits relative to costs by a factor of β = 0.77.
In this case, the gains from full commitment are negative if c̄ > 1.55. Compared to the uniform costs
case in the present focus model, this implies that binding commitment contracts are more desirable
for individuals with costly self-control, for a given “weight” on delayed benefits versus immediate
costs.


B        Further results and robustness tests for reduced-form results
B.1      Additional results on the behavior change premium

    Table A1: Correlation between the behavior change premium and expected behavior change

                                                        Behavior change premium
                                               Excl. $1 Excl. $1      $1 only    $1 only
                                                  (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)
             Expected behavior change           1.51***     1.52***    0.36***    0.36***
                                              (0.13)      (0.13)     (0.08)     (0.08)
             Constant                           0.10                   5.58***
                                              (0.22)                 (0.35)
             Dep. var. mean:                    1.20        1.20       6.10       6.10
                                              (0.15)      (0.15)     (0.38)     (0.38)
             Wave FEs                             No         Yes         No        Yes
             N                                 6,240       6,240      1,248      1,248
             Clusters                          1,248       1,248      1,248      1,248
Notes: This table reports the association between the estimated behavior change premium at each piece-rate
incentive level and the expected behavior change in visits per dollar increase in the piece-rate incentive. Each
column presents coefficient estimates from OLS regressions with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in
parentheses. In columns 1 and 2, all incentive levels except the $1 incentive are included, while columns 3
and 4 are restricted to the $1 incentive. Regressions in columns 2 and 4 include wave fixed effects and omit
the constant term. *** denote statistics that are statistically significantly different from 0 at the 1% level.


B.2      Additional results for Section 6.2
Here we show that the results in Table 4 in the main text are robust to splitting the sample by
those in the information control group and those receiving the enhanced information treatment. We
find here that there is no significant correlation for the control group and the point estimates are
actually negative. There is a somewhat stronger correlation between the measured behavior change
premium and the take-up of “more” commitments for those who received the enhanced information
intervention.




                                                      81
Online Appendix                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


  Table A2: Correlation between the behavior change premium and take-up of “more” contracts
                                         (a) Information control group
                                                     Take-up of “more”    visits contract
                                               8+ visits 12+ visits       16+ visits Pooled
                                                  (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)
              Behavior change premium           –0.040      –0.013         –0.036       –0.028
              (z-score)                        (0.025)     (0.024)        (0.029)      (0.022)
              Dep. var. mean:                     0.65        0.52           0.36          0.51
                                                (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)       (0.01)
              Wave FEs                             Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
              Contract FEs                          No          No             No           Yes
              N                                    429         622            429        1,480
              Clusters                             429         622            429           622

                                       (b) Information treatment group
                                                   Take-up of “more” visits contract
                                            8+ visits  12+ visits 16+ visits        Pooled
                                               (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
           Behavior change premium           0.035***    0.041***     0.055***      0.044***
           (z-score)                       (0.013)     (0.013)      (0.014)       (0.012)
           Dep. var. mean:                    0.62        0.47         0.31          0.47
                                            (0.03)      (0.02)       (0.03)        (0.02)
           Wave FEs                            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
           Contract FEs                         No          No           No           Yes
           N                                   246         452          246           944
           Clusters                            246         452          246           452

Notes: This table performs analysis identical to that of Table 4 in the body of the paper, but split by infor-
mation control versus information treatment groups. *** denotes statistics that are statistically significantly
different from 0 at the 1% level.


B.3    Additional results for Section 6.3
Here we show that the patterns of take-up for “more” and “fewer” commitment contracts, and in
particular the positive correlation between those two decisions, holds when we split the sample
separately into information control and enhanced information treatment groups. Note that the
positive correlation between the two types is present in both samples, but slightly weaker for those
receiving the enhanced information treatment.




                                                      82
Online Appendix                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


                   Table A3: Take-up of “more” and “fewer” commitment contracts
                                           (a) Information control group
                                                        Chose “more”       Chose “fewer”
                    Chose “more”      Chose “fewer”      given chose        given chose
                      contract          contract           “fewer”            “more”          Diff       Diff
     Threshold           (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)        (3)-(1)    (4)-(2)
      8 visits          0.65              0.36               0.88               0.49        0.23***    0.13***
      12 visits         0.52              0.33               0.72               0.45        0.20***    0.13***
      16 visits         0.36              0.31               0.56               0.48        0.20***    0.17***

                                         (b) Information treatment group
                                                        Chose “more”       Chose “fewer”
                    Chose “more”      Chose “fewer”      given chose        given chose
                      contract          contract           “fewer”            “more”          Diff       Diff
     Threshold           (1)               (2)                (3)                (4)        (3)-(1)    (4)-(2)
      8 visits          0.62              0.30               0.89               0.43        0.27***    0.13***
      12 visits         0.47              0.29               0.62               0.38        0.15***    0.09***
      16 visits         0.31              0.22               0.47               0.34        0.16***    0.12***


Notes: This table performs analysis identical to that of Table 6 in the body of the paper, but split by infor-
mation control versus information treatment groups. *** denotes statistics that are statistically significantly
different from 0 at the 1% level.




Table A4: Association between the behavior change premium and take-up of “more” but not “fewer”
contracts

                                                 Take-up of “more” visits contract     only
                                              8+ visits 12+ visits 16+ visits          Pooled
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)
              Behavior change premium           0.004      0.009        0.013            0.009
              (z-score)                       (0.015)    (0.014)      (0.014)          (0.013)
              Dep. var. mean:                    0.34       0.28         0.19             0.27
                                               (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.01)           (0.01)
              Wave FEs                            Yes        Yes          Yes              Yes
              Contract FEs                         No         No           No              Yes
              N                                   849      1,248          849            2,946
              Clusters                            849      1,248          849            1,248
Notes: This table reports the association between the estimated average behavior change premium (calculated
excluding the $1 incentive) and an indicator for whether a participant took up a “more” but not a “fewer”
commitment contract. Each column reports coefficient estimates from OLS regressions. Dependent variable
means with standard errors in parentheses are also reported. In columns 1, 2, and 3, the dependent variables
are indicators for taking up a “more” but not “fewer” contract at each threshold of 8, 12, and 16 visits,
respectively. Column 4 is a regression that pools over columns 1-3. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity-
robust in columns 1-3, and are clustered at the subject level in column 4. *,** denote statistics that are
statistically significantly different from 0 at the 10% and 5% levels respectively.


                                                      83
Online Appendix                                             Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


B.4     Additional results for Section 6.4.1
Here we provide a few additional results showing that measures that are positively correlated with
the take-up of “more” commitments tend to be negatively correlated with the take-up of “fewer”
commitments. These results bolster the arguments in Section 6.4.1 that participants were not simply
confusing “fewer” contracts for “more” contracts.

      Table A5: Correlation between perceived success in contracts and take-up of contracts

                                   Subj. prob. succeed in                 Subj. prob. succeed in
                                      “more” contract                        “fewer” contract
                                  (1)       (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)         (6)
      Commit to “more”          0.12***               0.14***        –0.09***                –0.13***
                              (0.02)                (0.02)          (0.03)                  (0.03)
      Commit to “fewer”                    –0.05* –0.08***                         0.17***     0.20***
                                          (0.03)    (0.02)                       (0.03)     (0.03)
      N                          399         399       399             399          399         399
      “More” − “Fewer”                                0.22***                                 -0.34***
                                                    (0.03)                                  (0.05)
Notes: This table reports the association between the take-up of “more” and “fewer” commitment contracts
(with a threshold of 12 visits) and subjective beliefs about the probability of success if exogenously assigned
the contract. Each column presents coefficient estimates and heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors in
parentheses from separate OLS regressions. Columns 1-3 display associations with participants’ subjective
expectations of following through on the “12 or more attendances” contract, with the subjective expectations
coded on a scale of 0 to 1. Columns 4-6 display associations with participants’ subjective expectations of
following through on the “fewer than 12 attendances” contract, with the subjective expectations coded on
a scale of of 0 to 1. The sample consists of participants in wave 3, the only wave in which we elicited the
probabilities of contract success. *,**,*** denote statistics that are statistically significantly different from
0 at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level respectively.




                                                       84
Online Appendix                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


                     Table A6: Other correlates of commitment contract take-up

                                    Expected attendance        Past attendance      Goal attendance
                                       (1)                        (2)                  (3)
        Chose “more contract”         1.94***                    1.31***              2.56***
                                    (0.21)                     (0.22)               (0.22)
        Chose “fewer” contract       –0.87***                   –1.94***             –1.03***
                                    (0.23)                     (0.23)               (0.25)
        N                            2,946                      2,946                2,946
        “More” − “Fewer”              2.81***                    3.25***              3.59***
                                    (0.34)                     (0.35)               (0.36)
Notes: This table presents results from three stacked OLS regressions that study how the three dependent
variables in columns 1-3 relate to people’s decision to take up the “more” contracts and the “fewer” contracts.
Since participants were asked about multiple commitment contracts in waves 1 and 2, each participant
contributes three observations to the regressions in these two waves. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors are reported in parentheses. *** denotes statistics that are statistically significantly different from 0
at the 1% level.


B.5     Additional results for Section 6.4.3
Here we present additional results that highlight that the patterns of selecting “more” and “fewer”
commitment contracts are not limited to participants for whom the contract was unlikely to be
binding. For each visit threshold we identify participants whose self-reported subjective expectations
for gym visits in the absence of incentives were at least two or four visits below the threshold. For
these individuals, the “more” contract would likely be significantly binding. Similarly, we identify
participants whose subjective expectations for gym visits in the absence of incentives were at least
one or three more than the threshold, which implies 2 or 4 more than the limit for compliance with
the “fewer” contract. The tables show that the take-up of both types of contracts is similar if we
limit to those for whom they were more likely to be binding (Table A7). Moreover, the correlation
between the take-up of “more” and “fewer” contracts is similar as we limit to those for whom one of
the contract types was more likely to be binding (Table A8).

                            Table A7: Take-up rate by expected attendance

                             Chose “more” Chose “more”                    Chose “fewer” Chose “fewer”
               Chose “more” given exp. att. given exp. att. Chose “fewer” given exp. att. given exp. att.
                 contract       ≤r−2            ≤r−4          contract        ≥r+1            ≥r+3
 Threshold (r)     (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
   8 visits        0.64          0.62            0.63           0.34           0.31            0.29
   12 visits       0.49          0.39            0.35           0.31           0.30            0.29
   16 visits       0.32          0.24            0.23           0.27           0.31            0.32

Notes: Each column reports the take-up rate of a “more” or “fewer” commitment contract with a given
visits threshold r ∈ {8, 12, 16}. In columns 2, 3, 5, and 6, the samples are restricted to participants whose
subjective expectations of gym attendance in the absence of incentives are ≤ r − 2 (column 2), ≤ r − 4
(column 3), ≥ r + 1 (column 5), or ≥ r + 3 (column 6), respectively.




                                                      85
Online Appendix                                             Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


            Table A8: Correlation of “more” and “fewer” take-up by expected attendance

                            Exp. att. Exp. att. Exp. att. Exp. att. Exp. att. Exp. att.
                      All    ≤r−2 ≤r−4 ≥r+1 ≥r+3                      ≤6        ≥ 17
      Threshold (r)   (1)     (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)
        8 visits    0.37*** 0.39*** 0.46*** 0.37*** 0.38*** 0.39*** 0.41***
        12 visits   0.24*** 0.23*** 0.27*** 0.31*** 0.27*** 0.29*** 0.32***
        16 visits   0.23*** 0.22*** 0.22*** 0.33*** 0.33***          0.25**    0.33***

Notes: Each column reports the correlation between the take-up of “more” and “fewer” commitment contracts
with a given visits threshold, with the sample limited in columns 2-7 by participants’ attendance expectations
in the absence of incentives. *** denotes differences that are statistically significantly different from 0 at the
1% level.


C     Structural estimation appendix
C.1     Details on GMM estimation of parameters
Let ξ = (β, β̃, b, λ) denote the vector of parameters that we are seeking to estimate. Let α̃i (p)
denote an individual’s forecasted visits as a function of piece-rate incentive p, and let ai denote
actual visits. Let pi denote the piece-rate incentive assigned to individual i. We have three sets of
moment conditions.
    The first set of moment conditions corresponds to forecasted attendance:
                                    h                           i
                                E     28 1 − e−λ(β̃(b+p)) − αi (p) pn = 0

for all p ∈ P F = {0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 12}, and all n ∈ {0, 1, 2}. The set P F is the set of all incentives
for which we elicited forecasts. We use 1, p, p2 as the instruments for the forecasted attendance
equation, and our results are virtually unchanged for smaller and higher n.
    The second set of moment conditions corresponds to actual attendance:
                                      h                        i
                                  E     28 1 − e−λ(β(b+pi )) − ai pni = 0

for all n ∈ {0, 1, 2}.
    The third set of moment conditions corresponds to the behavior change premium:

                                                                                                       
                               α̃i (p + ∆k ) − α̃i (p)     wi (p + ∆k ) − wi (p) α̃i (p + ∆k ) + α̃i (p)
E (1 − β̃)(b + (pk + pk+1 )/2)                         −                        −                           =0
                                        ∆k                         ∆k                      2

where pk and pk+1 are one of six pairs of adjacent incentives from the set P F , and ∆k = pk+1 − pk .
   Letting ξˆ denote the parameter estimates, the GMM estimator chooses the parameter ξˆ that
minimizes                                           0          
                                                   ˆ W m(ξ) − m(ξ)
                                          m(ξ) − m(ξ)           ˆ ,



                                                       86
Online Appendix                                               Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


                                          ˆ are the empirical moments, and W is the optimal
where m(ξ) are the theoretical moments, m(ξ)
weighting matrix given by the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the moment conditions.
We approximate W using the two-step estimator outlined in Hall (2005). In the first step, we set W
                                                                                ˆ which we denote
equal to the identity matrix,46 and use this to solve the moment conditions for ξ,
ξˆ1 . Since ξˆ1 is consistent, by Slutsky’s theorem the sample residuals û will also be consistent. We
then use these residuals to estimate the variance-covariance matrix of the moment conditions, S,
given by Cov(zu), where z are the instruments for the moment conditions. We then minimize
                                                   0           
                                                  ˆ Ŵ m(ξ) − m(ξ)
                                         m(ξ) − m(ξ)            ˆ


using Ŵ = Ŝ −1 , which gives the optimal ξˆ (Hansen, 1982).

C.2       Implications of heterogeneity for our parameter estimates
Consider a first-order, linear approximation to person i’s expected linear attendance, Ai (p) = λ0i +
λ1i βi (bi + p). The forecasted attendance curve is given by Ãi (p) = λ0i + λ1i β̃i (bi + p), and the desired
attendance curve is given by A∗i (p) = λ0i + λ1i (bi + p). The behavior change premium is then given
by
                                 BCPi (p, ∆) = (1 − β̃i )(bi + p + ∆/2)λ1i β̃i
                                                                                                   ¯
       We show that we can recover E[βi ], E[β̃i ] and E[bi ] from the population averages Ā(p), Ã(p), and
BCPi (p, ∆) . In other words, if one assumes that the aggregate forecasted and realized attendance
curves and the behavior change premium are generated by a representative agent, the parameters
ascribed to that representative agent in fact correspond to the average parameters in the population.
       We make the following assumptions:

Assumption 1. The parameters β̃i , bi , λ1i are mutually independent.

Assumption 2. The parameters βi , bi , λ1i are mutually independent.

Assumption 3. Terms of order E[(1 − β̃i )2 ] are negligible.

Proof. Without loss of generality, consider two values of p, p1 and p2 = p1 + 1. Let Ã¯−1 denote the
            ¯
inverse of Ã(p), which is also approximately linear, by assumption. We then have

                                      E[Ãi (p2 ) − Ãi (p1 )] = E[β̃i ]E[λ1i ]                               (19)
                                      E[Ai (p2 ) − Ai (p1 )] = E[βi ]E[λ1i ]                                  (20)
                                                   Ã¯−1 (0) = −E[b ]   i                                     (21)

Since the left-hand-side of all three equations above is known, we can solve for E[β̃i ]E[λ1i ], E[βi ]E[λ1i ],
E[bi ].
  46
    One other common approach is to use (zz0 )−1 as the weighting matrix in the first-stage, where z is a vector of
the instruments in the moment equations. We confirmed our standard errors and point estimates are the same under
both choices.


                                                         87
Online Appendix                                                    Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


    Next, note that

               E[BCPi (p, ∆)] = E[(1 − β̃i )(bi + p + ∆/2)λ1i β̃i ]
                                                                                                 
                                   = E[(1 − β̃i )(bi + p + ∆/2)]E[β̃i ]E[λ1i ] + O E[(1 − β̃i )2 ]
                                                                                               
                                   = E[1 − β̃i ] E[bi ]E[β̃i ]E[λ1i ] + (p + ∆/2)E[β̃i ]E[λ1i ]
                                                     
                                   + O E[(1 − β̃i )2 ]

Since E[bi ]E[β̃i ]E[λ1i ] and E[β̃i ]E[λ1i ] are identified from the system of equations (19)-(21), we can
therefore solve for E[1 − β̃i ] given a value of E[BCPi (p, ∆)] for a pair of (p, ∆). Given a value of
E[β̃i ], equation (19) then identifies E[λ1i ], and given the value of E[λ1i ], equation (20) then identifies
E[βi ].

C.3       Details on equilibrium strategies, value functions, and simulated behavior
C.3.1      Equilibrium value functions and strategies

We let f denote the probability density function (PDF) of a random variable given by c + X, where
X is distributed exponentially with rate parameter λ. We let F denote the cumulative distribution
function (CDF). The exponential distribution provides closed-form solutions for both the conditional
expectation and the CDF.
                           Z   x
                                                    1             
                                   cf (c)dc = c +      1 − e−λ(x−c) − (x − c)e−λ(x−c)                      (22)
                            c=c                     λ
                                     F (x) = 1 − e−λ(x−c)                                                  (23)
               Pt−1
    Let ht =     j=1 at   denote the period-t history summarizing a person’s total attendance in periods
1, . . . , t − 1. Given a contract C, we let Wt∗ (C, ht ; β, β̃) denote a person’s expected utility using the
period t − 1 information set and the long-run criterion. Let Wt (C, ht ; β, β̃) denote a person’s forecast
of the expected utility (normalized by β), which may differ from Wt∗ if β̃ 6= β. When C is a linear
piece-rate incentive of p per attendance,
                                                          Z   max(β(b+p)−c,0)
                      Wt∗ (C, ht ; β, β̃)   = (T − t) ·                         (b − c − c)f (c)dc
                                                           c=0
                                                          Z max(β̃(b+p)−c,0)
                       Wt (C, ht ; β, β̃) = (T − t) ·                           (b − c − c)f (c)dc
                                                           c=0

and in each period a person chooses to attend the gym if and only if β(b + p) ≥ ct . We now
characterize Wt∗ and Wt when C is a contract where participants lose p if they don’t attend at least
g times. We start with the sophisticated case where β = β̃. In period T ,




                                                              88
Online Appendix                                                        Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


                                 R
                                     βb
                                       (b − c)f (c)dc                           if hT ≥ g
                                 Rc=c
                                 
                                 
                     WT∗ (ht ) =     β(b+p)
                                    c=c     (b − c)f (c)dc − (1 − F (β(b + p)))p if hT = g − 1
                                 
                                 R βb
                                    c=c (b − c)f (c)dc − p                       if hT < g − 1
                                 
                                 

          ∗ (h) := W ∗ (h + 1) − W ∗ (h). Then a person chooses to attend the gym in period
Now set ∆Wt+1       t+1           t+1
                         ∗ (h )) ≥ c . For t < T , we have the following recursion on the value
t if and only if β(b + ∆Wt+1 t      t
functions:
                 Z         ∗ (h ))
                     β(b+∆Wt+1                                                Z   ∞
                               t
 Wt∗ (ht )   =                         (b +    ∗
                                              Wt+1 (ht   + 1) − c)f (c)dc +                          ∗
                                                                                                    Wt+1 (ht )f (c)dc. (24)
                 c=c                                                                   ∗ (h ))
                                                                               c=β(b+∆Wt+1 t



Note that (22) and (23) imply that the expression in (24) above has a closed-form solution for Wt
given a value function Wt+1 .
    Next, note that Wt (C, ht ; β, β̃) = Wt∗ (C, ht ; β̃, β̃), meaning that subjective expectations of utility
of partial naifs are immediately implied by the recursion for sophisticates. In period T ,
                                   R
                                       β̃b
                                          (b − c)f (c)dc                           if hT ≥ g
                                   Rc=c
                                   
                                   
                                       β̃(b+p)
              WT (C, ht ; β, β̃) =             (b − c)f (c)dc − (1 − F (β(b + p)))p if hT = g − 1
                                   Rc=c
                                    β̃b (b − c)f (c)dc − p
                                   
                                                                                    if hT < g − 1
                                   
                                      c=c

while WT∗ (C, hT ; β, β̃) = WT∗ (C, hT ; β̃, β̃). Set ∆Wt+1 (h) := Wt+1 (h + 1) − Wt+1 (h). In period t, a
person chooses to attend the gym if and only if β(b + ∆Wt+1 (ht )) ≥ ct . For t < T , we have the
following recursion on the value functions:


                          Z   β(b+∆Wt+1 (ht ))                                        Z   ∞
Wt∗ (C, ht ; β, β̃)   =                                ∗
                                                 (b + Wt+1 (ht   + 1) − c)f (c)dc +                          ∗
                                                                                                            Wt+1 (ht )f (c)dc.
                          c=c                                                         c=β(b+∆Wt+1 (ht ))
                                                                                                                            (25)
A person’s incremental gain from the contract is given by                   W0∗ (C, ht ; β, β̃) − W0∗ (∅, ht ; β, β̃),   where ∅
denotes the absence of a contract.

C.3.2      Simulating the impacts of contracts on behavior

Under a piece-rate incentive of p per attendance, a person attends in period t if and only if β(b+p) ≥
ct , and thus the impact of a piece-rate incentive on behavior is simply F (β(b + p)) − F (βb), for
which an analytic solution is given by (23). An analytic solution does not exist for the impacts of
commitment contracts. We thus study the effects using simulation methods.
    Specifically, we simulate attendance under a commitment contract over 10,000 draws of a T -
period cost vector (c1 , c2 , . . . , cT ), where each ct is an independent draw from the exponential distri-
bution with CDF F . In each draw, a person’s behavior in each period can be computed recursively
by “forward induction”—i.e., first computing behavior in period t = 1, then t = 2, and so forth. In


                                                                  89
Online Appendix                                               Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


particular, in period 1, a person chooses a1 = 1 if
                                     h                                       i
                               c1 ≤ β b + W2 (C, 1; β, β̃) − V2 (C, 0; β, β̃) .

For periods t > 1, a person chooses at = 1 if
                              h                                                  i
                        ct ≤ β b + Wt+1 (C, ht + 1; β, β̃) − Vt+1 (C, ht ; β, β̃) .

C.3.3    Optimal piece-rate incentives for efficient behavior change

Consider a set J of types indexed by j, and having a share µj in the population. The efficiency of
behavior change under a piece-rate incentive p is given by
                                                                                    
                                         X Z            c=bj +p
                               WE   =T·  µj                      (bj − c)fj (c)dc
                                              j∈J      c=bj

The first-order condition is
                               X
                                   µj βj (bj (1 − βj ) − βj p)f (βj (bj + p)) = 0
                               j


which implies that the optimal incentive must satisfy
                                      P
                                        j∈J   µj (1 − βj )bj βj fj (βj (bj + p))
                                p=            P        2                         .
                                                 j µj βj fj (βj (bj + p))


For example, under homogeneity, the optimal value of p is simply (1 − β)b/β. We verify numerically
that there is a unique value of p satisfying the condition above in the heterogeneous cases that we
study.




                                                        90
Online Appendix                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


C.4      Welfare effects of other commitment contracts

             Table A9: Estimated welfare effects of piece-rates and commitment contracts

                                           (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)
                                       Avg. ∆ in     ∆ Agent      ∆ Health     ∆ Attendance       ∆ Social
                                       attendance     surplus      benefits         costs         Surplus

  1     8+ visits contract                0.77        −$5.09        $6.41           $6.14           $0.27
  2     Linear incentive, p = $1.21       0.77         $14.42       $8.18           $5.26           $2.93
  3     16+ visits contract               1.43        −$3.40        $15.00         $12.05           $2.94
  4     Linear incentive, p = $2.24       1.43         $27.75       $14.77          $9.70           $5.06

Notes: Analogous to Table 10, this table reports the estimated effects of four different incentive schemes,
averaged over the full population. There are eight heterogeneous types in all rows, analogous to Table 10. In
rows 1 and 2, we assume that there are eight types of individuals, corresponding to eight subgroups: below-
or above-median past attendance, crossed with receiving either the enhanced information treatment or no
information treatment, crossed with choosing the 8+ commitment contract. In rows 3 and 4, we assume
that there are eight types of individuals, corresponding to eight subgroups: below- or above-median past
attendance, crossed with receiving either the enhanced information treatment or no information treatment,
crossed with choosing the 16+ commitment contract.


C.5      Welfare estimates for alternative specifications of heterogeneity

      Table A10: Estimated welfare effects of piece-rates and commitment contracts, homogeneity

                                           (1)            (2)         (3)            (4)             (5)
                                       Avg. ∆ in     ∆ Agent      ∆ Health     ∆ Attendance       ∆ Social
                                       attendance     surplus      benefits         costs         Surplus

  1     12+ visits contract               1.51        −$3.82        $14.49         $14.86          −$0.38
  2     Linear incentive, p = $2.15       1.51         $26.91       $14.37          $8.67           $5.70
        Optimal linear incentive,
  3                                       5.04        $118.61       $48.07         $36.53          $11.53
          p = $7.98
  4     8+ visits contract                0.63        −$1.39        $5.81           $6.08          −$0.28
  5     Linear incentive, p = $0.88       0.63         $10.57       $6.13           $3.62           $2.50
  6     16+ visits contract               1.64        −$3.46        $16.88         $16.69           $0.20
  7     Linear incentive, p = $2.32       1.64         $29.80       $15.61          $9.42           $6.19

Notes: This table reports welfare effects for the incentive schemes considered in Table 10 and A9, but
under different assumptions about heterogeneity. In this table, we assume that individuals are homogeneous
conditional on their choice of contract, as in row 2 of Table 9 (and its analogues for rows 4/5 and rows 6/7).




                                                     91
Online Appendix                                           Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


Table A11: Estimated welfare effects of piece-rates and commitment contracts, heteroegenity along
past attendance (below/above median)

                                          (1)            (2)        (3)             (4)            (5)
                                      Avg. ∆ in      ∆ Agent     ∆ Health     ∆ Attendance      ∆ Social
                                      attendance     surplus      benefits         costs         Surplus

  1   12+ visits contract                 1.29       −$9.10       $10.84           $9.83          $1.02
  2   Linear incentive, p = $1.97         1.29        $23.72      $12.67           $7.99          $4.68
      Optimal linear incentive,
  3                                       4.61       $111.78      $45.17          $35.17         $10.00
        p = $7.83
  4   8+ visits contract                  0.91       −$5.07        $6.53           $6.80         −$0.27
  5   Linear incentive, p = $1.37         0.91        $16.27       $9.07           $5.77          $3.30
  6   16+ visits contract                 1.31       −$5.95       $12.60          $11.91          $0.70
  7   Linear incentive, p = $1.98         1.31        $24.22      $12.86           $8.15          $4.71

Notes: This table reports welfare effects for the incentive schemes considered in Table 10 and A9, but under
different assumptions about heterogeneity. In this table, we make the heterogeneity assumption in row 4 of
Table 9 (and its analogues for rows 4/5 and rows 6/7).




Table A12: Estimated welfare effects of piece-rates and commitment contracts, heterogeneity along
past attendance (quartile)

                                          (1)            (2)        (3)             (4)            (5)
                                      Avg. ∆ in      ∆ Agent     ∆ Health     ∆ Attendance      ∆ Social
                                      attendance     surplus      benefits         costs         Surplus

  1   12+ visits contract                 1.35       −$9.82       $11.04          $10.17          $0.86
  2   Linear incentive, p = $2.15         1.35        $25.74      $13.48           $8.65          $4.83
      Optimal linear incentive,
  3                                       4.42       $108.70      $43.75          $34.23          $9.52
        p = $7.74
  4   8+ visits contract                  0.91       −$7.29        $6.64           $6.40          $0.24
  5   Linear incentive, p = $1.43         0.91        $16.85       $9.25           $6.04          $3.20
  6   16+ visits contract                 1.25       −$6.82       $11.09          $10.41          $0.68
  7   Linear incentive, p = $1.95         1.25        $23.52      $12.39           $8.06          $4.34

Notes: This table reports welfare effects for the incentive schemes considered in Table 10 and A9, but under
different assumptions about heterogeneity. In this table, we make the heterogeneity assumption of row 5 of
Table 9 (and its analogues for rows 4/5 and rows 6/7).




                                                    92
Online Appendix                                                                             Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


C.6    How commitment contracts affect attendance over time

        Figure A1: Simulated probability of attendance each day, chose 12+ visits contract


                                             1
                                                          Baseline
                                            0.9           With 12+ visits contract
                                                          First best
                                            0.8
          Probability of going to the gym




                                            0.7

                                            0.6

                                            0.5

                                            0.4

                                            0.3

                                            0.2

                                            0.1

                                             0
                                                  0   2   4     6     8    10    12    14     16   18   20   22   24   26   28
                                                                                      Day
Notes: This figure displays the simulated probability of attending the gym each day, under the heterogeneity
assumptions of Table 10.




                                                                                      93
Online Appendix                                                                            Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


         Figure A2: Change in likelihood of attendance each day, chose 12+ visits contract

                                                     .5
          Change in likelihood of going to the gym
                                                     .4


                                                     .3


                                                     .2


                                                     .1


                                                      0


                                                     -.1


                                                     -.2
                                                           0   2   4   6   8   10   12    14    16   18   20   22   24   26   28
                                                                                          Day

Notes: This figure displays the estimated change in the likelihood of attending the gym each day from
assignment to the “more” contract with a threshold of 12 visits. Estimates are obtained from an OLS
regression of gym attendance on indicators for each day and their interactions with an indicator for assignment
to the contract. The coefficients on the interaction terms are plotted with 95% confidence intervals, obtained
from standard errors clustered at the participant level. The sample is limited to participants who wanted
the contract and were exogenously assigned to either receive the contract or to receive no incentives. A line
is plotted with an intercept and slope equal to the coefficients on 12+ visits contract and Day × 12+ visits
contract, respectively, from the regression in Table A13.




                                                                                     94
Online Appendix                                           Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


                Table A13: Daily likelihood of attendance, chose 12+ visits contract

                                                              Likelihood of
                                                               attendance
                                                                   (1)
                              Day                              –0.005***
                                                              (0.001)
                              12+ visits contract               0.051
                                                              (0.045)
                              Day × 12+ visits contract         0.005**
                                                              (0.002)
                              Wave FEs                            Yes
                              N                                 7,336
                              Clusters                            262
Notes: This table reports the estimated change in the likelihood of attending the gym each day by assignment
to the “more” contract with a threshold of 12 visits. Day is an index for the day in the 4-week study period,
from 1 to 28, and 12+ visits contract is an indicator for assignment to the contract. The table presents
coefficient estimates and standard errors clustered at the participant level in parentheses from an OLS
regression. The sample is limited to participants who wanted the contract and were exogenously assigned
to either receive it or no piece-rate incentive or contract. **,*** denote statistics that are statistically
significantly different from 0 at the 5% and 1% level respectively.




                                                     95
Online Appendix                                               Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


C.7     Alternative assumptions about the cost distribution
C.7.1       Minimal cost draw of $10

                                    Table A14: Parameter estimates

                                    (1)            (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                     ˆ                                                 ˆ               ˆ
                                                                                                                    (1−β̃)
                                     β̂             β̃                b̂         (1 − β̂) · b̂   (1 − β̃) · b̂      (1−β̂)

      All                          0.74           0.91              20.70           5.35            1.84            0.34
 1
      (N=1, 126)                (0.72, 0.76)   (0.89, 0.93)     (20.08, 21.32)   (4.88, 5.81)    (1.41, 2.28)    (0.28, 0.41)
      Information control          0.73           0.92              20.95           5.56            1.61            0.29
 2
      (N=560)                   (0.71, 0.76)   (0.90, 0.94)     (20.09, 21.82)   (5.01, 6.11)    (1.18, 2.05)    (0.22, 0.36)
      Enhanced information         0.74           0.88              21.18           5.51            2.47            0.45
 3
      treatment (N=392)         (0.70, 0.78)   (0.84, 0.93)     (20.06, 22.30)   (4.54, 6.48)    (1.50, 3.43)    (0.33, 0.57)
      Below median past            0.68           0.89              18.31           5.84            1.95            0.33
 4
      attendance (N=550)        (0.66, 0.71)   (0.86, 0.93)     (17.63, 18.99)   (5.21, 6.47)    (1.31, 2.60)    (0.25, 0.42)
      Above median past            0.80           0.93              23.39           4.66            1.62            0.35
 5
      attendance (N=576)        (0.78, 0.82)   (0.91, 0.95)     (22.28, 24.51)   (4.03, 5.29)    (1.09, 2.14)    (0.26, 0.44)
      Chose 8+ visit               0.74           0.91              20.12           5.22            1.81            0.35
 6
      contract (N=546)          (0.71, 0.77)   (0.88, 0.94)     (19.27, 20.97)   (4.54, 5.90)    (1.11, 2.50)    (0.24, 0.45)
      Chose 12+ visit              0.71           0.90              20.83           5.97            2.04            0.34
 7
      contract (N=556)          (0.69, 0.74)   (0.87, 0.93)     (19.95, 21.71)   (5.29, 6.64)    (1.36, 2.73)    (0.25, 0.43)
      Chose 16+ visit              0.69           0.87              22.16           6.78            2.99            0.44
 8
      contract (N=275)          (0.65, 0.73)   (0.81, 0.92)     (20.69, 23.63)   (5.64, 7.92)    (1.74, 4.24)    (0.31, 0.57)
      Averaging heterogeneity      0.75           0.92              21.30           5.28            1.68            0.33
 9
      (N=952)                   (0.73, 0.76)   (0.90, 0.94)     (20.55, 22.04)   (4.83, 5.74)    (1.28, 2.07)    (0.27, 0.40)

Notes: This table replicates Table 8, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by 10 + X,
where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.




                                                         96
Online Appendix                                                                                         Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


                    Figure A3: Predicted and observed actual and expected attendance by incentive
                                          (a) All                                                                               (b) Averaging heterogeneity

           20                                                                                                      20



           15                                                                                                      15
  Visits




                                                                                                          Visits
           10                                                                                                      10



           5                                                                                                       5



           0                                                                                                       0
                0    1    2     3     4       5      6     7        8       9    10    11    12                         0   1     2     3     4       5      6     7        8       9    10    11    12
                                          Per-visit incentive ($)                                                                                 Per-visit incentive ($)

                         Predicted expected visits                      Prediction 95% CI                                        Predicted expected visits                      Prediction 95% CI
                         Predicted realized visits                      Prediction 95% CI                                        Predicted realized visits                      Prediction 95% CI
                         Average expected visits                        Average realized visits                                  Average expected visits                        Average realized visits




Notes: This figure replicates Figure 11, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by 10 + X,
where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.




                                    Table A15: Estimated impact of 12+ contract on attendance

                                                                                 (1)                    (2)                                 (3)                                            (4)
                                                                                                  Pr(att. ≥ 12)                  Pr(att. ≥ 12)
                                                                           ∆ in att.                                                                                   ∆ in Pr(att. ≥ 12)
                                                                                                  with contract             without contract

                                                                                3.51                    0.65                                0.22                                         0.42
 1         Empirical
                                                                         (1.38, 5.65)              (0.52, 0.78)                    (0.10, 0.35)                                    (0.26, 0.58)

 2         Homogeneous                                                          3.78                    0.96                                0.10                                         0.86
           Heterogeneous by median
 3                                                                              3.80                    0.89                                0.30                                         0.58
           past att., info. treatment
           Heterogeneous by
 4                                                                              3.99                    0.91                                0.30                                         0.61
           median past att.
           Heterogeneous by
 5                                                                              4.24                    0.90                                0.29                                         0.61
           quartile past att.
           Heterogeneous by quartile
 6                                                                              4.03                    0.89                                0.31                                         0.59
           past att., info. treatment

Notes: This table replicates Table 9, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by 10 + X,
where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.




                                                                                                   97
Online Appendix                                          Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


          Table A16: Estimated welfare effects of piece-rates and commitment contracts

                                         (1)            (2)        (3)            (4)            (5)
                                      Avg. ∆ in     ∆ Agent     ∆ Health    ∆ Attendance      ∆ Social
                                     attendance     surplus     benefits         costs         Surplus

  1   12+ visits contract                1.88       −$2.01       $38.03         $35.64          $2.39
  2   Linear incentive, p = $2.21        1.88        $30.33      $39.19         $30.61          $8.58
      Optimal linear incentive,
  3                                      5.56       $114.84      $115.99        $100.26        $15.74
        p = $7.34
  4   8+ visits contract                 1.15       −$1.06       $22.46         $21.61          $0.85
  5   Linear incentive, p = $1.36        1.15        $18.20      $24.27         $18.76          $5.51
  6   16+ visits contract                1.76       −$1.53       $39.83         $36.81          $3.02
  7   Linear incentive, p = $2.12        1.76        $29.22      $37.37         $29.11          $8.26

Notes: This table replicates Tables 10 and A9, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by
10 + X, where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.




                                                   98
Online Appendix                                              Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


C.7.2      Minimal cost draw of -$5

                                   Table A17: Parameter estimates

                                   (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)
                                                    ˆ                                               ˆ               ˆ
                                                                                                                 (1−β̃)
                                    β̂             β̃               b̂        (1 − β̂) · b̂   (1 − β̃) · b̂      (1−β̂)

     All                          0.33           0.82             4.57           3.07            0.84            0.28
 1
     (N=1, 126)                (0.24, 0.42)   (0.74, 0.89)     (3.56, 5.58)   (2.64, 3.49)    (0.60, 1.09)    (0.19, 0.36)
     Information control          0.30           0.83             4.96           3.47            0.85            0.25
 2
     (N=560)                   (0.20, 0.40)   (0.75, 0.90)     (3.66, 6.25)   (2.86, 4.08)    (0.59, 1.11)    (0.16, 0.33)
     Enhanced information         0.38           0.77             4.69           2.91            1.10            0.38
 3
     treatment (N=392)         (0.18, 0.58)   (0.57, 0.96)     (2.42, 6.95)   (2.16, 3.66)    (0.57, 1.63)    (0.17, 0.58)
     Below median past            0.15           0.89             3.88           3.28            0.41            0.13
 4
     attendance (N=550)        (0.03, 0.28)   (0.79, 1.00)     (2.77, 4.99)   (2.60, 3.97)    (0.07, 0.76)    (0.01, 0.24)
     Above median past            0.52           0.83             6.75           3.27            1.17            0.36
 5
     attendance (N=576)        (0.43, 0.60)   (0.75, 0.90)     (5.33, 8.16)   (2.78, 3.76)    (0.79, 1.56)    (0.25, 0.47)
     Chose 8+ visit               0.33           0.85             4.54           3.03            0.69            0.23
 6
     contract (N=546)          (0.20, 0.46)   (0.73, 0.97)     (3.17, 5.91)   (2.47, 3.60)    (0.28, 1.10)    (0.08, 0.37)
     Chose 12+ visit              0.28           0.81             4.96           3.57            0.94            0.26
 7
     contract (N=556)          (0.15, 0.41)   (0.69, 0.93)     (3.46, 6.46)   (2.93, 4.21)    (0.51, 1.37)    (0.13, 0.39)
     Chose 16+ visit              0.26           0.74             5.28           3.93            1.36            0.34
 8
     contract (N=275)          (0.04, 0.47)   (0.52, 0.97)     (2.46, 8.11)   (2.77, 5.09)    (0.66, 2.05)    (0.13, 0.56)
     Averaging heterogeneity      0.37           0.85             5.66           3.34            0.81            0.27
 9
     (N=952)                   (0.29, 0.44)   (0.79, 0.91)     (4.68, 6.64)   (2.88, 3.79)    (0.54, 1.09)    (0.19, 0.35)

Notes: This table replicates Table 8, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by −5 + X,
where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.




                                                        99
Online Appendix                                                                                         Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


                    Figure A4: Predicted and observed actual and expected attendance by incentive
                                          (a) All                                                                               (b) Averaging heterogeneity

           20                                                                                                      20



           15                                                                                                      15
  Visits




                                                                                                          Visits
           10                                                                                                      10



           5                                                                                                       5



           0                                                                                                       0
                0    1    2     3     4       5      6     7        8       9    10    11    12                         0   1     2     3     4       5      6     7        8       9    10    11    12
                                          Per-visit incentive ($)                                                                                 Per-visit incentive ($)

                         Predicted expected visits                      Prediction 95% CI                                        Predicted expected visits                      Prediction 95% CI
                         Predicted realized visits                      Prediction 95% CI                                        Predicted realized visits                      Prediction 95% CI
                         Average expected visits                        Average realized visits                                  Average expected visits                        Average realized visits




Notes: This figure replicates Figure 11, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by −5 + X,
where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.




                                    Table A18: Estimated impact of 12+ contract on attendance

                                                                                 (1)                    (2)                                 (3)                                            (4)
                                                                                                  Pr(att. ≥ 12)                  Pr(att. ≥ 12)
                                                                           ∆ in att.                                                                                   ∆ in Pr(att. ≥ 12)
                                                                                                  with contract             without contract

                                                                                3.51                    0.65                                0.22                                         0.42
 1         Empirical
                                                                         (1.38, 5.65)              (0.52, 0.78)                    (0.10, 0.35)                                    (0.26, 0.58)

 2         Homogeneous                                                          1.57                    0.78                                0.33                                         0.45
           Heterogeneous by median
 3                                                                              0.64                    0.58                                0.41                                         0.17
           past att., info. treatment
           Heterogeneous by
 4                                                                              0.63                    0.58                                0.41                                         0.17
           median past att.
           Heterogeneous by
 5                                                                              0.69                    0.57                                0.39                                         0.18
           quartile past att.
           Heterogeneous by quartile
 6                                                                              0.70                    0.59                                0.39                                         0.19
           past att., info. treatment

Notes: This table replicates Table 9, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by −5 + X,
where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.




                                                                                                  100
Online Appendix                                             Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


             Table A19: Estimated welfare effects of piece-rates and commitment contracts

                                           (1)             (2)       (3)            (4)            (5)
                                        Avg. ∆ in     ∆ Agent     ∆ Health    ∆ Attendance      ∆ Social
                                       attendance     surplus      benefits        costs         Surplus

  1     12+ visits contract                0.32       −$16.27       $1.85          $1.65          $0.20
  2     Linear incentive, p = $0.86        0.32        $9.51        $1.94          $1.08          $0.86
        Optimal linear incentive,
  3                                        2.09        $75.70       $12.73         $9.60          $3.12
          p = $6.12
  4     8+ visits contract                 0.19       −$10.25       $0.91          $0.66          $0.25
  5     Linear incentive, p = $0.55        0.19        $6.02        $1.28          $0.71          $0.58
  6     16+ visits contract                0.50       −$11.49       $3.75          $4.19         −$0.44
  7     Linear incentive, p = $1.41        0.50        $15.88       $3.10          $1.82          $1.28

Notes: This table replicates Tables 10 and A9, but assumes that the distribution of cost draws is given by
−5 + X, where X is an exponentially distributed random variable.


C.8      Dollar value of exercise from public health estimates
We provide two “back of the envelope” calculations of the dollar benefit of an hour of exercise.
Our goal is not to provide a comprehensive review of the literature on the value of exercise, but to
demonstrate that the literature provides a range of possible values. We then use that range when
calculating values for β̃.
      Sun et al. (2014) find a median difference of 0.112 Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) between
a group that was inactive over a two-year period and a group that exercised on average at least
2.5 hours per week over the two-year period controlling for sociodemographic characteristics (age,
race/ethnicity, living arrangement, income, and education) and health status (e.g., smoking and
BMI). If we adopt 50,000 dollars as the value for a QALY (Neumann et al., 2014), the benefit from
an hour of exercise is:


                                  0.112 × ($50, 000)/(2.5 × 104) = $21.5

      Despite the inclusion of control variables, this study likely overstates the causal effect of exercise
because it does not control for other factors that may affect the difference in QALYs between the
two groups such as diet before and during the period of study and exercise before the period of
study.
      Blair et al. (1989) examine the association between mortality risk and exercise over a fifteen-year
period among a population of healthy non-geriatric adults. They find that a male who moved from
the least fit quintile to the average of the other four quintiles would reduce his chances of dying
by 36.7%, and a female who made a similar move would reduce her chances of dying by 48.4%.
The authors also find that a brisk walk of 30 to 60 minutes each day would be sufficient to move


                                                     101
Online Appendix                                              Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


an individual to a plateau where further exercise would not further lower the risk of death. If we
assume that 45 minutes per day of exercise would at least move a person out of the lowest quintile
of exercise and into the upper four quintiles (a smaller change than reaching the plateau), then it
would lead to the reported reductions in mortality (36.7% for men and 48.4% for women). The
paper reports an age-adjusted all-cause mortality rate of 64 per 10,000 person-years among men in
the lowest quintile of exercise and 39.5 per 10,000 person-years among women in the lowest quintile.
The sample in our study is 61.2% female and 38.8% male with an average age of 34 years. Assuming
men age 34 years have a death rate of 161 per 100,000 and women age 34 have a death rate of 85 per
100,000, the weighted average reduction in the death rate from this level of exercise for an individual
of age 34 in our sample is47



reduction in deathrate = 0.388 ∗ 0.367 ∗ 161/100, 000 + 0.612 ∗ 0.484 ∗ 85/100, 000 = 48.1/100, 000

The value of the exercise then depends on the value of remaining life for a 34 year-old. If we adopt
the SVL (statistical value of life) used by the US Environmental Protection Agency of 9.0 million
dollars, we obtain


                                    48.1/100, 000 × 9, 000, 000 = $4, 329

       Since the exercise required to achieve this gain was 45 minutes per day, the value of an hour of
exercise is:


                                       $4, 329/(0.75 × 365) = $15.81

       Alternatively, we could assume that a QALY is worth $50,000, use life tables to calculate the
probability of survival to each age beyond 34, and calculate the present discounted value (PDV)
of life remaining. Using a discount rate of 2%, we calculate $1,431,000 for men and $1,519,000 for
women. Performing similar calculations to the ones above for men and women and then taking the
weighted average based on the fraction of each gender in the sample, we obtain $2.60 per hour of
exercise. Since part of the reason for discounting is to take account of the decreasing probability of
survival at higher ages, it may be appropriate to apply an even lower discount rate. If we assume
a discount rate of 0% so that the decrease in the contribution of QALYs at higher ages is entirely
attributable to a decreased probability of survival, the value of life remaining past age 34 increases
to $2,189,000 for men and $2,390,000 for women, and the value of an hour of exercise increases to
$4.01.
  47
   NCHS, National Vital Statistics System, Mortality. “United States Life Tables, 2014”. National Vital Statistics
Reports Vol. 66 No. 4. August 14, 2017.




                                                       102
Online Appendix                                          Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


D     Further study details and instructions

                                   Table A20: Study details by wave




Notes: This table describes the variations in the study across the three waves of implementation.


                               Table A21: Study demographics by wave

                                                    Wave 1      Wave 2     Wave 3       Total
          Female                                     0.66        0.61       0.57         0.61
                                                    (0.47)      (0.49)     (0.50)       (0.49)

          Agea                                       30.93       34.55      34.38       33.51
                                                    (12.61)     (15.29)    (15.70)     (14.82)

          Student, full-time                          0.64       0.54        0.55        0.57
                                                     (0.48)     (0.50)      (0.50)      (0.50)

          Working, full- or part-time                 0.50       0.60        0.59        0.57
                                                     (0.50)     (0.49)      (0.49)      (0.50)

          Married                                     0.25       0.28        0.27        0.27
                                                     (0.44)     (0.45)      (0.45)      (0.44)

          Advanced degreeb                            0.41       0.48        0.47        0.46
                                                     (0.49)     (0.50)      (0.50)      (0.50)

          Household incomea                          45,804     58,502      58,527     55,139
                                                    (40,574)   (48,248)    (49,722)   (47,121)

          Visits in the past 4 weeks, recorded        7.04       7.63        5.89        6.91
                                                     (5.86)     (6.12)      (5.36)      (5.86)
          N                                           340         509        399        1,248
a. Imputed from categorical ranges.
b. A graduate degree beyond a B.A. or B.S.
Notes: This table shows the means of demographic variables reported in the study across the three waves of
implementation. The table also summarizes data on past visit frequencies to the gym. Recorded visits are
obtained from the fitness center’s log-in records.


                                                   103
Online Appendix                                       Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


D.1    Elicitation of WTP for Piece-Rate Incentives - Instructions
Our online component contained a section designed to elicit willingness to pay for incentive pro-
grams. This section began by explaining to participants that as part of the study, they might receive
an incentive program that would pay them based on the number of days they exercise at their gym
(the fitness gym we partnered with). The online component then explained that we wanted to know
the value they placed on different incentive programs and how often they thought they might go to
the gym under these programs. See Figure A5.




                Figure A5: Introduction to willingness to pay section of the study




   Next, the study explained to participants the concept of willingness to pay, drawing on the
example of a one dollar per day incentive that ran over the next four weeks. See Figure A6.




                                                104
Online Appendix                                      Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky




             Figure A6: Explanation of willingness to pay for $1 incentive program




   Since participants may not have been familiar with the idea of willingness to pay, we presented
them with rows of decisions arranged in a table, where each decision asked them whether they
preferred the one dollar per day incentive or a fixed payment. See Figures A7 and A8.




                            Figure A7: Instructions for decision table




                                               105
Online Appendix                                       Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky




                                    Figure A8: Decision table




   The study then asked participants whether their answers matched their preferences and gave
them the chance to fill out the table again if they did not. The example in Figure A9 is for a
participant who switched from the one dollar incentive to the fixed payment at Decision 6 indicating

                                                106
Online Appendix                                       Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


a willingness to pay between eight and ten dollars.




                            Figure A9: Comprehension check for table

   From this point, the study explained that a slider is a faster way to answer these types of
questions, instructed participants on its use, and asked them to position a slider to indicate their
willingness to pay for a one dollar per day incentive program that would last 4 weeks. See Figure
A10.




                  Figure A10: Slider for WTP for $1 per day incentive program




                                                107
Online Appendix                                        Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky


   Once the participants positioned the slider, the study asked them the two questions shown below
to determine whether their answers were consistent with their preferences. See Figure A11.




                            Figure A11: Comprehension check for slider




   If the participant answered correctly, she was taken to instructions for filling out the rest of the
willingness to pay section of the study. If the participant answered incorrectly, she was shown the
following explanation (see Figure A12) and given the chance to try again.




                           Figure A12: Explanation of incorrect answer




   If the participant answered correctly on her second try, she was advanced directly to the next
set of instructions. If the participant answered incorrectly on her second try, she was given another
explanation of the correct answer and then advanced to the instructions. The instructions explained
that at the end of the online component, one of the incentive programs would be randomly selected
and the participant would either be given that program or a fixed payment with the choice to be
determined by the preferences she had indicated on the online component. See Figure A13. After
being presented with some answers to frequently asked questions (see Figure A14), participants were
instructed to use sliders to indicate their attendance projections and willingness to pay for programs
paying 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, or 12 dollars per day. See Figures A15 and A16. The order of presentation was
randomized across participants.




                                                 108
Online Appendix                                  Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky




                  Figure A13: Explanation of incentive program selection




                         Figure A14: Frequently asked questions




                                           109
Online Appendix                                   Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky




                  Figure A15: Instructions for incentive program questions




                                            110
Online Appendix                                        Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky




                        Figure A16: Page for $1 per day gym visit incentive




   If participants positioned the slider on its highest possible value, they were taken to a separate
fill in the blank question where they were asked to indicate the smallest fixed amount they would
prefer over the incentive program. The example in Figure A17 is taken from the question that
would have been the follow-up to the question above for the one dollar per day incentive where the
highest possible value on the slider was thirty dollars.




                                                 111
Online Appendix                                     Carrera, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, and Taubinsky




                        Figure A17: Fill-in-the-blank for off-slider WTP




   At the end of the online component, an incentive program and fixed payment were randomly
drawn for each participant and the online component explained to the participant whether, in
accordance with their preferences, they would receive the fixed payment or the incentive program.
The example in Figure A18 is for a participant whose choices revealed that she would prefer the
fixed payment that was drawn to the incentive program that was drawn.




   Figure A18: End of online component announcement of fixed payment or incentive program




                                              112
