NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

/HETEROGENEITY IN PANEL DATA:/ ARE THERE
STABLE PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS?

Jacques jairesse
Zvi Grfliches

Working Paper No. 2619

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1988

The research supported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

HETEROGENEITY IN PANEL DATA: ARE THERE STABLE PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS?

Jacques

Mairesse and Zvi Griliches

Errata

Due to the vagaries of the word processing system and the travel of

the authors several errors crept into this version. In particular,
Section 6, "Swamy Estimates," should be disregarded. It is superseded by
the comparably titled appendix. Also, as several references are not
included, a complete listing follows:
References
Ainemiya, T.

1977. "A Note on a Heteroskedastic Model," Journal of

Econometrics 5: 295-299.
Carter, R.L. and M.C.K. Yang. 1986. "Large Sample Inference in Random
Coefficient Regression Models," Communications in Statistics, Part A,

Theory and Methods, 15(8): 2507-2525.
Chamberlain, C. 1984. "Panel Data," in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. II,
ed. by Z. Griliches and M. Intriligator, 1247-1318. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Cox, D.

1983. "Some Remarks on Overdispersion," Biometrika 70.

Cragg, J.G. 1987. "A Bilinear Model for Heteroskedastic Panel Data,"
University of British Columbia, Department of Economics Discussion
Paper No. 87-23, Vancouver, Canada.

Dutta, J. and H.L. Leon. 1986. "Testing for Heterogeneous Parameters in a
Least Squares Framework," First Boston Working Paper Series 86-32,
Columbia University, Graduate School of Business.

Goldfeld, S.R. and R.M. Quandt. 1972. Non Linear Methods in Econometrics.

Amsterdam: North-Holland.

2

Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort and A. Trognon. 1984. "Pseudo Maximum
Likelihood Methods," Econometrica 52: 681-720.

Griliches, Z. and J. Mairesse. 1983. "Comparing Productivity Growth: An
Exploration of French and U.S. Industrial and Firm Data," European

Economic Review 21: 89-119.

_________

1984.

"Productivity and R&D

at

the firm

level,"

in R-D.

Patents and Productivity, ed. by Z. Griliches, 339-374. The
University of Chicago Press.

_________

1985.

"R&D and Productivity Growth: Comparing Japanese and

U.S. Manufacturing firms," National Bureau of Economic Research

Working Paper No. 1778. To appear in an "Income and Wealth"
conference volume.

Grunfeld, Y. and Z. Griliches. 1960. "Is Aggregation Necessarily Bad?,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,

:1-13.

Hausman, J.A. 1978. "Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica

46: 1251-1273.
Hildreth, C. and J.P. Houck. 1968. "Some Estimates for a Linear Model
with Random Coefficients," Journal of the American Association 63:
584-595.

Hsiao, C. 1986. Analysis of Panel Data. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Learner, E.E. 1978. Svecification Searches: Ad hoc Inference with
NonexDerimental Data. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
MaCurdy, T. 1981. "Multiple Time-Series Models Applied to Panel Data,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 646.

3

_________

1985.

"A Guide to Applying Time Series Models to Panel Data,"

Stanford University, unpublished paper.
Mairesse, J.

1987. "Les lois de la production ne sont plus ce qu'elle

etaient: une introduction a l'econometrice des panels," La Revue
Econornipue, (1): 225-271.

Mundlak, Y. 1978. "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross-Section Data,"
Econometrjca 46: 69-85.

Scheffe, H. 1959. The Analysis of Variance. New York: John Wiley and
Sons.

Solon, C. 1984. "Estimating Autocorrelation in Fixed Effects Models,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper No. 32.

Swamy, P.A.V.B. 1970. "Efficient Inference in a Random Coefficient
Model," Econometrica 38: 311-23.

__________

1971.

Statistical Inference in Random Coefficient Regression

Models. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
White, H. 1980. "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix
Estimation and a Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica 48:
817-838.

_________

1982.

"Maximum Likelihood Estimators of Misspecified Models,"

Econometrjcp 50(1): 1-25.

NBER Working Paper #2619
June 1988

Heterogeneity In Panel Data: Are There
Szable Production Functions?
AES TRACT

We estimate separate productions functions for approximately 450
manufacturing firms each in France and the United States and for 850
manufacturing firms in Japan, covering the 13 year period 1967-1979, and
focus on the wide dispersion in the estimated slope coefficients in all

three countries. The main question asked is:

"Is this dispersion real?"

Could it be just a reflection of sampling variability or is it an

indication of real heterogeneity? We estimate the "true" dispersion using
three different approaches: Maximum Likelihood, regressions of squares and
cross-products of residuals, and Swamy's "residual" method, and try to

interpret the somewhat different answers which emerge. In particular, we
investigate the "reality" of the estimated heterogeneity by looking at its
stability over time and by relating it to differences in capital shares and

the industrial structure. We conclude that the observed heterogeneity is
not "real." It is caused by some non-stable misspecification of our simple
model, implying that we are unlikely to discern different but stable
individual production relations in samples of this size which contain only
a limited number of the economically relevant variables.

Jacques Mairesse
Institut National de la
Statistique et des Etudes
Economiques
18, Boulevard Adoiphe-Pinard
75675 Paris Cedex 14
FRANCE

Zvi Griliches
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

November 1987
Revised May 1988

HETEROGENEITY IN PANEL DATA: ARE THERE STABLE PRODUCTION FUNCTIONS?

Jacques Mairess and Zvi Griliches*

1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Our paper is about heterogeneity in production relations at the micro

level and a quest for an interpretation of it. We have been studying, for
a number of years, the relationship between output and inputs, between
labor productivity and the capital-labor ratio, and between technological

change and investment in R&D. We have worked primarily with firm level
data in France, the U.S. and Japan and used the production function
framework, and especially the Cobb-Douglas form, as an organizing device

for our analysis.1 In this work we were struck both by the surprising
amount of variability in the basic economic ratios at the micro level and
by a number of "anomalies" in the results of conventional analyses of such

data. Since the usual approaches impose a common specification with
constant parameters across the different units, it is at least possible
that some of the apparent anomalies in our results could be due to the
neglect of the parameter heterogeneity.
We ask, in this paper, if the observed heterogeneity is "real" in some

sense and if it makes a difference for our major conclusions. It will turn
out, however, that it is much more difficult to provide a clear answer to
the first part of this question and we will, therefore, make only very

little progress on the second one. To illustrate the problem and to
describe some of the major aspects of our data we shall focus, primarily,
on analyzing estimates of the capital coefficient in a constant returns
Cobb-Douglas. production function and their potential heterogeneity across

different firms. We shall make a number of simplifying assumptions to make
the problem tractable and to help us to communicate our major results. In
particular, we shall abstract from various issues of simultaneity and other
obvious specification errors and conduct analysis under the assumption of
constant returns to scale (CRS).2

The story begins with our data: We have collected, constructed,
cleaned, and analyzed annual data on the output and inputs of about 450
manufacturing firms each in France and the U.S. and 850 firms in Japan, for

the years 1967 through 1979. We imposed common production function
coefficients across firms, and often also across industries within
manufacturing, in order to provide us with a framework for an analysis of
the sources of productivity growth in different countries and also to help

us in exploring the contribution of R&D. We estimated simple production
functions as a first step in such analyses. Continued experience with the
data has convinced us that most of the encountered problems cannot be cured

by fancier functional forms. We did not work with "complete systems" of
production relations. These require the availability of relevant
individual firm input and output prices at the micro level, something which
is not within the feasible set at the moment.

Table 1 shows the result of fitting a standard CRS Cobb-Douglas

production function to various dimensions of the data. We present three
estimates of the capital coefficient (elasticity) in two settings: levels

2

and first differences. The first column gives the "total" results, the
result of pooling all the data and imposing a common intercept and common

slope on all the observations. The data sets are then divided into their
"between" and "within" components, the first being equivalent to estimating
the equation on averag€

.,

over 13 years, for each firm, while the second

allows each firm to have its own intercept and gets its estimate from the

"within-firm" time series variations. It allows thereby for the presence
of correlated individual firm effects in the sense of Mundlak (1978) and

Chamberlain (1984). It should be noted also, that all the equations
contain a set of fourteen industry specific year dummy variables, allowing

thereby for flexible and industry specific time trends. The first
difference estimators are conceptually Close to the "within" estimators in
the sense that they also allow for the presence of individual firm

constants by differencing them out of the data. Their "between" component
is equivalent to the "longest" difference: i.e., it estimates the
coefficients from the average growth rate of the variables over the whole

13 year period. The "within" first differences estimator allows also for
individual firm differences in trends.

The overall results are not particularly surprising. Total and
between estimates are close together [the bulk of the variance in the data
is between firms and accounts for about 88 percent of the total variance in
the logarithm of labor productivity in all three countries] and are higher,

especially for France and Japan, than the within estimates. Japan tends to
have the highest capital elasticity (except in the "within" first

differences). Only in the U.S. data are the "between" and "within"

differences minor. These differences are even more striking, also in the

3

U.S. data, if one does not impose the constant returns to scale assumption

(see Mairesse, 1988). These are the kind of "anomalies" that have
preoccupied us for some time.

Now the fact that "within" estimates of economic coefficients tend to
be lower than "between" estimates is not new and has been much commented on

in the past. The very simple model that underlies these estimates may be
subject to many misspecifications which could account for such

discrepancies. An incomplete list would include the assumption of constant
returns to scale, the use of gross rather than net output measures and the
omission of measures of material use, R&D capital, and other aspects of
quality of labor and capital; the lack of measures of input utilization and
the associated simultaneity problems and short-run versus long-run
productivity movements issues, and the possibility of serious measurement

error in most of our variables. Some of these issues have already been
explored in other contexts and on other occasions. Several of the others,
especially issues of capacity utilization and measurement error we plan to

pursue further in the near future. Here we want to explore the underlying
heterogeneity in firm responses as another possible source of the observed
anomalies in our results.

The reason why we thought of this as a promising line of attack is
that if firms really differ in their response coefficients, estimates based
on different cuts of the data would represent a different weighting of the

underlying distribution of parameters. For example, "between" estimates of
production coefficients would weight the individual coefficients in
proportion to the square distance between their input ratios and the
economy or industry wide averages while "within" estimates of the same

4

coefficients would weight the same individual parameters by the relative

variance of their input ratios over time. Thetwo weight structures are
very different and if there were some correlation between such weights and
the underlying true parameters, the resulting average parameters could
differ quite a bit fron each other even if the underlying parameter

distribution was stable in some sense. A negative correlation of the
individual parameters with the "within" weights could account for the
finding that the "within" estimates are, in general, smaller than the

"between." Such a correlation could arise if firms whose environments are
changing more rapidly and whose capital-labor ratios fluctuate more have
managed to acquire technologies with less responsive, smaller capital
coefficients.

To see whether this could indeed provide at least a partial
explanation for our observed results we embarked on the task of estimating
a separate production function for each of our firms in all three countries

and summarizing the massive results in some comprehendible fashion. It was
clear from the beginning that with only 13 observations for each firm we
could estimate only rather simple, few parameter relationships, and that

the individual results were unlikely to be very precise. We were hoping to
make up what we were losing in precision at the individual level by a

clearer picture of the distribution of the parameters across firms. We
were not prepared, however, for the amount of heterogeneity that we
encountered in our data.

Besides allowing for the possible heterogeneity across firms one could
also relax the assumption of the constancy of the slope parameters in the

time dimension. Then we would be discussing the issue of "stability"

5

rather than "heterogeneity." It turns out that "instability" may be the
main problem with our data rather than heterogeneity and we shall explore

this a bit towards the end of this paper. The original emphasis of most of
our work in this paper, is, however, on the appropriate characterization of
the "individuality" of our firms.

In the next section we shall outline briefly the various

specifications of coefficient heterogeneity considered by us and the

interrelation between them. In section 3 we shall take a first look at our
major results: the observed variances of the individual parameters and
estimates of their "true" heterogeneity. In sections 4 and 5, we shall
estimate these variances directly within the framework of the random
coefficients model, using maximum likelihood methods and the more flexible
approach of regressing the squares and the cross-products of residuals on
comparable squares and cross-products of the independent variables.

In the

last section, we look for other ways of testing the "reality" and relevance
of our findings, and try to provide interim conclusions.

2. THE GENERAL FRAMEWORK
We estimate a number of different specifications of coefficient
heterogeneity using both level and first differences data.

Our general

framework can be described by the following simple equation:

—

where

÷

+

is logarithm of output per employee of firm i in year t,

the logarithm of capital per employee, and
independently of the

is

is a disturbance distributed

In this formulation the intercept parameters

6

a. and the slope parameters . are allowed to differ across firms and
different versions of the model correspond to different assumptions as to

how they differ. There is also a parallel first differences formulation:
=

Th(x.

—

x.1)

+

—

The different models we look at can be summarized
as follows:
Levels

First Differences

A. ai_a,j_

a.

B.

Ea. —

a, E(ai — a)2

C.

Ea. —

a, E$. — Th a

a2, .

b.

—

c.

a, Ufi

D. a distinct and fixed,

ETh , E(.

— fl)2

distinct and fixed.

—
fl.

E.

a.
1

and

fl.

1

distinct

and fixed.

These different combinations of assumptions can be described as follows:
(A) both coefficients constant across firms (the usual linear regression
assumption on pooled data); (B) random intercepts and constant slopes (the
simple error components or random effects model); (C) both intercepts and
slopes random across firms (the random coefficients model); (D) firm
specific intercepts and a common slope parameter (the fixed effects or
covariance model); (B) firm specific, fixed and different, interceptsand

slopes (the fixed coefficients model). The content of the distinction
between "random" and "fixed" or firm "specific" effects is partly in the
assumption that the former are independent of the other variables in the
equation, the x's (i.e., the firm effects are "uncorrelated," E(a1Ix) —
7

a);

an assumption that is not imposed on the data in fitting the fixed effects

versions of this model. Note that the uncorrelation assumption applies to
the absence of a relationship between the individual parameters and the
individual x's and not to the absence of a relationship between the
parameters themselves.4 We will indeed be estimating a covariance between
the intercept and slope parameters also in the "random" effects model but

our main emphasis will be on the slope parameter

and its variance.

Since differencing eliminates the individual intercepts, we are left

with only three comparable first difference versions, all with no
intercepts:

(a) a single common slope; (b) randomly differing slopes; and

(c) firm specific slopes. Versions E and c, which allow for complete
heterogeneity across firms, are the most general ones and all the other
versions are nested within them and could be tested for as different

restrictions on these more general models. Note that we have been
particularly explicit about the structure of the variance-covariance matrix
of the disturbances (s).

In most

of what follows we shall assume that

there is no serial correlation (or heteroskedasticity) beyond that which
arises from the presence of the individual firm effects which are to be
modeled explicitly; or that the serial correlation has been adequately

eliminated or reduced by the first difference transformation. The issue of
the correct specification of E is considered in the Appendix where we try
to deduce the correct sampling errors for our individual firm estimates.
Note also that we have not allowed for time variation in these parameters.

The variability over time in the aj would be absorbed in the .
also to vary over time would strain our already overextended

8

Allowing

computational framework.5 But we shall come back to this possibility in
discussing some of our results below.

3. A FIRST LOOK AT THE MAJOR RESULTS
Table 2 presents the results of estimating the simple production

function separately for each firm. It lists the averages and observed
dispersions of the estimated capital coefficients across firms both for the
"level" version, which is now a "within" equation with a separate constant
and slope for each firm, and the first difference version which allows, to
some extent, for serial correlation in the residuals from these equations.
For comparison purposes we list also similar statistics for five other

variables [which are not regression coefficients]: the annual levels [in
logarithms] and the annual growth rates of labor productivity and of
capital intensity, and the "share of capital" in value added which could be

thought of as another independent estimate of the capital coefficient. The
first row of the table thus gives the averages for the individual firm
capital coefficients and for the firm means of the various variables; the

second, their observed dispersion in the data. The average values for the
estimated coefficients are remarkably close to their least squares
counterparts in Table 1, the "within" levels and the "total" first

differences ones, but their dispersion is immense. The estimated standard
deviations do not provide, however, an adequate impression of this

dispersion. At this point a picture is worth more than several paragraphs
of description.

Figure 1 plots the distribution of the capital coefficients for France
[the pictures are very similar for Japan and the U.S.] against their

9

estimated precision [the inverse of their standard errors]. The estimated

range is enormous: for a coefficient with a prior mean of about 0.3 and a
reasonable range between .1 and .5 we get an actual range from —1.7 to
+2.3, with more than a third of the estimates being actually negative!
We did expect to see some heterogeneity at the individual level and
did assume that it would be magnified by the large sampling errors arising
from the rather short time series available for their estimation, but we
were not really prepared for this amount of dispersion.

We turned then to

an attempt to determine more precisely the amount of "pure" sampling
variance in the results and the complementary effort to determine the
"real" amount of dispersion in these estimates and an exploration of the
sense in which this dispersion is indeed "real," if any.

The next two lines in Table 2 attempt to provide a first round answer

to this question. Line 3 lists the estimated "true" dispersion or
heterogeneity of the

coefficients based on the methodology described in

Swamy (1970 and 1971). Among the different estimates of coefficient
heterogeneity, the Swamy estimates are the most straightforward to obtain.
They are computed as the difference between the observed variance of the
individually estimated firm coefficients and an average of the

corresponding sampling variances. Being based on the individual regression
estimates, they are robust to the possibility of correlated effects
(between the aj and

and the x's) contrary to the maximum likelihood

estimates and those based on the regression of the squares and cross-

products of the residuals. But since these estimates are computed as a
difference, they may yield negative values, and may be seriously affected
by even small biases in the estimates of the observed and sampling

10

variances. This would be the case, in particular, if the errors are
heteroskedictic and/or serially correlated. A positive serial correlation
in both the errors and the x's can account for part of the discrepancy that
we see between our Swamy estimates of

in levels and in first

differences. (See the Appendix for a discussion of the sensitivity of the
Swamy estimates to the misspecification of the variance-covariance matrix
of the errors.)

However, what is most striking in our Swamy estimates is their order
of magnitude:

of about 0.20 to 0.25 in first differences (o —

0.05)

and between 0.30 to 0.55 in levels (o from 0.10 to 0.30). These estimates
are still much too large to be indicators of a credible amount of
heterogeneity given our prior about the possible magnitude of the capital
elasticities (8 —

.3,

0.1). It is interesting to stress, in contrast,

the much smaller estimated "true" dispersion in the capital share:

of

only 0.10 (ci — .01) and the effectively zero estimate for the "true"
dispersion in the growth rates of labor productivity and capital intensity.
As far as these two last variables are concerned, Gibrat's Law applies and

we find not race of persistent individual firm differences in them: all
the observed variability is either common to all firms within an industry
or is transitory.

The fourth line in Table 2 lists the F statistics for the hypothesis

of equality of these coefficients [variables] across firms. Given the
large number of degrees of freedom in our data all these F statistics are
very "significant" at conventional significance levels [the critical F

ratios barely exceed one for our sample sizes]. One can question, however,
whether they should be used in this fashion in such large samples, reducing
11

the probability of Type II error as our sample sizes increase but keeping

the Type I error constant. A more symmetric treatment of the inference
problem, advocated by Learner (1978), would lead to the use of much higher

values for the "critical" F (about 11 for our data) and much less certainty
in rejecting the hypothesis of homogeneity.

Another way of getting an impression of the "significance" of such
numbers is to compare them to the F's computed for the between firms
dispersion in labor productivity, capital intensity, and capital share.

These are on the order of 90 and 11 to 21, respectively, as against 3 to 4

for the capital elasticity. Now that is heterogeneity!
A related view of the testing problem is indicated by Figure 2 which
plots the frequency distribution of the estimated t-ratios for the
individual capital coefficients and superimposes on it the theoretically
expected t-distribution for this sample size (11 degrees of freedom).

It

is clear from this picture that the rejection of the homogeneity assumption
comes from the presence of too many extreme values and is not the result of

just a few outliers. We can use it also to ask the heterogeneity question
in a slightly different multiple comparisons framework (see Scheffe (1959)

for its relation to the standard F test): since we are looking at a large
number independent test statistics, what is the right critical value for a
single statistic given that we want to keep a combined 5 percent

significance level for the testing process as a whole? For (approximately)
500 comparisons, as in the French sample, the individual significance level
should be set at about .0001 or a critical t-value of about 6.3 instead of

the conventional 2.2 level. A single observation of a t-ratio in excess of
6.3 would be enough to reject the hypothesis that all the observations

12

arise from the population with the same mean and differ only from each

other because of sampling variability. But in the French data we have 12
such observations !

6

This first round look at the dispersion in our data leaves us with

rather ambiguous conclusions. The observed dispersion in the estimates of
individual firm capital coefficients is very large and not really credible

as an indicator of "reasonable" heterogeneity. The idea that the results
could be due just to sampling variability is not supported by standard
statistical tests, but the level at which the observed statistics fail the

homogeneity hypothesis is not particularly impressive. The latter point of
view is reinforced by the fact that the estimates of sampling error and the
associated F-statistics, as we already noted, are very sensitive to the
underlying distributional assumptions and especially to the assumption of
homoskedasticity and serial independence (see Appendix).

4. MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATES
In Tables 3 and 4 we present several ML estimates for our three

samples and our different specifications. We estimated the specifications
B, C, and b, using the maximum likelihood framework. In each case the log
likelihood function is the sum of individual firm likelihood values
expressed in terms of the summary statistics for each firm and the

parameters to be estimated: a, ,

, a,
2

2

2

c, and a (see Swamy 1971,

sect. 4.3.d). For the constant parameters and the fixed effects cases, the
maximum likelihood estimates are equivalent to different OLS versions and

we have used the latter. For D they are the "within" estimators and for
the E and c specifications they are the previously described individual

13

firm estimates. These ML estimates, contrary to those presented in

Table 2, assume either the independence of the 's or the independence of

both a. and . from the x's, i.e., the absence of "correlated effects."
They also assume that e and the coefficients a and

are distributed

normally, or more generally that their distribution belongs to the linear
exponential family (see White 1981, 1982; Courieroux, Monfort and Trognon

1984). The standard errors of the estimates under the normality assumption
(computed from the inverse of the information matrix) are given in the
first line of parentheses; the more general standard errors robust under

heteroskedasticity and non-normality are given in the second line of

parentheses. Column 2 gives the estimated values of the log likelihood,
allowing one to compute directly the various likelihood ratio (LR) tests
for the randomness of the parameters (i.e., the nullity of the variances

and/or 02) or for their equality across firms (i.e., the equality of

and/or a for all i). We shall turn first to the tests of heterogeneity,
before looking at the orders of magnitude themselves. Table 5
recapitulates the 2LR values per degrees of freedom p of the tests (where p
is the number of restrictions or additional parameters) and the

or F statistics at the one percent

corresponding critical values of the

level of significance: x2001 (p)/p

F001(p,).

The pattern of the results is quite similar for all three samples.

All of the rejections appear to be very significant statistically. There
are, however, large differences between them, if one takes an eclectic view

of comparing gains in likelihood per additional parameters. In this sense,
the largest benefit comes from relaxing the constancy of the intercept

parameter a. With only one additional parameter c7,

1.4

the

random effects

specification is extremely parsimonious, this one parameter being
"equivalent" to about 80% of the (N—i) additional parameters of the fixed

effects specification. The additional improvement arising out of the
relaxation of the constancy of the slope parameter, although less dramatic,

is still quite sizeable. Again the random coefficient specification
performs relatively well (the additional variance parameter

is

"equivalent" to about 30 to 40 percent of the residual variance reduction
achieved by the N—i firm specific coefficients 3. in levels, and about 15
to 25 percent of it in first differences).

The LR tests of equality of the slope parameters /3 (D if E and a if C

are equivalent to the usual F tests (Chow tests of stability or
homogeneity) that have been discussed in the introduction (with our large
number of observations, 2LR/p values are in fact equal or almost so to F
values; they differ here only because the F given in Table 2 is based on a

different weighting). As we have noted already, although they are very
"significant" at conventional significance levels, they are not all that
"high" if one takes into consideration our large sample sizes and follows
Learner's view of using a critical value which increases with the number of
degrees of freedom.

We are, however, primarily interested in the order of magnitude of our

heterogeneity estimates. The more relevant numbers are the estimated
variances (c) for the two random coefficient specifications C and b. The
figures in brackets in Tables 3 and 4 given for the fixed coefficient
specifications are the empirical variances of the firm-specific estimated

As expected they are much greater than the estimated "true" c, most
of the differences corresponding to the sampling variances (i.e., the

15

variances due to the errors in the model) and our limited study period.

Although unaffected by the imprecision of the individual estimation of the

., the

estimated

remains large, and far too large for numbers which a

priori we would expect to be of the order 0.01 (o —

exceed 0.04 (o —

0.10)

and not to

0.20).

There is a rather clear pattern in this regard in the results for the

three samples. The c's estimated in first differences are much smaller
than those estimated in levels, but they still seem too large, being about
0.06 in France and Japan, and 0.04 in the U.S. (the corresponding estimates
in levels are about 0.15, 0.21 and 0.07, respectively).

The reason why the

variances are so different when estimated in levels and in first
differences (and nearer to what we would deem acceptable for the latter) is

unclear. A plausible explanation is, of course, the possibility of
correlated effects, since maximum likelihood estimation in levels assumes
that the random intercept effects a. are uncorrelated with the capital-

labor ratio. Going to first differences disposes of that problem.
fact that our estimates of the (mean) capital elasticity

The

tend to be

higher (clearly for Japan, more or less so also for France, but rather the
opposite for the U.S.) in specifications which are affected by the presence

of correlated effects (A, B, and C) is another indication of the same

phenomenon. There may be also some coherence in the observed discrepancies
in the estimated

and

in levels and first difference: they are both

quite wide for Japan and both modest for the U.S., France being in a
somewhat intermediate position.

Another explanation for the discrepancies in the

positive correlation of the errors

(not the fi)

is

in the regression, and hence their

16

the

negative autocorrelation in first differences. This would cause a positive
bias in the level estimates of

since the x themselves are strongly

positively correlated, but only a negligible one in the first difference
estimates, the differenced ax's being only weakly serially correlated.

5. ESTIMATES FROM REGRESSIONS ON SQUARES AND CROSS-PRODUCTS OF RESIDUALS
There is another way of estimating the variance components of

heterogeneity suggested by the random coefficients model literature. This
method (developed among others by Hildreth and Houck (1968), Goldfeld and
Quandt (1972), Amemiya (1977) and more recently by MaCurdy (1981, 1985))
relies on the fact that the variances and covariances of the dependent
variable y, conditional on the explanatory variable x, are linear functions
of the relevant squares and cross-products of the x's.

Thus, if the mean

parameters of the model have been estimated consistently in a first stage
and the corresponding residuals u computed in this stage, it can be shown
that regressing their squares and cross-products on the corresponding
squares and cross-products of the x's yields consistent estimates of the

variance parameters. Since these different regressions constitute a system
of related equations (with appropriate cross-equations restrictions on the
parameters), they can be estimated more efficiently (given the mean
parameters) by quasi generalized least squares (QGLS).

Letting

and

be the residuals from the simple OLS estimates of

our model in levels and in first differences (A and a), we have two systems
of equations across firms (the observations being over i). The first one
in levels consists of T equations on squares, of (T—1) on cross-products
lagged by one year, of (T—2) on cross-products lagged by two years,... or a

17

total of T(T+l)/2 — 91 of them. Similarly in first differences there are
for a total of T(T—l)/2 — 78.

such (T—l) equations on squares

Assuming that e's are uncorrelated over time, they can be written
respectively as:
2
u.
— a22
x
it

2
2
(aa + a e

it + 2aa8 x.it +

(SCP)

)

+

v.it

(t—l,.. .T)

u1, —

x. x,

+

a

(x. +

(t't';

2

it

£U.

+ a2 +

tl,...T;

t'—l,...T)

2
2
a 2.ux.
it +ugE +W.

it

(SCP')

(t—l,...(T—l))

Auft Aui, —

a Ax

Ax +
(tøt'; t—l,...(T—l);

t'—l,...(T—l))

We have estimated these two systems by OLS and QGLS (but shall report

here only on the latter). Although somewhat cumbersome (because of the
number of equations), this approach is more flexible than the ML method.

It is easier to investigate various assumptions about the error terms or

the random parameters themselves within this framework. In particular, we
can accommodate serial correlation of the errors by not imposing the
18

assumption that the intercepts of the different cross-product equations of
the system in levels are equal and allow also for non-stationarity of the
errors by not assuming them to be equal within various groups of equations.
Similarly, we can allow for unsynchronized random shocks on our response
parameter fi

by relaxing the equality constraints on the coefficients of the

squares and cross-products of the x's in different ways.
It is also possible to use first stage residuals corresponding to

alternative variants of the (first order) specification of our model. In
the case of the French sample, we have allowed for the possibility of

systematic (synchronized) changes over time in the capital elasticity ,

and for correlated (with the x's) firm effects by including all the
available

in the first stage regressions (using what is known as

Chamberlain's H matrix approach, 1984).
The results of our main computations are summarized in Tables 6, 7,
and 8, respectively, for the fully constrained estimates, and for those
constrained only within groups of equations and for those obtained from the
different year squares equation and from four years apart cross-products

equation. Compared to our previous ML estimates, there is a pleasant
surprise: the fully constrained estimates of

in levels are much

smaller, and now they are also quite close to the first difference

estimates. Both types of estimates, however, stay on the high side of what

would seem a priori reasonable: the estimated
—

range from 0.03

0.18) for the U.S. in first difference, to 0.06 (o — 0.25) for Japan

in levels.

While these results do not change our main conclusions significantly
they do raise some new puzzles. It is not clear why our earlier IlL

19

estimates of

in levels and those summarized in Table 6 should be so

different: in particular they are both affected similarly by correlated
intercept effects and by serial correlation of the errors (at least if we

impose the full set of equality constraints on the intercepts in the system

of square and cross-product regressions). It is also puzzling why our new
estimates of

2.(in

2.

levels) and of c (in levels and first differences) are

smaller than their ML counterparts. These anomalies point to some, still
unclear, misspecifications in our model.

The incompletely constrained estimates (in Tables 7 and 8) may shed

some light on this mystery. They show that there is much instability in
our results, especially in first differences. The example of the French
sample is most striking. We find a first difference estimate of

of

about 0.12 for the squares equations, with corresponding estimates for

individual year equations varying from 0.08 up to 0.42 (in 1974/73). This
estimate goes down to 0.04 in the four year apart cross-products equations
with corresponding separate estimates ranging again from —0.l8(!) to 0.16.
It drops down again to —0.04 (!) in six year apart cross-product equations,

and up again to 0.10 in the eleven year apart cross-product equations. For
the other two samples, the pattern is roughly similar, though less extreme.

The estimates of

in levels are much more stable; they do indicate,

however, a clear downward trend when we go from those estimated on squares

to the estimates based on the twelve year lagged cross-products. This
could be due to some form of random shocks in

unsynchronized but

strongly correlated over time, in addition to the fixed heterogeneity
component fi..

Such shocks unfortunately do not seem to account for what we

20

see in first differences, and we have not been able (yet) to characterize
the instability in these estimates satisfactorily.

6.

SWAMY ESTIMATES

Among the differeflt types of estimates of coefficient heterogeneity,

the Swamy estimates are the most straightforward to obtain. As already
noted, they are computed as the difference between the observed variance of
the individually estimated firm coefficients and an average of the

corresponding sampling variances. Since the Swamy estimates are based on
the individual estimates, they are robust to correlated effects. However,
being computed as a difference, they may be affected by even small biases
in the estimated sampling variances, which could be the case if the errors

e in our model are heteroskedastic and/or serially correlated. In
particular, the serial correlation both in the errors and the x's will
account for part of the discrepancy between the Swamy and ML estimates of

in levels and those in first differences. In order to have a clearer
appreciation of the sensitivity of the estimates to these (second order)
misspecification, we have computed the Swamy estimates under alternative
assumptions for the variance-covariance matrix of the errors.

7. EXTENSIONS AND INTERIM CONCLUSIONS
It is not easy to summarize our various results. There are two
numbers worth keeping in mind: our prior expectation about a reasonable
heterogeneity in the true fl's is a standard deviation of 0.1. The observed
standard deviation at the individual level is about 0.5 (0.4 in first

differences). A direct subtraction of an estimate of the sampling variance

21

(the Swamy method results in a "residual' estimate of the true dispersion
between 0.4 in levels and 0.2 in first differences, the latter still
being about twice as high as our prior expectations.

estimates of

More "direct"

which associate it with the coefficient of the squared x's

(or their crossproducts) in the squares and crossproducts of residuals

regressions or their maximum likelihood analogues, hover also, at their

lower range, around 0.2. Thus, allowing for sampling variability or
estimating the dispersion directly, still yields estimates that are "too
high.

At this point there are two possibilities: we could accept the 0.2
estimate as real and revise our expectations. If we allow for the fact
that our simple production function equation may be seriously misspecified
(there may be decreasing or increasing returns to scale, capacity
utilization fluctuations may matter, capital may be mismeasured, etc.),

then it may be reasonable to expect the

in a misspecified equation to

have a different prior distribution. For example, a more agnostic view
would still keep it between zero and one but would not be surprised by a

standard deviation of 0.2. An alternative, though not mutually exclusive
view, would lead us to inquire into the "reality" of this heterogeneity and

its stability over time. Unless the misspecification is in some sense
permanent, it is not particularly interesting.

We have actually explored a number of first order extensions of this
model and found that they do not reduce the estimated

significantly.

Neither letting go of the constant returns assumption or using value added
output measures and allowing thereby for the presence of the materials
input (in French and Japanese data) changes our results significantly.

22

The

"improvement" in the specification is counterbalanced by the decline in the
t1net" variance of the capital-labor ratio from which the fl's have to be

estimated.8 The impact of capacity utilization fluctuations remains still
to be explored because we do not have a good handle on it in our data.

Moreover, its effect i unlikely to be "stable," it would differ from
period to period, which leads us to our second way of looking at this
problem.

We also worried about the possibility that the observed heterogeneity
is just an artifact of a few outliers that using some alternative more

"robust" approach may make it go away. A look at Figure 1 will convince
one that our results do not depend just on a few outliers. Nevertheless,
we pursued two approaches towards robustness. In one approach, we
eliminate all firms whose within variance in X was either very small or

extremely large. This had essentially zero effect on our estimated "true"

2.it

reduced the observed variance and the estimated sampling variance

about equally. The other approach, computing a robust estimate of the
observed variance of the fl's from their interquartile range and subtracting

the median of the estimated sampling variances rather than their mean
resulted also in only minor changes in the final estimates, reducing
somewhat the

estimated in levels, from .19 to .15, but raising it for

the first differences based estimates, from .05 to .08.

(The reported

numbers are for Japan but the results are similar in all three countries.)
It is clear that the "over-dispersion" that we observe (see Cox 1983 for
related use of this term) is not the result of a few errant firms, but is
actually a pervasive aspect of our data and our approach to them.

23

Why do we care about heterogeneity? If people differ in their
response coefficients and if we contemplate some experiment which will
impinge differentially on them, then it would be valuable to know how they
differ and how this is related to any policy change we may wish to pursue.
If they do differ but these differences are not permanent, then knowing

their heterogeneity today may not help us any tomorrow. This leads us to
question also the time stability of the /3's and not just their cross-

sectional heterogeneity. One way of asking this question is to divide our
period into two, redo the analysis, and investigate the question whether
the estimated heterogeneity is the "same" in both periods, whether the
estimated within period /3's are correlated with each other.9

The results of reestimating our model for each firm in each of the

countries, separately for the two subperiods: 1967-1973 and 1974-1979, and

—

1
.IJuLpJ.L.L1L LLL I.JL L Lat..J.J1L

'•'i

F

4

given in Table 9. These correlations (the last two columns of row 4) are
remarkably low, on the order of .05 to .1, implying a rather substantial

time instability in these estimates and throwing serious doubt on the

"reality" of the previously estimated heterogeneity levels. Row 3 shows
the associated estimates of

based on their between periods covariance.

They are much lower than the total period based estimates and are now much

closer to what we might think is a priori reasonable. Moreover, the levels
and first differences based estimates are now very close to each other.

For comparison purposes we also list similar numbers for the average

output-per-man ratios and capital shares. The heterogeneity in them is
much more "permanent" and so is also the heterogeneity in the intercepts
(not shown here). For example, in France the between periods "permanent"

24

variance accounts for 95 percent of the total for the average

output-per-man ratio and for 90 percent of the total variance in the
average capital share. At the same time, the estimated variance of the 8's
from the between periods covariance is only 6 percent of the total period
estimates in levels and 28 percent in the first differences based

calculations. It is obviously a much less stable aspect of average firm

The most common way of allowing for heterogeneity in such data is to

estimate separate equations for different industries. We have already done
something along these lines by allowing separate industry-time constants.

But we can ask the additional question: Does the estimated heterogeneity
have any "industrial" content? A priori, we would think that it should
have some. Otherwise, the "reality" of the estimated dispersion in the
may be doubtful and also the usefulness of knowing it, even if it were

present. To check on this, we can run an analysis of variance of the
estimated individual slope coefficients using the same 14 industries
breakdown which we have already used in defining the time-industry dummy

variables. We have computed this for our sample of Japanese firms with the
result that the industrial structure, in the form of 14 industry dummy
variables, accounts for less than 5 percent of the observed variance in the
in first differences, and even less in levels (less than 2 percent).
Hence, consistent differences between industries in the parameters of the
production function are not significant contributors to the firm
heterogeneity as estimated by us.

Another way of asking about the "reality" of the observed dispersion

in the 's is to ask how they are correlated with other estimates of the

25

same thing. Under the assumption of competition and constant returns to
scale the capital share should roughly equal .

Even if one relaxes these

assumptions and allows for deviations from purely competitive conditions or
constant returns to scale, one would still expect a significant positive

correlation between these two measures. The facts summarized in line 5 of
Table 9 are, however, rather different. The observed correlations are
insignificant. Even if one takes the maximal number of .04 for France and
adjusts it upward for the attenuation due to sampling error in these
averages, one would still get Only .05 for this correlation, which is much
too small to allow us to think of one of these measures as being a
reflection of the other. It appears that the estimated dispersion in the

s

has little to do with what we may think are the reasonable sources for

it.

Having been aletted to the possibility of time-instability in these
estimates
their

we can now also look

variances.

for

it

in the regression

based estimates of

Unless the 's are stable over time, the regressions based

on the crossproducts of the residuals across different years and the
crossproducts of the x's, rather than on their squares, should yield much.

smaller estimates. This would he true because the time instability in the
B's should show up

in

the residual but not

be strongly correlated over

time. Since this effect may be masked by the presence of correlated
effects in the data (the correlation of the intercepts with the x's, which
is assumed away in such estimation), only the first differences or II matrix

residuals based calculations are relevant here.11 Looking at the last
three columns of Table 7 indicates clearly that the crossproduct based
variance estimates are much lower and unstable. The parallel fl matrix

26

residual based results summarized in Table 10 also indicate that when one
estimates this variance from "distant" cross products one gets a much lower

estimate of it. In short, whatever it is that these individual fl's measure
it is not a very stable aspect of firm behavior.

Moreover, there i some evidence that this instability is year
specific. If we break our data into even and odd years, rather than the
early and later periods, the correlations between the fl's are much higher:

.5 versus .05 for the two periods cut (in France). Thus, the fluctuations
in fi

are not random from year to year. This can also be seen in Table 8,

where we exhibit the separate estimates of cr based on squared residuals

from different years. It is quite clear that something happened around
1974 which is not very well captured by the model or by allowing for
heterogeneity in the fl's across firms rather than across time.

What can we conclude about the average of our estimated fl's, the

capital elasticity of output, rather than its dispersion? The major
conclusion is that we have not solved the between-within puzzle.

Heterogeneity is not the answer to it. This can be seen by comparing the
means of the individual fl's to either the between or the within estimates

which are reproduced, for convenience sake, in Table 12.

Except for the

U.S., lines 1 and 2 differ significantly (as do also lines B and D in

Table 3), but lines 2 and 3 do not. Line 3 is the unweighted average of
the individual fl's, line 2 is the weighted average and the two are

remarkably close, implying that the weighting scheme of the "within"

estimator is not the culprit for its "lowness." There do appear to be real
correlated effects (between the a.,, the individual constants, and the x's)

in the cross-sectional dimension (at least in France and Japan). There is

27

no evidence, however, of a significant correlated effect in the a's. Line
3 (or 5) which does not assume that the /3's are uncorrelated with the X's

turns out to be essentially the same as line 4 (or 6) which imposes the no-

correlation assumption on these estimates. Line 3 is also effectively the
same, as we have already seen, as line 2, which weights these estimates by

the individual firm variance of the
In a sense this evidence of no real relation between the individually
estimated /3's and the capital-labor ratios is another indication of the

"unreality" or irrelevance of their estimated dispersion. What is
impressive in this table is, however, the closeness of the various
estimates of the mean /3 among the se of estimators which allow for a

dispersion in the &s. Even noting the slight reversal for Japan and U.S.
in the lower part of this table which recapitulates some of the first-

differences based results, there is a sense in which the average response
coefficients appear to be rather well estimated.

What is then the answer to the rhetorical question in the title of

this paper? It is negative given the current status of our data and the
variables available to us. Without data on factor prices at the micro
level and information on actual capacity utilization, it is unlikely that
we could derive stable production relationships at the individual firm

level. Moreover, the simple production function model, even when augmented
by additional variables and further non-linear terms, is at best just an
approximation to a much more complex and changing reality at the firm,

product, and factory floor level. While it is possible to get reasonable
estimates of the average response coefficient which are consistent across
different data sets and different estimation methods, there does not appear

28

to be much promising content in the estimated dispersion. In this sense,
if we are interested in the average behavior of productivity then
"aggregation", or more correctly pooling, i.e., estimating a common
coefficient across a large number of firms, may not be "necessarily bad"
(cf. Grunfeld and Griliches, 1961).

Much more could be said about the various estimates than we have been

able to do here. We could do more exploring of the differences that arise
from the assumption of correlated individual effects ("random" versus
"fixed" effects estimates), from different treatments of serial correlation
in the disturbances, and from the results of alternative estimation methods

(see the Appendix for some additional discussion of these topics). But the
main problem facing us is the inadequacy of the underlying simple
production function model. We need to figure out ways of allowi.ng for the
discrepancy between recorded inputs and actually used levels, for lags, and
for the simultaneity in the various behavior relations associated with the

production process. As always, much work remains to be done, but then one
needs also to start somewhere.

29

Footnotes

*ENSAE and EHESS, Paris and Harvard University and NBER, respectively. We
are indebted to the National Science Foundation (SES-82-0806), CNRS, the
Sloan Foundation, and the NBER Productivity Program for financial support.

We are grateful to Thomas Abbott, Jean Marie Chanut, and Ghazala Mansuri
for research assistance and to Bronwyn Hall for many useful comments.

1. For examples of this work see Griliches and Mairesse, 1983, 1984, and
1985, and Mairesse, 1987.

2. What is visible in this paper is only the tip of an iceberg of a great
deal of work with these data. There are many interesting but tangential
issues, both substantive and econometric, which could be taken up as we
traverse this range of topics.

3. Using the notations and framework given in the next section, the
between estimates can be written as

b

— E

-

b.
iid where

- y)/(x.

-

) and d

= (x

While the within estimates are equivalent to

bw —
-

S

A2
pw ,

S (xjt -

where

Xyft - y)/

S (Xft

30

-

-

)2/ E (. -

and w — E (x. — — )2/
it
t

1•

E (x. — x.
it

J.

)2

The argument in the text assumes that
/3,,

which implies the

absence of "correlated effects" (.'s related to the x's). E(b) will be
less than

if there is a negative correlation between the 8's and

the w's.

4. Since the x's are also economic choice variables, this
not be reasonable for either the a's or the /3's.

assumption may

In a non-constant returns

case, with x (the capital-labor ratio) fully variable, it would be
proportional to /3.7(1 —

/3.).

This could introduce a correlated effects

problem in the cross-sectional estimates, but would not be a problem in the
time-series dimension, where most of the variability in x would come from
changes in the relevant factor prices.

5. See Hsjao (1986) for more elaborate versions which allow for
variability in both dimensions.

6. Both figures 1 and 2 plot the levels based
/3k.

graphs for the first differences based /3.

The corresponding

are similar in shape but the

dispersion is smaller. In the French sample, there are only three
whose t-ratios fall outside the 6.3 range.
7.

It is possible to speculate at length why different methods of

estimation give us different results. We have done so a bit already in
discussing them. It is basically an indication of some additional
misspecificatjon in our model, a point to which we shall come back below.

8. This can be illustrated by conside.ing parallel results which do not
include separate time-industry constants, putting all of the trend effects

into the capital-labor ratio. Such estimates yield, obviously, a much

31

higher

(e.g., 0.41 versus 0.16 in first differences for Japan), but also

of 0.31 versus 0.43) and the

a much smaller dispersion (an observed

implication of no true heterogeneity, all of the observed dispersion being

attributable to sampling variability. Thus, adding statistically important
variables, the sectoral year-dummies, and reducing thereby the potential
misspecification of the model, increases the estimated heterogeneity of 's
instead of reducing it.

9. One could, of course, pursue more general models of true instability,

+

letting it —

or

+

=

+ 6.A.

See Hsiao (1986) and Cragg

(1987) for such extensions. There are also more general approaches
possible to the definition and testing of parameter heterogeneity and

stability. See Dutta and Leon (1986) for example.
10. The correlation between the constants estimated separately for the two
periods is 0.45 for France. Adjusted for their respective sampling
variances, the "deattenuated" between periods correlation is 0.88, implying

a large measure of stability for this aspect of firm behavior. A
comparable deattenuation of the between periods correlation coefficient for
the slopes raises it only from 0.05 to 0.18.

11. The correlated effects model can be written as (see Chamberlain,
1984):

—

+ Thx.

+

and
—

'x

+

i.

where x is the vector (xil,...xjT) of all the x's in the different periods
for individual i. The estimated residual from the overall Because the

32

residual square and cross-product equations we estimate ignore the noncorresponding square and cross-product x terms, they are likely to
overestimate a. First differences, which eliminate the a's or the II
matrix residuals, which include the

terms in the equation and leave

only the rj. in the residual, do not suffer from this problem.

12. These numbers are either very close (or very different) and hence we
did not bother to subject them to formal Hausman (1978) tests.

33

Appendix: Swamy Type Estimates and Their Sensitivity to
HeteroskedastiCity and Serial Correlation

Since the Swamy type estimates can be very sensitive to second-order
manipulation of our model, we have computed them under alternative
assumptions for the variance-covarianCe matrix of the errors. A worthwhile
extension of this work would be based on more robust estimates of the
variances involved, using nonparameteric methods such as

the Jacknife or

Bootstrap.

We use the following matrix notation, in addition to that given in

section 2 of the text: A is the (2,2) variance-covarianCe matrix of the

coefficients (i.e., 611 '

22

612 2l —

is the (T,T)

Ei

for firm i (E —

variance-covarianCe matrix of the errors

E(

E'i) X

is the (T,2) matrix of observations on x for firm i and the constant (i.e.,

X. —

(x..,

(i.e.,

1T'
—

and

(,a)').

stands for the (2.2) vector of mean coefficients
The individual firm OLS estimates and their

corresponding sampling variances are as follows:

—

(XX)1Xy
X. (X

(X X.) X: .

—

The observed variance-covariaflCe matrix of the individual firm OLS

estimates is

N
—

i—i

(. 1— f3)(.1

—

34

)'

N

with —

E

i—i

.1

We can show that:

V(.) VE(. X. ,fl.,) + EV(.jX.,fl.)

+ EV(L IX. ,fl.)

E(V(IX8.) can be estimated by the average sampling variance:
E

assuming that

are uncorrelated across

i—i

firms, and thus the true variance-covariance matrix of the coefficients
can be estimated by:

-

V($.)

-

This formula generalizes that given by Swamy, where heteroskedasticity is
allowed only across firms, i.e., E. =

a21.

Thus, different assumptions about .,

yield

alternative estimates of

i. This is conditional, however, on obtaining consistent estimates of E
in the panel data context, with N going to "infinity" for a fixed T. The
most simple case is that of homoskedasticity and independence of the
errors:

E1 —

6

I

N

and V(.) —
1

a2

N c .

Ll

(X1 x.Y'.
It is also possible to allow
1

— a2

for heteroskedasticity across firms (as Swamy originally did):

I,

1

the sampling variance being computed then as the arithmetic average of the
individually estimated sampling variances:

1NE a2
i—l

1
1

(X1 X)

.

[The

Swamy estimates in Table 2 are computed in this way]. We also consider the
case of heteroskedasticity within firms, where

is a diagonal matrix

(White, 1980) which depends on X...1 In order to deal with serial

correlation, we assume a given autocorrelation (T,T) matrix of the errors
TCOR corresponding to an autoregression of the first order with
autocorrelation parameter p — .5 in levels (and the corresponding
35

autocorrelation matrix in first differences). Following Solon (1984), a
close examination of the first three serial autocorrelation coefficients of
the residuals computed both from the fixed effects specifications in levels
and in first differences, indeed suggests that a first order autoregression
with a p of about .5 would be an adequate description of the error process.
To take into account the serial correlation of the errors, we have also
used the Cochran-Orcutt transformation to compute the Swamy estimates in
quasi-difference form (i.e.,

(x. —

and

—

O.Sx.1)).

The various estimates of the "true" variance in the coefficients, that
we can compute under these different assumptions are given in Table 12. We
also present in this table the corresponding QCLS estimates of the mean fi.

These results are only given for the French sample, since they are very
similar for our other two samples.

The direction of the potential biases that we see in the estimated ci

is

what one might have expected, but their magnitude is more of a surprise.

Allowing for heteroskedasticity across firms or within firms increases the

estimated

by about 0.01 to 0.03. This increase is relatively minor for

the level estimates, but is more serious for the first difference
estimates, since they are much smaller than the former and of about the

same order of magnitude. Such bias, however, corresponds to a negative
correlation (across or within firms) between the variance of the residuals
and the corresponding squares of the x's (or tx's), which may be in part
spurious (due to sampling errors or outliers: very small or very large
squares of the x's or tx's).

36

Taking into account the serial autocorrelation of the errors, affects
our level estimates severely, changing the estimated

from about 0.18 to

0.13. This is confirmed by the quasi-differenced estimates, which are even
smaller, with estimated

of about 0.08. The first differences based

estimates of the sampling variance are not, however, biased by the
(negative) serial correlation in the. differenced errors, because the

differenced ax's are practically uncorrelated over time (contrary to the

x's in levels which are strongly positively correlated). It is interesting
to note that there is little difference in the various QGLS estimates of fi

corresponding to the various weighting schemes. Contrary to the variance
estimators, they are all consistent under

the

alternative (second order)

misspecification of the variance-covariance matrix of the errors.

37

APPENDIX NOTES

1. There is an identification problem in discussing heteroskedasticity in
the context of random coefficient models. The only heteroskedasticity that
matters here is one that is a function of the x's but that, in principle,

should be in the definition of it The random coefficients model is, in
fact, a particular model of heteroskedasticity. Since our main focus is on
the variability of

for us to define .

it

in the i (individual) dimension, it is sufficient
— f3. + e.
1

it

,

where the distribution of e. may be a
it

function of xt and throw them (L) into the definition of the overall
disturbance 6.
it

38

Re fererices

Axnemiya, T. 1977. "A Note on a Heteroskedastic Model," Journal of

Econometrics 5: 295-299.
Chamberlain, C. 1984. "Panel Data," in Handbook of Econometrics,
Vol. II, ed. by Z. Griliches and M. Intriligator, 1247-1318.

Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Criliches, Z. and J. Mairesse. 1983. "Comparing Productivity Growth: An
Exploration of French and U.S. Industrial and Firm Data," EuroDean

Economic Review 21: 89-119.

_________

1984.

"Productivity and R&D at the firm level," in R-fl.

Patents and Productivity, edited by Z. Griliches, 339-374. The
University of Chicago Press.

_________

1985.

"R&D and Productivity Growth: Comparing Japanese and

U.S. Manufacturing firms," National Bureau of Economic Research

Working Paper No. 1778. To appear in an "Income and Wealth"
conference volume.

Goldfeld, S.R. and R.M. Quandt. 1972. Non Linear Methods in Econometrics.

Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Grunfeld, Y. and Z. Griliches. 1960. "Is Aggregation Necessarily Bad?,"
Review of Economics and Statistics,

:1-13.

Hildreth, C. and J.P. Houck. 1968. "Some Estimates for a Linear Model
with Random Coefficients," Journal of the American Association 63:
584-595.

MaCurdy, T. 1981. "Multiple Time-Series Models Applied to Panel Data,"
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 646.

39

Mairesse, J. 1987.

"Les lois de la production ne sont plus ce qu'elle

etaient: une introduction a l'econometrice des panels," Working Paper
ENSAE, to appear in La Revue Econoniigue.

Mundlak, Y. 1978. "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross-Section Data,"
Econoinetrica 46: 69-85.

Scheffe, H. 1959. The Analysis of Variance. New York: John Wiley.
Swamy, P.A.V.B. 1971. Statistical Inference in Random Coefficient
Regression Models. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
1970. "Efficient Inference in a Random Coefficient Model,"

Econometri. 38: 311-23.
White, H. 1980. "A HeteroskedastiCity-COflsistent Covariance Matrix
Estimation and a Direct Test for Ijeteroskedasticity," EconometriCa 48:
817-838.

40

•

I

9
9

6

9

•
•

*

9

.

0

-2.0 •

—I.,

—1.0 0

—0.5

0.0

9

o.s I

¶

04

IS

1.0

z. s •

•

Il

a

a

a

••*•*

•a

a
a

•

a

a

2

*
*

a
0

5

a

5

•a
.5*

S

a

a...
*..
*• at 0*a.. •

0*5 W100N

.a

1

a

a

a
a a

a..
a a.

aaaa

a

a.

a.

a

a

a.

0

ta

a a

a..a

a

.a

a

a

*

a

a

a.

a

**

a

3

S

S

aaa

6

' a. *
a

a

1

a

a

a.

S

9

a.

a

10

a

a
a

a

a

11

S

12

a

a..

•S0 *aa
.....aa.
a..... a a a. a
*aaa a.... a. a. a a. a a..
5*0 *5
aa...a.a
a... a.. aa. a
a .a .aaa..a..a a... a *
.*.*..
a a..... a..... a. sea..
a a.. a. aa a a... •a
aa*
a a
a
a. a a. a a.. a. a.
a
a
a a

.

a

a

a

0

S

a

a

15

iit

*

a

14

a

a

13

—

16

17

IS

19

Franca, I'167- 79 leVelS,

20

N =

21

*

441.

22

a

24

IRB

23

Estimatis tf itidividual capital elasticities
vcrsus their cstlrn;it.ed precision

I

25

(ft)

26

27

II

$0

$1

%QO

tQuINCV

26

50

21

75

3)1

41

73

276

Li

65

36)

-10

-0.6

40

104

20

-1.3

SI.

242

£0

—'.5

30

*41

31

—3.'

45

603

1$

—s

40

12

11

35

11

66

-'.3

30

42

$

-4.5

2$

1.11

26

1.13

LII

p1.73

I.4I
600.00

0.65
(.2?

4)4
646

2

$1.01

III

I
3

Ill

$4.23
2.06
4*6

)$.66

$1.3)
2.12
607

6.76

S4.$l
5)27

1)14

iLl

LI.))

41.14

p.01
66.24

*0.20

12.20

6.13

11.06

22.6)

4.05

14.$$

11.06

2.40

11.21

$23
63.))

2.6)

4.0$

6.2?
0.6$

$

$

Il

1.,0

1.13

ii.
j

-1.6

6,2

3.,,
1.1$
63
7

-6

.16
6

.63

I

20

Cu".

2S*C I Iii

-6.6

?IIC$IST

I

CU$.

*

SSO

6.62

N

0.23

1

1967—79 levels,

1

60

France,
1

V SOLCI

•I0uINC, s** Cw*0f
isioroiuf

los

lt los
—

Frequency distribution of the t-r;it
for the individual capital elasl

Figure 2

Table 1: Alternative Estimates of Production Function Coefficients

Dependent Variable: Log Q/L
Levels

First Differences

Regress ions

Total

FRANCE
1967-79
N

441

T—13

2

R

JAPAN

Between

Within

Total

Between Within

0,163
0,266
(0,039) (0,014)

0,303

0,313

0,196

0,260

(0,009)

(0,031)

(0,011)

(0,014)

0,362

0,338

0,133

0,122

0,024

0,119

0,174

0,192

0,052

0,064

0,038

0,066

0,452

0,469

0,278

0,183

1967-79

(0,007)

(0,023)

(0,009)

(0,010)

N — 845

0,375

0,343

0,148

0,118

0,026

0,115

0,292

0,326

0,082

0,031

0,151

0,026

T — 13
R2
UNITED STATES
1967-79

fi

N — 462
T — 13
R2

Log Q/L —

—

0,359
0,170
(0,029) (0,010)

0,221

0,222

0,213

0,289

(0,007)

(0,024)

(0,008)

(0,009)

0,286

0,266

0,106

0,099

0,019

0,097

0,154

0,163

0,096

0,149

0,073

0,153

0,178
0,294
(0,030) (0,009)

Logarithm of output per employee.

coefficient

of log C/L. C/L —

capital

per employee.

Estimated standard error in parentheses.

—

standard

deviation of estimated residuals.

All equations contain also individual industry level year constants.

Table 2: Variability: Different Indicators

Coefficients

Variables

Country and
Indicator

Levels

Capital
Share

Log Capital
per Employee

Log Output
per Employee
Growth
Rates

Levels

.045

10.51

First
Levels Differences

Growth
Rates

FRANCE
(N — 441)
Average
Sb Observed

16.91

.046

.256

.194

.232

.375

.025

.526

.030

.096

.542

.414

•373

Q*

.524

0*

.094

.440

.213

dLspers ion

"True"

dispersion
F test

132.1

90.7

.4

29,51

.087

21.2

.7

2.9

1.4

JAPAN
(N — 845)

Average

14.71

.107

.316

.273

.161

.418

.028

.508

.031

.103

.625

.434

Sb Observed
dLspersion

dsersinn c
-p

.415

0*

.506

0*

.098

.539

.258

"True'

F test

122.3

87.6

.6

29.81

.021

11.1

.8

3.9

1.5

UNITED STATES
(N — 462)

Average

16.21

.051

-

.219

.283
.321

Sb Observed

.291

.020

.528

.030

-

.403

"True"

.289

0*

.526

0*

-

.323

dispersion
dispersion
F test

81.5

.4

126.5

.5

-

2.8

1.9

Notes to Table 2

The averages are the simple arithmetic means, except for the levels of
the output per employee and of the capital per employee where they are
the geometric means in thousand dollars per employee in 1970 prices.
Thus the averages of the individual estimates of the capital
coefficients

—

are simply

E
1

1
x ——
NT

E

1
E x.
it ——N

E

it
.

.

1

, and

that of the variables

x.:

i

x..

• The observed dispersions Sb are the standard deviations between firms,
i.e.:

—

(N—l)
or
2

1

E

s8 —

2

(xi— x..)

• The true dispersions are computed by adjusting the observed dispersions
for sampling variability. For the capital coefficients, they are the
Swamy estimates:

2 —

s2 — 1

E

2
2
v1, where the sampling variance v1 —

2

Se! Z (xjx.)

being the estimated variance of the errors in the individual
I
regressions. For the variables, we have similarly:

"2" —

2— 12
s, where

Sb

2
SW

1
N(T—1)

E E (xj_xj,) 2

See Mairesse, 1988, for more detail.
With this notation, it can be shown that the F tests can be computed

simply as: F —

2 22
b'bfl

2

Table 3: Maximum Likelihood Estimates on Levels
a

L(ML)

Specifications

2
e

2

a

a

2

a

a

a

FRANCE
(A) a —

Ct

2949.2

— Ct

7511.2

—

Ct,

(B) a — Rd,

0.1315
0.303
(0.009) (0.0025)
(0.032) (0.0097)
0.210

0.0192

0.114

(0.011) (0.0004) (0.008)
(0.028) (0.0011) (0.010)
— Rd

(C) a — Rd,

7890.2

0.212

0.0148

0.123

(0.022) (0.0003) (0.009)
(0.022) (0.0007) (0.013)

—0.018

(0.014)
(0.019)

[0.294]

(D) a — Fs,

— Ct

8702.3

(E) a — Fs,

— Fs

9732.1 [0.194] [0.01461 [0.194] [—0.054]

— Ct

5290.9

Ct

13255.8

0.196

0.0192

0.145

(0.008)
(0.009)

[0.118]

JAPAN
(A) a —

(B)

Ct,

—

— Rd,

0.1404
(0.007) (0.0019)
(0.023) (0.0065)
0.452

0.303

0.0239

0.121

(0.009) (0.0003) (0.006)
(0.021) (0.0008) (0.007)

— Rd

(C) a — Rd,

14112.7

0.291

0.0176

0.135

(0.019) (0.0003) (0.007)
(0.019) (0.0006) (0.008)
(D) a —

Fs,

(E) a — Fs,

fi

— Ct

15476.4

— Fs

17700.3 [0.273] [0.0173]

0.278

0.0238

(0.007)
(0.008)

0.213
(0.014)
(0.016)

[0.020]

[0.391]

—0.010

[0.118]
[0.207]

UNITED STATES
(A) a —

Ct,

(B) a — Rd,

fi

— Ct

4507.1

— Ct

9232.2

0.0820
0.221
(0.007) (0.0015)
(0.034) (0.0084)
0.214

0.0122

0.069

(0.008) (0.0002) (0.005)
(0.019) (0.0007) (0.008)
— Rd

(C) a — Rd,

9530.2

0.225

0.0100

0.068

(E) a — Ps,

fi

— Ct

10468.0

— Fs

11374.1 [0.219]

0.213

0.069

(0.004)
(0.005)

(0.007)
(0.008)

0.0122

[0.071)

0.0099

[0.122] [—0.023]

[0.163]

(0.016) (0.0002) (0.005)
(0.016) (0.0006) (0.008)
(D) a — Fs,

—0.001

Notes to Table 3

Ct --

constant;

Rd -- random; Fs --

firm

specific (fixed effects).

()

- - first

()

- - second line: "robust" standard errors obtained from the pseudo-

line: usual standard errors obtained from the maximum
likelihood method.

maximum likelihood method (White, 1980 and 1982; Gourieroux, Trognon,
1984).

Table 4: Maximum Likelihood Estimates in First Differences

Specifications

(a)

,9 —

Ct

(b) p — Rd

(c)

L(ML)

8506.7

8577.6

P

2
E

0.260

0.0148

(0.014)
(0.022)

(0.0003)
(0.0007)

2

a

0.246

0.0137

0.064

(0.019)
(0.019)

(0.0003)
(0.0007)

(0.010)
(0.010)
[0.172]

— Fs

8904.5

[0.232)

[0.0139]

Ct

16588.9

0.183

0.0140

(0.010)
(0.015)

(0.0002)
(0.0005)

JAPAN
—

(a)

(b) p — Rd

— Fs

(c)

0.168

0.0131

0.061

(0.014)
(0.014)

(0.0002)
(0.0004)

(0.007)
(0.007)

17308.4

[0.161]

[0.0132]

[0.188]

10071.5

0.289

0.0097

(0.009)
(0.018)

(0.0002)
(0.0004)

16684.2

UNITED STATES

— Ct

(a)

(b) p

(c)

fi

— Rd

— Fs

10186.1

10554.0

0.300

0.0088

0.040

(0.014)
(0.014)

(0.0002)
(0.0004)

(0.005)
(0.005)

[0.283]

[0.0089]

[0.103]

Table 5:

Likelihood Ratio Tests of Homogeneity versus Random or Fixed Coefficients
Heterogeneity

FRANCE

JAPAN

UNITED STATES

x0. 01(p)/p

Tests

—0

(A) if (B):
(B) if (E):

2 —

—0

— 0, a2

(B) if (E):
(A) if (0):

a. — a

(A) if (E):

a. —

a,

.—

(D) if (E):

9. —

9,

a.

—0

(a) if (b):

(a) if (c):

Li?. -

.—

likelihood

0

a

p

2LR/p

p

2LR/p

p

2LR/p

1

9124.0

1

15929.8

1

9450.2

6.

2

4941.0

2

8821.8

2

5023.2

4.6

1

758.0

1

1713.8

1

596.2

6.6

440

26.2

844

24.1

461

25.9

1.

880

15.4

1688

14.7

922

14.8

1

440

4.7

844

5.3

461

3.9

L

1

141.8

1

190.6

1

229.2

6.6

440

1.8

844

1.7

461

2.1

1

ratio. p - degrees of freedom.

F001(p,)

—

Table 6: Estimates from Systems of Regressions of Squares and Cross
Products of Residuals, Fully Constrained

2

2
Ci

CT

E

0.003

FR Levels

0.042
(0.003)

0.002

JA Levels

0.002

U.S. Levels

FR First Dif.

JA First Dif.

U.S. First Dif.

for

0.001
(0.003)

—0.009
(0.003)

0.052
(0.002)

—0.001

0.051

(0.000)

(0.003)

0.008
(0.000)

0.041

0.004

a.8

(0.002)

0.007

(0.000)

--

0.062

2

U

Ci

(0.002)

a

0.078
(0.007)

0.084
(0.006)

0.030
(0.004)

--

--

--

--

--

--

(0003)
0.032
(0.002)

levels computed as the difference between the intercepts of the

square and cross-product coefficients. For first differences, it is
an estimate of a2

(e—ti)

Table 7: Estimates from System of Regressions on Squares and Cross Products of Residuals.
Unconstrained Across Groups of Equations

Coefficients
from
EquatLons
of

FR Levels
a

2

a

JA Levels
a

2

a

U.S. Levels

a

2

a

FR FD

a

fi

2

JA FD

a

$

fi

U.S. FD

a

2

fi

SQ

0.037

0.003

0.055

—0.009

0.056

—0.012

0,117

0.106

0.082

CPI

0.036

0.003

0.055

—0.009

0.056

—0.002

0.083

0.027

0.047

CP2

0.036

0.002

0.055

—0.009

0.055

—0.002

0.022

0.006

0.048

CP3

0.035

0.002

0.056

—0.009

0.055

—0.002

0.031

0.024

—0.011

CP4

0.035

0.002

0.056

—0.009

0.054

—0.002

0.042

—0.005

—0.006

CPS

0.034

0.002

0.056

—0.009

0.052

—0.002

0.031

0.035

0.003

CP6

0.035

0.001

0.055

—0.010

0.050

—0.002

—0.041

0.046

0.006

CP7

0.034

0.000

0.055

—0.010

0.048

—0.002

—0.015

—0.004

0.020

CPS

0.033

—0.000

0.055

—0.010

0.045

—0.002

—0.003

0.050

—0.008

CP9

0.033

—0.001

0.055

—0.010

0.042

—0.002

0.070

0.008

0.048

CP1O

0.034

—0.001

0.054

—0.010

0.039

—0.002

0.101

—0.010

—0.014

CP11

0.032

—0.001

0.052

—0.010

0.035

—0.002

0.095

0.099

0.017

CPI2

0.030

—0.003

0.050

—0.010

0.033

—0.002

--

--

--

Dependent variables:
SQ -.

squared residuals; CPh -- cross-products of residuals h periods apart.

Table 8: Estimates from Regressions on Squares and Four Year Apart Crossproducts of Residuals, Unconstrained Across Equations (OLS Estimates)

Chamberlain's II

Levels

First Differences
U.S.

FR

JA

.127

.107

.124

.104

.033

.149

.076

.363

.070

.035

.036

.184

.149

.094

.185

1976

.053

.024

.154

.182

.103

.202

1975

.033

.032

.191

.183

.099

.170

1974

.055

.063

.157

.490

.080

.155

1973

.019

.045

.170

.231

.136

.114

1972

.021

.046

.163

.186

.128

.089

1971

.034

.048

.150

.129

.091

.146

1970

.017

.043

.136

.154

.135

.105

1969

.006

.026

.078

.125

.085

.087

1968

.009

.042

.059

.095

.136

.078

1967

.015

.035

.027

1979-75

.040

.034

.165

—.178

.019

—.089

1978-74

.045

.045

.160

.163

—.050

.005

1977-73

.027

.043

.185

.098

.056

—.071

1976-72

.036

.043

.172

.056

—.012

.180

1975-71

.038

.046

.171

—.033

—.107

—.023

1974-70

.031

.059

.145

—.001

.044

—.103

1973-69

.011

.042

.122

.067

.062

.040

1972-68

.020

.055

.099

.072

—.074

.019

1971-67

.021

.053

.073

FR

JA

U.S.

1979

.035

.034

1978

.042

1977

FR

JA

U.S.

Table 9: The Instability of Heterogeneity Estimates
1967-79 versus 1967-73 and 1974-79

Capital Coefficients (48)

Labor
productivity

Country
and

Capital
Share

Levels

First Differences

France
Sb

observed

.375

.096

.542

.414

"true" (tp)

.373

.094

.440

.213

"true" (bp)

.365

.089

.110

.113

.90

.76

.05

.05

.04

—.01

Corr bp

Corr (s,)
Japan
observed

.418

.103

.625

.434

048 "true" (tp)

.415

.098

.539

.258

(748 "true" (bp)

.405

.094

.186

.180

Corr bp

.88

.68

.06

.09

—.01

.02

Corr (s,)
U.S.

Sb observed

.291

.403

.321

048 "true" (tp)

.289

.323

.218

"true" (bp)

.282

.152

.154

.09

.12

Corr bp

observed

- - computed from the dispersion of the separately estimated
coefficients (or the firm

"true" (tp) 048

variable

means). From Table 2.

- estimated "true" dispersion, based on the total period
1967-79 (tp). From Table 2.

"true"

(bp) - - estimated from the covariance between the separately

estimated capital coefficients in the two periods (or the
means of the variables).
Corr bp

-

- observed

Corr (sc,8)

-

- correlation

correlation between the separately estimated
capital coefficients in the two periods.

between the average capital share and the
estimated (total period) capital coefficients.
Unavailable for the U.S.

Table 10: Summary of Heterogeneity of

Estimates for France

First Differences

Levels

oj

'8

°j

2
fl

2

0.

Observed

.542

.293

.414

.171

1.

Swamy (tp)

.440

.194

.213

.045

2.

Maximum Likelihood

.382

.014

.253

.064

3.

SQ and CF (total)

.205

.042

.226

.051

4.

ir residuals SQ and CF

.187

.035

n.r.

n.r.

5.

ir residuals

.119

.014

n.r.

n.r.

6.

Between periods

.110

.012

.113

.013

"distant" CF

1. From Table 2.
2. From Tables 3 and 4.

3. From Table 6.
4. and 5. Computed from residuals of regressions in which each
regressed on all (13) x's.

was

5. Based only on regressions of cross-products 10 years or more apart.

6. From Table 9.
n.r. - -

not

relevant.

Table ii: Alternative Estimates of the Capital-Output Elasticity

Levels

1. Between

2. Within

3. Average of Individual

4. ML Random Effects

France

Japan

United States

.313

.469

.222

(.031)

(.023)

(.024)

.196

.278

.213

(.011)

(.009)

(.008)

.194

.273

.219

(.026)

(.022)

(.019)

.212

.291

.225

(.022)

(.019)

(.016)

.232

.161

.283

(.020)

(.015)

(.015)

.246

.168

.300

(.019)

(.014)

(.014)

First Difference

5. Average of Individual
8's

6. ML Random Effects

Lines 1 and 2 from Table 1, lines 3-6 from Table 3. Standard errors for
lines 3 and 5 computed from the observed variance across firms divided by
N—i.

if

=
El

E.

=

"True"

if

"True" if
E. = diag
1

1

E.

"True" if

1

=

"True"

ctserv&1

)
y

—

8

- .

&2 iailtipliei by

p

=

.

0.132

0.195

0.193

0.181

0.293

0

2

a matrix whith arnespords to

x -

—0.050

—0.050

—0.048

—0.050

—0.054

2

i.

,

0.152

0.171

0.171

0.167

0.194

2

matrix of the residuals for firm

Sy

(0.023)

0.219

0.211
(0.024)

0.196
(0.024)

(0.024)

0.212

0.194

— varia1—(x)variance

QuasidiffererKs:

5.

4.

3.

2.

1.

Esates

Various Types of

Estimates in Levels

Table 12: Alternative Swamy's Estimates for France

ani

0.248
(0.014)

(0.015)

0.251

(0.016)

0.233

0.254
(0.015)

0.232

8

= .5

0.229
(0.018)

(0.018)

0.220

0.227
(0.018)

0.227

assunption.

0.011

0.023

0.045

0.011

0.171

2
08

0.078

0.089

0.072

0.187

2

Estimates in First Estimates in Quasi
Diferences
Differences

