                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DATA DIFFICULTIES IN LABOR ECONOMICS




                             Daniel   S.   Hamermeah




                           Working Paper No. 2622




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.  Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           N8ER Working Paper #2622
                                           June 1988


                       DATA DIFFICULTIES IN lABOR ECONOMICS




      This essaysets out a framework for evaluating spirica1 work in        tes
                                                                            of
the ability of the data to provide adequate parameter estinates and hypothesis
tests about the true underlying structure. Prthl of aggregation,
rspresentativeness and structural change are discussed in detail. These
criteria are applied to evaluate studies of labor supply, labor nsii, local
labor markets and union goals. Phçirical work in labor supply has made the

greatest strides because of the appropriateness of the data to answer questions
of interest. Studies in the other areas have not made so      ch
                                                               progress will
not   until   the same resources are devoted to collecting longitudinal

microeoozic data on       finns as have been spent on collecting   longitudinal

household data.




                                            Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                            Department of Economics
                                            Michigan State University
                                            East Lansing, MI 48823
            DThIJI/rI fl( LAR    14I                Daniel 8.   Rih
I.   Introôiction
     In the fifty years of the e2dstence of the Qnference on Research in
Inoe and Wealth labor eoozics has            the paragonxq    subepecialties
for its close links between mçirical work and theory, for the vast mt     of
data available and for the strides made in the thwlogy of data analysis.
Despite this distinction there are substantial imbalances in date resources in
this area and in the progress in understanding labor-marketph'a       that the
available data have made possible. Also, areas where we think that our
kxwle&e has been furthered by recent studies are in fact less advanced than
we believe be"e of problmns with date. Finally, the ability to generalize
our findings is in many cases limited by difficulties involving the interaction
of the sets of data used and the nature of the prthlmm under study.
     In Section II I present a general framework for analyzing the appropriate-
ness of a variety of date sets to the porposes for which they are used. This
approach is narrwer than that of Griliches (1986), wbo laid special wçhasis
on problmns of measuramant error. The view ioplicit here is, thongh, both
broader and different fron that of Stafford (1986). He ncentrated on the few
major longitudinal isebo1d date sets and developed an  a1st    Sclnmçetarian

theory of bow newly available sources of data both are called forth by and in
turn advance theory and infois policy. Ikst of his attention was focussed on
the use of these data sets in analyzing issues in labor supply. I pay
attention to labor supply in Section III; bit the bilk of the paper ounsiders
three other major areas of interest to labor ecoix*uists in light of this
discussion of the appropriatenessof date sets.
     Much of the discussion is of labor dmiand, including issues of asployment

adjusnt, 'the elasticity of labor 1
                                      sn'    and probl of labor—labor
note in this regard are the   (
substitution that have been addressed by very fce sets of data. Of particular
                                 data on U.S. maniifacbirii ass1ed by Berndt,
Fuss and Wavernan (1979) and others. Since such of our knowle6e    csfran
these aggregate data (see inrnq)t, 1986), it is essential to analyze    well
they mast the criteria presented in Section II. Much of the rest of what we
have learned recently   es  fran the estimation of oxçler production tech-
nologies applied to data fran   isebold surveys.    In Section IV I vini
the usefu1ress of these studies accordim7   to the criteria I set out.
       Sections V, VI and VII present sherter discussions of labor market-wide
phenanena, of trade-unionbehavior and  of the desirability of international
caiperisons. In the 19405 and early l950s labor ecozxxnists eiqaged in massive
studies of specific local labor markets. With the exception of Rees and Bhultz
(1970) this type of work ceased by 1955. day's research on labor markets
                                                                         _
must
suited is today's approach to analyzirq   I
       be deductive fran data on sançles of workers in many markets.
                                           a labor market cçerates, as
oaxpared to the approach of nearly two generations ago? Is there a possible
                                                                             well




ccqranise that can neet the objections to which each might be subject under
the consideration of the appropriateness of data sets? In the past ten years
interest has birgeoned in analyzix what, if anythizq, unions atteaçt to
madniize. Much of the work has been on one particular set of data (Dertouzos
and Peneavel, 1981). Hce representative are these data? re the available
data resources sufficient to alice us to draw any general inferences about what
unions seek to do? Tha cultural isperialien of marican irica1 econcinics


relationship in the itad States may not be representative of     s
should not blind us to the possibility that the structure that describes a
                                                                    (any?)
other eooies. Thus it is worth considerln under what cirum8tances the
consideration of descriptions of behavior for several
                                  2
                                                         w4  as is sore or
less inçortant in generalizing about behavior.
     Based en the general frwork for analyzing the açrcpriatsa of data
sets and its epecific alications to these         tral
                                                    issues in labor eooics,
I draw conclusions about the types of additional data that sild he collected.
Be"e the issues are to eons extent overlaing, it ebould he possible to
address the lacunas in the data jointly rather than treating data probles in
each area separately.
II.    A   Frwork for Evaluating      Data Describing Workers and loynent

         general linear ncdel describing the structure of an ecoic relation-
       The

ship at a tima that the researcher wishes to characterize (usually the present)
can be written as:
(1)
where
               y=+e       ,
             is the out variable, x is a vector of      independent variables,   b is a
         y
                                                                         t
vector of paramaters describing the structure of the relationship, is time
and e is a disturbancetens. The relationship that is estimated is nct this at
all,    kilt   S   instead:
(2)            =

where the subscript
                         +   e
                    itp indexes the units cbosen to represent the ecounic
relationship, and "1" indicates the tine(s) at which they were observed. I
assne throughout that (2) is estimated by best—practice technique. Thus
the assuiçtion of a linear ncdel is merely for expositional sieplicity, and
the discussion açlies to ncre caiçlex ncdels too.           b
                                                        is thus an unbiased
estimate of        b
                for the particular set of data (Y' X) chesen to
represent the relationship between y arid x, so that E(bIb) =          b.
      While I       ass
                     that    has all the nice statistical properties we desire,
it can be viewed as the best estimate of only one of a large nueber of vectors
of parmseters        b   based tçon possible sets of data
                                        3
                                                            (Y, X) cbosen.
Essentially there   is a distribotion of pareter vectors
                                                     of
                                                               b   oorrespondim
                                                          interest is
                                                                                     to
the distribition of the data seth.    The question                      whether:
(3)                 E(bI{Y,X}) =b,
where the unsubecripted b is the true value of the parter describin                the
relationship of interest to the researcher.     Four questions are relevant         in
anaiyziiq whether (3) holds: 1) Does the particular set of variables {Y,X}
that is chosen rspresent the true variables (y,x} well? This is essentially a
question of measurnt and specification error. Both           ran
                                                              measuranent
errors and sysenatic errors of measurenent are likely to be iortant problens
in labor-related data. They have, thoh, been well covered in the ecoitric
literature, and I pay then relatively little attention in the discussion
hereafter. 2) Is the sauçle that underlies the set of sub.xnits {I} that is
used to estimate (2) rspresentative of the population to      w
                                                              the theoretical
relationship (1) is supposed to apply? This goes far beyond the narrow
eoonxtric issue of saisple selection bias that has received so much attention
fron labor econiists and eoonanetricians. 3) Is the set of time periods (T}
likely to allow the researcher to draw correct inferences about the relationship
between y and x that holds at time t for the typical wit (perhaps different
fron  fr  the rspresentative unit in (I))? The issue here is one of structural
chaxqe. 4) re the intervals between wilts in the sets (I) and (T) appropriate
for the relationship between y and x that is bein studied? This is an issue
of appropriate aqgreation.
      Consider the second question:   Is the set (I) typical of all the units in
the eoory whose ecoic behavior we are tryiz to describe by (1)? If the
analysis of (2) for the data set 1iwi by (I,T} is to be          re
                                                            than an
eooetric case study, (I) should cover a broad set of submits in the
                                  4
ecoy, or cover a
set meets all of
                       f
                      te
                               typical submits.
                       worries, can it
                                                  If we are confident that the data
                                             be used to drm,   inferes about the
relationship in (1) in other econcoiss       during the time period wer sthdy?
      Thethird question snould be answered on two levels. The ampler, and
sore frequently discussed one, is that of structural change: What do the
tell us about the structural relationship between y and x today, or has that
relation changed so drastically that the estimation of (2) has beoe econanic
history that sheds little light on today's eoonccly? The answer to this
question depends on
relationship and on     I
                        rapidly structural change occurs in the particular
                        far in tine we are rwved           fr
                                                        the observations in the
set   (T). The sore ccixplex issue      is a canbination
                                                  of structural change and
misspecification: Is the relationship between Y and X so longer the          s
                                                                          as in
(2) because of the growth in inportance of additional factors, denoted by 2?
If data were collected on the 2, and if nothing else made the data set (I,T)
unrepresentative for current purposes, it would be a siixple matter to respecify
and reestimate (2) and use it to draw inferences about today's structure. If,

ever,       data on   2 were   not or could not have been collected, there   is no hope
of resurrecting (2) to analyze behavior today.
     The length of "the short nm' varies with the problen under study. The
intervals in the set {T} should be such as to make it possible for the estimates
of (2) to infons us about the speed with which equilibrii.n is reestablished
after the systen underlying (1) is shocked. Also, while we often view cross-
section data as allowing us to infer equilibrii.u relationships, that assuiption
is not necessarily valid. A time series of sufficiently long I can be useful
in allowing the inference of the structure of the equilibria that arise after a
shock. The problen here is to use the level of teiporal disaggregation
aprcpriate to the question under study. Another difficulty arises if the
                                        5
units in (I) are too large to prevent us fran asstnnisq that all underlyi.i
relationships are linear, and thus that estimation over aggregated data yields
unbiased results. Are they emall enoth so that decision makers' ncnlinear

responses can be detected, or are they so highly aggregated that nonlinearities
and disoontinuities are all miothed out? The problem here is that of
appropriate spatial disaggregation.
    This discussion is couched in       te    of estimation (of the true underlyim
parameter vector a characterizim   the relationship of interest). Clearly,
thoth, labor econunists are interested in hypothesis testii as well as in
estimation. A discussion similar to that above could be developed to deal with
the structurirxj of data appropriate to hypothesis testir. The main difference
would be that, in addition to the four problems discussed above, problems that
produce the eguivalent of the bias te in a mean squared error based on a
oaarison of        b
                   and b, we would also have to consider the statistical

distribotions of the      and of the set of     b
                                                that might arise frun the
entire raie of choices of I and T used to estimate the relationship. The
problems we consider here to analyze data appropriate to estimation are a
subset of those necessary to analyze data appropriate o hypothesis testing.
III •    Labor Supply—Synergy nong Data, Estimation and Theory

        Exiriag   the past twenty-fiveyears research on the supply of labor has been
the crown jewel of labor econunics (perhaps even in all of applied econcinics).
We have learned scnnething about important phenunena; major threads of micro-

        theory that had not been used in
econcinic                                      irical
                                                   work have been cplicitly

eiloyed in estimation; and these applications have generated important advances
in eootric            that have been used elsewhere in eocsics. The data are
                    theory
representative of the underlying populations being studied; there is no reason
to  ass   the results are irrelevant today beiie of interveningstructural
                                       6
changes; and there   is clearly no problam of cessive aggregation in what are
chiefly sets of data that have households as the i.mits of observation.
     The inortant esplorations in labor supply occurred along with a flowering

of data collection. Careully constructedcross—section sets of iseho1d data
became available during the 1960s; and the cxçuter technology, both barare

and software,  to analyze then was developed simultaneously. By the mid-l970s
the major longitudinal household data sets, the National LongitliM n*I Surveys
and the Panel Study of Inoone Dynamics, began to be used to study labor supply.
It is inçossible to believe that the developnent of these sources of
iMoation "forestall (ed] the denise of irical ecoxics," as inplied by
the title of Stafford's (1986) essay, or even to prove that causality ran fron
the development of these data to advances in theory and eoonanetrics. It is
difficult enough to prove causality in well-specified econcinetric nodels
dealing with hypotheses that are grounded in eooncnic theory. One should not
expect in this case to dam,nstrate sanething that historians of science have
debated and about which philosophers of science have prescribed for generations.
One naist believe, though, that we would know a lot less, and labor eoonanists'

fascination with problens of labor supply would be less intense, if these data
sources had not been constructed and the resources devoted to then bad instead
gone into data nore readily usable in other areas of labor ecosanics or in
other subfields of econcinics.
     I believe there have been three major advances in the eiirical study of
labor supply: 1) The estimation of inoc*ne and substitution effects; 2) The
growth in our understanding of labor—force dynamics; and 3) The recognition of
the life-cycle nature of labor supply. Cviously there have been advances in
understanding other supply-related pherena, such as household production,
population and   the demand for education.   None of   these, though,   is as central
                                   7
to labor si1y as these three main thxusts; and in ncne of the other areas are
the links   ng try, ecoietrics and data so well articulated.
     The    first                                    to a flowering of
                    advance, spurred by Mincer (1962), led
research using various housebold surveys, particularly the Survey of Ecornic
opportunity, that gave aiirical meaning to the basic results of thetheory of
cons.mr nnd. It allowed better predictions about the response of labor
supply to changes in the parameters of in-supç'ort programs and ncre careful
inferences and predictions about pattexns of labor supply in a growing eco1ny.
Witbout micro data neither of these achievnts could have been attained with
the same precision. ).s a result of the research of the 1960s our   ,lege   is

different dexgraphic groups, and      s
fairly secure about the relative magnitudes of labor—supply elasticities of
                                       consensus limits have been placed on the
range of the absolute magnitudes of these parameters.
     The second advance taught us that for many groups there is substantial

mebility into and out of the labor force. The irk of Heckman and Willis (1977)
and others damnstrated that it is as wrong to view a 65 percent participation
rate as reflecting participation by 65 percent of the population all year long
as it is to view it as reflecting part-year participation by the entire
population. Without longitudindal data this dnstration could nct have been
made. The discovery affected the irse of advances in theoretical ecozetrics,
for it generated an interest in developing eoonanetric techniques to analyze
the detenninants of sover-stayer distinctions. These techniques have been used
ctensively in other areas of labor eooics and have been applied to other
subfields of econcinics as well. Thus, for anple, the distinction between
unaxloymant spells and uneç>lomant duration (for       exle, Clark and strs,
1982), and issues in the borden of wç1oyment        ild met have been analyzed
without longitudinal data.
                                      8
     The final major advance sew labor econnists putting diçirical meat on the
bones of life-cycle theory by analyzing intertçoral subetitution using
longitudinAl data (e.g., Hurdy, 1981, and many others).  i1y         this
advancewas spurred by developments in macroecoxic theory; bit witzt the
micro-ecoietric analysis by labor econanists, helped along by the general
isplausibility of the assertion that intertlçoral substitution could be very
large, we would sot be fairly secure in our ileAe of its relative unior-
tance in affecting labor supply.
     The development of infomnation useful for research in labor supply and,

nre generally, in studying labor-force dynamics, has proceeded frzi aggregated
Census of Population data, to micro cross-section data on households, to



longer confined to the U.S. Indeed,  s
longitudinal surveys of individuals and households. These developments are so
                                          of the sost interesting efforts in
collecting these sorts of data are being made elsewhere, particularly in
Asstralia and Sweden.
     One   st ask, though, where this continuing concentrationof resources on
collecting longitudinal household data is leading us. As a brief foray into
this question I extended Stafford's (1986, Table 7.1) work categorizing

results of this analysis.1 It provides s
published studies on labor supply in six major journals. Table 1 presents the
                                             indication that professional
interest in labor supply has been slipping since the late 19705. The only
gxwth areas in the mid—1980s were studies of retirnent and migration.
Interest in retirnt was probably spurred by concern about an increasingly
inçortant general econcinic probln and by the creation of the Longitudinal
Retirmnent History Survey. Interest in migration stained fron concern about
policy; there was so sudden availAbility of data that made it possible to
ine     the issue. Studies in the mainstream areas of labor supply, particu-
                                 9
                                                  Table 1.

             Articles in Major Journals:          Labor Supply Subject,   by Year,    1965-87




                                           1965—69      1970—74   19? 5—79    1980—83      1984—87




Population     size   and structure           7              14      19          10             5


Household production                          0              LI      8           8              4

Labor supply of men                           2              5        7          6              6

Labor supply of women                         0              3       9           6              4

Labor supply of others and

        income support disincentives

        of UI, NIT,     taxes or other        2              7       16          15             8

Retirement                                    0              1       4           1              4

Educational demand                            3              11       9          2              2


Migration                                     13             9       14          4              5




TOTAL                                         27             61      86          52             38



SOURCE:       Cotumus   (1) —   (4)   from Stafford (1986); column (5), author's tabulation.
larly in the effects on labor s*çly of governt progr,         hays been of

eas
 It
           interest.
        is, of course, inçossibl. to identify the onises of the rr"sd interest
in the central areas of the study of labor sçly. I would argus, tbough, that
at least in part it stai fron the lack of —- advances in the    kii (not the
quantities) of data that are available for this purpose. The rich lode of the
feehk relationship between      data develent and the cpansion of     le6pa
about labor   suçly is -    yielding decidedly Mm ni shing returns.
     Clearly there are many areas that have not been well lored, and many
questions that can be answered with better data. We could take the position of
Wagner, the dull student in        "zwar weiss ich viel, dock noecht lob alles

wissen."2 After all,  the collection of panels that follow a cohort fron school
thrcuh middle age, for exaçle, will enable us to distinguish better between
the ecoiic dete.inants of labor-force behavior and backgImd effects, and
between transitory ecornic effects and those stasuing fron life-cycle behavior.

Additional studies of life-cycle behavior that tie labor suçly to liquidity
and labor-market constraints will undoubtedly be made. The potential for
auirixq b,lede aears limited, though. It is not clear that the efforts
of the 1970$ and 19803 (since the studies in Cain and Watts, 1973, that
r,resent mch of the first major achievnt I disoussed above) at refining
our iledge of labor supply elasticities (or their ocsçonent      in   and
substitution effects) have done anything to narrow the agreed—upon range of
estimates. There is nothing on the horizon or even imaginable that    se
likely to provide the kind of spur to research in this area that it received
 fran the developsent of new sets of data between 1965 and the late 19705.
IV.   Labor Denand—A Case of Underdevelopmant
      Unlike the study   of labor supply, in which the creation of large data sets
                                    10
led to   tris     strides in linki.xq theory to   irica1 analysis, these of us
who study labor denand have been less forttmate. The many interesting questions
on the dasand side have as inçortant ilications for policy as these     re
widely—studied s.çply questions. Thus issues of the danand for older workers,
the inçacts of technical change and international ocmçetition on the distrib.ztion
of             and the effects of margers aM xuisitions on job creation
szld be netivating research on the danand    for labor in much the   amna   ay that
interest in inocme maintenance progrna spurred much of the research on labor
supply in the 1960s and 1070g. That this has net happened—that we have made
less progress in answering questions about labor danand—is largely the result
of the failure to invest in the kinds of data that would   all U to obtain
answers, a failure that continues today.
     The questions and previous studies designed to answer then fall into two

categories: These involving asploynent dynenics and those concerned with
factor substitution. Let us consider the first groups One set of questions
involves the analysis of paths of asployxment adjustment   in response to egencus
shocks. Subsunad here   is the attaict to discover   the nature of the costs of


analysis of i
adjusting loyment that presunably generate observed adjustment paths. The
              firns adjust esploymant leads to questions about    labor
productivity (nest sinçly, the output-total hours ratio) changes cyclically.
These are inputs into the analysis of cost-based inflationary pressures, so
that this aspect of the study of labor danand becs a crucial macroecoiunic
issue. Similarly central to macroeooics are the isplications that adjustment
paths have for the the path of waçloyment.
     The study of aiployment adjustment should net be restricted to finna that
are assuned to be infinitely lived. Rather, it should enable us to wwerstaM
the eccr4c process by which out**t shocks generat. a conHnn4ngapaning and
                                  11
closing of different work sit.. that in turn produce. change. inloyt.
The analogy to the growth in the study of labor—force dynenic., including the

study of gross flows data in the CPS, ald   be clear.
     Bow well do sting    studies of esployment dyn.iice meet the criteria of
appropriate &-igation, rspreeentativenesa and onrreat structure?       broad
gr   of studies (suet recently, Borrison, 1986) uses knnukl data on an
exhaustive set of iiits aggregated over a large muiber of establi )vits in
manufacturing to analyze denand dynamic. in the oontext of a sudel allowing
oceçlete substitution ng   the inputs. (In l4orrison's and many others'
studies these are the ELE24—capital, labor, energy and materiale—data.)
This strand of the literature has severe prcblea under two of our criteria.
Aisost all the available evidence (see            1988a, for a survey) suggests
that asploysent responds to shocks fairly rapidly. This means that nrn1 data
are inherently incapable of telling us such abont the underlying path of
ssploymant adjustment: The data are too highly aggregated taçorally. They
are also too highly aggregated spatially. If there is any nonlinearity in the
adjustment process at the micro level, the use of aggregate data will in
general fail to identify it. 7iggregation should be done over the relationships
estimated as characterizing the micro units, not over the micro data in a way
that reguires assuçtions of linearity in those relationships. Since many
reasonable structures of adjustment oosts generate nonlinearities, this set of
studies will not help such in identifying what generates the path of sployment
adjusnt. Because the data oover only manufacturing, it is also hard to
claim that the results do well on the criterion of representativeness.


extended by Sargent, 1978) uses aigate iployment data to sudel    I fi'
     Jncther grcç of studies (beginning with Nadiri and 1sen, 1969, and


expectations about product desand affect paths of asployment. These allow the
                                12
researcher to distinguish adjusnt costs fron changes in expectations; and
their use of nonthly or quarterly data bee provide the arcpriate taiçoral
disaggregation. Nowever, because the data cover all manufacturing içloyment,
they suffer fron excessive spatial aggregation while at these   time perhaps
being unrspresentative of the entire ecoxy.
     These are not critici of the intellectual value of these series of

studies • We do - Lmderstand mere alx*.itv    to medel factor adjustment and
    to extricate lags arising fron adjusnt costs fron those produced by
shifts in eecations. What these studies have not done is tail us much about
the nature of adjustment at the plant level for the typical plant, since
nonlinear adjustment nay mean there is no "typical" plant, or much about the
true structure of adjustment in the regate. Because many of than use annual
data, they cannot info us   ait   the path of the response to exogenous danand
sbock.
     None of  the aspirical medels estimated in either strand of this literature
makes a serious attaipt to infer anything about the level or structure of the

costs that face fi when they change asploynent. The assusption is usually
made that adjustment costs can be aEprimdmated by a quadratic, which in turn

generates standard linear decision rules that are easily medelled as distrihited
lags.    lth     she offers no fonnal medelling of adjustment costs, Housanan
 (1988) does estimate lag structures for axployment-output relations in basic
steel production using menthly time-series data for the U.S., France and
Geany. The data are not ideal, as they do not allow estimating micro
relationships, it   they are such closer to the ideal than even two-digit SIC
data. The  thly     observations guarantee that there is no problan of taçora1
overaggregation. The only difficulties with the results are their lack of a
theoretical basis, possinly severe structural changes that have occurred and
                                13
the industry'. pOe&hl. failure to be rapresentative. Slightly diff.rest

s
prcb1 are presented by Mairesse and       Dot   (1985), whe use data for th.
     three countries based on observations of a rapresentative grç of
individual (manufacturiag) plants. The difficulty here is that the observations
are only snrnIAl, so that no serious attespt at infsrriai the size or structure
of adjusthient costs is possible.
         other studies are based sore soundly is micro theory, bat each has
prcbl of its oun that prevent us     fr   ooncludii that we I     such about

adjusthent costs. Nickeil (1979) estimates standard esployment-cutit relations
on quarterly time series oaveriag U.X. manufacturing, bat he does search for
structural changes induced by changes in legislation that he believes have
affected the costs of hiring and dimnissing workers. The difficulty here is
one of spatial overaggregation, perhaps   led    with too such taaporal
aggregation as well•    nrmh    (1988b)   uses sonthly plant-level data. While
the results do test q,licitly for alternative structures of adjusnt costs
that generate different paths of maploment denand, the coverage of the data
may not be rspresentative, and the time series are very short.

     Recently there has been a recognition is eiçirical studies of labor denand
that plants are not infinitely lived. limne etal (1988) have assenbled and
perfod sisple statistical analyses of a file of all manufacturing plants
present is any of the five Censuses of Manufactures between 1963 and 1982. The
data provide the nost detailed available picture of the totals of gross flovs
of plants into and out of dstenoe and of the conxuitant     fls  of loyinent
oççorbmities. This   is a gargantuan and praiseworthy undertaking. bnetbaless,
we should recognize that what they have achieved is still not    to a level
that will provide the basis for ana.lyzirq the deteinants of plant closings
and openings at the micro level. The plants are observed only quinquenniafly.
                                14
Deca1çosin;             changes over an observationperiod this long i.ices
positive and negative biases in the estimated fraction of net sloyment change
that is acrx.mtad for by births aid deaths of plants: Positive, because nonth-
to-einth or even yearly fluctuations in net            are missed; negative,
because short-lived establisbsents' births and deaths go unnoticed, still nore
inçortant   is that this very high dagre. of baioral aggregation prevents one
fron inferring anything about the  short— or even intadiate-nxn causes of

açlosent change. (The absence of output or factor-price data for each plant
also renders this inossible.) The restriction to uisnufacttirimgmaies the data
increasingly unrresentative.
      Jacobson (1986) and Leonard (1987) assesbled similar sets of longitudinal
data that have the advantages of covering all private nonfann establisboents
and of being available annually. This mitigates sone of the  prthl    of
tesçoral overregation. (atial ajggation is obviously not a problea.)
The only difficulties are that the data are available starting only recently;
each data set covers only one state, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin respectively;
aid output data are not available   (tIh payroll and, by calculation, earnings
data are in Jacobson's data). Thus far these data have also been used only to
deoxçose aggregate net changes in esploaeent into births, deaths aid
cpansions/oontractions of plants.
    The interesting questions in factor substitution have to do with the
effects of inçiosed changes in factor prices on the quantity of labor loyed
aid with the effects of changes in the s*ply of labor on wage rates. These
questions are of interest at the a,.ogate level aid for various disaggregations
of the irk force. In the fomar cese the crucial issue is the yiate
elasticity of labor deaiand; in the latter onse it is   of substitution &cn;
rkers of different types. In both ceses, thouh, the question can be
                                   15
diwied by analyiing      bow   fi' lot         of different gxe of workers
responds   to geiue changes in their     *s   rates.
      Research on labor—dand elasticities and labor—labor substitution cen be
divided into porely tise-saries studies and cross-section or pooled time-
series, cross-section varieties. The     forgrç consists muetly of analyses
of nni&l aggregate data in which labor is treated as hsgenaous or is
disaggregated into production and noiroduction workers. (Berndt and ristensen,
1974, was the first, McElroy, 1987, the must recent strand of this literature.)
M muted above,   the underlying data suffer fron problees of rspresentativeness.
Tbouh their high degree of taiçoral aggregation is mut a severe problam for
measuring labor-demand elasticities, the aggregation of all workers into at
must two groups limits their a1icability to questions of labor—labor
substitution. Their excessive spatial aggregation poses especially severe
problesm. The relationships that are estimated involve munlisear transform-
ations of the underlying data. There is mu reason to assume that the aggregation
of these relations for the underlying establishments  ld    produce the same
estimates as the ayy.agate data. Witbout simulation studies of the effects of
aggregation of the establisnt data (ignoring issues of aggregation of labor
into      or two Igeneous grs), we cannot be sure           much is learned

about the essentially microeconic question being asked. Similar problems
st    in the vast set of tine-series analyses based on data aggregated over
all   establishments within an industry (see Rm1,ieSh, 1986).
      Recently there have been a fewefforts to answer questions about factor
substitution using pooled tine-series, cross-section data based on establish-
ments.     Baitour, Berger and Garen (1987)     T four years of quarterly
observations on nearly 1000 coal    ml in Kentucky; Hart and Wilson (1988) use
five rnnj1 observations on around 50 natal-working establishments in the U. K.
                                    16
Both data sets allow the autbors to infer labor-demand elasticities (for
hcsogeneous labor) at the açrcpriat. levels of spatial and taoral disre-
gation. The only difficulties with the data used in these            studies
are that they are clearly unrepresentativeof anythir other than their
particular industries      and locales, and their coverage of very stort time
periods sakes    it   unlikely that they captors 'aerage cut) any short-term
fluctuations in the     parters b.
         estimation of labor—denand elasticities using cross-section data baa
       The

been a growth industry since the late 1970s. Unfortunately, these studies, all
of which estimate flavIble approximations to cost or protion functions, have
been based on data fron widely available household surveys rather than on
establisheent data. Thus sons of the work (e.g., Grant and RnArmh, 1981:
Grossean, 1982) uses Census of Population data regated to the     level and
linked to data on the capital stock by —. Another (Berger, 1983) uses time
series of CPS data for states in a similar manner.
       The                    set of studies is the general inappropriateness
             main probimu in this
of household data for the purpose of estimating denand relationships, basically
a problen of potentially severe unrepresentativeness. Essentially each worker
in the household survey represents the establis1t that eploys him or her;
many plants have none, while others have several representatives in the survey.
There is no reason to cpect biases due to this unusual saspling procedure, bot
it is hardly designed to m4n4ini ze s&çling error in data used to describe the
behavior of plants. The  spatial gation (to the           level) is also
excessive, due to the nonlinearity of the relationships that we noted above in
discussing time-series estimates cm aggregated data. The only virtue of these
studies is that they do allow the autbors to draw infercmces about substitution
      grçe of workers, as they disaggregat. the work forc, into a substantial
                                      17
ntiber of potentially interestixq categories.
      alternative aproach, ex1ified by Borjas (1986), avoids the
     An                                                                     atial
eggregati in the studies cited above by usixq individuals' weges frce the
Censusof Population as dendent variables in a generalizedLeontief nodel of
production. The major problen with the other studies is not obviated here,
though: The                                            iployers' denand for
                     sebold data used are rapresentative of
the individuals, bit they are likely to have very large errors in their role of

     i
measurii firss' behavior.
         studies (Sosin and Fairchild, 1984, and Allen, 1986) use plant-level
data to estimate production relationships. Those studies satisfy all the
criteria of appropriate spatial disareqation required to estimate the
relevant paranetars, assinim we believe the cross-section data reflect
equilibria. (Tiçoral disaggregation is not a major problen in this area.)
The data are rapresentative of the structures (several industries in Latin

America, and school and office biildieq construction in the U.S., both in the
early 1970s), t1sjh clearly not of all industry or of other eooies.
These    studies should be nodels of  appropriate data can be assenbled and
                                         how

used to estimate paraneters describimj a particular production technology.
        Unliice   the study of labor   stly, which was rejuvenated by the develcpuent
of large longitmiinsl household surveys, no similar advanee has occurred in
data on establi      )ts
                       that might produce a renasoe in the study of labor

an annual establisheent-based file constructed fron the    s
nnd. We du have the Longitudinal Research Database (I) on Establis1ts,
                                                             sources that

generate the published data in the Annual 8'.nvev of Manufactures. Though this
set of data overos probl of spatial a,.gation,
too infrequent to capture many of the labor-desand        ps  ervations are
                                                             of interest.
Also, the restriction to manufacturing plants esans the data suffer frca
                                         18
serious problese of unrepresentativeness. also available are the     flloyt
Cçorbmity Pilot Project ()PP) data, a panel with two ervations on each of
a large nianber of establishnents in 28 sites. Tb. diffioulties with this set
of data are that it is longer an on-going data collection effort, the sites
are zt representative and only limited infoation is provided on sales in the
participatingestablislinents.
     What is needed is a quarterly, or even better, a sonthly longitnMnkl
survey of an açrcçriately stratified sauple of establisnts that is
representative of all private nonfara bisiness. This survey should be
establisheent-based, should replace defmct establisIaents with appropriate
substitutes and should be benc1siarked at regular intervals to available
Censuses of Business, Manufactures, Mining,     etc. Given the frequency of
observations that   is required, only a mnall   sauçla is feasible, bit with
careful sauçliiq this can be reasonably representative. The survey should
contain data on production-worker and total loyment, on hours worked by
these two groups of workers, on the payroll for each type of worker, on other
labor costs (to all  the very much needed study of the effects of non-wage
costs on labor denand) and on total sales and production. These latter two
series are especially leportant if the airical study of labor danand at the
appropriate micro level is to have any basis in microeooric theory.
     The data collection effort I en proposing is nostly an extension and

rationalizationof what alrdy eci.sts. The nonthly BLB—790 data that form the
published series on disaggregated weekly earnings, hours, establisnt-based
aiployment, etc., cover a much larger sauple than is needed for this proposed
survey. The C6HA sançling frene is similar and has the virtue of mandatory
reporting requiranents that the BLB—790 data lacks. What the survey requires
is panding the BLB—790 data, in a mandatory s&çlirq freno if possible, to
                                   19
obtain infoziiation on rn-wage labor costs and output/sales, reducing the
slI,1e size trenus1y while            in1 its rresentativenesa,         and develcçing
a means of biilding an arcpriately constructed longitudinal fOrmat in which
to handle the data files. The additional data to be collected—rxm-wage labor
costa—are already collected through the mecbanis that produce the ftçloyment
Cost Indc. It sbould be possible to use the procedures that          grate
inputs into the
n   information
                  I
                  is that on output   and sales, and,   at least
                                                                    the
                  in constructing the proposed longitudinal file. The only
                                                                   for manufacturing
establisiments, these data are already collected on an annual basis.
     The collection of data on a quarterly or nonthly basis        ild
                                                                  enab].e us to
characterize adjustuent paths nore satisfactorily. Its basis in establisbaents
ald also provide nost of the information that would allow us to obviate the
nore inçortant difficulties with the data underlying studies of labor—labor
substitution. The only additional requirenent on this proposed data set is
that eçloyxnent in each establisiment (and bours and payroll too) be disaggre—
gated by various cuts of the labor force. At the very least, disaggregation by
sec, race and three age groups would be useful in answering questions nost
relevant to issues of policy involving the distrin*xtion of job creation and the
effects on wages of changes in relative stççlies of workers in different
daxxgrapbic gr.çs.
     Strides in constructing oczxçlex udels for inferring the nature of error
structures in factor adjustment and the nature of the technology of factor
substitution have neither been matched nor ntivated by similar strides in the


and econanetric structure tçon the    s
collection of data appropriate to the estimation.       Weare piling nore theoretical
                                            sets of unsuitable data. Until w creata
the kind of data set outlined here, the situation is likely to               worse.
V. labor-Market Sthdies—Can the Past Be Recaptured?
                                  20
     wring the late 1940s two major studies of local labor markets were
tmdertajcen, Reynolds (1951) for   New    Haven, and Myers and Shults (1951)   for
Nashua, New Haaçshire.                presents an excellent discussion and
                          (Sega]., 1986,
evaluation of these studies' lasting inçortance.) While not the first studies
of entire labor markets, these did carry the genre to its peak. Similar work,
which advanced the   literature by using nore     calex methods of analyzing the
data, was carried cut by Rees and Shultz (1970) in the early 1960s for the
Chicago labor market. The general aç'roach of these studies was to oc*nbine
household and establishnent data. In each case questions were asked of
exçloyers in a nunber of plants and of substantial nunbers of workers in those
plants. In essence the studies can be described as cross-section ocinbined
establisboent—lsehold surveys. This ccubined açroach has not been
repeated.3 We have been relegated to using increasingly ocilpiex sets of
household data and fairly   paltry sets of establisnent data.
     Is their absence a loss?      That   is, did we learn anything fron the labor—
market studies, and are there questions of interest today that could be answered
better if we had data like those collected in the labor-market studies? One set
of analyses that was novel at the time was of the role of spatial differences
in wage rates exi workers with similar characteristics in identical jobs at
different plants (stressed especially by       Rees and Shultz, 1970).   To sane

extent this infornation is -      duplicated with journey-to-work infonnation fran
the Censuses of Pcçlation      though the level of occupational detail is not so

great as in the labor-market studies. Nonetheless, the studies were the first
to stress the iriçortance of distance and the relative locations of workers and
jobs in producing large wage differences       ng
                                                otherwise identical workers.
     The labor-market studies were ahead of their time in their focus on           L
job vacancies are filled, on      workers search for jobs and on wage structures.
                                     21
It is true, particularly in the two studies fron the late 19405, that much of
                                                                      ar.
    s
the research is based on the attitudinal questions that we ecoists
In tbose
unlont
                 dies, tbouh, there is much discussion of the role of
             insurance benefits in job search; of reports on      workers
&xuire  1ee       about alternative jobs when theybe       unloyed; and of
the nature of jobs, includii trade—of fs between wages and job characteristics,
that affect workers' search behavior. Even the best içirical studies of job
search of the last twenty years based on large bousebold data sets (e.g.,
Hoizer, 1987) could have proceeded better usim data friu the labor—market
studies of the 1940s if the se    theoretical issues had been posed and the
statistical tectuüques z   in use had been widespread then.
     The labor-market studies meet nost of the criteria in Section II fairly



aggragation—to individual firns and housebolds. In    s
well. Their particular distinction is the appropriateness of the level of
                                                            ways they fail on
the criterion of representativeness, in that the labor markets studied are not
representative of anything bit thenselves • In another sense, thoth, the data
are quite representative: They provide the best possible way of describing
the inherently market phencmena that the authors were trying to examine and
that still interest us today. Obviously the industrial structures of the local
labor markets have changed over forty years (consider Nashua in particular).
Whether this means that the labor—market facts that these studies dnstrated
renain valid is unclear, bit their approach to thinking about labor markets is
surely still useful.

better answers to s
     The kinds of data collected in the labor-market studies would provide anich
                       of the questions about which labor eoonanists are nost
concerned today. nsider first the notion of efficiency wages, the idea that
there are substantial wage differentials that arise
                                 22
                                                    fr fi'      attesçts to
elicit effort fran workers.      of the "evidence" on this consists of
                                Mach

dsennstratiag the enistence of uncpla3.ned wage differentials in sehold data
across narrowly defined industries (e.g., Frueger and BuilDers, 1988). While
the oonospt was not addressed in today's teres, the role of efficiency wages
and unasploymentas a discipline device was recognized in the labor-market
studies, "The change fron a balanced to a loose local labor market unquestion-
ably brobt with it a tightening up of plant discipline... ." (Myers and Shultz,
1951, 144).                                                                    -

     analyzing the canbined establislmnt-householddata using today's techniques
and ooncspts could shed far ncre light on the inçortance of efficiency wages.

(Beginning efforts in this direction were made by Osberg         1986, and

Grosben, 1986.) Por exançle, with wage data on individuals in the sane
specific occupations one could easily measure the inçortance of fi-specific
effects. This would provide two substantial advances over current studies of
wage differentials, in that it would allow us to eonine wages within very
detailed occupations at the level of individual establishments. Longitudinal
data fron labor-market studies would also allow one to examine      occupation—

specific wage differences across plants affect turnover, a manifestation of
worker dissatisfaction and the obverse side of the extra effort that efficiency
wages are alleged to elicit.
     The second area of current research is on the relative roles of job-

natch.ing and on-the-job training      in prodiing observed patterns of wage growth
with job tenure (see brahan and Pafner, 1987).        The   question is whether wage
growth results frco                         or whether it just reflects sorting
                         fi-specific training,
of workers so that nore senior workers are those      w
                                                    have renamed with the
miçloyers with      they are well matched. The kinds of data produced in the
                 whcln

old labor-market studies would not add nuch to this discussion because of their
                                       23
limitation to siagle   oss sections. If such data were collected lomitii&ins1ly,
though, these questions   ild be answered as definitively as is possible in
ipirical work.    With ocnbined loiitudinal establis1ient-householddata we
could follow workers in specific jobs as output and productivity vary in the
plants where they work. That would enable us to observe sore closely the
effects of actual invesnts in trainiag (if any) that are taking place and
cortrib.xting to wage growth. Similarly, examiniag the detailed characteristics
of job vacancies in relation to the characteristics of current and - workers
would allow us to study the matching hypothesis directly rather than infer it
fron oc*içlicatad sodelling of the error structures of wage equations.
     A revival of the kinds of data collection that underlay the labor-market

studies would yield very high returns in instructing us about how labor markets
function. One method is to rsplicate the early studies in specific labor
markets using sodern saopling techniques and collecting data that we rie obtain
in household and establislixnt surveys. .n approach that will probably yield
sore infoznation at lower cost would conbine the longitudinal establisbeent
survey proposed in Section IV with a linked survey of substantial saoples of
individuals mxployed in the establislinents. This approach baa the virtue of
increasing spatial rspresentativeness and providing the desired bined


that will sot provide the sonthly or quarterly data that are necessary for s
longitudinal establistmant-household data. Still another method, thoi.sb one


purposes, is to use the establisrnt data underlying the Area Wage Surveys as
a starting place for the construction of the kinds of data needed for the
purposes of   this Section.   This approach to data collection
                                                            will also allow for
the easy anguisition of detailed product- and labor-market characteristics that
would be useful both for the specific topics discussed above and for other
market-based issues.
                                    24
VI. Union Goals
    For many years econanists and industrial relations            specialists have
discussed what unions     try to maximize.     Developing the pioneering      ork of
Ixmlop (1944), eooiunists have recently specified ndels designed to allow the
estimation of the parameters of "union utility functions" on micro data. In
sisple sodels particular     foof these functions are oc*nbined with loglinear
1abor—dnand equations to infer the parameters. 1ore cxmçlex sodels test
whether the union's marginal rate of substitution between 1oyment and wages
equals the slope of the labor-denand curve, or whether unions and
ncve off the denand curve to a pareto-sierior point on the contract curve.
     The main    strand of research (Dertouzos and Pencavel, 1981; Pencavel,1984;
Brown   and Ashenfelter, 1986;     NaCurdy and      Pencavel, 1986)   is entirely based on
pooled annual tine—series, cross-section data describii wages and
in locals of the International Typographical Union. The studies proceed fran
the sinçle labor-danand ncdel to various tests of whether the bargain is
denand—constrained. The second strand, Farber (1978) for the U.S., and Carruth
and Oswald (1985) for the U.L, uses annual tine series on mine workers to
estimate the degree of relative risk aversion in union utility functions.
        The authors   are veryof problens with specifying a single utility
                                 aware

function for the union. Pencavel in particular argues that the ITU is well
suited to finessing the problen of internal union decision—makim, because (he
argues) the workers are ho'çeneous and the union is very detxcratic. (Thus he
isplies that the median and average voters are identical.) N one would make
these claims about miners' unions in the U.S. or the U.K., so that one wonders
whether the idea of estimating a union utility function makes sense for then.
A  similar problen ehists with Eberts         and   Stone's (1986) cross section of teachers
 in New York state school districts.
                                         25
         difficulty in all these studies, b.it partinilarly in the strand of
       The
work by Pencavel and his colleagues, is the limitation to what is essentially

                       atypical (see Lipset, Trow and Dolenan, 1956) sagisent
one amall and runarkably
of the union sector. Mere is a case where trdous resources have been
devoted
the    sto boi1dii and testirq ever nre oczl nEdels on what is essentially

                                                                 -
         set of data. Asstlnirq the nEdel is relevant beyond the flu, it is
difficult to believe that additional effort at onllectin a      set of data on
ancther union would nct add       re
                                 to our understandii of what unions do than
introducirq yet nre cileaities to the basic nEdel.
VII.    Is There a   Need for   Validation Usirq International Data?
     In the discussion in Section II I set out as the desiderattu the
auisition of data that will provide the best estimates of the vector of
parameters b describixq the underlyi relationship. Do these parameters
describe behavior generally, or are we only concerned with characterizing
agents' actions in one particular econany? If the former we naist be especially
careful to consider whether, even if our data meet all the criteria for
appropriateness that I have laid out, the results they generate can be used to
draw inferences that apply beyond this country's borders. The issue is basically
one of representativeness of the data, except that too often we think that the
universe we are trying to represent is the eoonany of the particular oountry
where we reside. The obverse question involves the uses to which studies of
other countries' labor markets can be put by 7'.merican econanists. These are
basically: 1) To provide additional laboratories for the estimation of
parameters describing econcinic behavior generally; and      2) To   provide contrasts
to our   n    labor market.
       Whether such generalization is possible depends to a  large ctent on
whether:     1)   There are sufficient similarities in oonsmers' tastes across
                                       26
cowitries that we sheuld pect similar behavioral responses to various
stili;   2) Markets are sufficiently interconnected and technology diffuses

sufficiently rapidly that ocaçetition eliminates    chof the international
differences in behavior that would otherwise arise; and 3) The institutions
that regulate behavior are sufficiently similar so that the similar behavior
inherent in ecoxic agents is not altered by non-market forces. Since
technology flows nore freely across borders than does labor, these consider-
ations stgest that generalizing about suçly behavior frma studies on data
characterizing only one ecorny is likely to be nore risky than drawing
inferences about labor demand. Institutional differences do inhibit general-
ization; they also provide cç.çorttmities to predict the effects of altering
danestic institutions and to obtain data that allow for indspendent rlication
of estimates of their iispacts (asmining international differences in tastes and
technology are not too   great).
     Killingsworth's (1983) nonwiental study of labor supply swanarizes a vast
array of research and (mmn other contri.b.itions) tries to determine the
reasons for the disturbingly wide range of estimates of supply parameters.
While different estimation techniques, data sets and measurmnent      difficulties
undoubtedly contribote to the problem, one wonders         imch   of the range
results frma underlying differences     rg the different populations       being

sampled.   lthough, as I noted in Section    IV,   the data are not very
satisfactory, we have obtained a mznber of stylized facts about labor danand
(see Hainemesh, 1986). Given the sorry quality of the data, even the minimal
knowledge we have obtained about labor demand behavior generally would not be
possible witbout the accretion of demand studies frcc several econanies.
     In the area of predicting the effects of institutional change merican
aconanists can learn much fran studies of other econcxiies.    excellent example
                                   27
is in inferrii the effects of inçosiz otxçarab1e worth, where ocsarative
studies (e.g., Gregory etal, 1986) can tall us at least as much as general-
izations based on the enisting stzi.cthre of the da8estic labor market. In other
cases our institutions are similar to chose of other countries, Ixit our federal
syst imposes such uniformity that it is difficult to have much confidence
about estimates of labor-market effects. A particularly good example is the
evaluation of the eloyment and labor-force effects of the federal miniman
wage (Mincer, 1976). A study for Canada (Swidinsky, 1980), where provincial
laws produce greater cross-section variation in effective miniimsn wages,
substantially increases one's confidence in the results obtained for the U.S.
    The answer to the titular question of this section is a resounding yes.

We will never be able to make universally açlicable statenents about all
aspects of labor—market behavior; bit with nore attention to studies that use
data frcai countries other than the U.S., we will at least avoid the enbarrassing



the
                   s
ethnocentricity that often characterizes our attaiçts to generalize eiçirical
results. At the        Use, such attention will improve our understanding of
      destic labor market.
 VIII. What Is    To Be r-

      Doingarched eooi ..ics properly is an art—and the data used in
practicing this art must meet the criteria of açrcpriate aggregation,
rmpresentativess and current structure. Too often we irically-oriented
labor eoonnists have the lazy person's habit of taking available sets of data
and tailoring our methods of analysis, and sasetimes even the basic questions
we ask, to fit the available data. In the case of analyzing labor suçly,
where the available data are rmpresentative, offer the arcpriats degre. of
disaggregatioe and capture current structures well, this is an excellent
arcroach.     In other cases   it is not.   Studies of labor-denand phenanena and of
                                     28
the interaction of sup1y and dnand in the labor market have been based on
data that are often inaçrcpriately disaggregated, unreçresentative or
wcharacteristic of current structures. Indeed, the trenens resairces
devoted to oollectiu data that are best suited for analyzim labor suçly, and
the consequent availability of those data, have reduced incentives to collect
data that are nore suitable for these other questions.
      This is not a condamation of recent axpirical research on issues other
than labor suçly. We have learned a lot; b.it what we can possibly learn about
these issues is severely limited by the lack of açropriate data. Rather than
rely on inaçropriate data, those of us interested in xpirical research in
 labor econanics outside the narri and decreasinly fertile area of labor
 suly must adopt same of the sociologists' williiness to generate new sets of
 data (thoh, one would hope, without abandonim our willirqesa to construct
ndels to organize the analysis of those data). 1lso, given the limited
 resources available for collectiog data, we must urge public officials
 responsible for funding data collection to get out of the rut of concentrating
 on ever-larger and ever-longer sets of household data and redirect resources
 toward the kinds of data that are nre likely to yield new basic insights into
 the operation of labor markets. The individual data-collection efforts inched
 by such a redirection of public and private activities will not be inexpensive
 of time and noney. If coupled with sm curtailing of the increasing tendency
to spend energy and boet resources                   additional longer
                                       on accx.miulatirq

household-based longitudinal studies, they need not add to the share of public
resources devoted to the collection of data in labor-related areas.
     The major   area toward which resources should be shifted is the collection
of longitudinal, nonthly or quarterly, establishment data to which household
data on workers in the sançled establishments are linked. This data set should
                                  29
contain the   infoation   -- collected by the       BIB   in its isnense nthly   surveys
of establis1ents as well as infoation     out*Jt and sales. The sançle of
                                             on
establisInts need   rtbe large, t*zt it must be rresentative of the entire
ocozxy, rt merely the over—studied manufacturin sector. Simultaneous

sançlir of panels of workers in these establi&isents that provides infoination
like that -    available in the   NL8   and the   PSID,   or even in the CPS s.çplnents,
sbould also be undertaken. In ten years we would thus have in band          at little
extra cost a tool that allows us to understand increasirly inçortarit phernena
that have been heretofore either relatively neglected or studied using
inappropriate data.
     Without the kind of endeavor proposed here the only progress possible in
these areas of research and public policy will - through the continued
efforts of individuals whe collect      all, usually unrresentative        and

inoxlete sets of establisinent-housebolddata. This catch—as—catch—can
approach has been and can continue to be inçortant. It is unlikely to provide
sufficient additional kixwlee to save the study of labor econanics fron
increasingly sterile  irical work using the e,dsting massive sets of

housebold data and fron the growth      of "labor theory" that is increasingly
detached fron the analysis of   xpirical phezna.




                                    30
    Abraham, Katharine, and Henry Father. 1987.            Job Ixiration, Seniority and
Earnirqs. Nesrican Eooiic Review 77: 278—297.
      Allen, Steve. 1986. Union Work iWlas and Efficiencyin the 3iildirg
Trades. Journal of     Labor   Ecotics 4:     212—242.

      Baitour, Jaess, Mark Berger, and John Garen. 1987. The Short-run Denand
for labor in the Coal Industry. Unpublished paper, University of Kentucky.
     Berger, Mark. 1983. Changes in Labor Force Ocsçosition and Male
Earnings:    A Production Approach. Journal of Hunan Resources 17: 177-19 6.
       Berndt, Ernst, and Laurits Christensen. 1974. Tasting for the Enistence
of   a Consistent Aggregate Index of Labor Inputs. American Eooinic Review 64:
391—404.

             Melvyn Puss, and Leonard Wavean. 1979. A Dynamic Model of Cost
Adjusnt    and Interrelated Factor Denands. University of British Colilnbia,
Discussion Paper No. 79-30.
     Borjas, George. 1986. The Dmxgrapbic De11thJInts of the Danand for
Black Labor. In The Black Youth 1ovment Crisis, ads. Richard Freeman and
Harry Holzer, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     Brown, James, and Orley Ashenfelter. 1986. Testing the Efficiency of
nloyment Contracts. Journal of Political Econy              94:    8-40-S87.

     Cain, Glen, and Harold Watts. 1973. Inoane Maintenance and labor Suvly.
Chicago: Markham.
     Carruth, A. A., and A. J. Oswald. 1985. Miners' Wages in Post-War
Britain: An Application of a Model of Trade Union Behavior. Eournic Journal
95: 1003—1020.
     Clark, Kim, and Lawrence S.nnners. 1982• The Dynamics of Youth
Unanploynent. In The Youth Labor Market, eds. Richard Freeman and David Wise.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
     Denny, Michael, and Melvyn Fuss. 1977. The Use of Approximation
Analysis to Test for Snparability and the Bristence of Consistent Aggregates.
American    Ecoiic Review 67       404—418.

       Dertouzos,   James, and John    Pencavel.   1981.   Wage   and loyment
Detr"i nation Under Trade Unioniam: The International             Typographic Union.
Journal of Political Bco1y 89: 1162-1181.
       1)xnlcç, John. 1944•     Wace   Dete2llination Under Trade Unionimn.     New    York:
Maillan.
                                        31
     lAnme, TiflKthy, Mark Reberts, and Lawrence Samielson. 1988. Plant
Turoover, loyment Growth and Job Stability in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector,
1963-82. Urpthlished paper, Pennsylvania State University.

     Eberts, Randall, and Joe Stone. 1986. On the Contract Cerve: A Test of
Alternative Medals of Collective Bargaining. Journal of Labor Eootics 4:
66—81.

       Pa±er, Henry. 1978. Individual Preferences and Union Wage Detennination:              The
Cese   of the United Mine Workers. Journal of Political Eooncsny 86: 923-942.
       Grant,
Youths, White
                 Js,
                  W  and Daniel 5mw.h. 1981. Labor Market 0çetition Ancir
                      and Others. Review of Encinics and Statistics 63: 354-360.

     Gragory, Brbert, A. Daly and V. Ho. 1986. A Tale of           T
                                                               Co!.mtries:
Equal Pay for Wonen in Australia and Britain. Centre for Ecoixicic Policy
Research, Australian National University, Discussion Paper Me. 147.
       Griliches, Zvi.    1986.    Eooric   Data Issues.     In Handbook of Eooixinetrics,
edo. Ides. and Michael Intriligator.        Amsterdam:     Merth-Bolland Press.
    Groshen, Erica. 1986. Sources of Wage Dispersion: How Much On Fsployers
Matter? Unp.iblished Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University.
    Grosaman, Jean.    1982. The Substitutability of Natives and Iimnigrants in
Production. Review of Econcanics and Statistics 64 (1982): 596—603.
   Hrnesh, Daniel. 1986. The Dand for Labor in the Long m. In
Hanok of Labor Eoonc*nics, ads. orley Anbenfeltar and Richard Layard.
Amsterdam: Worth—Holland     Press.
             l988a. The Dand for Workers and             irs
                                                 and the Effects of Job
Security Policies. In iv1ovment. Un1oynent and Labor Utilization, ad.
Rebert Hart. London: Unwin Hymen.
       —-   —.    1988b. Labor Desand and the Structure of Mjusthnt         Costs.
National Poreau of Econcinic Research,  Working Paper Me. 2572.
    Hart,    ert, and Nicholas Wilson. 1988. The Desand            for Workers and
                                             ert
Hours: Micro Evidence fron the UK Metal Working Industry.
                                                               Lon:
                                                                    In 1ovment,

    Hecianan,
Political
              J,
Una!a1ovIt and Labor Utilization, ad.

            Eov
                    and      ert
                                              Hart.                    Unwin Hymen.

                                Willis. 1977. A Beta-logistic Medel for the
Analysis of Sequential Labor Force Participation by Married Wn. Journal of
                    85:   27—58.

    Homer, Harry. 1987. Infoiinal Jth Search and Black Youth Unealoymant.
American Ecoijc Review 77: 446—452.
       Housanan, Susan. 1988. Shorter Working Time and
Miusthant in the European Steel Industry. In loymant,
Labor Utilization, ad. ibert Hart.          Lc:
                                                               J U1ovt
                                                                   Seourity: Labor
                                                                                  and
                                           Unwin Hymen.

                                      32
       Jaonbeon, Louis. 1986. Job Creation and Destruction in Pennsylvania,
1975-85.    Unpblisbed paper, The W.B. tjobn Institute, Kalenazoo, MI.
       Kil1ixqsrth, Mark.    1983.    Labor   8zp1y. Cainbri6ge,   land:       Canbri&je
University Press.
       Krueger, Alan, and Lawrence
Structure. Eouretrica 56:
                                     Brs.
                                 259—294.
                                                1988.    Efficiency Wages and the Wage

     Leonard, Jonathan. 1987• In the       Place at the Wronp T:i:
                                            wro
Brtent of Frictional and Structural Unçlo'ment. In Univ1ovmentand the
                                                                                1
Structure of Labor Markets, eds. Kevin
Basil Blackwell.
                                            Ix
                                          and Jonathan Leonard. New York:

     Lipset, Beyncur, Martin Trow, and      Js
                                             Colenan. 1956. Union Dcracy:
The Internal Politics of the International TypOGraPhiCal Union. Glencoe, IL:
The Free Press.

       Murdy,   Ttas.    1981. An fliçirical Model of Labor Suly in a Life-
Cycle Setting. Journal of    Political Eco1y 89: 1059—85.
               and John Pencavel. 1986. Testing between Cxçeting Models of
Wage   and xçloinent DetArni nation in Unionized Markets. Journal of Political
Econanv 94: 83—539.
       Mairesse, Jacques, and Brigitte Donint. 1985. Labor and Invesbnt
Denand  at the Finn Level: A Cazçerison of French, Gennan and U.S. Manufacthrin,
1970—79.    European Econanic Review 28: 201—231.

     McElroy, Marjorie. 1987. Additive General Error Models for Production,
Cost and Derived Denand or Share Systns. Journal of Political Econc*ny 95:
737—757.

    Mincer, Jacob. 1962. Labor Force Participation of Married      In
Aspects of Labor Eooiics, ed. B. Gregg Lewis. Princeton, U: Princeton
                                                                          W.
University Press.
                1976. Un1oyment       Effects of Minmnnzn Wages. Journal of
Political Eoo1v     84: 887—8104.

     Morrison, Catherine. 1986. Structural Models of Dynamic Factor Denands
with Monstatic cpectations. International Eoonanic Review 27: 365—386.
       Myers, Charles, and George Shultz.      1951.    The Dynamics of   a Labor Market.
New   York: Prentice-Hall.
       Nadiri, H.I., and Sherwin I,sen. 1969. Interrelated Factor Dmmand
              Anerican Boonanic Review 59: 457—47 1.
Functions.
     Nickell, Steven. 1979. Uniployment and the Structure of Labor Costs.
Journal of Monetary Eoonc*nics 11: 187-222.
       Osberg, Lars, Richard postle, and      Don   Claint.     1986. The Incidence
                                     33
and 1irat.Lon of Individual thloyment: Supply side or Daand Side?
Journal of Eonnanics 10: 13-33.
                                                                            bri&te
     Pencavel, John. 1984. The Tradeoff Bebb'een Wages and ftçloyment in Trade
Union Ct,jectives. Quarterly Journal of Boononics 99: 21.5-232.

     Ream, Albert, and George Shnltz. 1970. Workers and Waqes in an Urban
Labor Market. Caicago: University of icago Press.

    Reyncids, Lloyd.    1951.   The   Structure of Labor Markets.   New   York:
Harper and Bros.
     Sargent, Thcxnas. 1978. Estimation of Dynamic Labor Dnand Schedules imder
Rational Expectations. Journal of Political EcoiY 86: 1009—1045.
     Sagal, Martin. 1986. Post-Institutionalimain Labor Eooiics: The
Forties and Fifties Revisited. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39: 388-
403.

       Sosin, Kim, and Loretta Fairchild. 1984. Nontheticity and Technclogica].
Bias   in Production. Review of Eoonxiics and Statistics 66: 44-50.
       Stafford, Frank. 1986. Forestalliaj the Denise of fliirica1 Eoonanics:
The Role   of Microdat in Labor Eooxics Research. In Handbook of Labor
Eoorics,    eds. Orley Ashenfaltar and Richard Layard. 7matarden: North—Holland
Press.
    Swidinaky, Robert. 1980. Mininnt Wages and Teenage Unexployment.
Canadian Journal of Ecoiics 13: 158-171.




                                  34
     *1    dely   indebted to Jeff Biddle for many helpful stqgesticns and to
Steve 1llen, Paul then, Zvi. Griliches, Harry Hoizer, Nick Kiefer, John Pencavel,
Sherwin PoseD, Jack Triplett and Stben Woodbiry for useful -mrts.
     1. The six journals are the marican Eooiic Review, Eoonsotrica,

    s
Journal of Political Eoory, Quarterly Journal of Eoonics, Review of
                                          Ecolunic Review. I tried to follow


                            i
Ecoiics and Statistics andasInternational
the      sets of clusions Stafford.
     2•   Johann Wolfgang
a lot, bit would like to
                            Goethe,       Part
                                 everything."
                                                  I,   Scene 1:   'ito be sure   (] I
    3 • The DDPP  data set does       ibine establislnents and households.        However,
içloyers aresoasked                          characteristics of their ncst
                    questions only about thethe
recent hire,    that  verylittle is made of obined nature of the data.
     4. apologies to V.      I.   LeDin.




                                       35
