NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELF-FULFILLING EXPECTATIONS, SPECULATIVE ATTACKS
AND CAPITAL CONTROLS

Harris Dellas
Alan C. Stockman

&

Working Paper No. 2625

: //Wwiv

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1988

The authors would like to thank Ed Buff ie for helpful comments. Stocknian
gratefully acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation. The
research supported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2625
June 1988

SELF-FULFILLING EXPECTATIONS, SPECULATIVE ATTACKS
AND CAPITAL CONTROLS

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the endogenous implementation of capital controls in

the context of a fixed exchange rate regime. It is shown that if there
exists a non-zero probability that the policymaker's response to a
speculative attack on official foreign reserves will be the introduction of
controls, such an attack may occur even when current and expected monetary
policy is consistent with a permanently viable, control-free fixed exchange

rate regime. Consequently, capital controls may be the outcome of selffulfilling expectations rather than the result of imprudent economic
policies.

Harris Dellas
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University

Alan Stockman
Department of Economics
University of Rochester

Nashville, TN 37235

Rochester, NY 14627

(615) 385-0174

(716) 275-7214

INTRODUCTION

The last few years have witnessed a revival of interest in the
removal of economic restrictions that are so extensively being used in
most developing countries. The presence of such controls Is considered
to be one of the main obstacles to achieving sustained economic growth.

A voluminous literature on economic liberalization now exists which
deals with a wide variety of issues, like the optimal order of liberal-

ization of the foreign accounts, its relation to domestic stabilization

policies, etc. (for a survey of some of these issues as well as references, see Edwards, 1983). However, despite widespread agreement on the

merits of economic liberalization, few such attempts have so far been
undertaken.

Moreover, most of these attempts failed at one stage or

another, which led to the complete abandonment of economic reform.

The reason for the failure of liberalization experiments can be
traced either to the adoption of economic policies which proved incon-

sistent with the permanent removal of controls; or to the lack of
credibility of government policy.

In the first case it is the current

behaviour of the policymakers that undermines the viability of the
reform.

In the latter case, reform failure is the result of the

("destabilizing') behaviour of the public which acts on expectations of
future policy reversals (even when current policies seem prudent).
In

context

this

paper we deal with the second source of failure in the

of the choice of the exchange rate system. We analyze how the

choice of the
success

exchange

rate regime influences the probability of

of a balance-of-payments liberalization attempt. We argue that

if current economic (monetary) policy is identical across alternative
exchange systems, a fixed regime is more likely to lead to a reimposi-

2

tion of controls even when monetary authorities behave responsibly;

that is even when monetary policy is consistent1 with the permanent
maintenance of a control-free environment.

What lies behind this

result is the fact that, in general, pegged and flexible exchange rates
are expected to be associated with different future economic policies.2
Pegged exchange rate systems are subject to possible balance-of-payments

crises that involve endogenous speculation against a currency and
associated capital flows.

If people expect that, as a result of a

speculative run, governments will impose capital controls to maintain
the fixed regime, self-fulfilling expectations may cause such an attack

to take place and the subsequent failure of the liberalization experiment. Note that the behaviour of individuals is absolutely rational as
their expectations are validated by subsequent policy actions.

We also argue that if a third party (like the IMF) stood willing
to lend foreign reserves to the domestic policymaker at a fixed rate in

the case of a speculative run, on the condition that "responsible"
monetary policy is maintained, no runs occur and a fixed exchange rate

regime without capital controls is viable (and no actual loans are
made).

Our analysis is applicable not only to the choice of the exchange

rate regime during a liberalization attempt but also to other policy
situations.

For instance, it can explain why the effects of policy

threats may be diametrically opposite from their intended objectives.

As demonstrated in the paper, the threat of capital controls ignites

speculative attacks instead of serving to deter them.

A similar

analysis can be applied to issues such as the effects of a variable
investment tax credit on investment and output fluctuations.

3

THE MODEL

We employ a variant of the standard balance-of-payments- -crisis
model (see Flood and Carber, 1984, Obstfeld, 1986) to analyze the case

of a small open economy. During a liberalization experiment, domestic

residents can hold domestic money, domestic bonds, foreign money and
foreign bonds.

Foreign money is not held because its return is dorni-

nated by the return on bonds. Domestic money pays no interest but it
is held because of the existence of trading frictions (such as a cashin-advance constraint).

If capital control-s are imposed, domestic

residents can no longer legally transact in foreign assets. Under a
fixed regime, the domestic government has a stock of foreign reserves
that is used to support the fixed exchange rate.

The following assumptions describe the behaviour of policy:

(a) Actual and expected domestic monetary policy is the same across
different exchange rate regimes; it does not change following the
occurrence of a speculative run;3 and is such that if a speculative

attack did not cause the introduction of capital controls, the

fixed regime could be viable indefinitely.

Hence, only runs

induced by the expectation of future controls can cause the
collapse of the fixed regime.

(b) If official reserves are brought below a certain critical value by
a speculative attack then the government imposes capital controls
(to be described shortly)

The model is built around the following equations:

M/Pt —

a

-

t1 — Rt + Dt

b.i

(I)
(2)

4

Dt—D+ut

(3)

Eut — 0, Eu — a2

(4)

—
i —

SP
i* + E

(5)

[(S+ijSt) - 1)

(6)

t

d

s

where M. M. Dt, Rt, S, Pt and i

are

the domestic nominal demand for

money, supply of money, domestic credit, foreign reserve holdings,
exchange rate, price level and nominal interest rate respectively; an

asterisk indicates "foreign"; and E is the expectations operator (we
assume rational expectations).

P —

1 and i* —

To simplify the exposition, we set

0.

We will assume that there are two critical values of Rt, R and R.

As long as official reserves exceed R, there are no restrictions on
transactions involving foreign issets.

If, however, Rt slips below R,

a tax is imposed on purchases of foreign issets by domestic residents.

When the level of reserves hits R, then the government withdraws from
the foreign exchange market and lets the exchange rate float. One can

justify this specification by arguing that the domestic government
faces a perfectly elastic foreign supply of reserves up to R, an upward

sloping curve from R to

and a perfectly inelastic one from R and on.

The fixed exchange rate is subject to capital controls in the interval
(R, R).

An alternative specification could have been to have assumed

that once reserves reach R, the government imposes strict quantitative

capital controls that prohibit domestic residents from acquiring new
foreign assets; the demand for foreign assets is then satisfied in the
black market at a price that includes a premium.

5

To ensure that capital controls are not the outcome of excessive
monetary expansion, but rather the result of self-fulfilling expecta-

tions about controls we will restrict the permissible behaviour of
domestic credit.

We will require that, if the policymaker announced

that no capital controls would ever be imposed, monetary policy is such

that no run ever takes place and foreign reserves suffice to maintain
the fixed regime indefinitely. The required restriction Rt >
that Ut

is

R

implies

such that

Prob (Ut

< aS

-

D

-

R) —

1

(7)

where S is the fixed exchange rate.

To highlight the interaction between self-fulfilling expectations

and future possible policies we will consider two alternative policy
scenarios.

Under the first, the government announces that she will

abandon the fixed regime when a balance-of-payments crisis occurs
(reserves decline below R) and will let the exchange rate float freely.

It is easy to show4 that under this policy, a speculative attack will

appreciation.
Consequently, people who
in the attack- -and exchange domestic for foreign assets- -

lead to an exchange rate
participate

will experience a capital loss. As participation in an attack violates
individual

rationality, no run takes place.

Under the second option, the domestic government threatens (credi-

bly) that she will impose a tax, r. on acquisition of foreign assets if

a run against the domestic currency causes foreign reserves to sink
below R.

We will now demonstrate that the existence of this threat

makes a speculative run a non-zero probability event, and that the
likelihood of a run depends on the interest elasticity of the demand

6

for money and the probability distribution of the shock to domestic
credit (Ut). What makes an attack possible is the fact that while the
domestic credit shock is not sufficient to wipe reserves out on its own
(condition 7), a substantial drop in foreign reserves becomes possible

when one includes the effect of the change in the domestic nominal
interest rate on the demand for money.

The interest rate changes

because the threat of capital controls leads to an expected (implicit)
currency devaluation which requires that the nominal interest rate rise
to

compensate holders of domestic currency denomninates assets for

potential capital losses.
The expected exchange rate for period t+l as of period t is
—

q(l+r)S

+ (l-q)S —

(l+qr)S

> S.

(8)

t

where q is the probability that Ut exceeds some critical level u, and u
is determined by

—

(a-b.i)S

-

D

-

R

(9)

(8) says that the expected exchange rate is the weighted sum of the
fixed exchange rate that will prevail if no run takes place and the
fixed cuin tax rate if a run takes place.

In (9) any Ut > u causes an

excess supply of money which cannot be satisfied with an outflow of
reserves (given R) but requires an exchange rate depreciation. Hence

for any u > u a speculative attack occurs and capital controls are
imposed.

(8) and (6) imply that i — qr and substituting into (9) we have
that q satisfies the condition

q —

prob (Ut > u) — prob [Ut > (a-bqr)S -

D

-

RI

(10)

7

We

can think of q as the probability of a balance-of-payments

nominal

crisis. Since ut is an i.i.d. random variable and the

rate is a constant, the

probability

interest

of an attack is the same for all

time periods.5 Capital controls are imposed the first time Ut exceeds
u. Notice that if the interest elasticity of the demand for money were
zero, expression (10) would reduce to (7) with q —

0, that is no attack

would ever occur.

Up to this point we have assumed that controls are known to be

imposed with certainty when reserves slip below R.

Our analysis,

however, can be extended to deal with situations in which the policymaker's response to a speculative attack is uncertain.

For instance,

suppose that the public believes that, following a run, controls will

be imposed

(will not)

with probability y (l-y).

Then the expected

exchange rate is

—

q[y.(1+r)S

+

(1-q)S

+

(l-y)[a1(R

+ D) + (a +

h)1

uti

(11)

where q is the probability that Ut exceeds a new6 critical level U.

ES+i <

no attack

S

is expected to
place

if

the

If

ever takes place. If, however, the exchange rate

following a run (ESi > S), a
realization of Ut is sufficiently high. The
depreciate

run may take

probability

of an attack is lower now and it depends on the probability distribution

of the domestic credit shock (q), the probability the public attacks to
government

elasticity

intentions to impose capital controls (y) , the interest
of the demand for money and on the level of reserves,

domestic credit and the exchange rate.

Note that

if the

policymaker

8

could credibly choose the probability of imposing controls (which
depends on things like the- -publicly perceived- - importance she attaches

to a fixed regime relative to a flexible), the optimal choice involves

setting y — 0.

If, however, announcements of future policies are not

credible, and no precoininitment technology is available, then the public

will assess the value of y by evaluating the policyinaker's objective
function under the two policy options.

The higher y, the higher the

possibility that a run will take place.

Before concluding this paper it is worthwhile making one remark
that seems to have relevance for real world liberalization reforms. If
an outside party (like the IMF) credibly promises to provide loans at a
fixed rate, conditioned on the doumestic policymnaker's following respon-

sible monetary policies (which the policymnaker does in our model
because of condition 7), then the fixed regime could be maintained
indefinitely with no attacks and capital controls.
choice

In such a case the

of the exchange rate regime is of no consequence for the proba-

bility of success of an economic liberalization attelmmpt. Moreover, in
equilibrium,

no actual loans need to be mimade.

Whether such an IMF

policy would be welfare-improving, or even feasible, is a more difficult
issue that we do not address here.

Notes

1Proponents of a fixed exchange system believe that a fixed regime
imposes discipline on the behaviour of monetary authorities (by endoge-

nizing the money supply)

In our case we assume that policymakers are

already disciplined, and that the choice of exchange systems does not
matter for the domestic credit component of the money supply.

2Stockman (1988) has emphasized the importance of these issues in

the context of the behaviour of relative prices across exchange rate
systems.

31f it did, it could fuel crisis expectations as it does in
Obstfeld (1986).

41f, as a result of a speculative attack, the government switches
to a floating exchange rate regime, the exchange rate will be determined

by the following stochastic diffurence equations (which is derived by
combining equations (1), (2), (5) and (6)):

bES1 + (a+h)S

— R + Dt

(Al)

t

which can be solved for St and when combined

S — a1(R

+ D) +

(a+b)1ut

(A2) and condition (8) imply that St < S,

with equation (4) gives

(A2)

i.e., the exchange rate

appreciates.

51t could vary over time if Ut was an autocorrelated stochastic
process.

6u is defined in a way similar to u in (9). The only difference

is that the nominal interest rate will now be calculated using (11)

10

rather than (8).

Notice that q

q, so a run is iiiore likely to occur

when controls are expected to be imposed with

ceLtainty.

Re ferences

Edwards, S. (1983), "The Order of Liberalization of the Current and
Capital Accounts of the Balance of Payments," NBER working paper,
No. 1507.

Flood, R. and P. Carber (1984), "Collapsing Exchange-Race Regimes,"
Journal of International Economics, 17, 1-13.

Obstfeld, M. (1986), "Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments
Crises," American Economic Review, 76, 72-81.

Stockman, A. (1988), "Real Exchange Rate Variability under Pegged and
Floating Nominal Exchange Rate Systems: An Equilibrium Theory," in
K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer (eds.), Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Po]icy, forthcoming, Spring, 1988.

