NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USE IT OR LOSE IT:
EFFICIENCY GAINS FROM WEALTH TAXATION
Fatih Guvenen
Gueorgui Kambourov
Burhanettin Kuruscu
Sergio Ocampo-Diaz
Daphne Chen
Working Paper 26284
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26284

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019

For helpful comments, we thank Mark Aguiar, Adrien Auclert, Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin,
Richard Blundell, V. V. Chari, Mariacristina De Nardi, Andres Erosa, Priscilla Fialho, Mike
Golosov, Joao Gomes, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Luigi Guiso, Bob Hall, Hugo Hopenhayn,
Nobu Kiyotaki, Dirk Krueger, Per Krusell, Guido Menzio, Claudio Michelacci, Ben Moll,
Thomas Piketty, Victor Rios-Rull, Martin Schneider, Rob Shimer, Stefanie Stantcheva, Aleh
Tsyvinski, Maxim Troshkin, Gabriel Zucman, and seminar and conference participants at various
institutions. For funding, Guvenen thanks the National Science Foundation; Kuruscu thanks the
Marie Sklodowska-Curie programme under Horizon 2020; and Kambourov and Kuruscu thank
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council. Daphne Chen made valuable contributions
in the early stages of the project before leaving for a career change.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Fatih Guvenen, Gueorgui Kambourov, Burhanettin Kuruscu, Sergio Ocampo-Diaz,
and Daphne Chen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

Use It or Lose It: Efficiency Gains from Wealth Taxation
Fatih Guvenen, Gueorgui Kambourov, Burhanettin Kuruscu, Sergio Ocampo-Diaz, and Daphne
Chen
NBER Working Paper No. 26284
September 2019
JEL No. D31,D60,E21,E22,E23,E24,E62,H21,H25,H3,K34
ABSTRACT
How does wealth taxation differ from capital income taxation? When the return on investment is
equal across individuals, a well-known result is that the two tax systems are equivalent.
Motivated by recent empirical evidence documenting persistent heterogeneity in rates of return
across individuals, we revisit this question. With such heterogeneity, the two tax systems have
opposite implications for both efficiency and inequality. Under capital income taxation,
entrepreneurs who are more productive, and therefore generate more income, pay higher taxes.
Under wealth taxation, entrepreneurs who have similar wealth levels pay similar taxes regardless
of their productivity, which expands the tax base, shifts the tax burden toward unproductive
entrepreneurs, and raises the savings rate of productive ones. This reallocation increases
aggregate productivity and output. In the simulated model parameterized to match the US data,
replacing the capital income tax with a wealth tax in a revenue-neutral fashion delivers a
significantly higher average lifetime utility to a newborn (about 7.5% in consumption-equivalent
terms). Turning to optimal taxation, the optimal wealth tax (OWT) in a stationary equilibrium is
positive and yields even larger welfare gains. In contrast, the optimal capital income tax (OCIT)
is negative—a subsidy—and large, and it delivers lower welfare gains than the wealth tax.
Furthermore, the subsidy policy increases consumption inequality, whereas the wealth tax
reduces it slightly. We also consider an extension that models the transition path and find that
individuals who are alive at the time of the policy change, on average, would incur large welfare
losses if the new policy is OCIT but would experience large welfare gains if the new policy is an
OWT. We conclude that wealth taxation has the potential to raise productivity while
simultaneously reducing consumption inequality.
Fatih Guvenen
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER
guvenen@umn.edu
Gueorgui Kambourov
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
g.kambourov@utoronto.ca
Burhanettin Kuruscu
University of Toronto
Deparment of Economics
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
kuruscu@gmail.com

Sergio Ocampo-Diaz
University of Minnesota
ocamp020@umn.edu
Daphne Chen
Econ One
tyyying@gmail.com

1

Introduction

In this paper, we ask a simple question: How does wealth taxation differ from capital
income taxation?1 To fix ideas, let a denote wealth, r denote the rate of return on wealth,
and τk and τa denote the flat tax rates on capital income and wealth, respectively. Under
a capital income tax, the after-tax wealth of individual i is given by
= ai + (1 − τk ) × rai ,
aafter-tax
i
whereas under the wealth tax, it is
aafter-tax
= (1 − τa ) × ai + (1 − τa ) × rai .
i
In a variety of benchmark economic models, the answer to the question above is not
rτk
. Partly because of
very interesting: the two tax systems are equivalent, with τa = 1+r
this equivalence, the academic literature on capital taxes most often focuses on capital
income taxes, with the understanding that they can be reinterpreted as wealth taxes.
However, the equivalence result relies on the assumption that all individuals face the
same rate of return on wealth, which we also made implicitly above by not indexing r
with a subscript i. But, what happens if this assumption does not hold—that is, if rates
of return vary across individuals (as the empirical evidence we review below indicates)?
To see some of the implications for capital taxation, consider the following illustrative
example. Two entrepreneurs start out with the same wealth level—say, $1,000 each—but
earn different returns on their wealth, say, r1 = 0% and r2 = 20%. Under capital income
taxation, the unproductive (first) entrepreneur will escape taxation because he generates no income, and the tax burden will fall entirely on the more productive (second)
entrepreneur because he generates positive capital income. Under wealth taxation, on
the other hand, both entrepreneurs will pay the same amount of tax on wealth regardless
of their productivity, which will expand the tax base, shift the tax burden toward the
unproductive entrepreneur, and reduce (potential) tax distortions on the productive entrepreneur.2 To the extent that these differences in productivity are persistent, a wealth
tax will gradually prune the wealth of idle entrepreneurs and boost that of successful
ones, leading to a more efficient allocation of the aggregate capital stock, in turn raising
productivity and output. In this sense, wealth taxation has a “use-it-or-lose-it” effect
that is not present in capital income taxation.
1
2

We use capital and wealth interchangeably throughout the paper.
Table I provides some illustrative calculations for this example.

1

While this is a clearly stylized example, it illustrates how (rate of) return heterogeneity can drive a wedge between the implications of the two ways of taxing capital. The
main contribution of this paper is to study these implications in a full-blown quantitative
overlapping-generations model with return heterogeneity. As we elaborate in a moment,
we find that the two taxes have very different—and sometimes opposite—implications.
Three more considerations motivate us to take return heterogeneity seriously for
studying capital taxation. First, a growing number of recent empirical studies cast
strong doubt on the assumption of homogeneous returns across households. Using administrative panel datasets that track millions of individuals over long periods of time,
these studies document large and persistent differences in rates of return across individuals, even after adjusting for risk and other factors (e.g., Fagereng, Guiso, Malacrino and
Pistaferri, 2016a; Bach, Calvet and Sodini, 2018; and Smith, Yagan, Zidar and Zwick,
2017).3 These new pieces of evidence make studying the tax implications of return
heterogeneity more than a theoretical curiosity.
Second, an active literature on power law models shows that rate of return heterogeneity is a powerful modeling tool that can generate key features of inequality that
have proved challenging to explain through other mechanisms.4 This is an important
consideration for the purposes of this paper: because the wealth distribution is extremely
concentrated, not only in the United States but also in many other countries, the bulk
of the capital tax burden falls on a small fraction of wealthy households. This makes
capital taxation much more about the “right tail” than taxes on consumption and labor
income, which are more evenly distributed than wealth. Thus, it is important for our
model not only to generate the extreme wealth concentration at the top but also to
be consistent with other features that are relevant for capturing the key trade-offs that
wealthy individuals face.
One such feature is the thick Pareto tail of the wealth distribution seen in many
countries (Vermeulen, 2016), which is challenging to generate (even by some models of
inequality that match the share of wealth held by the top 1%) but emerges naturally in
3

Among these, Fagereng et al. (2016a) study a 20-year-long panel that covers all households in
Norway and contains extensive details about their portfolios and investments during this time. They
find large differences across individuals in their (risk-adjusted) rates of return averaged over 20 years.
Bach et al. (2018) analyze a similar panel dataset from Sweden and conclude that the main driver of
wealth inequality at the top is heterogeneity in rates of return. Finally, for the United States, Smith et
al. (2017) use a unique panel dataset from the US Department of the Treasury that contains information
on 10 million firms and their owners; they document persistent heterogeneity in firm profitability even
after adjusting for risk and size.
4
See Gabaix (2009) and Benhabib and Bisin (2018) for excellent reviews of this literature.

2

models with return heterogeneity (Benhabib, Bisin and Zhu, 2011; Benhabib, Bisin and
Luo, 2017). Moreover, if return heterogeneity is persistent, these models also generate
behavior that is consistent with the dynamics of wealth inequality over time (Gabaix,
Lasry, Lions and Moll, 2016; Jones and Kim, 2018). Another important feature that
determines the trade-offs that the wealthy face is the extent to which their wealth is
dynastic (inherited) or self-made (accumulated). In the United States, a significant
fraction of the very wealthy are self-made and accumulate wealth very rapidly during
their lifetime. For example, about 53% of the individuals on the 2017 US Forbes 400
list were self-made billionaires, which implies a conservative lower bound of a 1,000fold increase in their wealth over the life cycle. A calibrated model featuring return
heterogeneity can generate this pattern, as we show in this paper.
Third, studying wealth taxation also has a practical motivation: it is a policy tool that
has long been used by governments around the world. Until the last decade or so, many
of the richest OECD countries (e.g., France, Germany, Spain, Italy, the Netherlands, and
Nordic countries, among others) had wealth taxation. Although its popularity has waned
in recent decades, wealth taxation is still being used in France, Spain, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, and Norway.5 In light of this reality, studying the effects of wealth taxation
(and how it differs from capital income taxation) is an important step toward providing
better guidance to policy makers.
For the quantitative analysis, we study an overlapping-generations model in which
individuals derive utility from consumption and leisure. The key ingredient of the model
is persistent heterogeneity in entrepreneurial productivity, which, together with incomplete financial markets that prevent the free flow of funds across individuals, allows some
individuals to earn persistently higher returns on wealth than others. The model features a bond market where individuals can borrow, subject to a collateral constraint, to
invest in their firm over and above their own assets. The same bond market can also
be used as a savings device, which will be optimal for individuals whose entrepreneurial
productivity (hence, their return) is low relative to the wealth they hold.
Each individual/entrepreneur produces a differentiated intermediate good using a
proprietary technology with individual-specific productivity. These intermediates are
combined in a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator by a final goods producing firm, which pins
down (together with the collateral constraint) each entrepreneur’s production scale and
profits. Individuals also face idiosyncratic labor income risk, mortality risk, and various
intergenerational links, although plausible variations in these details do not change the
5

As of 2017. See OECD (2018) for a recent review of the use of wealth taxes across OECD countries.

3

substantive conclusions. The calibrated model is consistent with key features of the US
wealth distribution mentioned above (including the Pareto right tail and the rapid wealth
growth of the very wealthy), as well as the amount of borrowing by US businesses and
the degree of capital misallocation, among other features.
Our analysis produces three sets of results. First, we study a revenue-neutral tax reform that replaces the current US tax system of capital income taxation with a flat-rate
wealth tax, keeping taxes on labor and consumption unchanged. Comparing across stationary equilibria, we find that this reform raises average welfare significantly—equivalent
to about 7%–8% of consumption (per person per year) for newborn individuals in our
baseline calibration. The gains come from a combination of the more efficient allocation of capital and the higher capital levels generated by the use-it-or-lose-it mechanism
inherent in wealth taxation.6
Second, we move to an optimal tax analysis in which a utilitarian government chooses
flat-rate taxes on labor income and wealth to maximize the ex ante expected lifetime
utility of a newborn. We repeat the same analysis but this time have the government
choose linear taxes on labor income and capital income. As before, we start by comparing
outcomes across stationary equilibria (and later consider the transition analysis). In the
first case, we find that the optimal wealth tax (hereafter, OWT) rate is positive and
relatively high, at about 3%. The high revenues from wealth taxes allow the government
to reduce the tax on labor income (from 22.5% to 14.5%), which is more distorting
than the wealth tax in this environment. The bulk of the welfare gain comes from the
reduced misallocation of capital (as in the tax reform), a smaller part from higher labor
supply, and almost none of it from a change in the capital stock level—which remains
almost unchanged—in the new stationary equilibrium. In other words, the benefits of
optimal wealth taxes in this experiment do not require more capital accumulation at the
aggregate level.
Turning to optimal capital income taxation (hereafter, OCIT), we find that the optimal tax rate turns out to be negative and large, about –35%, implying a large subsidy
to capital income. This finding may seem surprising in light of earlier results in the
literature, which found a high positive tax rate (of about +35%) using models that share
many similarities with ours (e.g., Conesa, Kitao and Krueger, 2009). The main source
6

Compared with the optimal tax analysis that follows, this tax reform experiment is useful for
two main reasons. First, by keeping other policy tools fixed and not relying on a particular objective
to be maximized, it allows for a clearer comparison of the effects of capital income versus wealth
taxes in isolation from the rest. Second, the same simplicity also makes it appealing for practical and
implementation purposes.

4

of difference is return heterogeneity: shutting down return heterogeneity in our model
restores the high positive tax rate found in previous work. To understand why this
happens, note that in Aiyagari-style models, the wealthy are simply workers who have
earned a high labor income in the past and saved part of it, but they are not any better
at investing this wealth than others, so the efficiency losses from capital income taxation
are not especially large. In contrast, with return heterogeneity, entrepreneurs who earn
high capital income (per unit of wealth) today are precisely the productive ones today,
which makes taxing capital income much more distorting and the efficiency losses especially large (and makes a subsidy an especially effective policy). These opposite results
show how accounting for return heterogeneity can matter not only for wealth taxation
but also for capital income taxation.
The same reasons also explain why wealth taxation is less distorting: because returns
are not permanent, the wealthy today include many entrepreneurs whose best years are
behind them. A wealth tax shifts the burden from less wealthy but more productive entrepreneurs toward these wealthier but less productive ones because the former generate
more capital income per unit of wealth (and the opposite for the latter group).
Third, the OWT economy has higher average welfare (9.6% more than the US benchmark) than the OCIT economy (6.3% more). A decomposition of the welfare gains from
wealth taxation shows that the gains come from a large rise in the level of consumption
(driven by higher after-tax wages) and a decline in the inequality of (i.e., the marginal
utility of) consumption. Thus, optimal wealth taxes yield both first- and second-order
gains. This is not the case with OCIT: although they deliver an even larger rise in
output, providing capital subsidies requires higher taxes on labor income, resulting in
only a small rise in after-tax wages. Furthermore, subsidies on capital income lead
to a significant rise in inequality—not only in wealth but also, and more importantly,
in consumption—resulting in distributional losses, which offset some of the gains from
levels—unlike what happens under optimal wealth taxes.
We consider an extension that models the transition path to understand how the
individuals who are alive at the time of the policy switch fare from this change. The
answer is far from clear because the welfare gains just discussed materialize once the
economy reaches a new stationary equilibrium, whereas these individuals may have to
incur additional costs (e.g., lower consumption to accumulate capital) during the transition. To keep the analysis computationally feasible, we do not solve for the full optimal
policy with transition. Rather, we keep one policy instrument (e.g., the labor tax rate) at
its non-transition optimum, allow the government to run a budget deficit or surplus dur5

ing the transition, and choose the other policy instrument (e.g., the wealth tax rate) so
that the budget will be balanced in the new stationary equilibrium, which now includes
interest payments on the accumulated debt. We also consider the opposite case—fixing
the wealth tax rate and choosing the labor income tax. We find that implementing the
OCIT policy leads to widespread welfare losses for existing individuals, including the
newborns at the time of the policy change. The same is not true for the OWT policy,
which delivers significant welfare gains for both the newborns and the overall population
that is still alive. For the latter group, in fact, the gains are virtually the same as what
arises from a steady state comparison. We discuss these results further in Section 7.1.
We conduct various sensitivity checks and extensions, including (optimally chosen)
progressive labor income taxes, optimal wealth taxes with an exemption level, estate
taxation, and relaxing or eliminating borrowing constraints, among others. As would
be expected, these changes affect the various magnitudes of welfare gains but they do
not overturn the main substantive conclusions of our analysis. Across these different
specifications, the optimal wealth tax rate ranges from 2% to slightly above 3%.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 elaborates on the simple static
example described above. Section 3 lays out the full-blown model, and Section 4 describes
the parameterization and model fit. Sections 5 and 6 present the quantitative results
from the tax reform and optimal taxation, respectively. Section 7 discusses sensitivity
analyses, and Section 8 concludes.
Related Literature
Although the use-it-or-lose-it feature of wealth taxes has been discussed by a few
authors, we are not aware of prior academic analyses of its effects, as we do in this
paper.7 Maurice Allais was among the best-known proponents of wealth taxes who
spelled out the use-it-or-lose-it rationale in his book on wealth taxation.8 More recently,
Piketty (2014) revived the debate on wealth taxation and proposed using a combination
of capital income and wealth taxes to balance these efficiency and inequality trade-offs.
Piketty mostly focused on equity considerations but also described the use-it-or-lose-it
mechanism without providing a formal analysis.9
7

This paper was first presented at the 2014 NBER Summer Institute and was widely presented at
seminars and conferences starting in 2015. It therefore predates the current public debate on wealth
taxes that rose to prominence during the 2020 presidential election campaign.
8
Allais observed that “[a] tax on the capital stock represents a bonus to production and penalizes the
inefficient owner, passive, for whom income taxes encourage inaction” (Allais, 1977, p. 501, translated).
9
The work of Shourideh (2013) shares some broad similarities with ours. He provides a theoretical
analysis of the Mirrleesian taxation problem of wealthy individuals who face a risk-return trade-off in
their investment choice. He finds a progressive saving tax to be the optimal policy.

6

The broader literature on capital taxation is vast, and we will not attempt to review
it here (but see Chari and Kehoe (1999) and Golosov, Tsyvinski and Werning (2006) for
surveys). Our paper is more closely related to the quantitative public finance literature
that allows for incomplete markets, plausibly restricted tax instruments, and finitely lived
individuals (Hubbard, Judd, Hall and Summers, 1986; Aiyagari, 1995; Imrohoroglu, 1998;
Erosa and Gervais, 2002; Garriga, 2003; Conesa, Kitao and Krueger, 2009; Kitao, 2010).
Some of these studies found that the optimal capital tax rate may be positive and large.
The two main differences between our analysis and these studies are (i) the presence of
heterogeneous returns and (ii) the consideration of wealth taxation. On capital income
taxation, our contribution is to show that if heterogeneity is sufficiently large, it alters
some key conclusions and turns the optimal policy from a tax to a subsidy. On wealth
taxation, we show that its effects can be qualitatively very different from taxing capital
income and yield larger and more broad-based welfare gains.
As noted above, this paper is also related to the power law models of inequality.10 This
literature points out that the thick Pareto tail of wealth cannot be generated through
precautionary savings in response to idiosyncratic income shocks (as in Aiyagari-style
models). This is because the wealth distribution inherits the Pareto tail of the income
distribution—as shown by Benhabib, Bisin and Luo (2017) theoretically and by Hubmer,
Krusell and Smith (2017) via simulations—which is significantly thinner than the tail
for wealth. Furthermore, when the idiosyncratic income process is estimated to match
micro evidence on income dynamics, these models significantly understate inequality at
the top—for example, they generate one-third of the wealth holdings for the top 1% and
fail to generate individuals with more than $20 million in wealth, among others.11
The power law literature identifies various plausible mechanisms (e.g., birth and death
processes, creative destruction, stochastic-beta, heterogeneity in returns, and others) that
can generate a Pareto tail in steady state (Benhabib et al., 2011, 2013, 2014; Stachurski
and Toda, 2019). Furthermore, as Gabaix, Lasry, Lions and Moll (2016) show, when the
heterogeneity in returns is persistent, these models generate behavior that is also consistent with the dynamics of inequality. Our model shares similarities with Jones and Kim
10

Here, we discuss here the most recent strand that focuses on inequality in income and wealth.
Earlier important contributions include Gabaix (1999) on Zipf’s law in city size distribution, Gabaix
(2011) on whether idiosyncratic shocks to firms can cause aggregate fluctuations, Luttmer (2007, 2011)
on the dynamics of firm growth and the Pareto tail in the firm size distribution, as well as the much
earlier literature in the 1950s that these papers build upon and extend. See Gabaix (2009) and Benhabib
and Bisin (2018) for detailed surveys.
11
See De Nardi, Fella and Pardo (2016), Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan and Song (2016), and Carroll,
Slacalek, Tokuoka and White (2017).

7

(2018), who emphasize the creative destruction process in entrepreneurial production
to explain the Pareto tail of the income distribution. Despite the rapid growth in this
literature, the implications of capital taxation in these models have not been explored,
and our paper fills this gap.
Finally, our paper has some useful points of contact with different strands of literature that feature (entrepreneurial) firms with heterogeneous productivity facing financial
frictions, leading to misallocation of capital, lower productivity, and underdevelopment,
among other results. Examples include Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and
Klenow (2009) in the context of aggregate TFP; Buera, Kaboski and Shin (2011), Midrigan and Xu (2014), Moll (2014), and Itskhoki and Moll (2019) in the context of economic
development; and Quadrini (2000) and Cagetti and De Nardi (2009) in the context of entrepreneurship, among others. These papers do not study tax policies in general, with the
exception of Itskhoki and Moll (2019), whose conclusions share some interesting similarities with ours. These authors find that, along the development path, the optimal policy
starts by suppressing wages to boost entrepreneurial profits and wealth accumulation,
which relaxes borrowing constraints over time, yielding higher productivity and wages.
In the long run, optimal policy reverses and becomes pro-worker. In our framework,
wealth taxation plays a similar role.

2

An Illustrative Example

It is useful to elaborate on the simple one-period example described in the Introduction. Consider two brothers, Fredo and Michael, who each have $1,000 of wealth
at time zero. Fredo has low entrepreneurial skills, so he earns a return of rF = 0% on
his investments, whereas Michael is a highly skilled businessman and earns a return of
rM = 20%. Both brothers invest all their wealth in their business and make no other decisions. To introduce taxation, suppose that there is a government that needs to finance
an expenditure of G = $50 through tax revenues collected at the end of the period. The
example is summarized in Table I.
Suppose that the government taxes capital income at a flat rate. To raise $50, the
required tax rate is 25% on income and is paid entirely by Michael, since he is the only
one earning any capital income. The after-tax rate of return is 0% for Fredo and 15% for
Michael. By the end of the period, Fredo’s wealth remained unchanged, whereas Michael
experienced an increase from $1,000 to $1,150 after paying his taxes.
Now instead suppose that the government decides to raise the same revenue with a
wealth tax. The tax base is now broader because Fredo does have wealth and cannot
8

Table I – Summary of the Illustrative Example
Capital Income Tax
Wealth
Pre-tax income
Tax rate

rF = 0%

rM = 20%

rF = 0%

rM = 20%

$1,000

$1,000

$1,000

$1,000

$0

$200

$0

$200

τk =

Tax liability

$0

After-tax rate of return

0%

After-tax wealth ratio

Wealth Tax

WM
WF

$50
$200

= 0.25

τa =

$1, 000 × τa ≈ $23

$50
$200−$50
$1,000

=

$1,150
$1,000

$50
$2,200

= 15%

= 1.15

$23
= −2.3%
− $1,000
WM
WF

=

= 2.27%
$1, 200 × τa ≈ $27
$200−$27
$1,000

$1,173
$977

= 17.3%

= 1.20

Notes: The subscripts F and M refer to Fredo and Michael’s variables, respectively. See the text for
further details.

avoid taxation, as he did under the capital income tax system. Specifically, the tax
base covers the entire wealth stock, or $2,200, at the end of the period. The tax rate
on wealth is $50/$2, 200 ≈ 2.27%. More importantly, Fredo’s tax bill is now $23, up
from zero, whereas Michael’s tax bill is cut by almost half, going down to $27 from
$50 before. The after-tax rate of return is, respectively, ($0 − $23) /$1000 ≈ −2.3%
for Fredo and ($200 − $27) /$1, 000 ≈ 17.3% for Michael. Notice that the dispersion in
after-tax returns is higher under wealth taxes as is the end-of-period wealth inequality:
$1, 173/$977 ≈ 1.20 versus $1, 150/$1, 000 = 1.15 before. Most crucially, the more
productive entrepreneur (Michael) ends up with a larger fraction of aggregate wealth:
54.6% versus 53.5% under capital income taxes.
Notice that the reallocation process also increases wealth concentration. However,
as we will see in the quantitative analysis, distributional losses are not a robust feature
of wealth taxes and are mitigated or reversed (into gains) when a proper production
function is introduced and wage income is added to the model. In that case, wealth
taxes can yield both efficiency and distributional gains.
To sum up, wealth taxation has two main effects that are the opposite of capital income taxes. First, by shifting some of the tax burden to the less productive entrepreneur,
it allows the more productive one to keep more of his wealth, thereby reallocating the
aggregate capital stock toward the more productive individual. Second, wealth taxes do
not compress the after-tax return distribution nearly as much as capital income taxes do,
which effectively punish the successful entrepreneur and reward the inefficient one. In a
9

(more realistic) dynamic setting, this feature will deliver an endogenous savings response,
further increasing the reallocation of capital toward the more productive entrepreneur.
Going forward, we will refer to the first, direct, effect as the “use-it-or-lose-it channel”
and to the second, endogenous, one as the “behavioral response channel.” In addition,
when the dynamic model is embedded in general equilibrium, the equilibrium response
of prices to tax policies will constitute a third and important effect, which we will refer
to as the “price channel.”
A final remark is in order. If this one-period example were repeated for many periods, all aggregate wealth would eventually be owned by the more productive entrepreneur
(Michael), thereby eliminating the initial misallocation of capital in the long run. While
this is correct, it depends critically on the return gap between entrepreneurs being permanent, which is not a realistic assumption: the fortunes of entrepreneurs vary both over
time and from one generation to the next (as entrepreneurial ability is at best imperfectly
inherited), so capital misallocation will persist even in the long run. These features will
be incorporated into the dynamic model we describe next.

3

Full OLG Model

We study an overlapping-generations model with two sectors (producing intermediate
goods and a final good, respectively) and a government that raises revenues through
taxes. We now describe each of these components.

3.1

Individuals

Individuals face mortality risk and can live up to a maximum of H years. Let φh
be the unconditional probability of survival up to age h, and let sh ≡ φh /φh−1 be the
conditional probability of surviving from age h − 1 to h. When an individual dies,
she is replaced by an offspring that inherits her wealth. Individuals derive utility from
consumption, c, and leisure, 1−` (where ` denotes 
market
 expected
X hours), and maximize
H
h−1
lifetime utility without any bequest motives: E0
φh u(ch , 1 − `h ) , where β
h=1 β
is the time discount factor.
Individuals make four decisions every period: (i) leisure time versus labor supply to
the market (until retirement age, R < H), (ii) consumption versus savings, (iii) portfolio
choice: how much of her own wealth to invest in her business versus how much to lend to
others in the bond market, and (iv) how much to produce of an intermediate good as an
entrepreneur. Each individual is endowed with two types of skill: one that determines her
productivity in entrepreneurial activities and another that determines her productivity
10

as a worker. We now describe these skills, the production technologies, and the market
arrangements, and then spell out each of the four decisions in more detail.
Entrepreneurial Ability and Productivity
The entrepreneurial productivity of individual i at age h, denoted zih , has two components: her entrepreneurial ability, z i , which is a fixed characteristic of the individual,
and a second component—to be described in a moment—that captures the stochastic
variation in productivity over the life cycle for a given ability level.
A newborn inherits her entrepreneurial ability imperfectly from her parent:
) = ρz log(z parent
) + εz i ,
log(z child
i
i

(1)

where εzi ∼ N (0, σz2i ). Because of this imperfect transmission, some low-ability children
will inherit large fortunes from their high-ability parents, and vice versa, providing one
source of capital misallocation in the model.
An entrepreneur faces many external factors that can amplify her ability (e.g., a lucky
head start on a novel idea, good health and high drive) or hamper it (e.g., competitors
catching up, negative health shocks, rising opportunity cost of time driven by family
factors). While these shocks can conceivably happen at any age, positive factors are
arguably more common at younger ages and negative ones later in life. With this in mind,
we assume that high-ability entrepreneurs (specifically, those with z i > z median = 1) start
life in the fast lane, with positive factors amplifying their productivity above their base
level, zih = z λi with λ > 1. In every subsequent year, they face the risk of losing their place
in the fast lane—for example, because of creative destruction by other entrepreneurs, as
in Jones and Kim (2018)—and dropping to their base level: zih = z i , with annual
probability p1 . With another probability p2 , all entrepreneurs (regardless of z i ) face the
risk of losing their entrepreneurial productivity completely, zih = 0, and they “retire”
from entrepreneurial work. The evolution of zih can be summarized by the following
three-state Markov chain, where Iih ∈ {H, L, 0} is an indicator function:


λ


z i
zih = z i



0

if Iih = H
if Iih = L




1 − p1 − p2
p1
p2


ΠI = 
0
1 − p2 p2 
0
0
1

and

if Iih = 0

(2)

denoting the transition matrix, with Ii0 = H if z i > z median and Ii0 = L otherwise.12
12

We prefer this parsimonious specification with only two parameters to more general transition

11

Modeling this stochastic variation in productivity serves three purposes. First, and
most importantly, it allows a more realistic calibration of the model to the wealth dynamics of the very wealthy, as we discuss in Section 4. Second, it introduces a second
source of capital misallocation (in addition to the intergenerational channel in eq. (1)).
Third, it provides an additional precautionary savings motive for individuals. The main
substantive conclusions continue to hold without the stochastic part (i.e., zih = z i ), but
the model falls short in matching some key wealth moments, as we discuss in Section
7.2.
Labor Market Productivity
The specification of labor market productivity, wih , is fairly standard:
log wih =

κi + g(h) + eih ,
|{z}
|{z}
|{z}

permanent

life cycle

AR(1)

where κi is an individual fixed effect, g(h) is a polynomial in age that captures the life
cycle component that is common to all individuals, and eih follows an AR(1) process
during the working years (h < R):
eih = ρe ei,h−1 + νih ,
where νih ∼ N (0, σν2 ). The permanent component, κi , is imperfectly inherited from
parents:
κchild
= ρκ κparent
+ εκi ,
i
i
where εκ ∼ N (0, σε2κ ). Individuals supply their labor services directly to the final good
producer. The aggregate effective labor supply is given by
Z
L = (wih `ih ) didh,
(3)
where wih `ih is a worker’s efficiency-adjusted labor hours. Therefore, for a given market
wage rate per efficiency units of labor, w, an individual’s labor income is yih = wwih `ih .

matrices one could write, especially given the difficulty of pinning down these parameters from available
micro data.

12

3.2

Production Technology

Intermediate Goods Producers
There is a continuum of intermediate goods, each produced by a different individual
according to a linear technology,
xih = zih kih ,
(4)
where kih is the final good (consumption/capital) used in production by entrepreneur i,
and zih is her stochastic and idiosyncratic entrepreneurial productivity at age h.13
The Final Good Producer
The final good, Y, is produced according to a Cobb-Douglas technology,
Y = Qα L1−α ,

(5)

where L is the aggregate labor input defined in (3), and Q is the CES composite of
intermediate inputs, xi :
Z
1/µ
µ
xih didh
Q=
.
(6)
R
To distinguish Q from the unadjusted capital stock, K = kih didh, we will refer to
the former as the “quality-adjusted capital stock” since its level depends on the allocation
of capital across entrepreneurs (and reflects the extent of misallocation). Each xi is
produced by a different individual in a way that will be specified in a moment. The final
goods producing sector is competitive, so the profit maximization problem is
Z
max

{xih },L

α/µ

xµih didh

1−α

L

Z
−

pih xih didh − wL,

where pi is the price of the intermediate good i. The first-order optimality conditions
13

The entrepreneur’s labor supply does not appear in (4) but in (3) instead. We made this choice
because the natural starting point for a first analysis of wealth taxation is to focus on entrepreneurs’
saving and production decisions and abstract from other endogenous choices that introduce new channels
and confound the analysis. This approach is in keeping with the bulk of the previous literature that
has employed the entrepreneur- or capitalist-worker framework to study capital taxation (see, e.g., Judd
(1985) and Straub and Werning (2018)). As we shall see, several mechanisms will already be operating
in the current framework, and we do not want to add more at this stage. However, given that this is
an interesting question, in Appendix E, we sketch an extension that introduces labor supply into (4)
and discuss the conditions under which this extension amplifies or dampens the effects of taxes that we
analyze in the current model.

13

yield the inverse demand (price) function for each intermediate input and the wage rate:
α−µ 1−α
L
p (xih ) = αxµ−1
ih Q

3.3

w = (1 − α)Qα L−α .

(7)

Markets and the Government

Financial Markets
There is a bond market where intraperiod borrowing and lending take place at a riskfree rate of r. This market has three important features. First, individuals can only use
borrowed funds only as capital in production. In particular, they cannot use it to finance
consumption. Second, borrowing and lending decisions take place before production but
after zih is observed, so there is no uncertainty about whether an entrepreneur can
repay at the end of the period. As can be anticipated, individuals with sufficiently
high entrepreneurial productivity relative to their private assets will choose to borrow to
finance their business, whereas those with low productivity relative to their assets will
find it optimal to lend for a risk-free return.
Third, borrowing is collateralized and is subject to a limit indexed to individuals’
assets:
kih ≤ ϑ(z i ) × aih ,
where ϑ(z i ) ∈ [1, ∞] and is nondecreasing in zi . When ϑ = 1, individuals can only use
their own assets in production; when ϑ = ∞, they can borrow without a limit. We
0
assume that ϑ (z i ) > 0 to capture the plausible idea that an entrepreneur’s productivity
may be partly observable by the market, allowing more productive entrepreneurs to
borrow more.14 In Section 7.2, we consider alternative forms of borrowing constraints,
including the limitless case, ϑ = ∞.15
The Government and Tax Systems
In the benchmark economy that aims to represent the current US tax system, the
government imposes flat taxes at rates τk on capital income, τ` on labor income, and τc on
14

Li (2016) provides evidence of looser constraints for more productive firms in a sample of young,
unlisted firms in Japan. Notice that with ϑ(zi ) ≡ ϑ for all i, financial constraints would have more bite,
by making constraints tighter for more productive entrepreneurs, which increases capital misallocation
and, consequently, the positive effects of wealth taxes. So, the specification we choose here provides a
more conservative benchmark.
15
One theoretical foundation for collateral constraints is agency problems, which we do not model
here. In recent work, Boar and Knowles (2018) study Ramsey taxation when entrepreneurs have an
incentive to hide/misreport their output to the financial intermediary and the government. They find
that capital income taxes exacerbate these agency problems as well as tax avoidance relative to wealth
taxes.

14

consumption. We will alternatively refer to this case as the “capital income tax” economy.
In the alternative “wealth tax” economy, the government does not tax capital income
(set τk ≡ 0) but imposes a flat-rate tax, τa , on post-production wealth. We will later
consider formulations with progressive taxes. We denote a tax system as T ≡ (τcap , τ` ),
where “cap” refers to the tax rate on capital, which can be on either capital income
or wealth depending on the context.16 The government runs a balanced budget every
period and uses the tax revenues to fund social security pension payments to retirees and
an exogenous, fixed level of government spending, G, which does not enter individuals’
utility function.
A Remark about the Timing of Taxes. The timing choice for the wealth tax—on
post-production wealth—was made for keeping the timing consistent with the capital
income tax economy. Yet it raises a question about the interpretation of τa as a wealth
tax because post-production wealth includes current-period entrepreneurial profits (eq.
12 below) in addition to beginning-of-period wealth, a. To the extent that zih is viewed
as partly capturing the effort or time that entrepreneurs spend running their business,
entrepreneurial profits can be viewed as including a return on their labor, which suggests
that τa may be better interpreted as a combined tax on the entrepreneur’s wealth and
labor input. Although, strictly speaking, this interpretation would be correct, it arises
from this particular timing choice, which is not an essential element in the model. An
alternative formulation that makes this point clear is a timing where taxes are levied on
beginning-of-period wealth, a—which clearly does not include entrepreneurial income.
As we show in Section 7.2, this formulation delivers the same substantive conclusions as
the baseline model, and if anything, it strengthens them. Therefore, this timing choice
is not a critical feature of the model, and interpreting τa as a wealth tax is justified.
Social Security Pension System
Individuals retire at age R and start receiving pension income, y R , which is determined according to the following formula:
y R (κ, eR−1 ) = Φ (κ, eR−1 ) y,

(8)

where y is the average labor income, and Φ(κ, e) is the pension replacement rate function,
which depends on a worker’s permanent type κ and the transitory component of her labor
productivity at age R − 1. The functional form of Φ is taken from the US Social Security
Administration’s OASDI system, as described in Appendix A.1.
16

Consumption taxes are not included in T because they will be fixed throughout the analysis.

15

3.4

Individuals: Two Decision Problems

Every period individuals make two sets of decisions: (i) the scale (kih ) at which they
operate their entrepreneurial business, which also determines how much they borrow or
lend in the bond market, and (ii) the labor-leisure and consumption-savings decision.
The first problem is static and does not interact with the second one in a given period,
so it can be solved separately from the latter. The only dependence is through the
appearance of a—which is predetermined—in the entrepreneur’s borrowing constraint.
I. Individual/Entrepreneur’s Problem
For clarity, we suppress the subscripts i and h when possible. Every period, the
individual/entrepreneur chooses the optimal capital level to maximize profit:
π (a, z) = max {p (zk) × zk − (r + δ) k} ,

(9)

k≤ϑ(z)a

where δ is the depreciation rate. The price of the differentiated good in (7) can be written
as: p (zk) = R × (zk)µ−1 , where R ≡ αQα−µ L1−α , yielding the solution
(
k (a, z) = min

µRz µ
r+δ

1
 1−µ

)
, ϑ(z)a ,

with the associated maximized profit function

R (zϑ(z)a)µ − (r + δ) ϑ(z)a
π (a, z) ≡
µ
(1 − µ) Rz µ µRzµ  1−µ
r+δ

if k (a, z) = ϑ(z)a

(10)

.

(11)

if k (a, z) < ϑ(z)a

II. Individual’s Dynamic Programming Problem
Let ω denote the post-production, after-tax wealth of the individual, which includes
current-period profits plus interest income from the bond market:

a + (π (a, z) + ra) (1 − τ )
if τcap = τk
k
ω(a, z; τcap ) ≡
,
(12)
[a + (π (a, z) + ra)] (1 − τa ) , if τcap = τa
where τcap is used used as generic notation for a tax on capital, which can be on wealth
or capital income. It will also be convenient to define the total disposable resources of

16

the individual (after production and taxation):
Y(a, `; z, e, κ; T ) ≡ ω(a, z, τcap ) + (1 − τ` )ww(κ, e)`,
which the individual optimally splits between c and a0 . Finally, let S ≡ (z, I, e, κ) denote
the vector of exogenous individual states. The individual’s dynamic problem is given by
h
i
0
Vh (a; S) = max0 u (c, 1 − `) + βsh+1 E Vh+1 (a0 , S ) | S
c,`,a

s.t. (1 + τc ) c + a0 = Y(a, `; z, e, κ; T )
a0 ≥ 0.

(13)

For retirees, the problem is the same except that labor income in Y is replaced with
retirement pension, y R (κ, e), with terminal condition VH+1 ≡ 0. Finally, the definition of
a recursive competitive equilibrium is standard and hence relegated to Appendix A.

4
4.1

Quantitative Analysis
Model Parameterization

The benchmark model is calibrated to the US data. The model period is one year.
Individuals enter the economy at age 20, retire from the labor market at age 64 (model
age R = 45), and quit entrepreneurial production when Iih = 0 is realized, which can
happen at any age. The conditional mortality probabilities are taken from Bell and
Miller (2002) for the US data, and individuals die by age 100 (81 periods) with certainty.
Preferences. In the baseline analysis, we consider a Cobb-Douglas utility function:
(cγ (1 − `)1−γ )1−σ
.
u(c, `) =
1−σ
We set σ = 4 following Conesa et al. (2009) and choose γ and β to generate 40 hours
of market work per week for the working-age population (i.e., ` = 0.4, assuming 100
hours of discretionary time per week) and a K/Y ratio of 3, which requires γ = 0.46 and
β = 0.9475.
Tax System. The current US tax system is modeled as a triplet of tax rates: (τk , τ` , τc ).
We set τk = 25%, τ` = 22.4%, and τc = 7.5% based on McDaniel (2007), who measures
these tax rates for the US economy.
17

Labor market productivity. The deterministic life cycle profile, g(h), is a quadratic
polynomial that generates a 50% rise in average labor income from age 21 to age 51.17
The AR(1) process has a persistence of ρe = 0.9 and an innovation standard deviation of
σe = 0.2, broadly consistent with the estimates in the literature.18 The intergenerational
correlation of the fixed effect is set to ρκ = 0.5 (see Solon (1999)). With these parameters
fixed, we set σεκ = 0.305 to match a cross-sectional standard deviation of log labor
earnings of 0.80 (Guvenen, Karahan, Ozkan and Song, 2015).
Entrepreneurial productivity. As discussed in the introduction, empirical evidence
on individual rates of return (which would provide natural moments to pin down ρz
and σεz ) has become available only very recently. The most relevant evidence for our
parameterization comes from Fagereng et al. (2018), who document the dispersion and
intergenerational correlation of individual-level average rates of return for Norwegian
households. Although the lack of US evidence is not ideal, Fagereng et al.’s evidence is
noteworthy for two reasons. First, it is based on a 20-year-long population panel, with
detailed information on investments (including private businesses) and debts, which is
hard to come by and enables them to measure the persistent component of return heterogeneity. Second, Fagereng et al. show that, despite the much lower income inequality
in Norway, wealth inequality is actually very high, with the Gini coefficient and top
wealth shares very similar to those for the United States. This suggests that Norwegian
evidence on returns may be more relevant than it first appears. With this caveat noted,
we set ρz = 0.1 to match the intergenerational correlation of individual fixed effects in
rates of return that the authors report.19 As for σεz , we choose it—together with the
parameters of the stochastic component—to match the wealth share of the top 1%.
The stochastic component, zih , has three parameters: λ, p1 , and p2 . The amplification
in returns generated by λ is critical for reproducing the very fast speed at which many of
the super-wealthy individuals reach that status over the life cycle. We match the fraction
of billionaires in the Forbes 400 list who are self-made, defined as a billionaire who came
from at most an upper-middle-class family.20 The model counterpart is defined as a
billionaire whose current wealth is at least 100 times (alternatively, 1,000 times) larger
than her initial wealth. We set λ = 5, p1 = 0.05, and p2 = 0.03, which generates a selfg(h) = −(h − 1)2 /1800 + (h − 1)/30
The choice of ρe is on the lower side of estimates to account for the fact that we do not model
transitory shocks separately.
19
Because this value seems quite low, we conducted a sensitivity check using ρz = 0.5 instead but
did not find any substantive differences. Results are available upon request.
20
Details of the Forbes classification of billionaires are in Appendix B, Table B.1.
17

18

18

Table II – Benchmark Parameters
Parameters Calibrated Outside of the Model
Parameter

Value

Capital income tax rate
Labor income tax rate
Consumption tax rate

τk
τ`
τc

25.0%
22.4%
7.5%

Annual persistence for indiv. labor efficiency
Std. of innovations to indiv. labor efficiency
Interg. correlation of labor fixed effect
Interg. correlation of entrepreneurial ability

ρe
σν
ρκ
ρz

0.9
0.2
0.5
0.1

Intermediate goods aggregate share in production
Curvature parameter of CES production func.
Depreciation rate
Curvature of utility function

α
µ
δ
σ

0.4
0.9
0.05
4.0

Annual transition rate into low entrepr. product. state
Annual transition rate into “retirement” from entrepr.
Maximum age
Retirement age

p1
p2
H
R

0.05
0.03
81
45

Parameters Calibrated (Jointly) Inside the Model
Discount factor
Consumption share in utility
Std. dev. of interg. transm. of labor fixed effect
Std. dev. of interg. transm. of entrepr. ability
Productivity boost while in fast lane

β
γ
σε κ
σεz̄
λ

0.9475
0.460
0.305
0.072
5.0

Note: The parameters σεz and λ are jointly chosen to match the top 1% share and fraction of self-made
billionaires. In addition, survival probabilities, φh , are taken from Bell and Miller (2002) (omitted from
the table).

made fraction of billionaires of 50% by the first definition (and 47.5% by the second),
compared with 54% in Forbes. For individuals with an above-median value of z i , it also
implies a mean duration of 12.5 years in the fast lane (I =H) and an additional 17.9
years as a normal entrepreneur (I =L).
Production. We target 0.60 as the labor share of output by setting α = 0.4. The
curvature parameter of the CES aggregator, µ, is set to 0.9, which corresponds to a 10%

19

Table III – Key Moments: Model versus US Data
US Data

Benchmark

Capital-to-output ratio
Std. dev. of log earnings
Average labor hours

3.00
0.80
0.40

3.00
0.80
0.40

Top 1% wealth share
Self-made billionaires (fraction)

0.36
54%

0.36
50%

Total tax revenue/GDP
Revenue from capital taxes/Total tax revenue
Bequest/Wealth

0.295
0.280
~1%

0.25
0.25
0.99%

Business Debt/GDP

1.29

1.27

Targeted Moments

Selected Untargeted Moments

Note: The five parameters chosen to match these moments are: β, γ, σεκ , σεz̄ , and λ. The last two
parameters are especially important for matching the top 1% share and the fraction of self-made billionaires
in the data.

markup over marginal cost. A higher µ brings the model closer to an AK framework,
which makes it easier to generate high inequality, a Pareto tail, and very high benefits
from improving the tax system. The reverse happens as µ goes down, but the effects are
mild down to a value of µ = 0.75 or so. Beyond that point, the diminishing returns in
entrepreneurial production become so strong that matching the right tail of the wealth
distribution becomes impossible (and is no longer Pareto). We report the results from
µ = 0.8 in Section 7.2. The depreciation rate of capital is set to 5%.
Financial constraints. For reasons explained before, we allow individuals with higher
entrepreneurial ability to borrow more. In particular, we discretize the z i distribution
into 9 equally spaced mass points between −3σz and +5σz and assign individuals to the
nearest group.21 Then we set ϑ(z i ) = 1 + 1.5(i − 1)/8 for i = 1, ..., 9. With this choice,
the model generates the same ratio of corporate debt to GDP as in the US data. We
experiment with looser constraints later.
Table II summarizes the parameters that we calibrate independently (top panel) and
those that are calibrated jointly in equilibrium (bottom panel) to match the moments
shown in the top panel of Table III.
21

Adding more groups at the bottom end does not make a difference.

20

Figure 1 – Pareto Tail: Wealth above 1 Million US Dollars
0

Log Counter-CDF

-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-12
-14
-16
$1M

$10M

$100M

$1B

$10B

$50B

Wealth (log scale)

4.2

Performance of the Benchmark Model

Before we can move on to the tax analyses, we need to discuss whether the parameterized model provides an acceptable description of the US economy along the dimensions
relevant for the current analysis.
The top panel of Table III reports the five moments we targeted in the calibration,
and the simulated model does a good job of matching them. The bottom panel reports
various untargeted moments of interest. First, the share of aggregate tax revenues in US
GDP is 29.5%, and the share of capital tax revenues in total tax revenues is 28%. The
model counterparts are slightly lower but still reasonably close to the empirical values,
both at 25%. Second, we compare the amount of bequests in the model with the US
data. In the model, total bequests are about 1% of aggregate wealth, which is broadly
in line with the estimates reported in the literature.22
Wealth inequality. To see whether the simulated model can reproduce the thick right
tail of the wealth distribution, we plot the log counter-CDF of wealth against log wealth.
If the right tail has a Pareto distribution—P (ω > x) = a × x−α —then this log-log plot
will be linear with a slope of −α. In Figure 1, the blue circles plot the US data for 2010
22

De Nardi and Yang (2016) report a range from 0.88% to 1.18% for the bequest-wealth ratio in
the United States. Hendricks (2001) reports a similar figure, 1%, using the 1989 Survey of Consumer
Finances (SCF) data. An earlier estimate by Auerbach, Gokhale, Kotlikoff, Sabelhaus and Weil (1995)
for the bequest-GDP ratio is 3.6%, which would translate to a 1.2% bequest-wealth ratio in our model
(given K/Y = 3).

21

Table IV – Wealth Concentration in the Benchmark Model
Share of aggregate wealth by top x%

x:
US Data
Model

50

10

1

0.5

0.1

0.99
0.97

0.75
0.66

0.36
0.36

0.27
0.31

0.14
0.23

Gini

0.82
0.78

Note: Wealth shares are computed using data for the United States from Vermeulen (2016), who merges
SCF and Forbes 400 data for 2010. The wealth Gini is based on the 2001 SCF, computed by Wolff (2006).

taken from Vermeulen (2016), who merges data from the Survey of Consumer Finances
(SCF) with the Forbes 400 list (to get data on billionaires omitted from the SCF). The
data align extremely well along a straight line from $1M all the way to $50B, confirming
the well-known Pareto right tail of the US wealth distribution.
The model counterpart is shown with red diamond markers, which is also close to a
straight line and overlaps very well with the data, especially up to about $0.5 billion.
The model implies a somewhat higher likelihood of billionaires than the data above that
point, which is also reflected in the share of wealth held by the top 0.1% (23% in the
model versus 14% in the US data; see Table IV). Given the challenges in generating a
thick tail at the very top, we do not view this disparity as a concern.23
Assessing financial frictions and misallocation in the model. We evaluate the
extent of financial frictions in the model along two dimensions. First, we ask how the
aggregate business borrowing in the model compares with the US data. In 2015, the
ratio of total nonfinancial business liability to US GDP was about 1.29, whereas the
analogous ratio of business debt-to-output ratio is 1.26 in the model.24 Alternative
measures of the business debt imply even lower figures, suggesting that the amount of
borrowing allowed in the parameterized model is probably on the high side; hence, if
anything, our parameterization is conservative.25
23

This overstatement is a feature of this particular calibration and can be fixed with small variations
in parameter values and—it turns out—without much effect on the tax analysis. See Figure C.2a for the
µ = 0.8 case and Figure C.2b when wealth is measured in present value terms. See Section 7 for further
discussion. We do not attempt to fine-tune the model to match it exactly since it seems inconsequential
for the tax analysis, which is our main focus.
24
The US figure is from the flow of funds accounts (Federal Reserve Statistical Release (2015Q3),
Table L.102), which reports a total nonfinancial business liability of $22.79 trillion and a nominal US
GDP of $17.65 trillion, yielding a ratio of 1.29.
25
Federal Reserve Statistical Release (2015Q1, Table L2) a value of $12.2 trillion for the “total credit
market borrowing by Nonfinancial Sectors, implying a ratio of 0.68, or half the value in the model.

22

Second, we measure the extent of capital misallocation following the method proposed
by Hsieh and Klenow (2009). The measure is based on the dispersion across firms of
the marginal revenue product of capital (and labor), given that it would be equalized
in a frictionless economy. Using data from the US Census of Manufacturers, Hsieh
and Klenow estimate that the TFP gains from removing all distortions (wedges), which
equalizes the “revenue productivity” (TFPR) within each industry, range between 31%
and 43% from 1977 to 1997. Adapting their method to our context, the corresponding
figure in our model is about 20%—or about half of what is reported by these authors (see
Appendix D for details). In a recent paper, Bils et al. (2017) argued that measurement
error in micro data can create an upward bias in the procedure and came up with a
revised estimate around 20%. So, overall, the extent of capital misallocation in the
model seems to be in line with what has been found in the US data.26

5

Tax Reform

In this section, we analyze the effects of a tax reform in which the government eliminates capital income taxes (setting τk = 0) and levies a flat-rate wealth tax, while
keeping τ` and τc unchanged. We compare both aggregate and distributional outcomes
in the stationary equilibrium of this wealth tax economy with those in the benchmark.
Compared with the optimal tax analysis we conduct in the next section, this tax reform
analysis serves two important purposes. First, it is a simpler experiment in that it does
not rely on the particular objective function maximized by the government, and it keeps
policy tools other than the wealth tax fixed. Consequently, it allows for a clearer analysis
of how wealth taxes work and how they differ from capital income taxes in isolation of
other channels that would be present with those additional steps. Second, its relative
simplicity also makes it appealing from a policy perspective, compared with an optimal
policy that requires changes to various tax tools simultaneously.
To make the comparison across the two economies meaningful, we need to impose a
neutrality condition. An obvious choice is to assume revenue neutrality; however notice
Asker, Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist (2011) use firm-level data and report an average debt-to-asset ratio
of 0.20 for publicly listed firms and a ratio of 0.31 for private firms in the United States. Given that
the capital-to-output ratio is 3 in our model, these numbers correspond to an aggregate debt-to-output
ratio between 0.60 and 0.93, which again is lower than in the model.
26
Another comparison of interest is the distribution of lifetime returns in the model and the data. As
explained earlier, the empirical measure is not available for the United States. Fagereng et al. (2016b)
report select percentiles of the distribution of fixed effects for individual returns. Table B.2 in Appendix
B.1 reports the model counterparts. The overall gap between the 10th and 99.9th percentile compares
well with the data, whereas the dispersion in the middle (e.g., the interquartile range) is somewhat
overstated.

23

one issue: because pension payments are anchored to the average income level (y in
equation (8)), a tax reform that changes y will also change SSP, violating the budget
balance if revenue is kept constant. To deal with this issue, we consider two cases. In the
first, which is our main “revenue-neutral” (RN) tax reform, we keep the pension income
of every individual fixed at its baseline value after the wealth tax reform. In the second
case, the “balanced-budget” (BB) tax reform, we allow pension benefits to scale up or
down with the level of y while choosing the level of wealth taxes to keep the government
budget balanced. Except where we note explicitly, the results we present below pertain
to the RN tax reform.

5.1

Results

The RN tax reform requires a wealth tax rate of τa = 1.13% to generate the same
revenue as the baseline economy (with τk = 25%). The BB reform requires a slightly
higher rate, τa = 1.54%, mainly because of the added cost of higher pensions.
With respect to macro outcomes, a glance at the left panel of Table V shows that
aggregate quantities increase across the board after the tax reform. Starting with the RN
reform, K and Q are higher by 19.4% and 24.8%, respectively. (The K/Y ratio rises from
3 to 3.25.) The larger increase in Q reflects the reduction in capital misallocation induced
by the wealth tax. This improvement in efficiency can be expressed as an increase in
TFP of 4.6% in the intermediate goods sector.27 Furthermore, aggregate labor hours
and the market wage are higher by 1.3% and 8.7% respectively, clearly showing that the
10.1% rise in output is primarily accounted for by the higher Q and not L. Finally, the
after-tax net interest rate falls by about 1 percentage point (right panel) since wealth
taxes erode the principal and the rise in the before-tax interest rate is too small (26 basis
points) to offset the principal loss.
The results for the BB reform are qualitatively the same as the RN reform (also
shown in Table V). Quantities increase slightly less (by 15%–20%) than in the RN
reform—owing to the somewhat higher tax rate to pay for rising pensions—with the
exception of TFP, which rises slightly more than before.
Several other changes are worth noting. Wealth inequality is higher in both the
RN and BB reform economies (as anticipated from the simple illustrative example in
Section 2), with the top 1% share rising from 36% to 46% and the top 10% share rising
from 66% to 72%. Inequality in labor earnings remains virtually unchanged, which is
27

Equation (16) in Appendix D provides the exact formula, which in this case simplifies to the change
in Q/K after the reform.

24

Table V – Tax Reform: Change in Macro Variables from Current US Benchmark
Tax Reforms: Change from Benchmark
Quantities (% Change)

∆K
∆Q
∆TFP
∆L
∆Y
∆C

RN

BB

19.40
24.80
04.60
01.30
10.10
10.00

12.300
18.400
05.500
01.400
07.900
08.400

Prices

%∆w
%∆w (net)
∆r
∆r (net)

RN

BB

08.70
08.70
00.26
–0.91

06.40
06.40
00.05
–1.02

Note: RN and BB refer to the revenue-neutral and balanced-budget reforms, respectively. Percentage
changes are computed with respect to the benchmark economy, which has τk = 25% and τa = 0%.
Changes in the interest rate are computed in percentage points. The net wage is defined as (1 − τ` ) w,
and the net interest rate is defined as (1 − τk ) r or (1 + r) (1 − τa ) − 1, depending on the model. The TFP
variable is measured in the intermediate goods market.

not surprising given the very small hours response to the reform. We will discuss the
changes in consumption and leisure inequality later on. Finally, the bequest-wealth ratio
barely moves (going from 1% to 1.07%).

5.2

Quantifying Three Mechanisms

The large rise in output in Table V is almost entirely driven by the rise in Q, which
itself is due partly to the rise in K (level effect) and partly to the improved allocation
of K across entrepreneurs (reallocation effect). Our goal here is to quantify and better
understand the mechanisms that contribute to these two effects.
To this end, we begin by documenting the extent of capital reallocation that results
from switching to wealth taxation. Table VI reports the percentage change in the fraction
of entrepreneurs with different ability (z i ) levels in various top wealth groups due to the
RN tax reform. The first row shows that among the top 1% wealth holders, the number
of entrepreneurs from the lower 90% of the z i distribution is 10.8% to 13% lower under
the wealth tax, whereas those from the top 10% of the z i distribution are higher by
9.4% to 11.2%. The lower rows of the table show that the same compositional shift with
declining magnitudes as we go down, thereby increasing the alignment of wealth with
entrepreneurial skills and driving the efficiency (TFP) gains from wealth taxation.
Next, to understand the factors that drive this increase in reallocation and the rise
in K, consider the three main differences between the benchmark US and RN reform
25

Table VI – Tax Reform from τk to τa : Change in Wealth Composition
Entrepreneurial Ability Groups ( z i Percentiles)
Top x%

0–40

40–80

80–90

90–99

99–99.9

99.9+

1

–12.0

–13.0

–10.8

10.5

11.2

9.4

5

–8.2

–3.3

1.6

8.3

8.9

7.9

10

–6.4

–1.3

2.9

6.4

6.9

6.2

50

–2.5

0.9

1.8

1.6

1.2

1.1

Note: The table shows the percentage change induced by the revenue-neutral tax reform of the share of
individuals in each entrepreneurialability group (ranked based on z i ) among the top x% wealth holders.

US
Each entry is computed as 100 × sRN
ji /sji − 1 , where sji is the share of entrepreneurs in top wealth
group j with ability level in z i group in the economy indicated by the superscript.

economies: (i) capital is taxed differently, (ii) equilibrium prices and hence returns are
different, and (iii) savings behavior (decision rules) is different. To be more precise,
we will refer to the effects of (i) as the use-it-or-lose-it mechanism; to (ii) as the GE
price effect; and to (iii) as the behavioral savings response. The first effect, in turn,
works through two channels: One, it shifts the tax burden toward less productive entrepreneurs and leave more profits in the hands of productive ones; and two, it changes
the distribution of after-tax rates of return for fixed equilibrium prices. Of course, equilibrium prices do change—captured by (ii)—so the distribution of before-tax rates of
return also change. The resulting change in the return distribution affects both the level
and distribution of wealth, even when decision rules are fixed. Of course, decision rules
also change—captured by (iii)—further affecting the level and distribution of capital.
Although these three channels interact with each other and cannot be perfectly disentangled, we can gain some insights into their relative importance through a sequential
decomposition.
Table VII reports a decomposition of these three effects on the rise in K with the
wealth tax reform (left panel), and further decomposes each effect into the contribution
of different entrepreneurial ability percentiles (middle panel): 0–90, 90–99, and the top
1% groups. The right panel shows the shifts in the wealth distribution across ability
groups resulting from each effect.
Starting in the left panel, the top row (A) shows that the use-it-or-lose-it effect on its
own (fixing prices and decision rules at the benchmark US economy equilibrium) would
raise K by 14.5 log percent from the benchmark level. The middle panel shows that
26

Table VII – Tax Reform: Change in Macro Variables from Current US Benchmark
Decomposing the Three Channels
∆ logK

Contrib. by z i pctiles

% Change in wealth share

14.5

0–90
3.8

90–99
4.4

99+
6.3

0–90
–5.7

–13.1

–8.2

–3.2

–1.7

C. Behavioral response

16.3

8.7

2.9

Total Effect (A+B+C)

17.7

4.3

4.0

Due to:
A. Use-it-or-lose-it
B. GE (price) effects

90–99
1.6

99+
4.0

0.0

–0.7

0.6

4.8

–1.4

–0.2

1.7

9.4

–7.1

0.7

6.4

Note: Row A reports the effect of replacing the capital income tax in the benchmark US economy with
the RN reform wealth tax, fixing the equilibrium prices and decision rules at the benchmark economy.
Row B reports the incremental effect from row A when all equilibrium prices are also changed to their
post-reform steady state values, while still keeping the decision rules at the benchmark. Row 3 reports the
incremental effect from row B, when decision rules are also adjusted (behavioral savings response). The
middle panel further decomposes each effect into the contributions of different entrepreneurial ability (z i )
groups, which add up to the aggregate changes reported in the first column.

more than 40% of this rise (6.3 log pct) is accounted for by the extra wealth left in the
hands of the top 1% z i group, another 30% (4.4 log pct) from the next 9% group, and
the remaining 25% (3.8 log pct) from the lower 90% of the population. Turning to the
wealth distribution, the effect is large (right panel): the wealth share of the top group
goes up by 4 percentage points (pp) and the share of bottom declines by 5.7 pp. These
results show that the use-it-or-lose-it channel does not only increase the level of K but
it also reallocates it (through the tax system) in a way that improves its efficiency.
Row B shows that if equilibrium prices are also adjusted (in addition to taxes), K
would decline by 13.1 log pct relative to row A, offsetting most of the gain, so the overall
change (A+B) from the benchmark US economy would be close to zero. The reason for
the GE negative price effect can be explained as follows: the after-tax average return on
both capital and the risk-free bond fall from a combination of diminishing returns (Q is
higher in the RN economy, whereas average z is fixed) and taxing wealth as opposed to
capital income. These lower returns, in turn, lead to slower wealth growth (with fixed
decision rules). Although this affects all groups, it is more severe for the lower ability
groups (middle panel) who heavily depend on the risk-free bond whose return falls by
almost 1 percentage point (Table V). That said, the wealth concentration increases (right
panel) but the change is more modest than in row A.

27

Finally, row C shows that the behavioral savings response—from changing the decision rules from row B to those under the RN wealth tax equilibrium—would raise K by
16.3 log pct relative to row B. Furthermore, the savings response is actually stronger at
the bottom end, with the 0–90 group contributing slightly more than half of the rise in
K. However, the wealth distribution further concentrates at the top.
Putting these three effects together (bottom row), we see that slightly more than
half of the total rise in K comes from the top 1%, with the rest more or less equally
contributed by the next top 9% and the bottom 90%. The right panel of the same
row shows that overall, the wealth share of the top 1% z group grows by 6.4 pp nearly
matched by the 7.1 pp decline in the bottom 90%. For the top 1% highest-ability group,
the strongest positive effect comes from the use-it-or-lose followed by the behavioral
response, with GE price effects having a smaller effect. As we will see later, because
of the improvement in productivity resulting from this reallocation, the rise in wages
improves welfare significantly even for those in lower productivity groups.

5.3

Welfare Analysis

We use two measures to quantify the welfare consequences of the tax reform. The
first one, CE1 , is a micro measure—constructed at the individual level—that allows
us to quantify the gains and losses experienced by different groups in the population.
It can also be aggregated to obtain a welfare measure for the whole population. The
second one, CE 2 , is a macro measure, basically an adaptation of the famous Lucas (1987)
calculation to our framework. It provides a single figure that is easy to interpret and
allows comparison with some previous work.
Specifically, for an h-year-old individual in state S ≡(a, S), we compute CE1 as the
percentage change in consumption at all future dates and states required to make her
indifferent between the stationary equilibria of the two economies. That is
VhUS ((1 + CE1 (h, S)) × cUS (h, S), `US (h, S)) = VhRN (cRN (h, S), `RN (h, S)),
where Vh is the lifetime value function and (c, `) are the consumption and leisure allocations starting from state (h, S), and the superscripts indicate the relevant economy (e.g.,
US versus RN).28 At the aggregate level, the main measure we will look at is the welfare
change for newborns, which is obtained by integrating over the stationary distribution
28

Given the utility function specification we use, CE1 (h, S) can be computed directly from the value
 RN
1/γ(1−σ)
V
(a,S)
functions: 1 + CE1 (h, S) = VhUS (a,S)
.
h

28

Table VIII – Average Welfare Gain from Tax Reform
RN

BB

7.40%
7.86%
67.8

5.58%
4.71%
94.8

Average welfare difference:
CE 1
CE 2
% with welfare gain

Note: The welfare figures report the percentage gain in consumption-equivalent terms from each tax reform
relative to the current US benchmark economy.

in the benchmark economy (ΓUS (h = 1, S)):29
CE 1 ≡

X

ΓUS (1, S) × CE1 (1, S).

S

As in Lucas’s calculation, CE 2 measures the fixed proportional consumption transfer
to all newborn individuals in the US benchmark economy so that average utility is equal
to that in the tax-reform economy. For the RN reform, it reads
X

ΓUS (1, S)×V1US ((1+CE 2 )cUS (1, S), `US (1, S)) =

S

X

ΓRN (1, S)×V1RN (cRN (1, S), `RN (1, S)),

S

and analogously for the BB reform.
Results. The welfare gains from the tax reforms are large: individuals born into the
current US economy would have to be compensated on average by 7.4% (CE 1 ) of their
consumption in every date and state to be as well off as they would be if they were born
into the RN tax reform economy, and by 7.86% using the CE 2 measure (Table VIII).
These large gains could be anticipated from the large increase in average consumption
and the little change in labor hours we saw in Table V; however, the welfare changes also
take into account the changes in the cross-sectional distributions, which do not seem to
dampen the level gains.
How are the welfare gains distributed across the population? The individual-specific
nature of the CE1 measure allows us to answer this question. In Table IX, we divide the
population into five age groups—real-life age 20, 21–34, 35–49, 50–64, and retirees—and
the same six bins for entrepreneurial ability as before. Each cell reports the average
29

We also calculated an analogous measure that integrates over individuals of all ages (and similarly
for CE 2 below) and found very similar results (available upon request).

29

Table IX – Welfare Gain by Age Group and Entrepreneurial Ability
Entrepreneurial Ability Groups ( z i Percentiles)
Age
groups:

20
21–34
35–49
50–64
65+

0–40

40–80

80–90 90–99
RN Reform

7.0
6.5
5.1
2.3
–0.2

7.3
6.3
4.4
1.8
–0.3

7.9
6.3
3.9
1.4
–0.4

8.9
6.6
3.3
0.8
–0.6

99–99.9

99.9+

10.6
7.0
1.7
–0.6
–1.2

11.7
6.8
0.1
–1.8
–1.8

BB Reform (SS Pensions Adjusted)

20
21–34
35–49
50–64
65+

4.9
4.7
4.2
4.9
7.2

5.3
4.6
3.7
4.3
6.7

6.0
4.8
3.4
4.0
6.4

7.2
5.4
2.8
3.2
5.8

9.3
6.1
1.4
1.4
4.3

10.5
6.2
–0.2
–0.2
3.0

Note: Each entry reports the average welfare gain or loss (CE1 ) from the RN and BB wealth tax reforms
relative to the current US benchmark for individuals in each age and entrepreneurial ability group. Averages
are computed with respect to the US benchmark distribution.

welfare change for individuals within the (h, z i ) bin.
This table has several takeaways. First, all newborn groups gain from the RN reform,
and these gains are fairly evenly distributed across ability groups—ranging from 7% for
the lowest 40% by ability to 11.7% for the top 0.1% group.30 Second, welfare gains decline
with age, which is not surprising: since wealth rises and productivity (zih ) falls on average
with age, the ratio of capital income to wealth falls, so the tax burden of wealth taxation
rises relative to capital taxation as individuals get older. This effect partially offsets the
gains from higher wages experienced by all workers in the RN economy, leading to overall
declining welfare gains by age. That said, the welfare change is positive for all working
age groups, except those with very high ability—the top 1% of the z i distribution—whose
losses from higher taxes on their large wealth holdings outweighs their gains from higher
wages.
30

Clearly, some subjectivity is involved in judging how even this distribution is. What we have in
mind is the comparison—discussed further in the next section—between optimal wealth and capital
income taxes, where the latter generates gains that are much more skewed toward the top end.

30

The welfare losses of retirees from the RN reform follow from the fact that their
pensions were kept fixed at their US benchmark level, so they do not share the wage
gains experienced by workers, yet their tax obligation on their accumulated wealth is
higher after the reform. The BB tax reform alleviates this problem by indexing pensions
to average wages. The average welfare gains (Table VIII) are slightly lower than the RN
reform—5.58% and 4.71% for the CE 1 and CE 2 measures, respectively—simply because
more revenue needs to be raised to pay for higher pensions. On the flip side, now all
retiree groups gain significantly from the reform (lower panel of Table IX). Overall, 68%
of individuals in the economy experience a welfare gain under the RN reform, and this
fraction jumps to 95% under the BB reform.
Before we conclude this section, let us summarize the key conclusions. First, an
economy with wealth taxes can raise the same amount of revenue as one with capital
income taxes (keeping all other tax rates constant) with less distortion. The result is
a reduction in the misallocation of capital, yielding higher average wages, consumption,
and welfare. Second, welfare gains are relatively evenly distributed, with newborns of
all entrepreneurial ability groups preferring the wealth tax economy. The gains become
smaller with age and are negative for older individuals, especially those with high wealth.
Third, allowing pensions to rise with average labor income (BB reform) yields somewhat
lower average welfare gains but spreads the gains to the vast majority of the population.
Finally, although these results show that wealth taxes outperform capital income taxes
when other tax instruments are fixed, they are silent on whether either tax is desirable
at all when the government can adjust the level of other taxes. In the next section, we
turn to address this question of optimal taxation.

6

Optimal Taxation

In this section, we study the optimal taxation problem in which the government
chooses a combination of tax instruments to maximize the ex ante lifetime utility of an
individual who is born into the stationary equilibrium (implied by the chosen tax policy)
subject to the constraint that it raises enough revenues to pay G + SSP as before.31 We
consider two versions of this problem. In the first one, the government chooses flat-rate
taxes on capital income and labor income. We refer to this as the optimal capital income
tax (OCIT) system. In the second, the government chooses flat-rate taxes on wealth
and labor income—the optimal wealth tax (OWT) system. Consumption taxes are held

P  OPT
More specifically, the maximized objective is
(1, S) × V1OPT (cOPT (1, S), `OPT (1, S)) ,
S Γ
where the superscript OPT refers to the relevant optimal tax economy.
31

31

Table X – Optimal Taxation: Tax Rates and Average Welfare Effects
US Bench.

RN Tax Reform

Optimal Taxation
τk

τa

τa (thresh.)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Tax Rates (%)

τk
τa
τ`

25.0
—
22.4

—
01.13
22.4

–34.4
—
—
03.06
036.0 14.10

—
03.30†
14.20

—
—

7.40
7.86

5.45
6.28

10.58
9.83

Welfare gain (%)

CE 1
CE 2

10.47
9.61

Notes: Percentage changes are computed with respect to the US benchmark economy calibrated in Section
4. † The optimal wealth threshold—below which τa = 0—is found to be equal to 25% of average labor
income, y, in the benchmark economy.

fixed in all experiments. We will compare the two optimal tax systems with each other
as well as with the current US benchmark. We also study an extension that introduces
progressivity into the wealth tax system through an exemption level below which wealth
is not taxed, and the government jointly chooses the exemption threshold and the wealth
tax rate above that level. We consider further extensions below.

6.1

Results

We begin with an overview of the main results, summarized in Table X. In the first
case, where the tax is levied on capital income, the optimal policy provides a large subsidy
to capital income (τk = −34.4%) and a high tax rate on labor income (τ` = 36%). This
policy is substantially different from the current US system, and we will analyze in detail
what drives this result. In the second case, where the tax is levied on wealth (without
an exemption level, see column 2), the optimal policy is a wealth tax of τa = 3.06% and
a labor income tax of τ` = 14.1%. Whereas the former, OCIT, raises higher revenues
from labor income relative to the US system and uses it to subsidize capital, the wealth
tax system does the opposite—raises revenues from wealth to significantly lower the tax
rate on labor income.
Turning to welfare, we see that both optimal policies raise average welfare relative
to the US benchmark, and the welfare gain from optimal wealth taxes (9.61%–10.47%
depending on the measure) is higher than that from the optimal capital income taxes
32

Table XI – Optimal Taxation: Changes in Macroeconomic Outcomes
Change from Benchmark
RN Tax Reform
Optimal Taxation
τk
τa
τa (thresh.)
%∆K
%∆Q
%∆L
%∆Y
%∆TFP
%∆C

19.40
24.80
01.30
10.10
04.60
10.00

69.00
79.60
–1.20
25.50
06.30
21.00

02.80
10.30
03.90
06.40
07.30
08.30

00.40
08.10
03.70
05.40
07.70
07.40

%∆w
%∆w (net)
∆r
∆r (net)

08.70
08.70
00.26
–0.91

27.00
04.70
–1.51
–0.87

02.40
13.40
0.68
–1.92

01.70
12.50
0.78
–2.07

Note: Percentage changes are computed with respect to the benchmark economy without wealth taxes
and capital income taxes of 25%. Changes in the interest rate are computed in percentage points. The
net wage is defined as (1 − τl ) w, and the net interest rate is defined as (1 + (1 − τk ) r) (1 − τa ) − 1. The
TFP variable is measured in the intermediate goods market. The optimal threshold
amounts to 25% of

the average earnings of the working population in the benchmark economy E .

(5.45%–6.28%). Adding an exemption level to the OWT system (column 3) changes
the results only marginally: the optimal exemption level is fairly low—about a quarter
of average labor income—and the tax rates on both wealth and labor income rise only
slightly. That said, given the extreme skewness of the wealth distribution, even this low
threshold exempts 37% of the population from paying any wealth taxes, leading to a
small improvement in average welfare compared with column 2. Now we delve into the
details of each experiment.32
6.1.1

Changes in Macro Variables

Table XI shows the changes in aggregate variables in each optimal tax economy from
their benchmark levels. The results from the RN tax reform are also reproduced here
for comparison. Starting with the OCIT case, we see a substantial rise relative to the
US benchmark in aggregate quantities across the board (with the exception of aggregate
32

Part of the welfare difference from the US benchmark arises from the differences in the stationary
distributions in the two economies (e.g., ΓUS (1, S) versus ΓOPT (1, S)) that are used as weights in the
welfare objective. To investigate how much this matters, we have also calculated average welfare in
the optimal tax economies using the optimal allocations but imposing the US benchmark distribution,
ΓOPT (1, S), and found that it makes a very small difference.

33

hours). In particular, K and Q are higher by almost 70% and 80%, respectively; L
is lower, but only marginally (–1.2%). As a result, aggregate output and consumption
are higher by 25.5% and 21%, respectively. Turning to the average wage, we see that
although it also rises substantially (by 27%), most of these gains are undone by the
higher optimal tax rate on labor income (36% versus 22.4% in the benchmark), resulting
in an after-tax rise of only 4.7%. This latter figure is much lower than the 21% rise in
consumption, which seems a bit surprising given that labor income makes up the bulk
of total resources for most individuals in the model. As we will discuss later, the answer
lies in the large rise in consumption inequality implied by optimal capital income taxes.
(This gap was much smaller in the tax reform experiments above; see Table V.)
A very different picture emerges in the OWT experiment: K is only marginally higher
(2.8%) than the US benchmark and Q is 10.3% higher, thanks to the more efficient
allocation of capital. Aggregate hours rise quite a bit now—by 3.9%—spurred by the
lower tax rate on labor income (τ` = 14.1%). Consequently, output and consumption
are higher by 6.4% and 8.3%, respectively. The average wage is only 2.4% higher than
the US benchmark, but the net after-tax wage is 13.4% higher. This time, notice that
consumption rises less than after-tax wages because of the higher taxes on wealth relative
to the US benchmark, which leads to a smaller rise in post-production, after-tax resources
(i.e., ω in (12)), moderating the rise in the consumption of the wealthy, and hence in
the aggregate. Moreover, (the marginal utility of) consumption becomes more evenly
distributed with wealth taxes. Finally, introducing an exemption level (column 3) makes
a relatively modest impact on the aggregates, which is not surprising both because its
level is low and because it affects the low-wealth individuals whose share in the aggregate
economy is small. That said, the exemption level does matter for the distribution of
welfare gains discussed later.
Comparing the two optimal tax systems reveals interesting contrasts. Broadly speaking, optimal capital income taxation results in rather dramatic changes in the economy.
The subsidy to capital income both raises the income accruing to high-productivity entrepreneurs and further incentivizes them to save more, leading to a 70% higher capital
level in the new economy and an increase in efficiency. Unlike wealth taxes, however,
which raise revenues from capital, the subsidy on capital income requires more revenues
to be raised from labor, leading to very small gains in after-tax wages relative to the
growth in output and (before-tax) wages. In this sense, optimal capital taxes shift the
tax burden from the wealthy to wage earners, delivering efficiency gains at the expense
of large distributional losses (which we will quantify in the next subsection).
34

Figure 2 – Welfare Gains from Optimal Taxation
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.25

0.4

0.5

Contrast this with wealth taxes, which result in much smaller adjustments in the
aggregate economy, with the capital stock barely moving from the US benchmark, and
output and wages rising by smaller amounts. However, by enabling a lower tax rate on
labor, it raises after-tax wages significantly, which in turn incentivizes work, leading to
higher aggregate hours. In this sense, the OWT system shifts the overall tax burden in
the opposite direction—from labor to capital—and further shifts the capital tax burden
from high-productivity entrepreneurs to low-productivity ones.
Mechanisms at play. To better understand the differences between the two tax systems, in Figure 2 we plot the objective functions that are maximized in the respective
optimal tax experiments. The red line shows the objective values under capital income
taxes, and the blue line shows it under wealth taxes. The x -axis shows the tax revenue
raised from capital as a fraction of total tax revenue. Because the latter (G + SSP ) is
kept fixed throughout, as the revenue share of capital varies along the x -axis, the labor
income tax adjusts in the background to balance the government budget. Thus, for a
given tax system, the optimal tax rate is found where the objective value is maximized
on this graph. The current US benchmark corresponds to the point at x = 0.25 on the
red line, since as noted earlier, τk = 25% generates a revenue share of (coincidentally)
25% from capital. To make the figure more informative, the y-axis does not report (ex
ante lifetime) utilities directly but instead reports the consumption-equivalent welfare
change implied by each objective value relative to the US benchmark. Thus, the current
35

Figure 3 – How K and Q Vary with Revenue Raised from Taxing Capital
40
OCIT economy

30
20
10

OWT economy

0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

US benchmark point corresponds to zero on the y-axis.
This figure offers several takeaways. The first one is the obvious contrast between
the slopes of the two lines: whereas welfare declines as more tax revenues are raised from
capital under capital income taxation, it rises strongly under wealth taxation. Despite
this apparent contrast, both patterns are driven by the same basic principle: in the
presence of persistent return heterogeneity, taxing capital has a stronger distorting effect
than without heterogeneity. For example, under capital income taxation, those who
pay the most taxes are those who are on average the most productive entrepreneurs,
and those who are spared are the least productive ones. This asymmetry makes it
optimal to flip the tax into a subsidy so as to boost productivity and output. Under
wealth taxation, the same asymmetry stemming from persistent return heterogeneity is
dealt with by imposing a relatively high tax on wealth, which creates the same type
of reallocation toward more productive entrepreneurs. Of course, because wealth is still
taxed, the effects on savings incentives are not as strong as with capital income subsidies,
which does not create a large rise in the capital stock, so the bulk of the gains come from
reallocation.
The distorting effects of the two taxes can be seen more clearly in Figure 3, which
plots the average capital level—both raw and quality adjusted—under each tax system
as the revenue share is varied. As expected, both K and Q decline as capital is taxed
under both systems and rise as it is subsidized. But, the two taxes have two major
36

differences. First, under wealth taxation, K (solid black line) declines much more slowly
with higher taxation than under capital income taxation (solid red line). In other words,
the same amount of revenue can be raised with the former, with a smaller distortion
to the capital level than with the latter. Second, and to compound the first effect, Q
declines more slowly than K under wealth taxation whereas the reverse happens—it
declines more steeply under capital income taxation. Thus, whereas wealth taxation
improves the efficiency in how capital is allocated (Q versus K), capital income taxation
does the opposite. The relationship reverses for subsidies, so the capital income subsidy
results in both an increase both K and a more efficient allocation of it.
To better illustrate the trade-offs between capital and labor income implied by each
tax system, Figure 4 plots the average after-tax labor income and capital income under
both tax systems. Although the welfare objective plotted in the previous figure also
takes into account preferences and the resulting distributional effects beyond average
consumption, this figure is still quite informative about the key trade-offs. With this
in mind, notice first that average after-tax capital income is declining with the capital
tax (dashed lines) under both tax systems, which is obvious. What is less obvious is
that it declines more slowly under wealth taxation, a point we expand on in a moment.
Second, the main contrast is in average after-tax labor income (the solid lines), which
declines with the tax rate on capital under capital income taxation and rises strongly
under wealth taxation, largely because of the labor income tax rate rising with capital
tax revenues in the former and falling in the latter. This is the main driver of the contrast
in how welfare varies with capital taxation we saw above.
Third, notice also that, under capital income taxation, the gains in after-tax labor
income flatten out considerably once the tax crosses into the subsidy territory. For
example, after-tax labor income is 0.60% higher when the revenue share is –0.1 and is
1.05% higher at the optimum when the revenue share is –0.34. Hence, the main reason
the optimal capital income subsidy is large is the nearly linear gains in (after-subsidy)
capital income, which accrues to the top end. Of course, higher capital subsidies and
labor income taxes also raise inequality, which keeps the optimal subsidy from being
higher than it is. Notice also that the flatness of the average labor income line, which is
also seen as a relatively flat spot in the average welfare function in Figure 2, suggests that
the large magnitude of the capital income subsidy would be sensitive to modest changes
in model details. Our robustness analysis in the next section confirms this, although
most of the tax rates we obtain range from –20% to –40%, so the sign of the tax seems
quite robust.
37

Figure 4 – Average After-Tax Labor and Capital Income vs. Capital Tax Revenues
15

40
k

30

10

20
5
10
0

0
-10

-5

-20
-10
-30
-15

-40
Opt.

-20
-0.4

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

% Deviation of After-Tax Average Capital Income

% Deviation of After-Tax Average Wages

Opt.

a

0.4

-50
0.5

Tax Revenue from K / Total Tax Revenue

These findings—of optimal capital subsidies—are in sharp contrast with some wellunderstood results in the literature, which find that taxing capital income is optimal. For
example, Conesa et al. (2009) find an optimal τk = 36% in an overlapping-generations
model that shares many similarities with ours. One key difference is return heterogeneity—which is abstracted from in their model. Without this heterogeneity, the wealthy are
wealthy because they have been lucky in the labor market and saved their high earnings;
however, they are not any better at investing their wealth than others. It is clear from
the mechanisms we have discussed so far that this disconnect—between being wealthy
and being a good investor/entrepreneur in such models—makes capital income taxation
significantly less distorting than shown here. As a result, the distributional benefits of a
positive tax on capital income can outweigh the costs of distortion and make a positive
tax rate optimal. In the next section, we examine this and related issues more closely
and reconcile our findings with these earlier studies.
Next, we turn to wealth taxes. As seen again in Figure 4, the rise in after-tax
wage income with the level of wealth taxes is very steep throughout. These gains are
balanced against the nearly linear decline in capital income due to higher taxation, and
the optimal level trades off these two considerations against each other. Because labor
income constitutes the bulk of total lifetime resources for the substantial majority of
individuals, the utilitarian social welfare function places a large implicit weight on it, so
overall the optimal tax rate leans heavily toward a rate that maximizes average after-tax
38

Table XII – Welfare Gain by Age Group and Entrepreneurial Ability
Entrepreneurial Ability Groups ( z i Percentiles)
Age
groups:

20
21–34
35–49
50–64
65+

0–40

4.0
3.7
2.7
1.1
–0.1

40–80 80–90 90–99 99–99.9
Optimal Capital Income Taxes

5.6
5.0
3.3
1.4
0.1

7.2
6.2
3.8
1.6
0.2

9.5
7.9
4.0
1.5
0.2

13.0
10.4
3.5
0.6
–0.2

99.9+

14.9
11.4
2.5
–0.4
–0.8

Optimal Wealth Taxes

20
21–34
35–49
50–64
65+

10.0
9.2
6.8
2.7
–0.6

9.7
7.9
4.9
1.4
-0.9

10.1
7.3
3.7
0.6
–1.2

11.1
7.1
2.1
–0.8
–1.8

13.1
6.6
–1.3
–3.7
–3.2

14.4
5.6
–4.4
–6.2
–4.5

Note: Each entry reports the average welfare gain (CE1 ) from the corresponding optimal tax experiment
for individuals in a given age and entrepreneurial productivity group (ranked based on the permanent
component of entrepreneurial productivity z). The average is computed with respect to the benchmark
distribution.

labor income. In the sensitivity analyses that we summarize in the next section, we
found optimal tax rates ranging from about 2% to 3% under reasonable calibrations.
For example, when we introduced progressive labor income taxes, we found the OWT
rate to be 2.4%, with slightly higher welfare gains than the baseline analysis conducted
here.

6.2

Who Gains and Who Loses?

So far, we have focused on aggregate outcomes, but as we have seen earlier in the
tax reform analyses, there are important distributional consequences. In Table XII, we
report the distribution of welfare gains and losses (CE1 ) across the population, in an
analogous format to Table IX above for the tax reforms.33 The top panel shows the
results for the OCIT (relative to the US benchmark) and the bottom panel does the
same for the OWT system. Broadly speaking, we see some of the same patterns as
33

The results based on an optimal (linear) wealth tax with a threshold limit are similar to those in
the OWT system, and we refer to them when appropriate.

39

we did with the tax reform earlier: the young gain more than the old; the gains for
the newborns (age 20) increase with entrepreneurial ability level, z, especially at the
very top; but the relationship between gains and z is reversed at older ages, so older
individuals with very high z often experience welfare losses.
Beyond these general patterns, however, note some important differences. First,
starting with the newborns (whose expected lifetime utility is maximized in the optimal
tax system), the welfare gains from the OWT system are distributed quite evenly across
ability groups: they rise from a 10% gain for those in the bottom 40% of the z distribution, to 11.1% for those in the 90th–99th percentiles group, and to a 14.4% gain for the
very top—the 0.1% group. This is not the case under OCIT, where the gains are only
4% for the bottom group and rise all the way to 14.9% at the very top. Notice that the
key difference is not at the top but at the bottom: individuals with low z do not gain
too much because the rise in average after-tax labor income is very modest. At the top,
the gains are similar (14.4% vs. 14.9%) under both systems.
A second notable difference is that, under wealth taxation, welfare gains decline more
sharply with age at the top end—turning into larger losses—for the top 1% or so. The
reason is clear: these individuals have a lot of accumulated wealth but face declining
productivity (and hence a declining profit rate), so looking ahead, the burden of wealth
taxes is heavier than that of the capital income taxes imposed in the US benchmark (not
to mention the OCIT system, which involves large subsidies). Finally, retirees have lower
welfare under wealth taxes for the same reasons explained earlier for the tax reform.34
This is one place where introducing the exemption threshold into the OWT system
makes a big difference and mitigates these welfare losses substantially. In particular, of
the retirees in the bottom 90% of the entrepreneurial ability distribution, the percentage
of those who have higher welfare under wealth taxation rises from 2% in the baseline
case without the exemption level to about 70% with the optimal exemption level (see
Table B.5 in Appendix B.2).35

34

To be more specific, the after-tax interest rate (r(net) in Table XI ) is 1.92% lower under OWT
relative to the benchmark but only 0.87% lower under OCIT. So, retirees’ after-tax capital income falls
more under wealth taxation than under the latter. (They also have much higher wealth in the latter
stationary equilibrium, but that brings back the transition discussion above.)
35
Another straightforward change would be to allow retirement pensions to rise with the average
labor income, as we studied in the BB tax reform analysis earlier, but we have not attempted to solve
this extension.

40

Table XIII – Decomposition of Welfare Gains
RN Reform

CE 2 (%)

7.86

OCIT

OWT

6.28

9.61

Consumption
Total

8.27

5.90

11.02

Level

10.01

21.04

8.28

Distribution

–1.58

–12.51

2.53

Leisure
Total

–0.38

0.36

–1.27

Level

–0.66

0.73

–2.21

0.27

–0.38

0.76

Distribution

The table reports the decomposition of the average welfare gains of newborns as measured
by CE 2 . See the text for details.

Decomposing the welfare gains
To understand the sources of welfare gains and losses, we implement a useful decomposition following Conesa et al. (2009). Specifically, the aggregate welfare gain, CE 2
(which corresponds to the objective function maximized by the government), is first
decomposed into effects from changes in consumption and leisure. In turn, each component is further decomposed into level effects and distributional effects (e.g., the change
in average consumption versus in its distribution, and the same for leisure).36,37
36

A similar decomposition was earlier used by Flodén (2001), where total welfare changes are expressed in terms of changes in levels, changes in uncertainty, and changes in inequality.
37
More concretely, let CE be the aggregate welfare gain, and CEC and CEL be the components
of CE due to changes in consumption and leisure allocations, respectively, such that 1 + CE = (1 +
CEC )(1 + CEL ). Then, CEC is given (for example, for the OWT economy) by
e 0 (cOWT (h, S), `US (h, S)),
V0 ((1 + CEC (h, S)) × cUS (h, S), `US (h, S)) = V
and CEL is
e 0 (cUS (h, S), `OWT (h, S)).
V0 ((1 + CEL (h, S))cUS (h, S), `US (h, S)) = V
Further, CEC can be decomposed into a level and a distribution component, CEC and CEσC , respectively:
b 0 (b
c(h, S), `US (h, S)),
V0 ((1 + CEC (h, S)) × cUS (h, S), `US (h, S)) = V

b 0 (1 + CEσ ) b
e 0 (cOWT (h, S), `US (h, S))
where b
cUS (h, S) = cUS (h, S) CUS and V
cUS (h, S), `US (h, S) = V
C
C
where one can show that 1 + CEC = (1 + CEC )(1 + CEσC ). A similar decomposition holds for leisure.

41

Table XIII reports the decomposition results. First, starting with the OWT system
(the last column), the 9.61% average welfare gain under OWT arises from an 11.02% welfare gain from changes in consumption and a 1.27% welfare loss from changes in leisure.
The small change coming from leisure is not very surprising given the small change in
aggregate hours we saw earlier. So, focusing on consumption, of the 11.02% gain from
consumption, 8.28% is due to the positive level effect (higher average consumption), and
2.53% is due to the positive distributional effect (improved distribution of the marginal
utility of consumption). Therefore, wealth taxation improves welfare by both growing
the economy and making it more equitable. This result is very different from the usual
intuition about the trade-offs involved in capital income taxation in incomplete markets
models. As mentioned above, in that case, capital income taxation results in a level loss
due to distortions of the positive tax rate, which is weighed against the less dispersed
consumption distribution it implies (thereby reducing inequality or serving as insurance
against idiosyncratic uncertainty). Here gains arise from both components, with the bulk
of the gains coming from the improved efficiency and growth component.
Turning to capital income taxation, we see that the usual mechanism just described
operates here too (middle column of Table XIII), but is manifested in the opposite direction: because the optimal policy is a subsidy, there are large level gains combined
with large distributional losses: of the 5.90% welfare gain from consumption, a substantial 21.04% is from a positive level effect, and –12.51% is from a negative distributional
effect.38 So, the same efficiency versus equity trade-off is present in our model, except
that the sign is reversed because the optimal policy is a capital income subsidy rather
than a tax. Finally, despite the small contribution of leisure to welfare changes, it is
worth noting that the level and distributional effects under the two systems again go
in opposite directions: whereas wealth taxes generate a 2.21% welfare loss from a level
effect (individuals work more), it also produces a small gain of 0.76% from an improved
distribution. The signs are reversed for capital income taxes, with a small level gain and
smaller distributional loss.
In robustness analysis, we have examined alternative versions of this decomposition
(e.g., decomposing the average welfare of the population rather than of newborns, using
the CE 1 measure, among others). The substantive conclusions remained consistent with
this baseline analysis, despite some changes in magnitudes. For example, when the CE1
measure is used, wealth taxes no longer produce a welfare gain from distributional effects;
it turns into a small loss of 0.62%. However, the distributional gains from leisure are
38

Note that the decomposition is multiplicative, so (1 + 0.059) ≈ (1 + 0.2104)(1 − 0.1251).

42

larger than before, so the overall contribution of leisure is no longer negative. Perhaps
more importantly, the bulk of the welfare gains come from the level effect of consumption,
as in the baseline case. Furthermore, the distributional losses coming from consumption
are always far greater under capital income taxes as before. These results are available
upon request.

7

Robustness

We begin, in Section 7.1, with an extension that introduces a transition path into
the OCIT and OWT analyses of the previous section. Then, in Section 7.2, we present
eight robustness experiments that include: (i) changing the timing of wealth taxes from
post-production to beginning-of-period wealth, a; (ii) modeling progressive labor income
taxation; (iii) eliminating the stochastic variation in entrepreneurial productivity (zih ≡
z i for all i, h); (iv) removing the borrowing constraint faced by entrepreneurs (i.e., ϑ =
∞); (v) reducing the CES curvature to µ = 0.8; (vi) eliminating return heterogeneity
(zih = 1 for all i, h, and µ = 1) which allows a comparison with Conesa et al. (2009); (vii)
introducing estate taxation; and (viii) measuring wealth in present value rather than in
book value. In each case, we follow the same calibration procedure as in our benchmark
economy, with two exceptions: in case (iii) we do not target the fraction of self-made
billionaires, and in case (v) the model is unable to match the wealth concentration in the
data. We repeat the RN tax reform experiment and the two optimal tax experiments
and report the results in Tables XV and XVI, respectively.

7.1

Accounting for the Transition Path

We extend the optimal policy analysis of Section 6 by modeling the transition path
after the switch to a new optimal policy regime to understand how the individuals who
are alive at the time of the switch fare. To be precise, the goal here is not to do an optimal
tax analysis with transition but rather to solve for an equilibrium that holds throughout
the transition and in the new steady state while minimally deviating from the OCIT
and OWT tax rates found above. To this end, we fix one of the two policy instruments
(e.g., τ` ) at its non-transition optimum found earlier (Table X), allow the government
to run a budget deficit (or surplus) during the transition, and choose the other policy
instrument (e.g., τa ) such that the budget—which now includes interest payments on the
accumulated debt—is balanced in the new stationary equilibrium. Therefore, this tax
rate needs to be solved jointly with the equilibrium transition path, defining a new fixed
point problem. We consider different versions of this setup.
43

Table XIV – Extension: Policy Analysis Accounting for the Transition Path
OCIT
Policy instrument fixed:
τk
τa
τ`
CE 2 (newborn)
CE 2 (all)

OWT

τk

τ`

τa

τ`

–34.38∗
0.00
37.41
–5.30
–3.86

–26.80
0.00
36.00∗
–4.85
–3.55

0.00
3.06∗
15.40
7.71
4.65

0.00
3.40
14.10∗
8.43
5.07

Note: Both the tax rates and welfare figures are reported in percents. ∗ indicates that the
tax rate is fixed at its non-transition optimum shown in Table X.

Starting with the OCIT policy, first, we fix τk at the non-transition optimum (–34.38%
from Table X) and choose τ` as just described. The new equilibrium value of τ` is 37.41%
(Table XIV, first column) compared with 36.0% without transition, and K is 67.2%
higher (vs. 69%) in the new steady state. Most of the transition is completed between 45
to 50 years: 95% of the gap (between the first year of transition and the new steady state)
is closed in 41 to 43 years for output, consumption, and employment; and 54 years for K
versus 42 years for Q, where the faster convergence of the latter reflects the contribution
of improving capital allocation with the new optimal policy. Full convergence (99.9%)
takes about 80 years. During the first 36 years of the transition, the government runs a
deficit, accumulating debt that reaches 116% of output in that year and 130% by year
80, after which the debt is rolled over.39 The higher labor income tax rate, now applied
to a larger aggregate wage income in the new steady state, pays for both the new capital
income subsidy and the interest on this debt.
The results for welfare changes are especially interesting. We start by comparing the
welfare of newborns—those who enter the economy the first year of the reform—to the
alternative without the new policy. The average welfare of this cohort falls by 5.30% in
consumption-equivalent terms, in contrast to the 6.28% gain we found without transition
in Section 6. Broadening the comparison to include the entire population alive at the
39

The reason for this result is clear: the new policy involves an immediate loss of capital income tax
revenue and need for funds for the capital income subsidy. While the higher labor tax rate increases
revenues from labor income, this rise is tempered by an immediate 9.6% fall in labor supply in response
to the higher tax rate. The resulting revenue shortfall causes the early budget deficit, which eventually
closes as the growing economy raises wages, reversing the decline in employment, and generating more
revenue from labor income.

44

time of the reform shows an average loss of 3.86% compared with a 4.87% gain without
transition (not reported earlier).
This dramatic reversal stems from two sources. The first one is straightforward: the
transition analysis makes explicit the cost of accumulating the large capital stock (about
67% higher) found in the new steady state, which requires higher savings and lower
consumption early in the transition. Second, τ` jumps from 22.4% in the benchmark
to 37.41% in the first year of transition, lowering the after-tax wage labor income both
directly and indirectly—by depressing labor supply, which falls by 9.2% in the first year
of the new policy, driving the 4.7% fall in output upon impact. Both of these costs are
borne in the earlier decades of the transition, whereas the benefits (higher wages and
consumption) are realized only gradually and are thus discounted, adding up to a large
welfare loss.
The other polar case—fixing τ` = 36% and finding τk —yields a similar picture, which
we discuss more briefly in the interest of space. The capital income subsidy is now smaller,
τk = −26.8%, compared with −34.38% without transition. More importantly, both
newborns and the overall population experience welfare losses, albeit slightly smaller than
before: by 4.85% and 3.55%, respectively. The conclusion from these two experiments is
clear: accounting for the transition path is critical for the OCIT analysis and turns the
apparent gains into nontrivial losses.
Turning to optimal wealth taxes (OWT) with transition, first, when τa is fixed (at
3.06%), the new equilibrium value of τ` is 15.40% (versus 14.10% without transition).
As for welfare, newborns continue to experience large gains: average welfare rises by
7.71% compared with the 9.62% gain found without transition. Looking at the overall
population, the transition barely changes the results, with welfare rising by 4.65% versus
4.79% without transition. The other polar case (τ` = 14.10% fixed) delivers an optimal
wealth tax of τa = 3.40% and yields a gain of 8.43% for the newborn cohort. Perhaps
more surprisingly, the gain for the overall population is 5.07%, which is slightly higher
than the 4.79% figure without transition, so there is no presumption that accounting for
transition automatically implies smaller welfare gains.40
These welfare results—as well as why they are so different from the OCIT case—are
driven by two main factors. The first one works through the decline in labor taxes and
40

In this case, the welfare losses are confined to older individuals at the top of the z distribution,
whereas the young all gain regardless of their z group. This is the exact opposite of the OCIT transition:
those in the bottom 80% of the z distribution experience welfare losses with the young below the median
bearing the brunt of the losses, while the older individuals at the top experience larger gains (see Table
B.7).

45

has both a level and a distributional effect. Basically, the immediate fall in τ` causes
after-tax wage income to jump, raising average consumption by 4.7% in the first year
of reform.41 Moreover, the rise in consumption is proportionally larger at the lower end
of the income distribution—because wage income accounts for a larger share of total
disposable resources—which leads to a more even consumption distribution. Another
way to state the same result is that the OWT system reduces the share of tax revenue
raised from labor income by shifting it toward wealth, yielding a more even distribution
of consumption. The second key difference of the OWT transition is that it requires
(almost) no capital accumulation at the aggregate level because the levels of K in preand post-reform steady states are virtually the same, differing from each other by less
than 2%. Thus, unlike in the OCIT case, there is no aggregate capital accumulation
that can reduce consumption during the transition. Rather, the gains are driven by the
reallocation of capital toward more productive individuals.42
Overall, these extensions show that considering the transition path has little effect
on the implications of optimal wealth taxes found in the baseline analysis, whereas it
upends the welfare gains from large capital subsidies that emerged without considering
the transition. In this sense, this analysis strengthens the case for wealth taxes and
weakens it for capital income subsidies.

7.2

Extensions and Sensitivity Analysis

I. Alternative timing: taxing beginning-of-period wealth. As discussed in Section 3.3, in the baseline model, the wealth tax was assumed to be imposed on postproduction wealth (i.e., τa × (a + (π (a, z) + ra)) to align the timing with that of capital
income taxes. Consequently, the tax applied not only to assets a but also to profits
earned during the period. To see whether this timing assumption is critical, we solve
the model again but this time, taxing beginning-of-period wealth: τa × a. As seen in
Tables XV and XVI, this change makes only a modest difference, and when it does, it
actually raises the welfare gains relative to the baseline (by about 0.4% and 1.2% for the
tax reform and OWT cases, respectively). The reason for these improvements should
be intuitive: in the original timing, the wealth tax is also partly on profits (or capital
41

The reduction in τ` also raises labor supply, further raising output, although this effect is not large
early in the transition.
42
That said, K is not constant during the transition but follows a nonmonotonic path, falling for
the first 13 years and then taking another 35 years to rise back to its pre-reform level. This is because
switching to wealth taxes reduces the after-tax return of many older and wealthier individuals who now
find it optimal to increase consumption and spend down their wealth. Although the opposite happens
for young and productive individuals, their wealth is a smaller fraction of the aggregate. However, note
that Q rises monotonically—thanks to reallocation—so output rises throughout the transition.

46

income), which, as explained before, is highly distorting in this framework. The alternative formulation relieves the latter from wealth taxation, making it a pure wealth tax
which is more effective.
II. Progressive labor income tax. To introduce progressivity into the labor income
taxes, we follow Heathcote, Storesletten and Violante (2014) and write after-tax labor
income as (1 − τ` )(wyh n)ψ with ψ = 0.815. We set τ` to obtain an average labor income
tax rate of 22.4%—the same rate as in the US benchmark. As before, the labor income
tax is kept fixed in the tax reform experiment, whereas in the optimal tax analyses, τ` and
ψ are jointly chosen with τk or τa . As seen in both Tables XV and XVI, the results remain
very similar to the baseline case, with a slightly smaller welfare gain in the tax reform
case and a slightly higher one in the optimal tax experiments. One notable difference is
that the optimal labor income tax is more progressive than the US benchmark, ψ = 0.72,
which allows a lower wealth tax rate of τa = 2.4%.
III. Constant z over the life cycle. As discussed in Section 3, without the stochastic
fluctuations in zih as modeled in equation (2), even the best calibration cannot simultaneously match the steady state wealth concentration and the fraction of self-made
billionaires (the latter is 18.5% here versus 50% in the baseline). The average welfare
gains from both the tax reform and OWT are lower than in the baseline but still large
at about 5%–6%. One notable difference is in τkOPT , which is no longer a large subsidy
but is instead close to zero (–2.33%). A second finding is that switching to wealth taxes
causes a larger efficiency gain—equivalent to a TFP rise of 11.7%, which is up to twice
the gain in the baseline calibration (ranging from 4.6% to 7.7% in Tables V and XI).43
IV. No financial constraint: ϑ = ∞. In this extreme case scenario, marginal returns
are equalized across entrepreneurs, so capital is no longer misallocated. Yet, switching
to a wealth tax still increases welfare. The gain is about 1.5% across the tax reform and
optimal tax case. Although this gain is significantly smaller than in the baseline case,
that there is any gain at all may seem surprising. First note that both K and Q rise
by the same amount (by 6.28% in Table XV), so there is no TFP improvement because
43

Both results can be understood as follows. With constant zih , returns are much more persistent
over the life cycle (declining gradually because µ < 1), which creates two important effects. First, there
is less capital misallocation in the model, both because one source of misallocation—stochastic zih —is
eliminated and because the new calibration implies less heterogeneity in z i , thereby implying effectively
looser constraints. Second, the efficiency gains from a given reallocation are larger because now the
correlation between current wealth and future productivity is higher, so there are potentially larger
efficiency gains from wealth taxation. These explain both the lower gain in welfare and the fact that the
larger part of it coming from TFP gains. Of course, the model cannot match the dynamics of wealth,
which is one of the reasons why this is not our preferred baseline.

47

48

7.40

7.86

19.37

24.79

8.70

10.10

1.28

10.01

CE 1

CE 2

K

Q

w

Y

L

C

(2)

(1)

10.50

1.33

10.60

9.10

26.10

20.41

8.25

7.75

10.01

0.69

10.01

9.25

25.61

21.27

7.06

6.48

0.90%

labor tax

of period wealth

1.18%

Progressive

Tax beginning

1.43

1.86

Welfare Change

1.65%

(4)

ϑ=∞

No constraints

7.85

7.54

1.24%

(5)

µ = 0.8

curvature

Lower

11.25

1.75

9.54

7.66

22.37

9.56

2.93

0.91

3.02

2.10

6.28

6.28

8.33

0.57

8.38

7.77

21.25

16.43

Change in Macro Variables (%)

5.36

5.46

1.23%

(3)

Constant z

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1.92%

(6)

rates of return

Homogeneous

11.31

1.37

11.25

9.75

27.90

21.05

8.80

8.22

0.95%

(7)

Estate taxes

8.17

1.04

8.18

7.08

19.87

15.60

6.48

6.07

1.26%

(8)

Present value

Note: The eight robustness experiments are as follows: (i) taxing beginning-of-period wealth; (ii) modeling progressive labor income taxation; (iii)
eliminating the stochastic variation in entrepreneurial productivity (zih ≡ z i for all i, h); (iv) removing borrowing constraints, ϑ = ∞; (v) eliminating
return heterogeneity (zih = 1 for all i, h and µ = 1); (vi) reducing the CES curvature to µ = 0.8; (vii) introducing estate taxation; and (viii) measuring
wealth in present value rather than in book value.

1.13%

τa

Baseline

Table XV – Robustness: Tax Reform Experiments

there is no misallocation to begin with. Thus, the gain is entirely from the effect of
wealth taxes on savings incentives and the resulting rise in the capital stock. Turning to
the optimal tax experiments, we see that τkOPT is now positive, 13.6%, but still smaller
than the benchmark level of 25%, whereas τaOPT is 1.57%, half the rate in the baseline
case. As before, the OWT system delivers a higher welfare gain than the OCIT system.
V. Reducing the CES curvature: µ = 0.80. As noted earlier, µ is an important
parameter as it determines the extent of diminishing returns in entrepreneurial production. Holding other parameters fixed, a lower µ implies lower efficiency gains from wealth
taxation, since diminishing returns lowers the correlation between past wealth and future
productivity. However, the same mechanism implies that for the same parameter values,
wealth inequality will be lower in the model, so a recalibration requires a higher dispersion in z̄i (σεz̄ ) to match the top (1%) wealth concentration, which undoes the first effect.
As a result, the welfare results remain broadly similar to the baseline model: gains are
almost unchanged for the tax reform, slightly lower (8.32%) in the OWT system (with
a lower tax rate τaOPT = 2.12%), and slightly higher (7.38%) in the OCIT system.44
VI. Eliminating return heterogeneity. As emphasized before, return heterogeneity
is the key new ingredient in our model that distinguishes our model from previous work,
so this experiment allows us to investigate whether eliminating it reconciles our findings
with earlier ones. We check several things. First, we noted earlier that with zih = 1 and
µ = 1, capital income and wealth taxes become equivalent. This is confirmed in column
(5) of Table XV for the tax reform case, leading to no changes in any variable, as well
as in Table XVI where both optimal tax systems yield the same exact outcomes.
Second, and more importantly, the optimal capital income tax is now positive and
large: τkOPT = 25.4% compared with −34.4% in the baseline with return heterogeneity.
This new tax rate is also much closer to Conesa et al. (2009) but is still below their 36%
figure. Another small difference between the two models is in the treatment of accidental
bequests. They are passed on to one’s offspring in our model but are distributed equally
to all newborns in their model. When we change this assumption to match theirs, the
new optimal rate we find is τkOPT = 42.4%, slightly exceeding their figure. Therefore, this
experiment confirms their findings of a large positive capital income tax rate and also
44

Another effect of the stronger diminishing returns implied by the lower µ is the extent to which
the model can generate a Pareto tail. As shown in Appendix C, Figure C.2a, the model with µ = 0.8
continues to generate an almost linear Pareto tail—which overlaps better with the data than the baseline
calibration. In additional analyses, we found that the Pareto tail starts to curve down around µ = 0.75
and disappears for µ = 0.7 and lower.

49

Table XVI – Robustness: Optimal Tax Experiments
τk
US Bench.
OCIT
OWT
OWT
US Bench.
OCIT
OWT
OCIT
OWT
OCIT
OWT
OCIT
OWT
OCIT
OWT
OCIT
OWT
OCIT
OWT

τ`

ψ

τa

CE 2 (%)

Baseline Model
25%
22.4%
—
—
–34.4%
36.0%
—
6.28
—
14.1%
3.06%
9.61
I. Timing: Tax on Beginning-of-Period Wealth
12.0%
3.62%
10.87
II. Progressive Labor Income Tax
25%
15.0% 0.815
—
—
–38.8%
29.3% 0.720
—
9.31
—
12.7% 0.720 2.40%
10.71
III. Constant z over the Life Cycle
–2.33%
29.0%
—
3.27
—
18.5%
2.21%
5.80
IV. No Financial Constraint: ϑ = ∞
13.6%
26.0%
—
0.41
—
22.7%
1.57%
1.43
V. Lower Curvature in CES: µ = 0.80
–38.6%
37.7%
—
7.38
—
18.6%
2.12%
8.32
VI. Homogeneous Rates of Return
25.4%
22.33%
—
0.005
—
22.33%
1.93%
0.005
VII. Estate Taxes
–32.2%
33.7%
—
9.26
—
13.0%
3.12%
11.02
VIII. Present Value
–18.3%
33.56%
—
4.16
—
16.45%
2.64%
7.38

shows the importance of return heterogeneity for studying capital taxation, regardless of
whether this is done through taxing capital income or wealth.

50

VII. Estate taxes. We now introduce estate taxes that mimic the US system, with a
40% tax rate above an exemption level of $5 million. The rest of the model is recalibrated
with this new feature. The results are similar, with wealth taxes resulting in a slightly
higher welfare increase than in the baseline case (by 1%–1.5%) in both the reform and
optimal tax cases. The reason is that estate taxes provide another source of wealth
taxation, so as wealth concentration rises because of the reform or optimal taxation, more
revenue collection occurs through estate taxation, which improves the overall efficiency
of the tax system. Notice that welfare gains are larger even under OCIT because part of
the system now involves a wealth tax (on estates).
VIII. Present value. In the baseline analysis, the notion of wealth we used was an
individual’s assets, a. Although this approach is fairly standard, a sensible alternative is
to use the “market value” of the firm that each entrepreneur owns, the value of which
depends not only on a, the “book value,” but also on her zih .45 To see whether the
difference matters, we replaced a with the expected present value of future earnings,
discounted by the average rate of return in the economy. The wealth tax is still based
on the book value. For given parameter values, market value wealth is more dispersed
than the book value (because it also depends on zih ), so the recalibration to the same
inequality targets requires a lower σzih than before, leading to slightly smaller efficiency
gains. As a result, welfare gains from wealth taxes are about 1%–2% smaller than in
the baseline but are still substantial (ranging between 6%–7.5% in the tax reform and
optimal tax case).
7.2.1

Further Extensions

We have conducted some other experiments that we do not discuss to save space. We
have considered alternative assumptions for borrowing constraints: (i) ϑ(z i ) = ϑ for all
i, (ii) relaxing the constraint so that the debt-to-GDP ratio is 3 (rather than 1.29), and
(iii) allowing for unlimited borrowing at a higher interest rate than the rate for lending,
and recalibrated the model. The upshot was that case (i) strengthened the results for
wealth taxes, case (ii) yielded lower welfare and efficiency gains, but closer to the baseline
than the ϑ = ∞ case presented above, and case (iii) had a small quantitative effect and
no substantive ones. We have also explored the effects of alternative values for some key
parameters, such as ρz (0.5 instead of 0.1 in the baseline) and the risk aversion (2 instead
of 4).
45

For a given a, profits and, consequently, their present discounted value are rising in zih , driving a
wedge between market value and book value.

51

8

Discussions and Conclusions

Wealth taxation has been a widely used policy tool for governments around the world,
although its popularity has declined significantly in recent decades. One major reason for
this decline has been the lack of a good rationale for its use, which itself reflects a dearth
of academic research on its effects. In this paper, we presented a case for wealth taxes
based on efficiency and distributional benefits and quantitatively evaluated its effects.
Under capital income taxation, entrepreneurs who are more productive, and therefore generate more income, pay higher taxes. Under wealth taxation, on the other hand,
entrepreneurs who have similar wealth levels pay similar taxes regardless of their productivity, which expands the tax base and shifts the tax burden toward unproductive entrepreneurs. Furthermore, wealth taxes reduce the after-tax returns of high-productivity
entrepreneurs less than low-productivity ones, which creates a behavioral savings response, which further shifts the wealth distribution toward the productive ones. Finally,
the general equilibrium response of prices to wealth taxes can dampen the aggregate
savings incentives, but its effect on reallocation is still in the same direction as the first
two effects. The resulting reallocation increases aggregate productivity and output.
An optimal tax system with wealth taxation involves a positive tax on wealth (that
ranges from about 2% to 3% a year across different specifications) and improves average
welfare for every cohort starting with the tax reform. The higher revenue generated
by the wealth tax allows the government to substantially reduce the tax rate on labor,
raising after-tax wages relative to after-tax capital and interest income, making the
consumption distribution more even. These findings lead us to conclude that wealth
taxation can increase efficiency, grow the economy, and reduce inequality all at once.
An optimal tax system with capital income taxation involves a large subsidy to
capital income and results in several drastic changes in the economy, including a much
higher capital stock, output and consumption, coupled with much higher consumption
inequality. Although average welfare in the OCIT steady state is higher compared to
the benchmark US economy, both the population alive at the time of the reform and the
cohorts that enter the economy soon after the reform experience large welfare losses.
Overall, our analysis lends strong support to the consideration of wealth taxation as
a more desirable alternative to capital income taxation, as it has the potential to improve
aggregate productivity, grow the economy, reduce consumption inequality, and improve
welfare for large parts of the US population. In building our quantitative model, we
tried hard to incorporate features that we believed were key for the first-order trade-offs
52

between wealth taxation and capital income taxation. As is the nature of quantitative
analysis, we inevitably left out some other features of the real world that may be relevant for the overall effects of wealth and capital income taxation. We hope that these
results would provide impetus for exploring the issues that we have not addressed in
this paper. One such broad topic concerns some practical considerations that come up
in implementing these policies. These questions are on our current and future research
agenda.

53

References
Aiyagari, S. Rao, “Optimal Capital Income Taxation with Incomplete Markets, Borrowing
Constraints, and Constant Discounting,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, 103 (6), 1158–
1175.
Allais, Maurice, L’impôt Sur Le Capital et la Réforme Monétaire, Hermann, 1977.
Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist, “Comparing the Investment
Behavior of Public and Private Firms,” NBER Working paper, No. 17394, 2011.
Auerbach, Alan J, Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J Kotlikoff, John Sabelhaus, and
David N Weil, “The Annuitization of Americans’ Resources: A Cohort Analysis,” Working
Paper Series 5089, National Bureau of Economic Research 1995.
Bach, Laurent, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini, “From Saving Comes Having?
Disentangling the Impact of Saving on Wealth Inequality,” Working Paper 2018.
Bell, Felicite C. and Michael L. Miller, “Life Tables for the United States Social Security
Area: 1900-2100",” Actuarial Study 116, Office of the Actuary, Social Security Administration
2002.
Benhabib, Jess, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo, “Earnings Inequality and Other Determinants
of Wealth Inequality,” American Economic Review, May 2017, 107 (5), 593–97.
,
, and Shenghao Zhu, “The Distribution of Wealth and Fiscal Policy in Economies
With Finitely Lived Agents,” Econometrica, 2011, 79 (1), 123–157.
, , and , “The Wealth Distribution in Bewley Models with Investment Risk,” Working
Paper, 2013.
,
, and , “The Distribution of Wealth in the Blanchard-Yaari Model,” Macroeconomic
Dynamics, Forthcoming, 2014.
and , “Skewed Wealth Distributions: Theory and Empirics,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 2018, 56 (4), 1261–91.
Bils, Mark, Peter J. Klenow, and Ciane Ruane, “Misallocation and Mismeasurement?,”
Working Paper, Stanford University 2017.
Boar, Corina and Matthew Knowles, “Entrepreneurship, Agency Frictions and Redistributive Capital Taxation,” Working paper, New York University 2018.
Buera, F., J. Kaboski, and Yongseok Shin, “Finance and Development: A Tale of Two
Sectors,” American Economic Review, August 2011, pp. 1964–2002.
Cagetti, Marco and Mariacristina De Nardi, “Estate Taxation, Entrepreneurship, and
Wealth,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 85–111.
Carroll, Christopher, Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N. White, “The
Distribution of Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume,” Quantitative Economics,
2017, 8, 977–1020.
Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy,” in John B.

54

Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1, Elsevier, 1999,
chapter 26, pp. 1671–1745.
Conesa, Juan Carlos, Sagiri Kitao, and Dirk Krueger, “Taxing Capital? Not a Bad Idea
After All!,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 25–48.
De Nardi, Mariacristina and Fang Yang, “Wealth inequality, family background, and
estate taxation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2016, 77, 130 – 145.
, Giulio Fella, and Gonzalo Paz Pardo, “The Implications of Richer Earnings Dynamics
for Consumption, Wealth, and Welfare,” Working paper 21917, National Bureau of Economic
Research 2016.
Erosa, Andres and Martin Gervais, “Optimal Taxation in Life-Cycle Economies,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 2002, 105 (2), 338–369.
Fagereng, Andreas, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malacrino, and Luigi Pistaferri, “Heterogeneity and Persistence in Returns to Wealth,” Working paper, Stanford University 2016.
,
,
, and
, “Heterogeneity in Returns to Wealth and the Measurement of Wealth
Inequality,” American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (5), 651–655.
,
,
, and
, “Heterogeneity and Persistence in Returns to Wealth,” Working paper,
Stanford University 2018.
Federal Reserve Statistical Release, “Z.1 Financial Accounts of the United States: Flow of
funds, balance sheets and integrated macroeconomic accounts,” Technical Report, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2015Q1.
, “Z.1 Financial Accounts of the United States: Flow of funds, balance sheets and integrated
macroeconomic accounts,” Technical Report, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System 2015Q3.
Flodén, Martin, “The effectiveness of government debt and transfers as insurance,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 2001, 48 (1), 81–108.
Gabaix, Xavier, “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (3), 739–767.
, “Power Laws in Economics and Finance,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009, 1, 255–93.
, “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, May 2011, 79-3, 733–772.
, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll, “The Dynamics of
Inequality,” Econometrica, 2016.
Garriga, Carlos, “Optimal Fiscal Policy in Overlapping Generations Models,” mimeo, 2003.
Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Ivan Werning, “New Dynamic Public Finance:
A User’s Guide,” in “NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2006,” MIT Press, 2006.
Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song, “What Do Data on
Millions of U.S. Workers Say About Labor Income Risk?,” Working Paper 20913, National
Bureau of Economic Research 2015.
,
,
, and
, “What Do Data on Millions of U.S. Workers Say About Labor Income

55

Dynamics?,” Working Paper, University of Minnesota 2016.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L Violante, “Consumption
and Labor Supply with Partial Insurance: An Analytical Framework,” American Economic
Review, 2014.
Hendricks, Lutz, “Bequests and Retirement Wealth in the United States,” Working Paper,
Arizona State University 2001.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J. Klenow, “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
and India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Kenneth L. Judd, Robert E. Hall, and Lawrence Summers,
“Liquidity Constraints, Fiscal Policy, and Consumption,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1986, 1986 (1), 1–59.
Hubmer, Joachim, Per Krusell, and Anthony A. Smith, “The Historical Evolution
of the Wealth Distribution: A Quantitative-Theoretic Investigation,” Working paper, Yale
University 2017.
Imrohoroglu, Selahattin, “A Quantitative Analysis of Capital Income Taxation,” International Economic Review, 1998, 39, 307–328.
Itskhoki, Oleg and Benjamin Moll, “Optimal Development Policies with Financial Frictions,” Econometrica, 2019.
Jones, Charles I. and Jihee Kim, “A Schumpeterian Model of Top Income Inequality,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (5), 1785–1826.
Judd, Kenneth L., “Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model,” Journal
of Public Economics, 1985, 28 (1), 59–83.
Kitao, Sagiri, “Labor-Dependent Capital Income Taxation,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
2010, 57 (8), 959–974.
Li, Huiyu, “Leverage and Productivity,” 2016.
Lucas, Robert E., “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1978, 9 (2), 508–523.
, Models of Business Cycles, New York: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Luttmer, Erzo G.J., “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 1103–1144.
, “On the Mechanics of Firm Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 78 (3), 1942–
1068.
McDaniel, Cara, “Average Tax Rates on Consumption, Investment, Labor and Capital in the
OECD: 1950-2003,” Arizona State University mimeo 2007.
Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Yi Xu, “Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from PlantLevel Data,” American Economic Review, February 2014, 104 (2), 422–458.
Moll, Benjamin, “Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-Financing Undo
Capital Misallocation?,” American Economic Review, October 2014, 104 (10), 3186–3221.

56

OECD, “The Role and Design of Net Wealth Taxes in the OECD,” OECD Tax Policy Studies,
2018, (26).
Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge: Belknap of Harvard UP,
2014.
Quadrini, Vincenzo, “Entrepreneurship, Saving, and Social Mobility,” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 2000, 3 (1), 1–40.
Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity
with heterogeneous establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 707 – 720.
Shourideh, Ali, “Optimal Taxation of Wealthy Individuals,” Technical Report, Wharton
School at University of Pennsylvania 2013.
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, “Capitalists in the
Twenty-First Century,” Working Paper, UC Berkeley 2017.
Solon, Gary, “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market,” in Orley Ashenfelter and
David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3A, Vol. 3A, North-Holland, 1999,
pp. 1761–1800.
Stachurski, John and Alexis Akira Toda, “An Impossibility Theorem for Wealth in
Heterogeneous-agent Models with Limited Heterogeneity,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2019,
182, 1–24.
Straub, Ludwig and Iván Werning, “Positive Long-Run Capital Taxation: Chamley-Judd
Revisited,” Working paper, MIT 2018. Test.
Vermeulen, Philip, “How Fat is the Top tail of the Wealth Distribution?,” Reivew of Income
and Wealth, 2016.
Wolff, Edward N., “Changes in Household Wealth in the 1980s and 1990s in the U.S.,”
in Edward N. Wolff, ed., International Perspectives on Household Wealth, Eduaward Elgar
Publishing, 2006, chapter 4, pp. 107,150.

57

ONLINE APPENDIX

58

A

Model Details and Additional Equations

A.1

Social Security Pension System

When an individual retires at age R, she starts receiving social security income
y (κ, e) that depends on her type κ in the following way:
R

y R (κ, e) = Φ (κ, e) y,
where Φ is the replacement ratio. The replacement ratio is progressive and given by

y1R (κ,e)

0.9


yR
1

 R



0.27 + 0.32 y1 (κ,e)
−
0.3
R
 Ry1

Φ (κ, e) =
y
(κ,e)

1

−2
0.81 + 0.15
yR

1


1.13

if

y1R (κ,e)
yR
1

≤ 0.3

y1R (κ,e)
≤2
yR
1
R
y (κ,e)
2 < 1 yR ≤ 4.1
1
y1R (κ,e)
4.1 < yR
1

if 0.3 <
if
if

where y1R (κ, e) is the average efficiency units over lifetime that an individual of type κ
gets conditional on having a given eR = e:
Z
1
R
yh (κ, e) dΓ (h, a, S) .
y1 (κ, eR ) =
R h<R,a,S
The vector S = (z, I, κ, e) is the vector of exogenous states of an individual, and the
integral is taken with respect to the stationary distribution (Γ) of individuals such that
R
eR is the one given on the left-hand side. Finally, y R
1 is the average of y1 (κ, e) across κ
and e. The term SSP denotes the aggregate value of “social security pension” payments:
Z
SSP :=
y R (κ, e) dΓ (h, a, S) .
(14)
h≥R,a,S

A.2

Recursive Competitive Equilibrium

Definition. Let ch (a, S), `h (a, S), ah+1 (a, S), and k(a, z) denote the optimal decision rules and Γ (h, a, S) denote the stationary distribution of individuals. A recursive
competitive equilibrium is given by the following conditions:
1. Consumers maximize utility given p(x), w, r, and taxes.
59

2. The solution to the final goods producer gives pricing function, p(x), and wage rate,
w.
R
1/µ
R
3. Q = h,a,S (z × k(a, z))µ dΓ (h, a, S)
and L = h,a,S (yh (κ, e) `h (a, S)) dΓ (h, a, S),
where log yh = κ + g(h) + e.
4. The bond market clears:
Z
(a − k (a, z)) d Γ (h, a, S) .

0=
h,a,S

5. The government budget balances: the revenue raised by taxes on labor, consumption, and capital income or wealth equals government consumption, G, plus pension
payments to retirees, SSP:
Z
G + SSP = τk
(ra + π (a, z)) d Γ (h, a, S)
h,a,S
Z
+ τa
((1 + r)a + π (a, z)) d Γ (h, a, S)
h,a,S
Z
+ τ`
(wwh (κ, e) `h (a, S)) d Γ (h, a, S)
h<R,a,S
Z
+ τc
ch (a, S)d Γ (h, a, S) ,
(15)
h,a,S

where τa ≡ 0 in the capital income tax economy and τk ≡ 0 in the wealth tax
economy, and SSP is given in eq. (14).

B
B.1

Additional Tables
Dispersion of Individual Rates of Return

The heterogeneity in the rates of return is an important mechanism in the model for
generating a wealth distribution that is consistent with the data in numerous dimensions.
Therefore, it is of interest to compare the dispersion in the rates of return in the model
and the data. Even though the empirical evidence is scarce, Fagereng et al. (2016a)
report the rates of return in the Norwegian data. Rather encouragingly, the dispersion
observed in the model matches well with the facts reported in Fagereng et al. (2016a).
p
Let rih
denote the annual return on the investment portfolio of individual i at age h:
p
rih
=

raih + π (aih , zih )
,
aih
60

Table B.1 – Forbes Self-made Index
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Description
Inherited fortune but not working to increase it
Inherited fortune and has a role managing it
Inherited fortune and helping to increase it marginally
Inherited fortune and increasing it in a meaningful way
Inherited small or medium-size business and made it into a 10-digit fortune
Hired or hands-off investor who didn’t create the business
Self-made who got a head start from wealthy parents and moneyed background
Self-made who came from a middle- or upper-middle-class background
Self-made who came from a largely working-class background; rose from little to nothing
Self-made who not only grew up poor but also overcame significant obstacles
Our definition of “Self-made”: groups 8 to 10

Fraction 2015
7.00
4.75
5.50
5.25
8.50
2.25
10.00
32.00
14.50
7.75
54.25

Table B.2 – Distribution of Lifetime Returns around the Median
p10
p25
P50 p75
Norwegian Data –2.4% –1.3% 0% 2.1%
Working life
–3.7% –2.9% 0% 4.5%
Ages 25-65
–3.4% –2.9% 0% 4.7%
Ages 20-24
–10.0% –5.6% 0% 4.9%

p90
p99
p99.9
4.1% 9.7% 19.9%
7.8% 13.3% 19.4%
8.0% 13.6% 19.9%
13.3% 32.7% 55.4%

Note: Lifetime returns are weighted by the individual’s wealth at each age. All numbers are before tax.
All numbers are presented as differences from the median. The Norwegian data are taken from Fagereng
et al. (2016a), Table 4, which reports percentiles of fixed effects of individual returns to wealth. The data

for P99.9 were kindly provided to us by the authors.

where π is the profit as defined in equation (9). The lifetime rate of return, denoted rip ,
is computed as a weighted average of annual returns:
rip

=

R
X

p
ϕih rih
,

h=1

where ϕih = aih /ΣR
h=1 aih is the relative wealth share at age h.
Table B.2 reports various percentiles of rip in the data and the model, relative to the
median return in the data and the model, respectively. The lifetime rate of return at
the 99.9th percentile, relative to the median return, is around 20% in both the model
and the data. The lifetime returns at other percentiles above the median, however, are
slightly higher than the returns observed in the data; for example, the lifetime return
at the 99th percentile is around 10% in the data and around 13–14% in the model. As
expected, the rates of return are substantially higher at high percentiles when individuals
61

Table B.3 – Cross-Sectional Dispersion in Annual Rates of Return: Benchmark vs. RN
Reform Economy.
P10

P50

Benchmark 2.00 2.00
Wealth Tax 1.74 1.74
Benchmark 1.50 1.50
Wealth Tax 0.59 0.59

P90
P95
P99
Before-tax
17.28 22.35 42.36
14.62 19.04 36.91
After-tax
12.96 16.76 31.77
13.32 17.69 35.35

Note: Each cell reports the annual rate of return in percentages.

Table B.4 – Welfare Change: Optimal Wealth Taxes with Exemption Threshold
Productivity group (Percentile)
Age

0–40

40–80

80–90

90–99

99–99.9

99.9+

20

9.9

9.8

10.3

11.4

13.4

14.6

21–34

9.1

8.0

7.4

7.2

6.6

5.6

35–49

6.7

4.9

3.6

1.9

–1.6

–4.9

50–64

2.7

1.5

0.6

-0.8

–3.9

–6.5

65+

–0.4

–0.7

–1.0

–1.6

–3.2

–4.6

Note: This table reports the welfare change distribution for the optimal wealth tax with
exemption to complement Table XII.

are young. As productive individuals experience significant growth early in the life cycle,
between the ages of 20 and 24, they experience rates of return as high as 55% at the 99th
percentile. Overall, the distribution of lifetime rates of return in the model is consistent
with the distribution observed in the Norwegian data.46

B.2

Additional Results on the Distribution of Welfare Gains/Losses
in the Population

46

The overall message remains unchanged if we instead compute the lifetime rates of return percentiles
in the model relative to the median return in the Norwegian data.

62

Table B.5 – Fraction with Positive Welfare Gain by Age Group and Entrepreneurial
Ability
(a) Optimal Capital Income Taxes

Productivity group (Percentile)
Age

0–40

40–80

80–90

90–99

99–99.9

99.9+

20

95.4

98.6

99.3

99.6

99.8

99.9

21–34

96.3

97.7

97.7

97.3

96.0

94.6

35–49

91.7

92.8

91.1

87.8

80.3

73.4

50–64

74.2

76.2

73.8

69.4

60.3

52.8

65+

13.8

18.6

18.7

18.2

16.6

15.0

(b) Optimal Wealth Taxes

Productivity group (Percentile)
Age

0-40

40-80

80-90

90-99

99-99.9

99.9+

20

94.5

93.1

93.3

94.6

95.8

96.1

21–34

95.7

92.6

90.5

88.8

84.2

78.2

35–49

91.3

82.8

76.5

68.2

53.6

43.6

50–64

72.6

62.9

56.1

49.4

39.8

33.8

65+

2.1

2.3

1.8

1.4

0.9

0.7

(c) Optimal Wealth Taxes with Exemption Threshold

Productivity group (Percentile)
Age

0-40

40-80

80-90

90-99

99-99.9

99.9+

20

94.5

93.1

93.3

94.6

95.8

95.9

21–34

95.6

92.4

90.4

88.5

83.8

77.6

35–49

91.1

82.4

76.0

67.8

53.2

43.3

50–64

76.4

66.7

59.6

52.5

42.3

35.8

65+

75.9

68.6

63.7

57.9

48.7

42.1

Note: Each entry reports the share of individuals in a given age and entrepreneurial productivity group (ranked based on the permanent component of entrepreneurial productivity
z) that would experience a positive welfare gain (CE1 ) from the corresponding optimal
tax experiment. The shares are computed with respect to the benchmark distribution.

63

Table B.6 – Total Tax Revenue and Tax Revenue by Source
Benchmark

0.25
0.25
0.54

Total tax rev./GDP
Rev. capital taxes/Total tax rev.
Rev. from labor/Total tax rev.

Tax Reform
RN

BB

0.23
0.17
0.59

0.24
0.22
0.56

OWT

OCIT

0.24
0.41
0.36

0.20
–0.34
1.08

Table B.7 – Welfare Change: Optimal Tax Reforms with Transition
(a) Optimal Capital Income Taxes

Fixing τk

Fixing τl

Productivity group (Percentile)

Productivity group (Percentile)

0-40

40-80

80-90

90-99

99-99.9

99.9+

0-40

40-80

80-90

90-99

99-99.9

99.9+

20

-6.1

-2.7

0.5

5.4

13.0

17.5

-5.6

-2.6

0.3

4.5

11.4

15.4

21–34

-5.6

-0.8

3.6

10.0

20.6

27.4

-5.1

-0.8

3.0

8.6

18.0

24.1

35–49

-5.0

-0.4

2.9

7.0

12.7

16.0

-4.6

-0.4

2.5

6.1

11.1

14.2

50–64

-3.2

0.0

2.0

4.2

7.2

9.0

-2.9

0.0

1.7

3.7

6.4

8.0

65+

0.7

1.9

2.6

3.6

5.1

6.1

0.6

1.7

2.3

3.2

4.5

5.4

(b) Optimal Wealth Taxes

C

Fixing τa

Fixing τl

Productivity group (Percentile)

Productivity group (Percentile)

0-40

40-80

80-90

90-99

99-99.9

99.9+

0-40

40-80

80-90

90-99

99-99.9

99.9+

20

6.4

6.6

7.4

9.0

11.8

13.5

7.1

7.1

7.9

9.4

12.1

13.8

21–34

5.8

5.2

5.3

5.9

6.8

6.7

6.4

5.6

5.5

5.9

6.4

6.1

35–49

3.9

2.8

2.1

1.3

-1.0

-3.3

4.3

2.9

2.1

1.0

-1.7

-4.4

50–64

1.2

0.4

-0.1

-1.1

-3.3

-5.3

1.3

0.4

-0.3

-1.4

-4.0

-6.2

65+

-0.5

-0.7

-0.9

-1.4

-2.6

-3.8

-0.6

-0.9

-1.1

-1.7

-3.1

-4.4

Additional Figures

64

different generations (parents and children, etc.) at least for some of the years, we obtain measures of
the wealth returns fixed effects for both parents and children whenever they belong to different
households.12 Given the availability of family identifiers, it is possible to link children to parents. This
allows us to test whether wealth returns are correlated across generations, and to check whether such
correlation is coming from the persistent component or from observable characteristics that may be
shared by both generations. Overall, we able to retrieve the fixed effects of almost 2 million (1,959,956)
parents and their corresponding children.
We start by ranking parents according to their financial wealth, the return to it, and the
persistent component of the returns (fixed effect). For each variable, we allocate parents to various
centiles of the corresponding distribution. We do this by cohort (year of birth) and year. Next, for each
percentile of the parents’ variable of interest (wealth, returns, or return fixed effect), we compute the
average percentile occupied by their child in the distribution of the same variables in the same year
(again, relative to their year of birth cohort to control for the fact that parents and children are in
different points of their life cycle).

Figure C.1 – Intergenerational Rank-Rank
Wealth
To start, Figure Correlation
10 plots the relationin
between
parent’s wealth rank and the average child’s
wealth rank.

(b) Fagereng et al. (2016a)

80

(a) Baseline
80

45 Degree Line

70

60

65
60

50

55
50

40

45
40
35
30

Sons wealth percentile

70

75

30
0

20

40

60

80

0

100

Fathers wealth percentile

20

40
60
Father's wealth percentile

Average son's wealth percentile
45-degree line

80

Predicted son's percentile

Figure 10: Intergenerational correlation in wealth

12 In this version we focus on fathers and sons.

25

65

100

Figure C.2
(a) Stronger Diminishing Returns in Entrepreneurial Production, µ = 0.8
Pareto Tail Above $1,000,000

0

US Data
Regression Line
Model ( =0.8)
Regression Line

-2

Log Counter-CDF

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12

-14

-16
1e+06

1e+07

1e+08

1e+09

1e+10

5e+10

Wealth (log scale)

(b) Measuring Wealth in Present Values
Pareto Tail Above $1,000,000

0

US Data
Regression Line
Model
Regression Line

-2

Log Counter-CDF

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12

-14

-16
1e+06

1e+07

1e+08

Wealth (log scale)

66

1e+09

1e+10

5e+10

D

Misallocation in the Benchmark Economy

Our benchmark economy is distorted because of the existence of financial frictions in
the form of borrowing constraints, and we can measure the effects of these distortions
on aggregate TFP and output and compare them with those obtained in other studies.
A large and growing literature frames the discussion on misallocation in terms of various
wedges, such as capital, labor, and output wedges. The analysis in Hsieh and Klenow
(2009) is particularly useful since, in a similar model environment, they study the degree
of misallocation and its effect on TFP in manufacturing in China, India, and the United
States. Hsieh and Klenow use detailed firm-level data from the US Census of Manufacturers (1977, 1082, 1987, 1992, and 1997) and find that the TFP gains from removing all
distortions (wedges), which equalizes the “Revenue Productivity” (TFPR) within each
industry are 36% in 1977, 31% in 1987, and 43% in 1997.
We will follow the approach in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and compute the same
measures of misallocation for the united States as in their analysis. It is useful to briefly
describe their approach as it applies to our framework. The final goods producer behaves
competitively and uses an aggregated good, Q, and labor, L, in the production of the
final good,
Y = Qα L1−α ,
where Q aggregates the intermediate goods xi in the following way:
Z

xµi di

Q=

1/µ
.

i

Each intermediate goods producer i produces a differentiated intermediate good using
the production function xi = zi ki , where zi is individual i’s entrepreneurial ability and
ki is the amount of capital.
Instead of modeling and capturing the effect of a particular distortion, or distortions,
the approach of Hsieh and Klenow and the related misallocation literature is to infer the
underlying distortions and wedges in the economy by studying the extent to which the
marginal revenue products of capital and labor differ across firms in the economy (or
in a particular industry). This is based on the insight that absent any distortions, the
marginal revenue products of capital and labor have to be equalized across all firms.47
47

This is the case in the monopolistic competition models, such as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009).
Alternatively, in environments such as in Lucas (1978) and Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), in which
firms feature decreasing returns to scale, but produce the same homogeneous good, in the non-distorted
economy the marginal products of capital and labor have to be equalized.

67

TFP in the Q sector. We will first focus on the Q sector, the sector that produces the
composite intermediate input Q by aggregating all the intermediate goods xi . Under this
alternative capital-wedge approach, the problem of each intermediate goods producer is

πi = max p (zi ki ) zi ki − 1 + τik (R + δ) ki ,
ki

where τik is a firm-specific capital wedge. The only input in the production function
of the intermediate goods producer is capital, and as a result only one wedge can be
identified in the analysis. We choose to specify that wedge to be the capital wedge, but
in principle it should be understood as capturing the effect of an output wedge.
The revenue TFP in sector Q for each firm i is
T F P RQ,i ≡


1
p (xi ) xi
1 + τik (R + δ) .
=
ki
µ

The aggregate TFP in sector Q can be expressed as

T F PQ =

! 1−µ
µ
 1−µ
Z 
µ
T F P RQ
di
,
zi
T F P RQ,i
i

(16)

where the average T F P RQ is given by
Z
T F P RQ =

1
p (xi ) xi
di
T F P RQ,i pq Q

−1
.

In the non-distorted economy, without capital wedges, the level of TFP in the Q sector
is
Z
 1−µ
µ
µ
∗
T F PQ =
(zi ) 1−µ di
≡ z.
i

Therefore, we can measure the improvement in TFP in the Q sector, ΩQ , as a result of
eliminating the capital wedges, or equivalently, as a result of eliminating the borrowing
constraints:
! 1−µ
µ
 1−µ
Z 
µ
∗
T F PQ
z T F P RQ,i
ΩQ =
=
di
.
T F PQ
zi T F P RQ
i
Table D.8 reports ΩQ for various economies: the TFP in the Q sector in the non-distorted
economy is 58% higher than in the benchmark economy, 51% higher than in the economy
with a wealth tax, 54% higher than in the economy with a consumption tax, 49% higher
68

Table D.8 – Hsieh and Klenow (2009) Efficiency Measure - Benchmark Model
T F PQ
∗
T F PQ
T F PQ

Mean TFPR
StD TFPR
p99.9
p99
p90
p50
p10

Benchmark
1.001
1.582
0.145
0.054
0.68
0.35
0.19
0.14
0.1

Tax Reform (τa )
1.047
1.514
0.131
0.048
0.61
0.32
0.17
0.12
0.09

Opt. Taxes (τk ) Opt. Taxes (τa )
1.064
1.074
1.489
1.475
0.106
0.145
0.039
0.053
0.5
0.66
0.27
0.35
0.14
0.19
0.1
0.14
0.07
0.1

than in the economy with an OCIT, and 47% higher than in the economy with an OWT.
Wealth taxes give the higher TFP gains, allowing for better allocation of capital across
firms, even without eliminating the borrowing constraints. The tax reform experiment
implies a TFP gain of 4.6%, and optimal wealth taxes give a TFP gain of 7.3% with
respect to our benchmark economy.
This can also be seen in the dispersion of TFPR in the different models. Recall that
absent any constraints on the firms, TFPR would be equated across all of them, so there
is higher misallocation in the economy the higher the dispersion of TFPR across firms.
Table D.8 reports the standard deviation of TFPR and some of its percentiles.
Comparison with the Hsieh and Klenow (2009) results for the United States
In order to compare these results with the results reported in Hsieh and Klenow
(2009) for the United States, we need to note that the improvement in aggregate output,
ΩY , as a result of eliminating the capital wedges in the economy can be expressed as
Y∗
ΩY =
=
Y



T F PQ∗
T F PQ

α 

K∗
K

α 

L∗
L

1−α
.

Since the model with capital wedges is static, the effect of the removal of the capital
wedges on aggregate capital, K, and labor supply, L, cannot be taken into account. The
analysis in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) measures the improvement in total output as a
result of an improvement in TFP in all industries. In our model, this corresponds to
the improvement in TFP in the Q sector. Therefore, removing the capital wedges would

69

increase total output, through its effect on TFP in the Q sector, by 20%.48
Two things are important to point out. First, the magnitude of the misallocation
in our benchmark economy is substantial, although a bit lower than the one measured
in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) using micro data from manufacturing firms: 36% in 1977,
31% in 1987, and 43% in 1997. However, it is in line with the level reported in ongoing
research by Bils et al. (2017), who take into account measurement error in micro data
and find gains from removing distortions for the United States in the range of 20%. In
any case, it is worth noting several differences between our framework and that of Hsieh
and Klenow (2009). Our benchmark economy is parameterized based on moments from
the entire economy, not just the manufacturing sector. Second, our benchmark model is
a dynamic model, and any changes in the financial frictions will affect aggregate capital
accumulation and aggregate labor supply. The misallocation calculations above do not
take those changes into account. It is clear, however, that eliminating the financial
friction would increase the aggregate capital stock K and lead to larger increases in total
output than measured above. The effect on aggregate labor supply is less obvious.

E

Endogenous Entrepreneurial Hours

In the baseline formulation, entrepreneurs’ labor supply does not enter their production function. This was a deliberate choice to avoid introducing another (potentially
interesting) channel through which wealth and capital income taxes can operate, which
would add another layer to the analysis. Leaving a full analysis to future research, here
we show how a plausible extension that introduces labor supply would interact with
wealth taxes. The main result is that the labor supply of entrepreneurs would rise under
wealth taxes relative to capital income taxes as long as their initial labor hours are not
too high, and vice versa when they are. We give a sketch of this result here and provide
more details and derivations in the following subsection.

E.1

Overview of Result

The main new channel results from a standard income versus substitution effect. To
see this, consider the modified production function, x = z(k`)µ , replacing (4), so the
entrepreneurs’ problem (9) becomes:
γ

max ((1 − τa )a + [R (zk`)µ − (r + δ) k + ra] (1 − τ ) − a0 ) (1 − `)1−γ ,

`,k≤ϑ(z)a

48

0.40
Note that Ω̃Y = Ωα
= 1.20.
Q = ΩQ

70

where τ ∈ {τa , τk } and τa = 0 if τk > 0. The first order condition for hours is given as
(1 − τ ) µR (zk)µ `µ−1 (1 − `) =

1−γ
((1 − τa )a + [R (zk`)µ − (r + δ) k + ra] (1 − τ ) − a0 ) .
γ

The left hand side corresponds to the marginal benefit of extra work, which is the
marginal utility of consuming extra output. The marginal utility depends on leisure
since consumption and leisure are complements in the utility function. So, when ` is
high, i.e., leisure is low, the marginal benefit (MB) of extra work is lower. Switching to a
wealth tax increases MB since τa is a much smaller tax than τk on output. But if ` is high,
the increase in MB will be small. Now consider the marginal cost (MC): it is the utility
loss due to extra work, which is proportional to consumption due to complementarity.
If a switch to a wealth tax reduces consumption, it is obvious that ` increases. But if
the wealth tax raises her consumption, what happens to ` depends on how much MB
increases relative to MC. We can show that for our benchmark parameterization, a sufficient condition for hours to increase is ` ≤ 0.43 for the capital-constrained entrepreneur
and ` ≤ 0.88 for the unconstrained entrepreneur.
To see this, consider the problem of an entrepreneur who chooses hours of work ` in
her own firm and capital:
γ

max ((1 − τa )a + [R (zk`)µ − (r + δ) k + ra] (1 − τ ) − a0 ) (1 − `)1−γ

`,k≤ϑ(z)a

where τ ∈ {τa , τk } and τa = 0 if τk > 0. The first-order condition with respect to ` gives
dC γ−1
C
(1 − `)1−γ =
d`



1−γ
γ



C γ (1 − `)−γ .

The left-hand side is the marginal benefit, and the right-hand side is the marginal cost
of extra hours of work in one’s firm. Simplifying this expression and substituting consumption gives

1−γ
γ

E.2

(1 − τ ) µR (zk)µ `µ−1 (1 − `) =
((1 − τa )a + [R (zk`)µ − (r + δ) k + ra] (1 − τ ) − a0 ) .

Details and Derivations

A. Capital-constrained entrepreneur (k = ϑ (z) a)
In this case, k = ϑ (z) a is fixed and the first order condition is given by the following:
71

1−γ
γ

=
(1 − τ ) µR (zϑ (z) a`)µ 1−`
`
µ
((1 − τa )a + [R (zϑ (z) a`) − (r + δ) ϑ (z) a + ra] (1 − τ ) − a0 ) .

The left-hand side decreases with ` and the right-hand side increases with `, thus
there is a unique solution. Consider what happens to the left-hand side and right-hand
side for a given ` if we switch from a capital income tax to a wealth tax:
∆LHS = (τk − τa ) R (zϑ (z) a`)µ µ
∆RHS =

1−`
`

1−γ
(−τa a + (τk − τa ) [R (zϑ (z) a`)µ − (r + δ) ϑ (z) a + ra] − ∆a0 ) .
γ

If ∆LHS > ∆RHS, then ` would increase. To see under what conditions this would
happen, note that the same term (τk − τa ) R (zϑ (z) a`)µ appears on both sides. However,
there are some additional negative terms on the right-hand side:
1. − (r + δ) ϑ (z) a + ra < 0,
2. −∆a0 < 0 if ∆C > 0 (the case where ∆C < 0 obviously gives an increase in `),
and
3. −τa a < 0
So, definitely (τk − τa ) R (zϑ (z) a`)µ > ∆C. Thus, if µ 1−`
> 1−γ
, we definitely know
`
γ
that ∆LHS > ∆RHS. Using our benchmark parameterization µ = 0.9 and γ = 0.46,
we have
1−`
≥ 1.3
`
1
≥ 2.3
`
` ≤ 0.43
Of course, this is a sufficient condition. So, if the entrepreneur were not working too much
initially (i.e. ` ≤ 0.43), then switching to a wealth tax would increase her entrepreneurial
hours. Otherwise, the income effect would be greater than the substitution effect, and
she would reduce her entrepreneurial hours. If we used µ = 0.45 and γ = 0.46 instead,
the entrepreneurial hours would increase if
` ≤ 0.28.
72

B. Capital-unconstrained entrepreneur
When the entrepreneur is not capital constrained, we have the same first-order condition for labor supply:

1−γ
γ

(1 − τ ) µR (zk)µ `µ−1 (1 − `) =
((1 − τa )a + [R (zk`)µ − (r + δ) k + ra] (1 − τ ) − a0 ) ,

and the first-order condition for k is given as
µk µ−1 R (z`)µ = r + δ

1/(1−µ)
µR (z`)µ
k =
.
r+δ
Inserting the latter into consumption, we obtain
"
C = (1 − τa )a +

µRz µ
r+δ

1/(1−µ)

#
1
−
µ
`µ/(1−µ) (r + δ)
+ ra (1 − τ ) − a0
µ

and inserting it into µR (zk)µ `µ−1 on the left-hand side of the first-order condition for
labor supply gives
µ µ−1

µR (zk) `

µ µ−1



= µRz `

=

µRz µ
(r + δ)µ

µR (z`)µ
r+δ

1/(1−µ)

µ/(1−µ)

`(2µ−1)/(1−µ)

Using the expression for C and µR (zk)µ `µ−1 , we can write the first-order condition for
labor supply as


(1 − τ )
1−γ
γ

"
(1 − τa )a +

µRz µ
(r + δ)µ

µRz µ
(r + δ)µ

1/(1−µ)

1/(1−µ)

`µ/(1−µ)

`(2µ−1)/(1−µ) (1 − `) =
#
!

1−µ
+ ra (1 − τ ) − a0
µ

The left-hand side of this equation corresponds to the marginal benefit, and the righthand side corresponds to the marginal cost of extra hours of work by the entrepreneur.
73

A switch to a wealth tax increases the left-hand side (since τa << τk ). At an interior
`, that will increase hours of work. The right-hand side might increase or decrease with
such a switch. If it decreases, then optimal hours of work increases unambiguously.
For example, for wealth-rich entrepreneurs with relatively modest productivity, a wealth
tax might reduce their after-tax wealth and consumption leading them to work more.49
Consider what happens to the left-hand and the right-hand sides for a given ` if we
switch from a capital income tax to a wealth tax:

∆LHS = (τk − τa )

µRz µ
(r + δ)µ

1/(1−µ)

`(2µ−1)/(1−µ) (1 − `)

and
∆RHS =

1−γ
γ



1/(1−µ)
µRz µ
τk ra − τa (1 + r) a + (τk − τa ) (r+δ)
µ

(1−µ)`µ/(1−µ)
µ

0

− ∆a


.

Note that if the ∆RHS < 0, the switch to a wealth tax definitely increases entrepreneurial hours. So, we will focus on the case, in which ∆RHS > 0. In this case,
∆a0 > 0 because of monotonicity. We also know from all our experiments that a wealth
tax puts a higher tax burden on the majority of the population and those who earn the
market interest rate. So, we will work with the assumption that τk ra − τa (1 + r) a < 0.
Then, a sufficient condition for ∆LHS > ∆RHS is that
`(2µ−1)/(1−µ) (1 − `) ≥

1 − γ (1 − µ) `µ/(1−µ)
,
γ
µ

49

When µ < 0.5, the left-hand side is strictly decreasing and the right-hand side is strictly increasing
and strictly concave in `. Thus, the increase the left-hand side increases hours of work and the increase
in right-hand side reduces hours of work. When µ > 0.5, the right-hand side would be strictly increasing
and convex in `. The left-hand side is strictly concave and has a maximum at ` = 2µ−1
µ . To see this,
take the derivative of the left-hand side gives
dLHS
d`

2µ−1

= a (+) constant × ` 1−µ

2µ − 1 − µ`
.
(1 − µ) `

Note that LHS = 0 and RHS > 0 for ` = 0, so the net benefit (MB-MC) of extra hours of work at
` = 0 is negative. If there is an optimal interior `∗ > 0, then the left-hand side should be above the
right-hand side for ` < `∗ , and the slope of the left-hand side should be smaller than the slope of the
right-hand side at ` = `∗ . Thus, again the increase in the left-hand side increases hours of work, and
the increase in the right-hand side reduces hours of work.

74

which implies
1
1−γ1−µ
≥
+1
`
γ
µ
1
(1 − γ) (1 − µ) + γµ
≥
`
γµ
γµ
.
` ≤
(1 − γ) (1 − µ) + γµ
In our calibration, γ = 0.46 and µ = 0.9, which gives ` < 0.88. If we set µ = 0.45, then
` < 0.41.

75

