NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COLLECTIVE REPUTATION IN TRADE:
EVIDENCE FROM THE CHINESE DAIRY INDUSTRY
Jie Bai
Ludovica Gazze
Yukun Wang
Working Paper 26283
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26283

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019

We thank Rodrigo Adao, Abhijit Banerjee, Chris Blattman, Oeindrila Dube, Ben Faber, Rema
Hanna, Asim Khwaja, Rocco Machiavello, Nina Pavnick, Nancy Qian, Daniel Xu and
participants at the HKS Growth Lab seminar, Microsoft Research lab seminar, Entrepreneurship
and Private Enterprise Development (EPED) in Emerging Economies Workshop, and the IGC/
CDEP/Chazen Firms/Trade/Development conference for helpful comments. We thank Hongyuan
Xia for providing excellent research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Jie Bai, Ludovica Gazze, and Yukun Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Collective Reputation in Trade: Evidence from the Chinese Dairy Industry
Jie Bai, Ludovica Gazze, and Yukun Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 26283
September 2019
JEL No. F10,F14,L15,L66,O10,O19
ABSTRACT
Collective reputation implies an important externality. Among firms trading internationally,
quality shocks about one firm’s products could affect the demand of other firms from the same
origin country. We study this issue in the context of a large-scale scandal that affected the
Chinese dairy industry in 2008. Leveraging rich firm-product level administrative data and
official quality inspection reports, we find that the export revenue of contaminated firms dropped
by 84% after the scandal, relative to the national industrial trend, and the spillover effect on noncontaminated firms is measured at 64% of the direct effect. Notably, firms deemed innocent
by government inspections did not fare any better than noninspected firms. These findings
highlight the importance of collective reputation in international trade and the challenges
governments might face in signaling quality and restoring trust. Finally, we investigate
potential mechanisms that could mediate the strength of the reputation spillover. We find that
the spillover effects are smaller in destinations where people have better information about
parties involved in the scandal. New firms are more vulnerable to the collective reputation
damage than established firms. Supply chain structure matters especially in settings where
firms are less vertically integrated and exhibit fragmented upstream-downstream relationships.
Jie Bai
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jie_bai@hks.harvard.edu
Ludovica Gazze
UChicago
33 N. LaSalle Street
Suite 1600
Chicago, IL 60602
lgazze@uchicago.edu

Yukun Wang
Department of Economics
Cornell University
109 Tower Road
429 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850
USA
yw2234@cornell.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26283

1

Introduction

In markets with information frictions, quality shocks about one firm’s products could impose
an externality on other firms selling similar products. Tirole (1996) formalizes the theory of
collective reputation. In such settings, when an incident spoils the group’s reputation, it can
be hard for an individual firm to break away from the low-trust-low-quality equilibrium and
new firms could be “endowed” with the damaged reputation. Empirically, how important is
collective reputation and what are the potential mechanisms that mediate its strength?
In this paper, we study collective reputation in the context of trade and development.
When selling on the international markets, producers from the same origin country are often
viewed as a “group”: for example, “Swiss watches”, “French wines”, and “Made-in-China”.
For firms in developing countries that are mostly positioned at the lower end of the valueadded chain and export mainly non-branded products, a long international supply chain can
make it particularly difficult to trace products to an individual producer within an origin
country. As a result, collective reputation becomes especially important in determining
firms’ exporting performance. In fact, the rising safety and quality concerns regarding goods
from developing countries in recent years can significantly hinder firms from penetrating
the high-end markets.1 In a recent survey of over 600 manufacturing firms in China, firms
cited lack of reputation and mistrust as one of the main challenges of exporting to global
markets.2 Therefore, understanding how collective reputation spreads within an industry or
a geographic area is important for informing trade and development policies.
We exploit a large-scale quality scandal that a↵ected the Chinese dairy industry in 2008.
Similar to many industries in developing countries and emerging markets, the Chinese dairy
industry was dominated by a large number of small and non-established players that exhibited rapid growth prior to the scandal. Using administrative data on quality inspections
conducted by the Chinese government following the scandal, we identify the firms and the
products at each firm that failed the inspections (contaminated firm-product pairs) and those
products and firms that were never found to be contaminated.3 We merge the official inspec1

A list of historical and contemporary incidents on food contaminations can be found at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of food contamination incidents#2001 to present. Some of the recent
prominent cases include the Chinese dairy scandal in 2008 and the Brazilian meat scandal in June 2017 (see
an Economist article on the incidence: https://www.economist.com/news/business/21719416-chile-chinaand-eu-have-banned-some-or-all-countrys-meat-meat-scandal-brazil).
2
The survey is led by Jinan Institute for Economic and Social Research (IESR) and Guangzhou General
Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine. We thank IESR for sharing the survey
instruments and the data.
3
We conducted an extensive news search through LexisNexis to cross validate the official inspection
reports. See Section 3.3 for more details.

1

tion lists with firm-product level Chinese Customs data and firm-level Manufacturing Survey
data to examine both the direct e↵ects of the scandal on contaminated firm-product pairs,
as well as the e↵ects on other products at the contaminated firms (within-firm spillovers)
and the e↵ects on innocent and non-inspected firms (across-firm spillovers).
We begin by showing that the scandal had a large impact on the overall export performance of the entire dairy sector in China, thus providing an ideal setting for studying
within-sector spillovers. Using a di↵erence-in-di↵erences framework, we find that the average
value of dairy exports plummeted by 68% following the scandal and failed to recover ever after five years. This estimate captures both the direct impact on contaminated firm-products
and the spillovers on other firms and products. Decomposing the direct versus indirect impacts, we estimate an aggregate spillover e↵ect of 57%, about four fifths of the total e↵ect.
Our estimates are robust to various empirical specifications that relax the classical DD assumption. To the extent that products by di↵erent dairy firms are imperfect substitutes, the
estimates provide a lower bound on the collective reputation e↵ect.
Next, we investigate how the spillover e↵ects are distributed across di↵erent firms and
products. We leverage the detailed micro data on export activities and inspection outcomes
at the firm-product level. Our results suggest that contaminated firms saw a drop of 84% in
export revenue after the scandal relative to the national industrial trend. These firms were
also 14.2% less likely to export following the scandal. Furthermore, we find that innocent
and non-inspected firms experienced an equally significant decline in export revenue that is
about 64% of the e↵ect on directly contaminated firms. Moreover, firms deemed innocent
by government inspections do not fare any better than non-inspected firms. All together,
these findings point to large reputation spillovers and highlight the potential challenges of
government actions in helping firms to signal quality and restore trust.
Finally, we investigate potential mechanisms that may underlie the observed spillover
e↵ects. Since a firm’s reputation is essentially constituted by buyers’ beliefs and perception,
the ways that consumers gather information and learn crucially matter for the extent of reputation externalities. Specifically, we examine the role of: 1) information accuracy in global
media reports, 2) salience of individual (firm) brands, and 3) observability (or traceability)
of the supply chain network.
First, to study the role of information accuracy and global media, we construct measures
of consumers’ knowledge about the scandal across di↵erent countries, using Google Trends
Search indices for phrases that reflect a more or less accurate depiction of the event. We
find that the spillover e↵ects are smaller in countries where people appear to have better

2

information about the parties directly involved in the scandal, reflected in more targeted
internet search behavior. In particular, the across-firm spillover e↵ect is primarily driven by
exports to destinations with low information accuracy.
Second, to examine the interaction between collective and individual reputation, we exploit baseline variation in firms’ exporting experience and find that young firms are more
vulnerable to the collective reputation shock, consistent with the theory outlined in Tirole
(1996): a more established individual reputation can (partially) shield firms from the collective damage, whereas newcomers su↵er more from the “original sin” of the predecessors.
Third, to examine the role of the supply chain network, we use the Chinese Customs
data to identify the major sourcing location for each exporting firm. We find that sourcing
the same products from the same location as a contaminated firm hurt export performance.
This suggests that production networks matter in transmitting reputation spillovers, especially in settings where firms are less vertically integrated and exhibit fragmented upstreamdownstream relationships, as in typical agricultural markets in developing countries.
A growing empirical literature studies firm reputation and quality provision in markets
with information frictions (Banerjee and Duflo, 2000; Jin and Leslie, 2009; List, 2006; Macchiavello, 2010; Cabral and Hortacsu, 2010; Björkman-Nyqvist, Svensson, and YanagizawaDrott, 2013; Bardhan, Mookherjee, and Tsumagari, 2013; Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2015;
Li, Tadelis, and Zhou, 2016). At the same time, prior studies have shown that information
frictions play an important role in international trade (Allen, 2014; Macchiavello and Morjaria, 2015; Startz, 2017). We build upon these two bodies of research by examining the role
of “group” reputation in trade. Our results demonstrate that collective reputation forces can
have important implications on a country’s trade pattern, acting as an underlying source of
a country’s comparative advantage.
Despite earlier works on the theory of collective reputation (Tirole, 1996; Winfree and
McCluskey, 2005; Fleckinger, 2007; Levin, 2009; Fishman, Simhon, Finkelshtain, and Yacouel, 2010), empirical studies remain scarce (Freedman, Kearney, and Lederman, 2012; Bai
et al., 2016; Zhao, 2018; Bachmann, Ehrlich, Fan, and Ruzic, 2019). Exploiting a natural
experiment, our results explicitly identify this important source of externality, and illustrate
how it is mediated by various informational and market forces.4
Finally, the study relates to the broad literature on firm performance and quality upgrad4

There is also a literature in agricultural and resource economics that studies collective reputation in food
and beverage industries, such as Bordeaux wine and regional appellations. Most studies use hedonic price
regressions to examine the role of group reputation (e.g., Castriota and Delmastro (2014); Marchini, Riganelli,
Diotallevi, and Pa↵arini (2014); Gergaud, Livat, Rickard, and Warzynski (2017)). We take advantage of a
natural experiment that relaxes the identification assumptions.

3

ing in development and trade (Syverson, 2011; De Loecker and Goldberg, 2014). Previous
studies have examined: (1) supply side constraints, including credit access, lack of quality
inputs, and managerial constraints (e.g., De Mel, McKenzie, and Woodru↵ (2008); Harrison and Rodrı́guez-Clare (2009); Kugler and Verhoogen (2012); Banerjee (2013); Bloom,
Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie, and Roberts (2013)), and (2) demand side factors, including
access to high-income markets (e.g., Verhoogen (2008); Park, Yang, Shi, and Jiang (2010);
Manova and Zhang (2012); Atkin, Khandelwal, and Osman (2017)). This study highlights
information frictions and low collective reputation as another potential barrier.5
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background information on the 2008 Chinese dairy scandal and Section 3 describes the data. Section
4 presents motivating evidence on the overall impact of the scandal on the dairy industry. Section 5 analyzes reputation spillovers across firms and products. Section 6 examines
mechanisms that could mediate the spillover e↵ects. Section 7 concludes.

2

Background on the 2008 Chinese Dairy Scandal

The Chinese dairy industry exhibited fast growth during the early 2000, both in terms of
domestic production and exports. The industry’s average annual growth rate was as high as
23.93% prior to 2008. Figure 1 shows that the industry’s annual export value increased over
3 times from 2000 to 2007. The number of exporting firms increased from 150 in 2000 to
335 in 2007.6 Nonetheless, in 2007 dairy exports still constituted a relatively small share of
the entire dairy production in China, and accounted for only $300 million of the country’s
$1.2 trillion exports revenue. Similar to many other industries in developing countries, it
was dominated by a large number of small and non-established players.
Over the past decade, there has been an increasing number of quality and safety issues
5
This paper also speaks to the literature on quality scandals and product recalls. Most of the previous
studies have either relied on laboratory experiments to examine consumer reactions to hypothetical product
scandals (Ahluwalia, Burnkrant, and Unnava, 2000; Dawar and Pillutla, 2000)), or focused primarily on
stock market outcomes using an event-study approach (Davidson and Worrell, 1992; Marcus, Swidler, and
Zivney, 1987; Zhao, Lee, Ng, and Flynn, 2009)). Furthermore, most studies focus on losses in own sales and
stock market price (Van Heerde, Helsen, and Dekimpe, 2007), rather than across-firm spillovers. The most
closely related study is Freedman, Kearney, and Lederman (2012), which examines toy recalls in the US and
documents sizable spillover e↵ects.
6
Figure 1 shows a spike in export growth between 2006 and 2007–the total value of exports increased by
about 138%. This spike is mainly driven by new firms entering into the exporting markets. Specifically, 30
firms contributed more than 80% of the growth spike; over 50% of the spike is driven by a single product–milk
powder; finally, over 50% of the spike is driven by exports to 6 destinations, namely Thailand, Germany,
Bangladesh, Taiwan, UAE and Hong Kong.

4

regarding Chinese food products. One of the most widely known incidents is the distribution of contaminated baby milk formula in September 2008, hereinafter referred to as “the
scandal”. The incident led to 4 infant deaths, 51,900 hospitalized children and 700 tons of
milk powder recalled nationwide. The infant formula was found to be illegally adulterated
with the industrial chemical melamine, which was added to mimic higher protein content in
the milk. Melamine is commonly used in the manufacturing of plastics and has been linked
to an increased risk of kidney stones (Hau, Kwan, and Li, 2009).
Following the initial outbreak, the Chinese government quickly shut down the supplier
of the contaminated milk powder, Sanlu Group, which was one of the largest dairy firms
in China. However, further investigations revealed that the adulteration stemmed from
malpractices of some upstream milk producers, raising the suspicion that more downstream
dairy firms could have been a↵ected.7 This discovery led to three big rounds of government
inspections: the first round targeted firms producing infant formula–175 firms were inspected
and 22 were found to have traces of melamine in their products. The subsequent 2 rounds
targeted producers of milk powder and liquid milk respectively, and covered most dairy
producers in China. We describe the three rounds of inspections in greater detail in Section
3.3. These inspections uncovered contamination in more dairy and dairy-related products,
including yogurt, milk, cheese, baby food, and cake. Product recalls were immediately
issued. By the end of 2008, the Chinese government issued an official statement that the
incidence had been fully addressed and proper measures had been put in place to ensure
the safety of the dairy products on the market.8 Corroborating the Chinese government’s
statement, data from EU’s Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed, which publishes safety
notifications and recalls for imported food products, shows that notifications related to
melamine contamination in dairy products imported from China surged in the Fall 2008 but
quickly subsided a few months after the initial outbreak (see Figure A.1).
Despite the official statement, the scandal triggered widespread fears over food safety in
China. Thousands of Chinese dairy-related products were pulled from supermarket shelves
across the world. Some countries stepped up inspections for Chinese imports, while others
issued explicit import bans for products containing dairy ingredients from China. For instance, the EU authorities stipulated tests for Chinese imports containing more than 15%
of milk powder and announced a ban on all products for children coming from China that
contained milk; the US Food and Drug Administration restricted imports of all Chinese food
7

According to the investigation reports, these malpractices were in fact “open secrets” in the industry.
See https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB122567367498791713
8
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/3079146/China-claims-tainted-milk-scandal-is-over.html

5

products containing milk; India imposed a temporary ban on import of milk and all milkrelated products from China and extended this ban till 2019. Our news search has identified
43 destinations (out of 282) that imposed explicit regulatory bans on certain Chinese dairy
imports (see Table B.1).
The scandal has had a long-lasting impact on the dairy industry in China. The General
Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine (GAQSIQ) stopped issuing national exemption status to domestic food producers9 and tightened inspections on
domestically produced food products. Dairy firms also tightened their standards for purchased raw milk and some started to build their own upstream milk farms to better monitor
and control quality. Despite these actions, the scandal came as a devastating blow to the
industry and almost entirely wiped out the country’s dairy exports in the ensuing years.
Figure 1 shows that dairy exports sharply collapsed after 2008 and failed to recover even by
the end of 2013, the end of our sample period. At the same time, dairy imports in China rose
rapidly after the scandal (Figure A.2), suggesting that domestic consumers also switched to
foreign dairy products in response to safety concerns surrounding the domestic brands.

3

Data

We assemble three micro-level datasets: the Chinese Customs Database, the Chinese Manufacturing Survey, and the list of inspections conducted by the Chinese government following
the scandal. We merge the three datasets using detailed firm and product information.

3.1

Chinese Customs Database (2000-2013)

The Chinese Customs Database provides information on transaction-level trade flows for the
universe of China’s exports and imports over the time period. The data is collected and made
available by the Chinese Customs Office. For the analysis in this study, we focus on exports.
For each transaction, we observe the exporting firm name, location, value and quantity of
the exports, the HS eight-digit product code, the city in China where the product is sourced
from and the final exporting destination. We compute unit prices for exported products by
dividing the value of exports by quantity. While the data is available at daily frequency,
for our analysis we aggregate the data to firm-product-year level. Figure A.3 plots China’s
9

This was previously known as the “inspection-free” program, which gave exemption status to qualified
food producers and waived various quality inspections for these firms.

6

overall export growth over time. Exports grew rapidly during the early 2000s following the
entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO).
We define “dairy industry” using the HS eight-digit product classification. Most of the
dairy products fall under the HS two-digit code 04, while infant dairy products fall under
19 and milk protein products extracted from raw milk fall under 35. Table B.2 provides the
full list of the HS eight-digit codes and descriptions for dairy products.

3.2

Chinese Manufacturing Survey (2005-2009, 2011-2013)

The Chinese Manufacturing Survey data is compiled from annual surveys conducted by the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), and includes all industrial firms that are identified as
being either state-owned or non-state firms with sales revenue above 5 million RMB. As
described in previous studies, even though a large number of small to medium industrial
firms (80%) are excluded from the sample, they account for only a small fraction of the total
economic and export activities in China. In particular, the excluded firms employ 28.8%
of the industrial workforce, but only produce 9.3% of the total output and generate 2.5%
of the export revenue (Brandt, Van Biesebroeck, and Zhang, 2012). Our analysis focuses
on dairy firms within the manufacturing sector. For each firm-year observation, we observe
basic production and financial information, including firms’ four-digit industry code, years
of operation, total sales, employment, and export revenue.

3.3

Government Inspection Lists

The Chinese government implemented three rounds of inspections after the scandal broke
out in late 2008. The three rounds of inspections focused respectively on producers of infant
formula, milk powder, and liquid milk. In the first round, the government inspected all 109
infant formula producers in China and found 22 to be contaminated. The second round
inspected 154 randomly sampled milk powder producers (together making up over 70% of
the market share) out of 290 producers nationwide and found 20 to be contaminated. The
third round targeted 466 more established dairy brands with large market shares, and found
9 plants of 3 major brands to be contaminated.
For each round of inspection, the Chinese government released the full list of firm names,
the products of each firm being inspected and the corresponding inspection results. We
obtained the inspection lists (at the firm-product level) from the official GAQSIQ website.
To cross validate the information in the official reports, we conducted an extensive news

7

search through LexisNexis: all the media-reported cases of contamination we could find
were covered in the Chinese official inspection reports.
We merge the firm-product level inspection lists with the Customs data using firm names
and product information, and with the Manufacturing Survey data using firm names (since
we do not observe product information in the Manufacturing Survey). Based on the firmproduct level inspection information, we classify firms into one of the three following categories: contaminated, innocent, and non-inspected firms. The first is defined as firms with
at least one product found to be contaminated during one or more rounds of the inspections.
The second is defined as firms that passed the tests for all of their inspected products. The
third group includes firms that were never inspected. We can classify products into these
three categories analogously: for example, contaminated products are those found to be
contaminated in at least one of the inspected firms, and innocent products are those that
cleared the inspection in all firms inspected.
Using these definitions, we’ve identified 149 contaminated firm-product pairs in 67 contaminated firms, and 413 innocent firm-product pairs in 95 innocent firms in the Customs
data. The Manufacturing Survey data contains 73 contaminated and 352 innocent firms.

3.4

Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents firm-level baseline (2000-2007) summary statistics. It reports the number
of non-missing observations, mean and standard deviation for a set of key export performance measures (Panel A), as well as employment and total sales (Panel B), separately for
contaminated (Columns 1 and 2), innocent (Columns 3 and 4), and non-inspected firms
(Columns 5 and 6). Column 7 calculates the di↵erence in means between the contaminated
and non-inspected firms (Column 2 and 6) and Column 8 reports the p-value of the di↵erence. Panel A shows that on average, contaminated firms have larger exporting revenue and
are more experienced compared to innocent firms; however, they are not systematically different from the non-inspected firms. Panel B reinforces that observation that contaminated
firms are larger in terms both of employment and of sales revenue than innocent firms and
non-inspected firms. This is consistent with the fact that the Chinese government targeted
larger firms in the third round of inspection.10
Table 2 presents product-level baseline summary statistics for the same export performance measures. Panel A shows that on average contaminated products are exported in
larger amount and for more years comparing to innocent and non-inspected products. Con10

Table A.1 presents the same baseline summary statistics for non-dairy food industries.

8

taminated products also appear to be less likely to be exported to countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) although the di↵erence is not
significant. Panel B presents the same summary statistics for non-dairy food products.
Figure A.4 plots the number of exporting products and destinations for contaminated,
innocent and non-inspected firms before and after the scandal. Many firms exported a single
product to a single destination, but some export multiple products to multiple destinations.
In Section 5, we discuss in greater detail how these patterns help generate the variation we
exploit for the firm-product level analysis.

4

Impact of the Scandal: Industry Level Analysis

This section estimates the overall impact of the scandal on the export performance of the
Chinese dairy sector. Section 4.1 discusses our preferred empirical specification, a di↵erencein-di↵erences (DD) specification, as well as threats to the validity of the DD assumptions
and additional tests we perform that relax these assumptions. Section 4.2 presents our DD
estimates. Our finding that the scandal decreased the total value of dairy exports by 68%
over the course of five years motivates us to further explore the within-sector spillovers across
firms and products in Section 5.

4.1

Empirical Specification

Equation (1) presents our baseline di↵erence-in-di↵erence specification, which compares the
value of exports of dairy products, the treated industry, to the value of exports of other
two-digit level industries before and after 2008, the year of the scandal.
Yjt =

dairy Dairyj

⇥ Postt +

j

+

t

+ ⇡Xjt + ✏jt

(1)

Yjt is the natural logarithm of the value of exports for industry j in year t; Dairyj is an
indicator for the dairy industry; Xjt include time-varying controls at the industry level, such
as the value share exported to di↵erent continents at baseline (2000 to 2007) interacted with
year indicators. We introduce these covariates to control for di↵erential trends in destination
countries that might a↵ect di↵erent industries di↵erently. In our preferred specification, we
limit the set of control industries to exclude non-dairy food industries. The latter might
be a↵ected by the scandal as well, if foreign consumers update their perception about the
quality of Chinese food products in general following the scandal. This leaves us with 79
9

control industries. We cluster standard errors at the industry level allowing for arbitrary
correlation in error terms across time for a given industry.
The internal validity of the DD design rests on the assumptions that the treated and control industries would be on parallel trends absent the scandal. The parallel trends assumption
might not hold for two reasons. First, as discussed in Section 2, the dairy industry saw a
rapid growth in exports prior to the scandal, a growth episode that might not be paralleled
by other industries. Second, the global financial crisis in 2008 could have a↵ected di↵erent
industries di↵erently. If so, we may erroneously attribute to the scandal an export decline
in dairy products that was in fact due to the crisis. Perfectly overcoming these concerns is
challenging in the current context. We perform a series of robustness checks to address these
issues to the best we can. In particular, we show that our estimates of the impact of the crisis
are robust to several specifications that relax the parallel trends assumption, such as including a vector of industry-specific linear time trends in Equation (1). We further supplement
our DD specification with an interactive fixed e↵ect model (Gobillon and Magnac, 2016) and
synthetic control method. Reassuringly, the di↵erent methods, despite relying on di↵erent
identification assumptions, produce qualitatively and quantitatively similar estimates to the
DD design. Appendix C presents the alternative empirical strategies and results.

4.2

Results: Di↵erence-in-Di↵erences

Table 3 presents estimates of Equation (1). We focus first on Panel A. The baseline specification in Column 1 includes only year and industry fixed e↵ects, and estimates a decline
of 65.5% in the value of dairy exports following the scandal.11 Columns 3 and 4 build on
this specification by adding time-varying controls and industry-specific linear trends. Our
preferred specification in Column 4 estimates that the value of dairy exports plummeted by
68% following the scandal. Column 2 expands our sample to include non-dairy food industries. The interaction coefficient between the indicator for food industry and post dummy
suggests that the scandal did not a↵ect the non-dairy food industries in an economically and
statistically significant way.
Panel A estimates the overall impact of the scandal on the dairy industry, capturing both
the direct impact on contaminated firm-products, as well as the spillovers on innocent and
non-inspected firms and products. We can gauge the aggregate spillover e↵ect by excluding
11

Because most of the coefficients we estimates are large in magnitude, in what follows we compute
elasticities using the mathematical formula: Elasticity = (eCoe↵ 1) ⇥ 100, where Coe↵ is the estimated
coefficient reported in the tables.

10

the contaminated firm-products from the “treated” (dairy) industry. Panel B shows that
the overall spillover e↵ect on the innocent and non-inspected sample appears to be slightly
smaller than the total e↵ect, although this di↵erence is only statistically significant in our
preferred specification in Column 4. Specifically, we estimate a spillover e↵ect of 57% decrease in exports for the innocent and non-inspected firm-products, about four fifths of the
total e↵ect of the scandal on the entire dairy sector.

5

Reputation Spillover: Firm-Product Level Analysis

Motivated by the findings in the previous section, we next zoom into the dairy sector and
examine the extent to which the impact of the scandal spilled over across firms and products.
Specifically, we are interested in examining both the direct impact on contaminated firmproducts, as well as the spillover e↵ects within and across firms in the industry. To do so,
we take advantage of the rich micro-level data on export activities at firm-product level, and
merge those with inspection outcomes as described in Section 3 to exploit within-industry
variation in the involvement in the scandal. Our main regression specification is as follows:
Yf pt =

direct CFirm-Productf p

⇥ Postt

+

within-firm CFirmf

+

across-firm CProductp

+

1 IFirm-Productf p

+

2 IFirmf

+

fp

+

t

⇥ Postt

⇥ Postt

⇥ Postt

⇥ Postt

+ ✏f pt

(2)

We restrict the analysis to the dairy industry. The dependent variable Yf pt is an outcome
for firm f product p at year t, including the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) transformation of
export revenue and export quantity, the natural logarithm of export price, and an indicator
for exporting.12 Except for the price outcome, we first create a balanced panel at firmproduct and year level in order to capture extensive margin responses (i.e., entry and exit into
exporting). CFirm-Productf p is an indicator for contaminated firm-product pairs directly
involved in the scandal: the indicator equals 1 if a given product of a firm was inspected
and failed the quality test. CFirmf is an indicator for contaminated firms involved in the
12

We use the IHS transformation for export revenues and quantity to obviate the fact that we have missing
firm-product-year cells when exports are zero (Burbidge, Magee, and Robb, 1988).

11

scandal: the indicator equals 1 if a firm was inspected and at least one of its products failed
the test. CProductp is an indicator for contaminated products involved in the scandal: the
indicator equals 1 if at least one of the inspected firms failed the quality test for the given
product. IFirm-Productf p and IFirmf are defined similarly: IFirm-Productf p is an indicator
for innocent firm-product pairs that were inspected and passed the quality test. IFirmf is an
indicator for innocent firms that passed the quality test for all of their inspected products.
Identification relies on the assumption that unobserved firm-product-year specific shocks
that a↵ect the outcomes are uncorrelated with the initial inspection status. In other words,
absent the scandal, all firm-products would have seen the same growth in export performance
over time. However, the Chinese government did not choose which firms to inspect randomly:
Table A.3 shows that even for the second round of the inspection, where the inspections were
claimed to be random, inspected firms appear to di↵er from non-inspected firms based on
several observable characteristics, including the value of exports in 2007. Overall, inspected
firms are on average larger than non-inspected firms (Section 3.4).
To assuage concerns of omitted variable or selection bias, our preferred specification
controls for 1) firm-product (

f p)

and 2) year ( t ) fixed e↵ects, as well as 3) an interaction of

baseline firm-product export volume with the post indicator. First, this specification partials
out time-invariant firm-product unobservable characteristics, such as quality. Second, it
controls for common nationwide dairy industry time trends, such as global demand shocks.
Third, we allow for di↵erential trends for firms of di↵erent sizes to ensure we account for
the fact that firms of di↵erent sizes might have been on di↵erent growth trajectories during
the dairy boom prior to the scandal. Thus, our analysis captures di↵erential changes in
performance across firm-products over time. To examine the sensitivity of our results, we
also estimate an alternative specification controlling for firm, product and year fixed e↵ects
separately (Table A.2). We cluster standard errors two-way at the product-year and firm
level allowing for arbitrary correlation in error terms across time for a given firm and for a
given product-year across firms.
The omitted category in Equation 2 includes innocent and non-inspected products from
non-inspected firms. Therefore,

across-firm

identifies the impact of the scandal on non-

inspected firms selling one of the contaminated products (i.e., across-firm spillovers).

within-firm

identifies the overall impact on the contaminated firms (i.e., within-firm spillovers) whereas
direct
2

captures the additional impact on their directly involved products. Similarly,

1

and

capture the impact on the innocent firms and innocent firm-products relative to the omit-

ted group. Table A.4 describes the variation in the data in each group that allows us to

12

identify these various e↵ects.
We first present our baseline estimation results in Section 5.1 and discuss alternative
explanations and additional robustness checks in Section 5.3.

5.1

Results: Direct and Spillover E↵ects on Exports

Table 4 reports the main estimates from Equation (2). Column 1 examines the impact of the
scandal on the IHS of export revenue and shows large within-firm and across-firm spillovers.
Specifically, we estimate ˆwithin-firm = 1.8, significant at the 1 percent significance level,
that is, contaminated firms experienced a drop of 84.1% in export revenue after the scandal
relative to the national trend and the firms’ average performance. Within contaminated
firms, directly involved products are a↵ected more–the estimated coefficient

direct

is mean-

ingful (-0.489, or -38.7%) but imprecisely estimated, suggesting that there may be a lot of
heterogeneity among the subset of directly contaminated firm-products. Another possibility
is that since most products within the contaminated firms are a↵ected, the coefficient is
only picking up any di↵erential impact of contaminated versus innocent and non-inspected
products within those firms.
Next, in line with the industry-level analysis in Section 4, we see a large and negative
spillover impact on firms selling contaminated products: the estimate for

across-firm

is -0.773

(or -53.8%) and is significant at the 1 percent significance level. Finally, the e↵ects on
innocent firms and products are very mixed: while the coefficient on IFirm-Product⇥Post is
large and positive, the overall impact on innocent firms, relative to non-inspected firms, is
negative. Both of these estimates are not statistically significant.
Column 2 examines the e↵ects of the scandal on the IHS of export quantity and finds
similar results. Comparing the estimates of

across-firm

in Column 1 and 2, the decrease in

quantity explains 97.9% of the across-firm spillover, after taking into account entry and exit.
Column 3 examines changes in unit price. The regression is estimated on the unbalanced panel of firm-product-year observations with positive export activity. The estimate of
across-firm

is -0.157 (-14.5%) and is significant at the 10 percent significance level. The direct

impact on contaminated firm-products is -0.122 (-11.5%) but is not statistically significant,
whereas the within-firm spillover ˆwithin-firm is positive at 0.293 (23.2%) with a standard error
of 0.051. We speculate that firms, especially contaminated firms, may have lowered prices for
products that were found to be contaminated, while at the same time switched production
to higher-end products, resulting in an overall increase in the firm-level price.
Column 4 examines the impact of the scandal on the extensive margin, and finds that
13

contaminated firms are 14.2% less likely to export after the scandal. The estimate for
within-firm

is significant at the 1 percent significance level, whereas the one for

direct

is non-

distinguishable from 0. All Chinese dairy firms carrying contaminated products, regardless of
whether innocent, contaminated or not inspected, are 6.2% less likely to export contaminated
products, and the estimate of

across-firm

is significant at 1 percent significance level. The

results on innocent firms and products are again inconclusive.
Finally, we examine how persistent the direct and spillover e↵ects are by fully interacting
the firm-product group dummies with year dummies in Equation (2). Figure 2 plots the
regression coefficients with standard errors for two outcome variables: log value of exports
and exporting indicator. We see that both the within-firm and across-firm spillover e↵ects
persist over five years after the scandal and display little sign of recovery.

5.2

Interpretation: The Role of Government Inspections

Overall, the results show large within-firm and across-firm spillovers in export performance:
both the non-inspected products of contaminated firms and the contaminated products of
non-inspected firms were significantly adversely a↵ected by the scandal. On the other hand,
the e↵ects on innocent firms and products are highly mixed. To the extent that inspection
outcomes released by the Chinese government can serve as a form of quality signal, these
results warrant more investigation. This section discusses two potential explanations for the
mixed results on innocent firms and products.
The first explanation is that the public might perceive government inspections as a bad
signal for potential quality violations. The fact that a firm went under inspection may
indicate that something was not right, even though some of the inspections were claimed to
be targeted at random (see discussions in Section 2). An alternative explanation is that any
firm that appears in the post-scandal news reports is associated implicitly with the scandal
stigma if people do not pay attention to the details of the news. Ma, Wang, and Khanna
(2016) discuss this “reminder (salience) e↵ect”.
Table 5 examines the impact of the scandal on firms’ domestic performance using the
manufacturing survey data. Since information on domestic sales is not available at the
product level, we conduct the analysis at the firm level and restrict the sample to a balanced
panel to control for sample composition changes. The coefficients are less precisely estimated.
Qualitatively, we see a negative impact of the scandal on contaminated firms while the
innocent firms do not appear to perform better than the non-inspected ones.
Overall, these findings are consistent with the two potential explanations discussed above
14

and highlight the challenges governments might face in trying to send signals to the market
and restore trust via inspection e↵orts. These results speak broadly to the importance
of understanding the process of information acquisition and the resulting information set
of consumers. We come back to this point in Section 6 when we discuss the mechanisms
underlying the reputation spillovers.

5.3

Alternative Explanations and Robustness Checks

This section considers several alternative explanations that may contribute to the results in
Section 5.1 aside from reputation spillovers and presents additional robustness checks.
5.3.1

Di↵erential Time Trends

Di↵erent sub-industries within the dairy sector may be on di↵erent growth trajectories: in
particular, contaminated products may grow faster or slower than other products absent the
scandal, leading to biased estimates of the spillover e↵ects. Table A.5 allows for di↵erential
time trends across sub-industries at the HS two-digit level. Reassuringly, the results look
qualitatively very similar to the results in Table 4.
Contaminated firms and other firms may also be on di↵erent growth trajectory. If the
contaminated firms were growing faster prior to the scandal, the estimated coefficients would
be partly driven by these fast-growing firms mechanically scaling down their production and
reducing exports after the scandal. To alleviate this concern, we allow for di↵erential time
trends with respect to baseline sales in our baseline specification. In Table A.6, we further
exclude firms and destination countries that account for most of the export growth spike
between 2006 and 2008 (see more discussion in Section 2). The results are very similar.13
5.3.2

Confounding Supply-Side Factors

Collective reputation represents a demand-side force, but there may be supply-side forces
changing at the same time that impact Chinese dairy exporters. For example, the scandal
may have disrupted the activities of some upstream suppliers; some milk farmers and milk
stations exited the market as a result. Similarly, stronger government regulations may exert
additional costs on firms, raising their production costs. All these supply-side forces can lead
to reductions in export revenue and quantity. However, a pure upward shift of the supply
13

As discussed in Section 2, a few predominant firms and export destinations drive the growth spike in
the pre-scandal period (2006-2007).

15

curve would have resulted in an unambiguous increase in price (conditioning on exporting),
contrary to what is shown in Table 4 Column 3: the coefficient on CProductXPost, the
key collective reputation spillover e↵ect, is negative and significant at 10 percent level.14
This result alone implies that the demand curve must be moving downward and outweigh
the supply curve movement. While we cannot completely rule out the e↵ect of all supplyside factors, we can conclude from the analysis that the demand-side force due to collective
reputation played an important role in this context.
5.3.3

Confounding Foreign Demand Shocks

Di↵erent firms may be subject to idiosyncratic demand shocks depending on the conditions
in the destination countries they export to. If contaminated firms are more likely to export
to countries that happen to demand more or less imported dairy products after 2008, the
estimated ˆdirect and ˆwithin-firm would be biased. To examine this possibility, we construct
a measure of firm-specific demand shock using a firm’s baseline export value share to each
destination country multiplied by each destination country’s yearly dairy imports from the
rest of the world excluding China and summed over all destinations. Table A.7 shows that
our results are robust to including these firm-specific demand shocks as additional controls.
5.3.4

Foreign Import Regulations Due to Protectionist Motives

Import regulations directed to all firms from the same origin-industry can result in similar
“spillover” patterns in Table 4. As we discussed in Section 2, after the 2008 scandal, several
destinations imposed explicit import bans on Chinese dairy products. Table B.1 list these
destinations by their value share of the total dairy exports from China.
One way to think about such trade policy is that foreign governments react on behalf
of domestic consumers in light of rising safety concerns about products imported from a
particular country. Such blanket-style regulations can be regarded as an underlying channel
for the collective reputation e↵ect. However, a di↵erent story is that some of these regulatory
hurdles may arise from protectionist motives. In other words, foreign countries can take
advantage of the scandal to raise import barriers. Empirically distinguishing these two stories
is challenging. We perform an additional analysis by looking at the performance of Chinese
dairy exporters only to those destinations without explicit import bans. Interestingly, the
results, shown in Table A.8, are very similar to the main results. This suggests that while
14

We can repeat the price regression on a balanced sample of exporters (i.e., firms which exported both
before and after the scandal) to account for any sample composition change; the results are robust.

16

explicit government regulations are present, they cannot explain the spillover e↵ects in full.
Market-based forces due to collective reputation do matter.

6

Mechanisms

In this section, we investigate three potential mechanisms that could mediate the strength
of the reputation spillover e↵ects documented in Sections 4 and 5. Since a firm’s reputation
is constituted essentially by buyers’ beliefs and perception, the ways that consumers gather
information and learn crucially matter for the extent of reputation externalities. Thus, each
of the mechanisms we investigate is inherently related to how consumers’ information set is
formed and shaped. Specifically, we examine the roles of: 1) information accuracy in global
media reports, 2) salience of individual (firm) brands, and 3) observability (or traceability)
of the supply chain network. In this and other real world contexts, all of these forces can
act jointly and interact with one another. Rather than trying to disentangle and quantify
the impact of each, our goal is to examine whether a particular force has bite.

6.1

Information Accuracy in Global Media Reports

A vast literature has shown that media influences people’s perception, thereby a↵ecting a
wide range of social and economic outcomes (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010). In the context
of food scares, Adda (2007) and Luong, Shi, and Wang (2019) show that news information
alters consumers’ perceived risk of encountering low quality products and thereby a↵ects
demand. Therefore, the way that media reports an event matters for the event’s implications.
We investigate an important aspect of media reports: informational accuracy, that is, the
level of detail with which media outlets described the involvement of di↵erent firms in the
scandal. Figure A.6 Panel A shows a typical Chinese media report on the scandal which
usually came with a full list of contaminated firms and products. On the other hand, Panel
B shows an example from the Western media, the New York Times, which only reported an
estimated number of contaminated firms but did not mention any specific name.
Such heterogeneity in media contents across countries can generate di↵erent information
sets among local consumers. We can imagine two scenarios: one in which consumers perfectly
understand the evolution of the scandal and are able to closely keep track of the inspection
outcomes, and the other in which consumers have trouble identifying the contaminated
firms and begin to worry about Chinese dairy products in general as a result of the scandal.
Collective reputation forces would be stronger in the latter scenario compared to the former.
17

To construct a systematic measure of consumers’ information accuracy across di↵erent
export destinations, we leverage Google Trends data. Google Trends provides public time
series indices based on Google Search data, which capture how often a search term is entered
relative to the total search volume in a given geographical area. To compare relative popularity across search terms, each data point of Google Trend indices is divided by the total
searches of the geographical area and the time range it represents, and scaled on a range of
0 to 100 for any given period. We collect two types of search indices, a web search index
and a news search index, for di↵erent countries and regions. For each index, we construct
the relative search intensity ratio for the two keywords, “Sanlu” versus “2008 Chinese milk
scandal”. Figure 3 displays the relative search intensity for several regions and countries. It
shows that web users on the left panel–China, Hong Kong and New Zealand–search “Sanlu”
much more than the generic phrase, suggesting that consumers in these locations may be
more informed about the parties directly involved in the scandal. In comparison, information
appears to be much less specific in countries on the right panel–the US, Canada and UK.15
We collect the web and news search intensity ratios for all rcountries and regions available
on Google Trends–there are 31 in total. We classify them into two groups according to
the relative search intensity: “high” indicates a higher ratio and thus higher information
accuracy. Table B.3 describes the classification.
Table 6 reports the heterogeneous impact of the scandal on export performance to destinations with high and low search intensity ratios, using the news search index. Consistent
with the discussion above, the across-firm spillover e↵ect ( ˆacross-firm ) is driven by exports
to destinations with low information accuracy (-0.617 compared to -0.044). The p-value
for testing equality of two coefficients is 0.0616.16 Results using the web search index are
presented in Table A.9 and the qualitative takeaways are very similar.
Overall, the results show that information accuracy plays an important role in mediating
the collective reputation force. This may be particularly relevant in the context of international trade as media coverage of events that happen in foreign countries, where information
needs to travel far, may be less precise due to the lack of local knowledge.
15

Figure A.5 shows the search behavior across provinces in China. Not surprisingly, Hebei province, where
the headquarter of Sanlu was located, has the highest search intensity for the keyword “Sanlu”.
16
For this test we cluster standard errors at firm level.

18

6.2

Salience of Individual Brand

A firm’s reputation can have both an individual component and a collective component: for
example, consumers may observe a noisy signal of the industrial average quality as well as a
signal from each firm. In this case, a strong individual reputation can potentially mitigate the
impact of a collective reputation shock. As many industries in developing countries, most
of the Chinese dairy exporters lack established international brand. However, some had
exported for more years than others before 2008. We use a firm’s exporting experience as a
proxy for its individual reputation stock. Due to our short baseline period, we define “new
(young)” firms as those that just entered into exporting in 2008 and define “established”
firms as those that had exported for one or more years prior to 2008.
Table 7 shows the heterogeneous impact of the scandal on new and established firms.
In line with the above discussion, the across-firm spillover e↵ect is larger for new exporters
(again we allow for di↵erential time trends with respect to firm size, which is likely to di↵er
between new and established exporters). A test of equality of ˆacross-firm in Column 1 and 2
(or Column 3 and 4), has p-value of 0.0191 (or 0.0734). The test of equality of the spillover
e↵ects on the extensive margin, ˆacross-firm in Column 5 and 6 (or Column or 7 and 8), has
p-value of 0.0335 (or 0.1313).17 We interpret these findings as evidence that in light of a
collective reputation shock, a more established individual reputation can (partially) shield
firms from the collective damage, whereas newcomers are more likely to su↵er the “original
sin” of the predecessors.

6.3

Information on the Supply Chain Structure

The production process and supply chain structure could matter for reputation spillovers.
If the root cause of a quality defect is limited to an individual firm, consumers may not
be concerned about other firms from the same origin-industry. One example of this is the
case of Samsung Galaxy battery fire. By contrast, if the quality defect stems from upstream
production processes, such as in the case of the Chinese dairy scandal (see discussion in
Section 2), the supply chain structure could become important. Indeed, typical supply chains
in agricultural settings in developing countries feature a large number of fragmented upstream
producers selling to downstream traders and firms. Quality control by the downstream
parties can be very difficult. Therefore, in light of a quality scandal about product quality
of one firm, consumers have reasons to worry about the quality of other firms that source
17

For this test we cluster standard errors at firm level.

19

from the same upstream sources.
To shed light on this mechanism, we take advantage of the Chinese Customs Data in
which firms are required to report the sourcing location for each of their export transactions.
We leverage this information to identify a firm’s major sourcing city based on the firm’s prescandal export values from each city. We define an indicator variable called “CSourceCity”
if a city hosts at least one contaminated firm. Similarly, we define an indicator variable
called “CSourceCity-Product” if a city hosts at least one contaminated firm for a given
contaminated product.
Table 8 reports the impact of sourcing from a contaminated location, for innocent and
non-inspected firms. The coefficients are not estimated precisely, but the point estimates
suggest that sourcing the same products from the same location as a contaminated firm
can hurt export performance. Note that there is a potential countervailing competition
e↵ect: to the extent that firms in one location compete for the same labor market and
upstream suppliers, innocent and non-inspected firms may benefit as their rivals were hit by
the scandal. Therefore, the negative coefficient on CSourceCity-ProductXPost can be seen
as a lower bound of the collective reputation e↵ect.
Summary: This section explores three mechanisms potentially driving collective reputation
spillovers. First, information accuracy plays an important role in mediating the strength of
collective reputation—the spillover e↵ects are smaller in destinations where people appear
to have had better information about parties involved in the scandal Second, individual
reputation can mitigate collective reputation damage, and new firms appear to be the most
vulnerable to collective reputation shocks. Finally, supply chain structure matters especially in settings where firms are less vertically integrated and exhibit fragmented upstreamdownstream relationships.

7

Conclusion

Understanding how reputation spreads within an industry or a geographic area is important for informing trade and development policy as collective reputation implies an important externality. This paper studies this question in the context of Chinese dairy firms’
exports following the 2008 scandal. We document strong reputation spillover e↵ects on noncontaminated firms. Surprisingly, firms deemed innocent by formal inspections do not appear
to be faring any better than non-inspected firms. These findings highlight the important
role of collective reputation in international trade and the challenges governments might face
20

in trying to signal quality and restore trust. We further investigate potential mechanisms
that underlie the spillover e↵ects. All together, the analyses highlight the role of information
accuracy, individual reputation and supply chain structure in mediating the strength of the
collective reputation e↵ect.
Naturally, the external validity of the results is an empirical question as the exact magnitudes of the spillovers vary across industries and countries. The framework and approach
set out here could be used to study similar issues in other contexts. Our study has two broad
policy implications concerning 1) the role of government and third-party certifications and
2) the role of market structure.
First, collective reputation may call for government interventions, but government-led
inspection e↵orts may generate counterproductive signals depending on the reputation of the
inspection body itself. Private third parties and international certification bodies may act
as an e↵ective complement or substitute for government regulations, especially in developing
country settings. Yet, based on our interviews with firms in the Chinese dairy industry,
third-party certification has not been adopted in this sector. This could be either due to
high costs and logistical hurdles of obtaining these certifications, or perceived low returns
from certification. Understanding the barriers to adoption as well as the e↵ectiveness of
these programs is crucial for designing policies that could assure a high quality standard and
break the low-quality-low-reputation equilibrium.
Second, the study takes a first step in investigating various mechanisms that may a↵ect
the transmission of reputation spillover. Understanding these mechanisms can help inform
policies in light of a collective reputation crisis. In the context of the Chinese dairy industry,
one noticeable reaction many firms undertake following the scandal is vertical integration
with upstream milk farms. One rationale for this is to enforce stronger quality control (Hansman, Hjort, León, and Teachout, 2017); an equally important rationale is to signal to the
market the supplier relationship, so that a firm is better shielded from wrongdoings of other
firms’ suppliers. By 2018, over 70% Chines raw milk was produced from vertically-integrated
milk farms.18 Future work is needed to understand more about how collective reputation affects firms’ quality investment incentives, including endogenous supplier network formation.
Acting as an important externality, it could also have rich interactions with other market
forces, such as entry and market competition.

18

News source: http://news.ifeng.com/a/20180611/58672931_0.shtml.

21

References
Abadie, A., A. Diamond, and J. Hainmueller (2010): “Synthetic control methods for
comparative case studies: Estimating the e↵ect of California’s tobacco control program,”
Journal of the American statistical Association, 105(490), 493–505.
Abadie, A., and J. Gardeazabal (2003): “The economic costs of conflict: A case study
of the Basque Country,” The American Economic Review, 93(1), 113–132.
Adda, J. (2007): “Behavior towards health risks: An empirical study using the “Mad Cow”
crisis as an experiment,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 35(3), 285–305.
Ahluwalia, R., R. E. Burnkrant, and H. R. Unnava (2000): “Consumer response to
negative publicity: The moderating role of commitment,” Journal of marketing research,
37(2), 203–214.
Allen, T. (2014): “Information frictions in trade,” Econometrica, 82(6), 2041–2083.
Atkin, D., A. K. Khandelwal, and A. Osman (2017): “Exporting and firm performance: Evidence from a randomized trial,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bachmann, R., G. Ehrlich, Y. Fan, and D. Ruzic (2019): “Firms and collective
reputation: a Study of the Volkswagen Emissions Scandal,” .
Bai, J. (2009): “Panel data models with interactive fixed e↵ects,” Econometrica, 77(4),
1229–1279.
Bai, J., et al. (2016): “Melons as Lemons: Asymmetric Information, Consumer Learning
and Seller Reputation,” Discussion paper.
Banerjee, A. V. (2013): “Microcredit under the microscope: what have we learned in the
past two decades, and what do we need to know?,” Annu. Rev. Econ., 5(1), 487–519.
Banerjee, A. V., and E. Duflo (2000): “Reputation E↵ects And The Limits Of Contracting: A Study Of The Indian Software Industry,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115(3), 989–1017.
Bardhan, P., D. Mookherjee, and M. Tsumagari (2013): “Middlemen margins and
globalization,” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(4), 81–119.
Björkman-Nyqvist, M., J. Svensson, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2013): “The
market for (fake) antimalarial medicine: Evidence from uganda,” .
Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts (2013): “Does
Management Matter? Evidence from India*.,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1).
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, and Y. Zhang (2012): “Creative accounting or
creative destruction? Firm-level productivity growth in Chinese manufacturing,” Journal
of development economics, 97(2), 339–351.
22

Burbidge, J. B., L. Magee, and A. L. Robb (1988): “Alternative transformations to
handle extreme values of the dependent variable,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 83(401), 123–127.
Cabral, L., and A. Hortacsu (2010): “The dynamics of seller reputation: Evidence
from eBay,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 58(1), 54–78.
Castriota, S., and M. Delmastro (2014): “The economics of collective reputation:
Evidence from the wine industry,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 97(2),
469–489.
Davidson, W. N., and D. L. Worrell (1992): “Research notes and communications:
The e↵ect of product recall announcements on shareholder wealth,” Strategic management
journal, 13(6), 467–473.
Dawar, N., and M. M. Pillutla (2000): “Impact of product-harm crises on brand
equity: The moderating role of consumer expectations,” Journal of marketing research,
37(2), 215–226.
De Loecker, J., and P. K. Goldberg (2014): “Firm performance in a global market,”
Annu. Rev. Econ., 6(1), 201–227.
De Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008): “Returns to capital in microenterprises: evidence from a field experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4),
1329–1372.
DellaVigna, S., and M. Gentzkow (2010): “Persuasion: empirical evidence,” Annu.
Rev. Econ., 2(1), 643–669.
Fishman, A., A. Simhon, I. Finkelshtain, and N. Yacouel (2010): “The economics of
collective brands,” Bar-Ilan University Department of Economics Research Paper, (201011).
Fleckinger, P. (2007): “Collective Reputation and Market Structure: Regulating the
Quality vs Quantity Trade-of,” .
Freedman, S., M. Kearney, and M. Lederman (2012): “Product recalls, imperfect
information, and spillover e↵ects: Lessons from the consumer response to the 2007 toy
recalls,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(2), 499–516.
Gergaud, O., F. Livat, B. Rickard, and F. Warzynski (2017): “Evaluating the net
benefits of collective reputation: The case of Bordeaux wine,” Food Policy, 71, 8–16.
Gobillon, L., and T. Magnac (2016): “Regional policy evaluation: Interactive fixed
e↵ects and synthetic controls,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(3), 535–551.
Hansman, C., J. Hjort, G. León, and M. Teachout (2017): “Vertical integration,
supplier behavior, and quality upgrading among exporters,” Discussion paper, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
23

Harrison, A., and A. Rodrı́guez-Clare (2009): “Trade, foreign investment, and industrial policy for developing countries,” Handbook of Development Economics, 5, 4039–4214.
Hau, A. K.-c., T. H. Kwan, and P. K.-t. Li (2009): “Melamine toxicity and the
kidney,” Journal of the American Society of Nephrology, 20(2), 245–250.
Jin, G. Z., and P. Leslie (2009): “Reputational incentives for restaurant hygiene,”
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 1(1), 237–267.
Kugler, M., and E. Verhoogen (2012): “Prices, plant size, and product quality,” The
Review of Economic Studies, 79(1), 307–339.
Levin, J. (2009): “The dynamics of collective reputation,” The BE Journal of Theoretical
Economics, 9(1).
Li, L. I., S. Tadelis, and X. Zhou (2016): “Buying reputation as a signal of quality:
Evidence from an online marketplace,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
List, J. A. (2006): “The Behavioralist Meets the Market: Measuring Social Preferences
and Reputation E↵ects in Actual Transactions,” Journal of Political Economy, 114(1),
1–37.
Luong, T. A., C. M. Shi, and Z. Wang (2019): “The Impact of Media on Trade:
Evidence from the 2008 China Milk Contamination Scandal,” Available at SSRN 3164244.
Ma, J., Z. Wang, and T. Khanna (2016): “Milk Safety in China: A Field Experiment,”
Working Paper.
Macchiavello, R. (2010): “Development uncorked: Reputation acquisition in the new
market for Chilean wines in the UK,” .
Macchiavello, R., and A. Morjaria (2015): “The value of relationships: evidence
from a supply shock to Kenyan rose exports,” The American Economic Review, 105(9),
2911–2945.
Manova, K., and Z. Zhang (2012): “Export prices across firms and destinations,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, p. qjr051.
Marchini, A., C. Riganelli, F. Diotallevi, and C. Paffarini (2014): “Factors
of collective reputation of the Italian PDO wines: An analysis on central Italy,” Wine
Economics and Policy, 3(2), 127–137.
Marcus, R. D., S. Swidler, and T. L. Zivney (1987): “An explanation of why shareholders’ losses are so large after drug recalls,” Managerial and Decision Economics, 8(4),
295–300.
Park, A., D. Yang, X. Shi, and Y. Jiang (2010): “Exporting and firm performance:
Chinese exporters and the Asian financial crisis,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
92(4), 822–842.
24

Startz, M. (2017): “The value of face-to-face: Search and contracting problems in Nigerian
trade,” Discussion paper.
Syverson, C. (2011): “What determines productivity?,” Journal of Economic literature,
49(2), 326–65.
Tirole, J. (1996): “A theory of collective reputations (with applications to the persistence
of corruption and to firm quality),” The Review of Economic Studies, 63(1), 1–22.
Van Heerde, H., K. Helsen, and M. G. Dekimpe (2007): “The impact of a productharm crisis on marketing e↵ectiveness,” Marketing Science, 26(2), 230–245.
Verhoogen, E. A. (2008): “Trade, quality upgrading, and wage inequality in the Mexican
manufacturing sector,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 489–530.
Winfree, J. A., and J. J. McCluskey (2005): “Collective reputation and quality,”
american Journal of agricultural Economics, 87(1), 206–213.
Zhao, X., Y. Lee, S. Ng, and B. B. Flynn (2009): “The impact of product recall announcements on stock market reaction: a study of Chinese listed companies,”
US-China Business Cooperation in the 21st Century: Opportunities and Challenges for
Enterpreneurs, p. 28.
Zhao, Y. (2018): “Your (Country’s) Reputation Precedes You: Information Asymmetry,
Externalities and the Quality of Exports,” .

25

0

60

Value of Exports (in Million Dollars)
100
200
300

80
100
120
140
Quantity of Exports (in Million Kiloton)

160

400

Figure 1: Event Study Graph: China’s Dairy Exports

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Year
Value

Quantity

Notes: This figure plots Chinese dairy export value and quantity from 2000 to 2013.

26

-.6

-5

-.4

Direct effect
-.2
0

Direct effect
0

.2

5

.4

Figure 2: E↵ects over Time: Export Value (Left) and Export Dummy (Right)

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Event

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2010

2011

2012

2013

2010

2011

2012

2013

Event

Year

Year
CFirmsProductsXYear

-4

-.2

Within-firm spillovers
0
.2
.4

Within-firm spillovers
-2
0
2
4

6

.6

CFirmsProductsXYear

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Event

2008

2009

Event
Year

CFirmsXYear

CFirmsXYear

-2

-.2

Across-firm spillovers
-1
0
1

Across-firm spillovers
-.1
0
.1

2

.2

Year

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Event

2008

2009

Event

Year

Year

CProductsXYear

CProductsXYear

Notes: This figure plots the regression coefficients of the following three group dummies interacted with year dummies:
ContaminatedFirm-Product, ContaminatedFirm and ContaminatedProduct. The same regressions also include the interaction
terms between year dummies and InnocentFirm-Product as well as InnocentFirm dummies; these coefficients are not plotted.
The outcome variable for the left column is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (IHS) of export value and that for the
right column is the exporting dummy. All regressions control for firm-product and year fixed e↵ects. The dotted lines plot the
95% confidence intervals, based on two-way clustered standard errors at the the firm and product-year level.

27

Figure 3: News Search Behavior Across Export Destinations

Notes: The figure plots Google Trends news search indices for China, Hong Kong and New Zealand on the left column, and
US, Canada and UK on the right column. The red line plots the search index for the keyword “Sanlu” and the blue line plots
the search index for the keyword “2008 Chinese milk scandal”.

28

Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics: Dairy Firms
Contaminated
Number
Mean
(1)
(2)

Innocent
Number
Mean
(3)
(4)

Non-Inspected
Number
Mean
(5)
(6)

Contaminated vs. Non-Inspected
Di↵erence
p-value
(7)
(8)

Panel A. Customs Database
Avg. yearly export revenue
(in million dollars)
Years of exporting

29

% exports to OECD countries
(conditioning on exporting)

15
.
15
.
15
.

3.299
(6.152)
4.8
(2.859)
.49
(.431)

23
.
23
.
23
.

.496
(.906)
3.217
(2.315)
.389
(.422)

960
.
960
.
960
.

1.846
(6.617)
4.222
(2.43)
.603
(.388)

1.453
(1.551)
.578
(.718)
-.113
(.108)

.349
.
.421
.
.299
.

177.244
(294.354)
4.551
(1.053)
73.237
(165.395)
3.136
(1.449)

777.467
(252.157)
1.181
(.234)
908.96
(341.242)
1.912
(.334)

.002
.
0
.
.008
.
0
.

Panel B. Manufacturing Survey
Employment
Log (employment)
Sales revenue (in million RMB)
Log (sales revenue)

38
.
38
.
36
.
36
.

954.711
(1573.413)
5.732
(1.449)
982.197
(2073.951)
5.048
(2.006)

284
.
284
.
264
.
263
.

279.86
(451.327)
5.043
(.94)
112.279
(235.044)
3.707
(1.275)

1407
.
1393
.
880
.
867
.

Notes: For each firm, the sample includes only dairy products. Column 1, 3, and 5 show the number of firms in each category. Columns 2, 4, and 6 show the mean of selected
variables in each subsample. For these variables, Column 7 calculates the di↵erence between contaminated firms (Column 2) and non-inspected firms (Column 6), obtained
by regressing the outcome variable on a contaminated group dummy. Column 8 presents the p-value of the di↵erence. Standard deviations are in parentheses for Column 2,
4 and 6. For Column 7, robust standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 2: Baseline Summary Statistics: Dairy and Dairy-related Products
Contaminated
Number
Mean
(1)
(2)

Innocent+Non-Inspected
Number
Mean
(3)
(4)

Di↵erence
(5)

p-value
(6)

2.369
(3.825)
1.22
(.677)
-.095
(.12)

.542
.
.086
.
.437
.

Panel A. Dairy Products
Avg. yearly export revenue
(in million dollars)
Number of exporting years
% to OECD countries

11
.
11
.
11
.

6.358
(11.122)
7.636
(1.206)
.552
(.246)

12
.
12
.
12
.

3.989
(6.409)
6.417
(1.975)
.648
(.328)

Panel B. Non-dairy Food Products
Avg. yearly export revenue
(in million dollars)
Number of exporting years
% to OECD countries

16
.
16
.
16
.

38.528
(51.01)
7.875
(.5)
.798
(.125)

944
.
944
.
944
.

21.227
(67.015)
6.088
(2.507)
.758
(.264)

17.301
(12.552)
1.787
(.146)
.04
(.031)

.168
.
0
.
.204
.

Notes: Columns 1 and 3 show the number of products (HS eight-digit) in each category. Columns 2 and 4 show the mean
of selected variables in each subsample. Column 5 calculates the di↵erence between contaminated products (Column 2) and
innocent plus non-inspected products (Column 4), obtained by regressing the outcome variable on a contaminated group
dummy. Column 6 presents the p-value of the di↵erence. Standard deviations are in parentheses for Columns 2 and 4. For
Column 5, robust standard errors are in parentheses.

30

Table 3: Impact of the Scandal on Exports: Industry-Level Analysis
Dep Var: Log (Export Value)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.892***
(0.114)
-0.174
(0.139)
1386

-0.687***
(0.238)

-1.140***
(0.086)

1107

1120

Panel A. All Dairy Exports
DairyXPost

-1.065***
(0.080)

FoodXPost
Observations

1120

Panel B. Innocent+Non-Inspected Firm-Products Only
DairyXPost

-0.915***
(0.080)

Observations

1120

-0.741***
(0.114)
-0.174
(0.139)
1386

Year, Industry FEs
YearXValue Share to di↵erent continents
Industry time trends
Excluding the food sector

YES
NO
NO
YES

YES
NO
NO
NO

FoodXPost

-0.554**
(0.233)

-0.848***
(0.086)

1107

1120

YES
YES
NO
YES

YES
NO
YES
YES

Notes: This table shows the regression results for Equation 1. Panel A contains all exporters, collapsed to the
industry-year level. Panel B excludes contaminated firm-products in order to quantify the aggregate spillover
e↵ect. We create a balanced panel at industry (HS two-digit) and year level. The dependent variable is log annual
export value for each industry. The baseline specification in Column 1 includes only year and industry fixed
e↵ects. Column 3 and 4 build on this specification by adding time-varying controls, including the value share
exported to di↵erent continents at baseline (2000-2007) interacted with year indicators and industry-specific linear
time trends. Column 1, 3 and 4 exclude non-dairy food industries; Column 2 include all HS two-digit industries.
Standard errors clustered at the product (HS two-digit) level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.

31

Table 4: Impact of the Scandal on Exports: Firm-Product Level Analysis

CFirm-ProductXPost
CFirmXPost
CProductXPost
IFirm-ProductXPost
IFirmXPost
Observations
Firm-product FE
Year FE
BaselineSizeXPost

IHS (Value)
(1)
-0.489
(1.180)
-1.838***
(0.437)
-0.773***
(0.281)
1.083
(0.978)
-0.944
(0.768)
13775

IHS (Quantity)
(2)
-0.345
(1.157)
-1.811***
(0.456)
-0.757***
(0.257)
0.981
(0.929)
-0.847
(0.708)
13775

Log (Price)
(3)
-0.122
(0.091)
0.209***
(0.051)
-0.157*
(0.087)
-0.211**
(0.083)
0.219**
(0.097)
1519

Exporting (dummy)
(4)
-0.019
(0.078)
-0.153***
(0.031)
-0.064***
(0.023)
0.081
(0.071)
-0.081
(0.063)
13775

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

Notes: This table shows the regression results for estimating Equation 2. The sample contains all dairy exporters
(excluding intermediaries) in the Chinese Customs Data (2000-2013). We rectangularize the data to create a
balanced panel at firm-product (HS eight-digit) and year level for outcomes in Column 1, 2 and 4. Columns 1 and
2 present results for the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (IHS) of the outcome variables of interest, export
value and export quantity. The interaction terms are the products of the post-scandal dummy (2009-2013) with
the following five group indicators: (C)ontaminatedFirm-Product, (C)ontaminatedFirm, (C)ontaminatedProduct,
(I)nnocentFirm-Product, and (I)nnocentFirm. The omitted category includes innocent and non-inspected products
from non-inspected firms. All regressions control for firm-product and year fixed e↵ects. Baseline size measures a
firm’s baseline (2000-2007) total exports volume. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the firm and product-year
level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.

32

Table 5: Impact of the Scandal on Domestic Performance

CFirmsXPost
IFirmsXPost
Observations
Firm FE
Year FE
BaselineSizeXPost

Log (Total sales revenue)
(1)
-0.315
(0.255)
-0.036
(0.089)
1664

Log (Domestic sales revenue)
(2)
-0.311
(0.255)
-0.040
(0.089)
1664

Log (Employment)
(3)
-0.181
(0.235)
-0.099
(0.067)
1666

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

Notes: This table shows the regression results for the e↵ects of the scandal on firms’ sales and employment. The sample includes
the balanced sample of dairy firms in the Manufacturing Survey data (2005-2009 & 2011-2013). The interaction terms are the
post-scandal indicator (2009-2013) with the following two group indicators: (C)ontaminatedFirm and (I)nnocentFirm. The
omitted category includes non-inspected firms. All regressions control for firm and year fixed e↵ects. Baseline size measures a
firm’s total sales revenue from 2005 to 2007. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. *** implies significance at 0.01
level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.

33

Table 6: Information Accuracy: Heterogeneous Impact Based On Google News Search Index

CFirm-ProductXPost
CFirmXPost
CProductXPost
IFirm-ProductXPost

34

IFirmXPost
Observations
Firm-product FE
Year FE
BaselineSizeXPost

High
(1)
-1.096
(1.390)
-0.577
(0.639)
-0.044
(0.150)
0.470
(0.496)
-0.267
(0.367)
13775
YES
YES
YES

IHS (Value)
Low
Rest
(2)
(3)
-0.284
-0.047
(0.943)
(0.495)
-1.480** -0.890***
(0.609)
(0.297)
-0.617*** -0.383***
(0.196)
(0.141)
0.637
0.749
(0.735)
(0.550)
-0.343
-0.922
(0.382)
(0.634)
13775
13775
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

High
(4)
-0.953
(1.349)
-0.656
(0.657)
-0.074
(0.136)
0.444
(0.494)
-0.239
(0.361)
13775
YES
YES
YES

IHS (Quantity)
Low
Rest
(5)
(6)
-0.226
-0.029
(0.911)
(0.460)
-1.402** -0.830***
(0.598)
(0.279)
-0.570*** -0.355***
(0.184)
(0.130)
0.576
0.691
(0.703)
(0.521)
-0.306
-0.831
(0.344)
(0.590)
13775
13775
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

Exporting (dummy)
High
Low
Rest
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.061
-0.011
-0.002
(0.094)
(0.061)
(0.035)
-0.055
-0.117** -0.073***
(0.047)
(0.050)
(0.022)
-0.003 -0.052*** -0.032***
(0.013)
(0.016)
(0.011)
0.031
0.041
0.068
(0.038)
(0.058)
(0.043)
-0.026
-0.027
-0.078
(0.037)
(0.032)
(0.049)
13775
13775
13775
YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

Notes: This table shows the regression results for the heterogeneous e↵ects of the scandal across export destinations with di↵erent information accuracy.
The sample contains all dairy exporters in the Chinese Customs Data (2000-2013). We create a balanced panel at firm-product (HS eight-digit) and year
level. Columns 1-6 present results for the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (IHS) of the outcome variables of interest, namely export value and export
quantity. We categorize export destinations by high and low information accuracy, using the Google news search intensity ratio. ”High” information
accuracy destinations display high ratio of searches for the word “Sanlu” relative to searches for “2008 Chinese milk scandal”. We also include results for
countries without Google news search index (“Rest”). The interaction terms are the products of the post-scandal dummy (2009-2013) with the following
five group indicators: (C)ontaminatedFirm-Product, (C)ontaminatedFirm, (C)ontaminatedProduct, (I)nnocentFirm-Product, and (I)nnocentFirm. The
omitted category includes innocent and non-inspected products from non-inspected firms. All regressions control for firm-product and year fixed e↵ects.
Baseline size measures a firm’s baseline (2000-2007) total exports revenue. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the firm and product-year level. ***
implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.

Table 7: Individual Reputation: Heterogeneous Impact By Age of Exporting

CFirm-ProductXPost
CFirmXPost
CProductXPost
IFirm-ProductXPost
IFirmXPost
Observations

Established
(1)
-0.678
(1.419)
-1.119**
(0.502)
-0.390
(0.358)
-0.456
(0.831)
-0.597
(0.798)
9830

IHS (Value)
New
Established
(2)
(3)
-1.251***
-0.760
(0.219)
(1.423)
-2.098***
-1.069**
(0.716)
(0.508)
-1.520***
-0.214
(0.464)
(0.411)
2.979*
-0.463
(1.765)
(0.821)
-1.714
-0.583
(1.209)
(0.794)
3945
9830

New
(4)
-0.943***
(0.157)
-2.112**
(0.832)
-1.160***
(0.398)
2.787
(1.843)
-1.375
(1.208)
3945

Established
(5)
-0.032
(0.092)
-0.084**
(0.035)
-0.034
(0.028)
-0.026
(0.061)
-0.047
(0.067)
9830

Exporting (dummy)
New
Established
(6)
(7)
-0.091***
-0.036
(0.019)
(0.092)
-0.190***
-0.082**
(0.063)
(0.035)
-0.115***
-0.026
(0.036)
(0.033)
0.199*
-0.026
(0.120)
(0.060)
-0.147
-0.048
(0.093)
(0.067)
3945
9830

New
(8)
-0.068**
(0.033)
-0.192***
(0.073)
-0.089***
(0.030)
0.185
(0.126)
-0.122
(0.093)
3945

Firm-product FE
Province-year FE
BaselineSizeXPost

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

HS2digitXYear
H2digitXPost

YES
NO

YES
NO

NO
YES

NO
YES

YES
NO

YES
NO

NO
YES

NO
YES

Notes: This table shows the regression results for the heterogeneous e↵ects of the scandal on exports across firms of di↵erent exporting experiences. The sample
contains all dairy exporters in the Chinese Customs Data (2000-2013). We create a balanced panel at firm-product (HS eight-digit) and year level. Columns
1-4 present results for the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (IHS) of the outcome variable of interest, export value. Column 1,3,5,7 use the subsample
of established firms, which are firms that have exported more than 1 year before 2008. Column 2, 4, 6, 8 use the subsample of new firms, which are firms
that haven’t exported before 2008. The interaction terms are the products of the post-scandal dummy (2009-2013) with the following five group indicators:
(C)ontaminatedFirm-Product, (C)ontaminatedFirm, (C)ontaminatedProduct, (I)nnocentFirm-Product, and (I)nnocentFirm. The omitted category includes
innocent and non-inspected products from non-inspected firms. All regressions control for firm-product and year fixed e↵ects. Baseline size measures a firm’s
baseline (2000-2007) total export revenue. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the firm and product-year level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, **
0.5, * 0.1.

35

Table 8: Supply Chain Structure: Heterogeneous Impact By Sourcing Location

CProductXPost
CSourceCity-ProductXPost
CSourceCityXPost
Observations
Firm-product FE
Year FE
BaselineSizeXPost

IHS (Value)
(1)
-0.735***
(0.277)
-1.063
(0.659)
0.015
(0.283)
13019

IHS (Quantity)
(2)
-0.725***
(0.255)
-0.989
(0.607)
0.014
(0.258)
13019

Log (Price)
(3)
-0.106
(0.087)
-0.130*
(0.070)
0.013
(0.045)
1351

Exporting (dummy)
(4)
-0.063***
(0.023)
-0.072
(0.052)
0.003
(0.024)
13019

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

YES
YES
YES

Notes: This table shows the regression results for the heterogeneous e↵ects of the scandal on exports across firms with
di↵erent sourcing locations. The sample contains innocent and non-inspected dairy exporters in the Chinese Customs Data
(2000-2013). We create a balanced panel at firm-product (HS eight-digit) and year level for outcomes in Column 1, 2,
and 4. Columns 1 and 2 present results for the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (IHS) of the outcome variables of
interest, namely export value and export quantity. The interaction terms are the products of the post-scandal dummy
(2009-2013) with the following three group indicators: (C)ontaminatedProduct, (C)ontaminatedSourceCity-Product and
(C)ontaminatedSourceCity. All regressions control for firm-product and year fixed e↵ects. Baseline size measures a firm’s
baseline (2000-2007) total export revenue. Standard errors are two-way clustered at the product-year and location (province)
level. *** implies significance at 0.01 level, ** 0.5, * 0.1.

36

