NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANDATED FINANCIAL REPORTING AND CORPORATE INNOVATION
Matthias Breuer
Christian Leuz
Steven Vanhaverbeke
Working Paper 26291
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26291

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019, Revised August 2020

We gratefully acknowledge helpful comments and suggestions from Ray Ball, Benjamin
Balsmeier, Phil Berger, Jannis Bischof, Hans Christensen, Wouter Dessein, Stephen Glaeser,
John Hughes, Antoinette Schoar, Andrew Sutherland, Laurence van Lent, Alexander Wagner
(discussant), Alminas Zaldokas, Jingjing Zhang (discussant), and seminar participants at the
University of Chicago, University of Mannheim, Bocconi University, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, UCLA, Lancaster University, the 2019 EASYS, the 2019 Conference on Regulating
Financial Markets at Goethe University Frankfurt, and the 2020 AAA FARS Midyear Meeting.
This study is based on data from Eurostat, the Community Innovation Survey (CIS) of 2000 to
2014. The responsibility for all conclusions drawn from the data lies entirely with the authors.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Matthias Breuer, Christian Leuz, and Steven Vanhaverbeke. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Mandated Financial Reporting and Corporate Innovation
Matthias Breuer, Christian Leuz, and Steven Vanhaverbeke
NBER Working Paper No. 26291
September 2019, Revised August 2020
JEL No. K22,L51,M41,M48,O43,O47
ABSTRACT
We investigate the impact of reporting regulation on corporate innovation activity. Exploiting
thresholds in Europe’s regulation and a major enforcement reform in Germany, we find that
forcing a greater share of firms to publicly disclose their financial statements reduces firms’
innovative activities. At the same time, it increases firms’ reliance on patenting to protect their
innovations, to the extent they continue innovating. Our evidence is consistent with mandated
reporting having significant real effects by imposing proprietary costs on innovative firms, which
in turn diminishes their incentives to engage in innovative activities. Importantly, we examine
aggregate effects at the industry level, net of spillovers. Thus, our results imply that positive
information spillovers (e.g., to competitors, suppliers, and customers) within industries are not
large enough to compensate the negative direct effect on the prevalence of innovative activity.
The spillovers instead appear to concentrate innovation among a few large firms in a given
industry. In sum, financial reporting regulation has important distributional and aggregate effects
on corporate innovation.
Matthias Breuer
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway
Uris 605A
New York, NY 10027
mb4468@gsb.columbia.edu
Christian Leuz
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu

Steven Vanhaverbeke
Rotterdam School of Management
Postbus 1738
Rotterdam 3000
Netherlands
vanhaverbeke@rsm.nl

1. Introduction
Disclosure and financial reporting mandates are ubiquitous. They typically aim to improve
the functioning of capital markets and to protect firms’ investors and other stakeholders. Despite
substantial evidence of capital-market benefits from corporate disclosures (see survey by Leuz &
Wysocki 2016), firms frequently oppose disclosure and reporting regulation arguing that it forces them
to reveal proprietary information and thereby dissipates the gains from innovation. How serious this
concern is, however, remains unclear (Zingales 2009). A mere redistribution of gains from proprietary
information (e.g., from a firm to its competitors or customers) may not be a concern and could even
be desirable if it generates spillover effects (e.g., via follow-on innovation). If this redistribution,
however, discourages innovative activities overall (Arrow 1962), then regulators face a tradeoff. Thus,
it is important to study regulatory effects at an aggregate level (e.g., industry, market, economy) to also
capture redistribution and spillover effects. While prior work has demonstrated that disclosure can
have proprietary costs, we have less evidence when it comes to the effects of reporting regulation on
innovative activity, especially at an aggregate level. 1
In this study, we empirically investigate the effect of regulation mandating the public disclosure
of financial statements on market-wide innovative activity. Innovation is key to productivity and
economic growth and, at the same time, an activity for which the potential proprietary costs of
reporting mandates are pertinent. We examine market-wide effects to understand whether mandatory
reporting merely redistributes innovative activity (e.g., from firms facing mandates to others) or affects
innovative activity in the aggregate. For identification, we exploit unique features of reporting
regulation in Europe. The regulation, set forth in the Accounting Directives of the European Union

Bernard (2016), Breuer (2019), and Berger et al. (2019), for example, document that mandatory reporting imposes
competitive costs on firms. Consistent with competitive costs of disclosure, Dedman and Lennox (2009), Li et al. (2017),
and Gassen and Muhn (2018), among others, document that concerns about the loss of proprietary information limits
firms’ voluntary reporting.

1

1

(EU), mandates that all limited-liability firms—private and public ones—must disclose their financial
statements, including a management report discussing business risks, R&D activities, and firm strategy.
However, countries can grant exemptions to smaller private firms, leading to size-based thresholds
that vary by country. Exempted firms must typically provide only an abridged balance sheet with
abbreviated notes, allowing them to withhold substantial information that otherwise would have to be
disclosed in the income statement, more detailed notes, or the management report. Additionally, the
enforcement of these reporting mandates varies by country and over time. In this regard, Germany
is particularly relevant because it essentially failed to enforce its reporting mandate until 2007, when
mounting pressure by the EU commission triggered a substantial enforcement reform (e.g., Bernard
2016; Breuer 2019; Vanhaverbeke et al. 2019).
The European setting exhibits several desirable features when investigating the effect of
mandatory reporting on innovative activity. First, the size-based thresholds across EU countries and
the German enforcement reform generate substantial variation in the amount of financial information
that otherwise opaque private firms are required to provide. Second, both the size-based thresholds
and the enforcement change enable us to use difference-in-differences techniques. Third, the EU
regulation and the German enforcement reform pertain to all limited-liability firms rather than a few
public firms, plausibly resulting in aggregate effects. 2 Notably, private firms play an important role
for innovation (e.g., Rothwell 1978; Acs & Audretsch 1990; Vossen 1998; Schneider & Veugelers
2010). Lastly, there are detailed innovation input and output data for European and especially German

Out of the 24 million active firms in Europe, 80% are limited-liability companies, and are thus affected by the Accounting
Directives (EU 2019b). Similar to the US, small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) represent over 99.8% of active
enterprises within the economy. SMEs employ 93 million people, accounting for 67 % of total employment in the EU28 non-financial business sector (EU 2017), and a significant percentage of these firms are innovative. According to the
European Commission (EU 2019a), 38.3% of EU-28 SMEs developed at least one product or process innovation in the
period 2014-2016, compared to 67.8% of the large enterprises. Some SMEs developed disruptive or breakthrough
innovations, while others innovated in more incremental ways. The proportion of innovative SMEs (large enterprises)
that introduced at least one new-to-the-market innovation between 2014 and 2016 was 13% (32%).
2

2

firms, including various innovation types, allowing us to measure innovation effects more granularly
and also fairly comprehensively.
We employ two research designs to identify the effect of reporting regulation on innovation
at the market or industry level. In the European setting, we exploit the fact that country-level
exemption thresholds have different implications for the share of mandated firms across industries.
For example, industries with greater fixed asset requirements exhibit a larger fraction of firms that
exceed the asset-based exemption thresholds. We use this country-industry-level variation in the
intensity of the regulation as our market-level treatment in a cross-sectional difference-in-differences
design. Importantly, we calculate the intensity using a representative firm-size distribution per industry
rather than the actual country-industry-specific distributions. This intensity treatment, known as a
simulated instrument, alleviates concerns about reverse causality (e.g., innovation causing growth,
which in turn increases the share of firms above the thresholds) and about omitted factors correlated
with country-industry-specific firm-size distributions (e.g., a country’s industrial specialization).
In the German setting, we exploit the fact that the enforcement reform affected private
limited-liability but not unlimited-liability or public firms. Similar to the European setting, we use a
continuous treatment capturing the intensity of the reform, measured at the local market level.
Specifically, we use the pre-determined share of limited-liability firms among all firms, in a given local
(county-industry) market as the treatment (akin to Bartik instruments; Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. 2019)
and employ a time-series difference-in-differences design. For firm-level and robustness tests, we also
use standard time-series difference-in-differences designs comparing treated (limited-liability) and
control firms, either unlimited-liability or publicly traded firms, around the enforcement reform.
The two settings and designs exhibit complementary strengths and weaknesses. The main
strength of the European setting is that it is more likely to estimate the aggregate net impact of

3

mandatory reporting, which comprises the direct effects on firms facing the mandate and the indirect
effects at the country-industry level. That is, the country-industry-level aggregation of the European
captures spillovers to other firms more comprehensively than the German setting with regional
aggregation. Specifically, the European analysis includes any redistribution effects across firms at the
country-industry level, including positive spillover effects for customers, suppliers and competitors
within the same coarse industry. In addition, the European analysis essentially compares different
country-industry equilibria and as such accounts for long-run adjustments in industries along all
margins, including potential financing benefits spurred by greater industry-wide transparency. In this
sense, our estimates of the country-industry analysis represent the net-net effect of the mandate with
respect to innovation. 3 The high level of aggregation comes at the cost of power (i.e., limited
observations at the country-industry level). By contrast, the main strengths of the German setting are
the power that comes with the granular county-industry (or firm-level) variation in enforcement and
the detailed input and output measures of corporate innovation. The within-country regional
aggregation neglects potentially important spillovers, but the more granular analyses in the German
setting help to explore the mechanism, i.e., are better suited to estimate the direct effects on firms
(instead of the net impact of the mandate) and to uncover the various forces shaping the net impact.
Thus, the enforcement reform analysis complements the aggregate analysis in the European setting.
We collect and combine financial information on private and public firms in Europe from
Bureau van Dijk’s Amadeus database, patent data for European firms from Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis
database and the European Patent Office’s PATSTAT database, information on innovation inputs
and outputs in Eurostat’s Community Innovation Surveys and the Mannheim Innovation Panel. The

We acknowledge that our country-industry analysis neglects spillovers crossing broad industry and country boundaries.
If such spillovers are substantial, our aggregate results need to be interpreted with caution. In support of our countryindustry analysis, we find that the largest market for the vast majority of our sample firms (80%) is at the local or national
level. Similarly, sales to customers outside of firms’ own country amount to only 2% for the average firm.

3

4

European sample covers up to 26 countries over a time span of 15 years from 2000 to 2014. The
German sample covers more than 20,000 unique firms over 12 years from 2002 to 2013.
In the European setting, we find that mandatory financial reporting is significantly negatively
associated with the prevalence of corporate innovation (e.g., fewer innovating firms) at the countryindustry level. Thus, within-country-industry spillovers are generally not large enough to compensate
for the negative direct effect on firms’ innovative activities. We do not find significant evidence that
the mandates reduce total innovation spending though. These results suggest that, while reporting
mandates discourage many firms’ innovation activities, a few firms appear to increase their spending.
Consistent with this redistribution of innovative activity, we find that reporting mandates imposed on
other firms spur innovation, especially for larger firms or customers and suppliers.
In the German setting, we also find that forcing firms to provide financial reports is negatively
associated with the number of innovating firms in local markets, consistent with the European results.
Unlike the European results, we even find that reporting mandates are significantly negatively
associated with the total innovation spending in local markets. This decline in spending at the county
level appears to be driven by firms operating in markets with few existing competitors. These local
monopolist frequently stop innovating altogether, likely because mandated reporting dissipates the
gains from innovation. In line with this proprietary-cost explanation for the effect of mandatory
reporting on innovation, we document that the mandates are negatively associated with firms’ profit
margins, sales from new-to-market innovations, and cost reductions due to process improvements.
In supplemental tests, we investigate the impact of reporting mandates on firms’ financing,
patenting, and financial-statement-based innovation measures. We first document that reporting
mandates appear to reduce the likelihood that firms’ innovative activities are hampered by financial
constraints. In line with a vast literature (e.g., Leuz & Wysocki 2016), this evidence suggests mandatory

5

reporting provides capital-market benefits. These benefits, however, are rather limited for the private
firms in our setting and cannot offset the discouraging effect of the mandate on corporate innovation
due to the loss of proprietary information. Next, we find that reporting mandates exhibit an
ambiguous relation with patenting. On the one hand, reporting mandates discourage innovations, and
thus imply fewer patents. On the other hand, reporting mandates appear to increase the use of
patenting, rather than secrecy, to protect firms’ remaining innovations. We finally document that
reporting mandates are negatively associated with financial-statement-based innovation measures (e.g.,
changes in intangible assets), corroborating our innovation-survey-based findings.
Our evidence is remarkably consistent across the distinct settings and designs. It suggests that
disclosure and reporting mandates discourage innovation activities of mandated firms, especially local
monopolists, and redistribute innovative activity toward a few larger firms. At the country-industry
level, our highest aggregation level, it appears that the negative direct effect of reporting mandates
possibly outweighs any positive spillover effects. Whether this negative net impact also generalizes to
the economy-wide level is unclear, given potential cross-industry and cross-country spillovers
neglected in our country-industry analysis. What appears clear though is that reporting mandates
concentrate innovative activity among a few, typically larger firms. This distributional impact of
reporting mandates can have important ramifications for the type of innovations and market structure
(e.g., Acs & Audretsch 1987, 1988; Holmstrom 1989; Rossi-Hansberg et al. 2019).
Our study contributes to several streams of the literature. Survey evidence suggests firms
frequently point to concerns about the loss of proprietary information when justifying secrecy or
opposing demands for greater transparency (e.g., Graham et al. 2005; Minnis & Shroff 2017). 4

Graham et al. (2005) provide survey evidence that 59% of CFOs fear giving away “company secrets” or hurting their
competitive position through voluntary disclosure. Similarly, Minnis and Shroff (2017) provide survey evidence indicating
that 61% of firms believe that competitors download and view their financial statements if they are publicly available.

4

6

Although theory supports the link between proprietary costs and secrecy (e.g., Verrecchia 1983),
empirically identifying proprietary costs from disclosure mandates as well as establishing the impact
of proprietary costs on disclosure decisions has proven challenging (e.g., Berger 2011; Lang & Sul
2014). That said, several recent studies provide evidence supporting the proprietary cost hypothesis.
Using the same settings as our study, Bernard (2016), Breuer (2019), and Glaeser and Omartian (2019),
for example, provide evidence that reporting mandates impose competitive costs on firms. Li et al.
(2017), Glaeser (2018), and Gassen and Muhn (2018), in turn, provide evidence that concerns about
proprietary costs lead firms to reduce their disclosures. We add to this literature by documenting the
distributional and industry-wide effects on innovative activity.
Prior studies on the link between disclosure and innovation tend to focus on the firm-level
relation between voluntary financial reporting and innovation proxies such as R&D expenses or
patents (e.g., Park 2018; Zhong 2018). These studies provide mixed evidence. Some find that more
transparent firms engage in greater innovative activities due to reduced funding costs or agency
conflicts (e.g., Brown & Martinsson 2018; Zhong 2018). Other studies suggest innovative firms
choose more opaque financial-reporting practices due to concerns about proprietary costs (e.g.,
Dambra et al. 2015; Barth et al. 2017; Chaplinsky et al. 2017). We add to this stream of research in
three ways. First, we study mandatory rather than voluntary financial reporting, which gives us
plausibly exogenous changes in firms’ reporting. Second, and consistent with our focus on mandates,
we estimate aggregate effects at the market or industry level, instead of firm-level effects. 5 Third, we
exploit detailed input and output data on various types of corporate innovation. Hence, we do not
have to rely solely on patents, which are a relatively narrow and potentially misleading proxy for firms’

Moreover, they document that 48% of surveyed firms state that they downloaded financial statement information about
one of their competitors in the past.
5 Importantly, Brown and Martinsson (2018) and Kim (2019) also provide market-level tests. They find, on net, that greater
country-level transparency and patent disclosures, respectively, spur innovation. By contrast, we find evidence that more
extensive financial-reporting regulation, on net, hurt innovation in both the European and the German setting.

7

overall innovative activity (e.g., Gittelman 2008; Nagaoka et al. 2010; Reeb & Zhao 2020). Moreover,
these data stem mostly from confidential surveys, rather than financial reports, which mitigates issues
related to the strategic disclosure of R&D expenses (e.g., Koh & Reeb 2015).
Our study is closely related to concurrent work on the effects of mandatory patent disclosures
(e.g., Hedge et al. 2018; Valentine 2018; Kim 2019). 6 Our focus, however, is on the potential social
costs of reporting regulation, rather than disclosure regimes that are directly tied to innovative activity
or its patent protection. Thus, our study is more similar in focus to Allen et al. (2018). They examine
the impact of financial-reporting regulation on innovation and provide evidence that costly financialreporting regulations (i.e., SOX) can negatively affect young firms’ innovative activity. Their study
suggests that SOX diverted scarce resources away from innovative activities toward regulatory
compliance, yet it did not lead to improved transparency for these young, early-stage companies. Our
study differs in its identification strategy but also because the reporting mandates that we examine
come with relatively small (direct) compliance costs, yet significantly increase firms’ disclosures. 7
Our patent results also contribute to the nascent literature on the complementarities between
firms’ disclosure and patenting strategies (e.g., Arundel 2001; Glaeser 2018; Glaeser et al. 2019; Reeb
& Zhao 2020). This literature highlights that patenting is just one among several ways in which firms
can protect their innovations. Patenting provides legal protection in exchange for public disclosure
of patent information. Alternatively, firms can choose to protect their innovation through (trade)
secrecy (Arundel 2001). The latter creates a link to financial reporting as financial reports can provide
proprietary information (e.g., Berger & Hann 2007; Bens et al. 2011; Berger et al. 2019). Consistent

The papers on mandatory patent disclosures exploit the 1999 American Investors Protection Act (AIPA) which
accelerated the disclosure of U.S. Patent applications. Using this law change, Dass et al. (2018) and Saidi and Zaldokas
(2019) document an increase in patenting, liquidity, and external financing due to enhanced disclosure, while Valentine
(2018), Kim (2019), and Hussinger et al. (2018) document a reduction of firms’ incentives to innovate due to concerns
about the loss of private information in the patenting process.
7 The firms in our setting are required to prepare full financial statements irrespective of the public reporting mandate.
6

8

with a link between patenting and financial disclosure, Glaeser (2018) and Glaeser et al. (2019)
document that firms’ patenting decisions are positively associated with firms’ financial-reporting
incentives. Our study adds evidence that mandatory financial reporting can increase the propensity
to use patenting rather than secrecy to protect rents from innovative activities. This shift toward
patenting can mask an overall decline in innovative activity and hence lead to misleading inferences if
one relies solely on patenting activity to measure firms’ overall innovative activity.

2. Reporting Regulation and Innovation: Conceptual Underpinnings
Firms that engage in innovative activities generate proprietary know-how, for instance, about
lucrative markets, products or services as well as about new technologies and processes. This knowhow allows firms to differentiate from competitors and to earn (quasi-)rents. To shield these rents
from competitors and contracting partners (e.g., customers and suppliers), firms protect proprietary
information through secrecy or by legal means, e.g., patenting.
Financial reports, however, reveal some of this proprietary information generated by firms’
business and innovative activities. For instance, the income statement shows R&D expenses, profit
margins, and cost structures. A firm’s profit margin is typically indicative of its competitive position
(e.g., product differentiation, pricing power). Similarly, information about the cost structure (or gross
margin) could reveal cost-leadership advantages in production processes and sourcing (see also Berger
et al. 2019). The balance sheet provides information about a firm’s financial resources as well as its
tangible and (sometimes) intangible assets (i.e. patents, copyrights, trademarks). 8 In addition, financial
reports provide extensive narrative disclosures, especially in the management report, which entails
discussing key products and services, a firm’s strategy, and its R&D activities.

For example, mentioning a patent or patent application in the narrative disclosures of the financial report or recording a
patent on the balance sheet can be informative, as either one points to the existence of a patent for which more detailed
information is publicly available in patent office online databases (Wyatt & Abernethy 2008).

8

9

Thus, the disclosure of financial reports could impose proprietary costs by facilitating direct
and indirect competitor learning. It could, for example, not only influence a competitor’s strategic
decisions about new investments or which markets to enter, but also trigger further information
search. When a competitor learns from the financial report how profitable a firm is, the competitor
could invest additional resources in figuring out what drives the high profit margin or the distinctive
cost structure. The financial report could trigger a search for additional, more detailed information in
scientific or industry-specific publications, patent databases, by going to trade fairs, speaking to
suppliers or by reverse engineering products. While competitors operating in the same industry or
market are likely aware of a firm’s products and services, the financial statements provide information
on how profitable these products and services are. 9 In addition, this information could induce new
firms to enter the industry or market (e.g., Darrough & Stoughton 1990; Wagenhofer 1990).
Survey evidence supports the notion that firms are concerned about disclosing financial
statements to the public because it can reveal proprietary information. For example, Minnis & Shroff
(2017) find that 61% of firms are concerned that competitors download and view their financial
statements if they are publicly available. Moreover, 48% of surveyed firms state that they downloaded
financial statement information about one of their competitors in the past. Similarly, Graham et al.
(2005) document that 59% of CFOs fear giving away “company secrets” or hurting their competitive
position through voluntary disclosure.
Importantly, the disclosure of financial reports is not only relevant with respect to competitors,
but could also impose competitive costs by weakening a firm’s bargaining power vis-à-vis its major

9 Similar

concerns are raised by managers and regulators. A review by the ICAEW (2013, p. 33) stated: “A firm’s knowledge
of what is profitable and what is not is a form of intellectual capital—akin to an invention, but often much more transient.
If this information is disclosed, then the firm’s competitors benefit as they learn which fields to move into and which to
avoid, without having to incur the costs of being first movers. In this situation, the winners from disclosure are the
imitators, and the losers are the pioneers.”

10

contracting partners. For example, it could prompt a customer of a high-margin firm to re-negotiate
prices or to search for alternative producers with lower margins (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009;
Minnis & Shroff 2017). Survey evidence in Minnis & Shroff (2017) supports this notion. They
document that 46% (37%) of companies download the financial report of their customers (suppliers).
According to survey evidence in Arrunada (2011), 85% (25%) of firms use information services to
access information about their clients (suppliers). Similarly, it could enable a labor representative at a
low-wage or high-margin firm to benchmark labor costs and profitability across firms and bargain for
higher wages (e.g., Palmer 1977; Amernic 1985; Liberty & Zimmerman 1986; Aobdia & Cheng 2018).
Likewise, the disclosure of financial reports could allow suppliers and banks to identify new customers
or borrowers, resulting in outside options and hence competition for existing procurement or lending
relationships (e.g., Costello 2013; Breuer et al. 2018). The overall thrust of these arguments is that
financial reporting has the potential to spur new arm’s length transactions and change the resource
allocation in the economy (e.g., Hombert & Matray 2016).
Firms consider competitive costs resulting from the revelation of proprietary information to
competitors and contracting partners when making organizational, financing, and reporting choices.
Innovating firms, for example, tend to work with few trusted suppliers (e.g., Bönte & Wiethaus 2007;
Aobdia 2015), raise financial capital from a limited number of capital providers (e.g., Bhattacharya &
Chiesa 1995; Asker & Ljungqvist 2010; Kerr & Nanda 2015), and avoid disclosing their financial
reports or limit voluntary disclosures (e.g., Bhattacharya & Ritter 1983; Barth et al. 2017). 10
Financial reporting regulation, which is common around the world, counters these tendencies
by mandating the public disclosure of firms’ financial reports. The specific rationale for reporting

10 A large literature in accounting documents an association between firms’ proprietary costs and their disclosure choices
(e.g., Harris 1998; Leuz 2004; Verrecchia & Weber 2006; Berger & Hann 2007; Dedman & Lennox 2009; Bens et al. 2011;
Li et al. 2017; Glaeser 2018). For reviews of this literature, see Beyer et al. (2010) and Lang and Sul (2014).

11

mandates differs somewhat across countries, but broadly speaking, the mandates typically aim to
improve the functioning of capital markets and to protect firms’ investors and other stakeholders, by
leveling the informational playing field between corporate insiders and outsiders. However, in light
of the discussed usefulness of financial reports to competitors and contracting partners, a key concern
is that mandatory reporting not only brings capital-market benefits, but also imposes competitive costs
on firms, especially innovative ones (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009; Zingales 2009). Consistent with
this concern, firms frequently oppose new reporting mandates, pointing to their proprietary or
competitive costs (e.g., Graham et al. 2005; Minnis & Shroff 2017; Zhou 2018). 11 Thus, it is important
to study the costs and benefits of reporting regulation. Prior literature provides substantial evidence
on the capital-market effects of reporting mandates, but much less on their real effects, especially
when it comes to innovative activities (e.g., Leuz & Wysocki 2016; Roychowdhury et al. 2019).
Evaluating the effects of mandatory reporting on innovation is challenging because a mandate
may harm some firms, but help the competitive positions of others, necessitating an analysis at the
aggregate level, be it the market or the economy. The loss of proprietary information by one firm
may simply be a gain by another firm. For the economy as a whole, such information spillovers could
be desirable to the extent they disseminate knowledge and spur follow-on innovations (e.g., Hedge et
al. 2018). However, such redistribution could also be harmful if mandatory reporting reduces
aggregate innovative activity in the economy because firms anticipate that proprietary costs diminish
their returns to innovation (Arrow 1962). Thus, the net effect of mandatory reporting on the aggregate
innovative activity in the economy is ultimately an empirical question. 12

However, as Berger and Hann (2007) and Leuz et al. (2008) discuss, firms could also oppose financial disclosures and
reporting mandates for agency or private benefit reasons, nevertheless citing proprietary costs to justify their opposition.
12 While the firm-level relation between competition and innovation is generally ambiguous, Schmutzler (2010) documents
that competition for ex-post rents (e.g., spurred by disclosure) is unambiguously negative for ex-ante innovation incentives.
Accordingly, the relevant question is whether the negative direct impact is offset by positive spillovers in the aggregate.
11

12

While the net effect is ambiguous, firm-specific costs and benefits of reporting mandates likely
depend on a firm’s competitive position and size (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009; Bernard 2016;
Bernard et al. 2018). For example, the proprietary costs of a mandate are likely higher for a local
monopolist than a firm operating in a competitive market. Absent the reporting mandate, the local
monopolist can protect its rents by hiding its profitability from its competitors and contracting
partners. A firm in a competitive market, by contrast, earns limited rents irrespective of whether it
has to report or not. In a similar vein, a small firm should be hit harder by a mandate than a large
firm. Absent the reporting mandate, a small firm can minimize proprietary costs by communicating
privately with its narrow stakeholder base. A large firm would report publicly, and incur proprietary
costs, even without a mandate, because it needs to communicate with a broad set of stakeholders (e.g.,
Buzby 1975). In addition, a large firm likely benefits more from the spillovers caused by mandating
other firms to report, compared to a small firm (e.g., Max-Planck-Institute 2009). A large firm, for
example, can leverage its extensive resources and bargaining power to extract a share of the other
firms’ rents (e.g., Bernard 2016). A small firm would find it more difficult to take advantage of
investment opportunities in new markets or to bargain with its contracting partners for better prices
by threatening to switch to other suppliers or customers. Thus, this discussion highlights that
reporting regulation potentially has important distributional consequences that are worth studying.

3. Institutional Background
3.1. Reporting Regulation in Europe
The EU Accounting Directives regulate firms’ financial reporting in Europe since the 1980s.
The EU regulation requires limited-liability firms—private and public ones—to prepare and publicly
disclose a full set of audited financial statements. Typically, these financial statements include a
balance sheet, an income statement, an audit opinion, extensive notes, and a management report

13

discussing the competitive position and strategy, key products and services, business risks, investment
and financing plans as well as activities in the field of research and development (see example in Online
Appendix). To reduce the regulatory burden for smaller firms, EU regulation allows private firms
below certain size thresholds to report less and/or forgo a financial statement audit.

These

exemptions are based on a combination of thresholds defined for total assets, sales, and employees.
These thresholds uniformly apply to all industries within a given country. While the EU sets maximum
exemption thresholds, countries can set lower levels, subjecting more firms to the full reporting
requirements. This discretion has resulted in notable variation in the relevant thresholds for reporting
and auditing across EU countries. 13
The threshold-based exemptions allow a substantial fraction of firms to reduce markedly what
information they have to provide publicly. In many countries, exempted firms must disclose only an
abbreviated balance sheet with abridged notes. Although these firms still have to prepare a full set of
financial statements for internal purposes and private reporting to their shareholders, the exemption
allows them to hide potentially proprietary information about (i) their innovation inputs (e.g., R&D
activities and expenses) and outputs (e.g., profit margins and the cost structure) that otherwise would
be revealed in the income statement as well as about (ii) their R&D activities and future actions (e.g.,
investments, financing, and strategy) that otherwise would have to be discussed in the management
report. 14 In the Online Appendix, we provide an example of exempted reporting and show for this

The respective maximum thresholds set by the EU were around 4 million Euros in total assets, 8 million Euros in sales,
and 50 employees during the majority of our sample period. For country-specific threshold variation, see, for example,
Cna Interpreta (2011), Minnis and Shroff (2017), Bernard et al. (2018), and Accountancy Europe (2019).
14 There is some variation in what firms have to provide or they are exempt from. For instance, firms can use one of two
income-statement formats in Europe. They either classify expenses by nature (e.g., wage expense and material expense)
or function (e.g., cost of goods sold, advertising expense). The former is more prevalent in continental Europe, whereas
the latter is more prevalent in the UK. Thus, the estimated reporting mandate effect in the EU setting reflects the average
reporting format, exemption, and enforcement level across our sample countries, industries, and years.
13

14

firm how reporting changes once it crosses the thresholds and has to comply with full reporting. 15
3.2. Enforcement Reform in Germany
Germany, as a member state of the EU, transposed the EU Accounting Directives into
national law in the 1980s and hence German firms have been subject to the EU reporting mandate
for a long time. The enforcement of national laws resulting from the EU directives, however, varies
across countries (e.g., Christensen et al. 2016). In Germany, the reporting mandate had been weakly
enforced until a sweeping reform in 2007 (e.g., Bernard 2016). Before the reform, limited-liability
firms were required to file their financial statements with local courts and to publish their statements
in local newspapers. The local courts were not tasked to ensure compliance or to engage in proactive
enforcement, and monetary sanctions for non-compliance were low. Not surprisingly, the resulting
share of limited-liability firms complying with the reporting mandate was as low as 5-10%.
In 2007, Germany reformed its enforcement of the reporting mandate via the Bill on the
Electronic Registers for Commerce, Companies and Associations (EHUG), effective for financial
statements with fiscal years ending in December 2006 or later. Germany’s reform efforts were a direct
response to mounting pressure from the European Commission and the transposition deadline for
the Company Law Disclosures Directive (EU Directive 2003/58/EC), which required the
implementation of a central electronic publication register by 2007. The reform created a central
electronic publication register in charge of the dissemination of limited-liability firms’ financial
statements, instituted centralized and proactive enforcement of the mandate by the Ministry of Justice,
and introduced escalating fines for non-compliant firms. As a result of the reform, the share of
limited-liability firms providing the required financial reports increased to above 90%.

This

compliance increase substantially enhanced corporate transparency in Germany as it meant that
While this example illustrates how much more information a firm provides once it is subject to full reporting, we
emphasize that our identification strategy does not rely on such over-time variation when firms outgrow the thresholds.

15

15

financial statements of more than 900,000 firms became available to the public for the first time.

4. Data
We combine financial and innovation data for limited-liability firms in Europe from several
sources. For the European sample, we obtain financial information from Bureau van Dijk’s Amadeus
database and firm-patent links from Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis database. We further obtain patent data
from the European Patent Office’s PATSTAT database and information on innovation activity across
Europe from Eurostat’s Community Innovation Survey. 16 We obtain information on European
countries’ reporting-exemption thresholds from Breuer (2019). This European sample covers up to
26 countries over a time span of 15 years from 2000 to 2014. Within each country, we aggregate firmlevel financial and patent data to the three- or two-digit NACE industry level to create a countryindustry-year level dataset for our market-wide analyses.

In aggregating the innovation-survey

responses, we use population weights to obtain aggregate measures that are representative for the
population of firms in each country.
For the German sample, we obtain financial information on both limited- and unlimitedliability firms from the Mannheim Enterprise Panel (MEP). The MEP is based on the firm-level data
of Creditreform, the dominant credit bureau in Germany. 17 It is the most comprehensive micro
database of companies in Germany outside the confidential business register maintained by the
Federal Statistical Office of Germany. The MEP database includes unique-patent identifiers, allowing

16 We use confidential micro-level data (called secure-use files) accessible at Eurostat’s Safe Center in Luxembourg. We
use all available survey waves (2000, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014). The survey is carried out by the EU member
states and European Statistical System members. In each country, the data are collected by a local team of statisticians
specializing in innovation studies and working at an independent research institute or the national statistical office. The
survey questions are harmonized across countries, and cognitive tests are regularly conducted to assure that the questions
elicit the desired information. Member states are required to provide innovation statistics to the EU, and almost all
Member States require firms answer the survey. The data are used for the annual European Innovation Scoreboard and
can be used for academic research at Eurostat’s Safe Center in Luxembourg. See Online Appendix for more details.
17 See Bersch et al. (2014) for more details about the construction of the MEP database.

16

us to link our sample firms with all patents available in the PATSTAT database to construct patent
indicators (ZEW 2019a). We augment this data with detailed information on innovation inputs and
outputs from the Mannheim Innovation Panel (MIP), which is based on successive issues of the EU’s
Community Innovation Survey. This German sample covers more than 20,000 unique firms over 12
years from 2002 to 2013. The firm-level panel, however, is unbalanced as the innovation surveys do
not ask the same questions every year and firms do not always respond to all questions. Moreover,
there is substantial churn due to the limited survival time of especially smaller firms. The panel is
replenished to account for churn and adjusted for non-random response bias via representative resampling, but there is nevertheless sparse data at the firm level. We again aggregate data at the market
level, in this case using county and industry as the relevant market. Aggregating at the county-industrylevel mitigates the limitations of the panel data. That is, county-industry-level aggregation together
with the representative sampling imply that it is not important for the same firm to answer the same
question over time (or around the enforcement reform in Germany). 18

5. Research Design
We exploit both of the aforementioned settings—threshold-based mandates in Europe and a
major enforcement reform in Germany—to empirically investigate the effect of mandated financial
reporting on corporate innovation. Both settings allow us to use difference-in-differences designs,
which purge our estimates from various confounding differences across countries (e.g., code- vs.
common-law countries), industries (e.g., labor- vs. capital-intensive industries), or over time (e.g., crisis
vs. normal times). The two settings have complementary strength and weaknesses and allow us to
provide estimates from a cross-sectional as well as a time-series difference-in-differences design.

We choose counties as a relevant regional aggregation level. German counties represents an intermediate administrative
level between municipalities and German states. They are comparable to US counties (Nomenclature of Territorial Units
for Statistics level 3). Prior research based on German data frequently relies on counties as the relevant regional level, see,
for example, D’Acunto et al. (2018), Huber (2018), Breuer et al. (2018), and Breuer (2019).

18

17

5.1. Exemption Thresholds
A central feature of the threshold-based regulation in Europe is that a given country’s
exemption thresholds affect industries in different and, importantly, predictable ways. For example,
a regulation that exempts firms below the 50-employees threshold from full reporting affects laborintensive industries more strongly than capital-intensive industries. Analogous arguments can be made
for a threshold based on total assets, which likely affects capital-intensive industries more strongly.
Thus, the same threshold implies heterogeneous regulatory intensities across industries.
We exploit this country-industry-level heterogeneity in regulatory intensity in the following
cross-sectional difference-in-differences design: 19

=
Ycit β Reporting cit −1 + γ X cit + α ct + δ it + ε cit ,
where Ycit is the dependent variable (e.g., the share of patenting firms) in a given country c , industry

i , and year t ; Reporting cit −1 captures the regulatory intensity measured as the share of firms above
country c ’s reporting-exemption thresholds in industry i and year t − 1 ; X cit denotes a vector of
controls; α ct is a country-year fixed effect and δ it is an industry-year fixed effect. 20
This cross-sectional difference-in-differences design compares more versus less intensively
regulated industries within the same country at the same point in time, while accounting for systematic
differences across industries. This within-country-year design addresses important concerns about
the endogeneity of thresholds chosen by countries at a given point in time. Regulations differ across
countries and change over time for many reasons, creating concerns about endogeneity and
Our design exploits rich cross-sectional variation in country-industry-level treatment intensity. We explicitly do not
focus on time-series variation for several reasons. First, there were only few, limited changes in thresholds over time.
Second, these few changes coincided with other major changes at the country level. Third, market-wide innovation effects
likely take time to play out, rendering short-window time-series designs less useful than cross-sectional designs.
20 In alternative specifications, we use the share of firms exceeding both the reporting- and auditing-thresholds as our
(credible) reporting intensity measure.
19

18

concurrent events (e.g., Ball 1980; Leuz 2010; Hail et al. 2017). By using a within-country-year design,
we control for any confounding cross-country differences (e.g., property rights, education, etc.) and
any country trends, shocks or changes over time, observed or unobserved. This feature is a substantial
advantage over the usual (time-series) difference-in-differences design that exploits a regulatory
change in a given country as treatment. 21 Another advantage is that the potential competitive and
spillover effects from reporting mandates take time to play out. The cross-sectional difference-indifferences design essentially compares equilibria in different countries and industries resulting from
different thresholds, rather than shorter-term effects around regulatory changes.
Thus, country- and industry-level differences as well as trends and changes are well addressed
in our design. We rely on the identifying assumption that confounding factors at the country-industry
level are uncorrelated with corporate innovation and the share of firms to which the mandate applies.
This assumption would likely be violated if countries were setting their reporting thresholds
differentially for specific industries. A number of institutional features suggest this is unlikely to be
the case. First, the thresholds are set uniformly across industries. They are motivated by the desire
to reduce the disproportionate regulatory burden for smaller firms (in all industries), resulting among
other things from fixed costs associated with financial reporting requirements. 22 If the EU or specific
countries really intended to treat industries differently, they could have set industry-specific exemption

21 After accounting for country-year and industry-year effects, the (standardized) reporting treatment essentially captures
the interaction of country-level thresholds and industry-level firm-size distributions.
Ni

1
Ni

∑ 1( s

ij

> sct ) ,

j =1

where N is the number of firms in an industry, s is the size of firm j , and s is the exemption-threshold in a given
country at a given point in time. In contrast, the reporting treatment would capture any endogenous changes and
differences in country-industry-specific firm-size distributions, even after accounting for the country-year and industryyear fixed effects, if we were not using the standardized industry-distributions to calculate the share:
N cit

1
N cit

∑ 1( s

cijt

> sct ) .

j =1

22 Fixed costs depress the profit margin more, the lower a firm’s sales. This scale effect is not specific to a particular
industry and one reason why the EU prescribes a uniform sales-based exemption threshold for all industries (e.g.,
European Commission 2019)

19

thresholds. Second, countries are constrained in their threshold choice by the maximum levels set by
the EU to prevent a regulatory race to the bottom. Most countries introduced the thresholds several
decades ago (before our sample period) and have updated them only infrequently. Countries’ initial
threshold choices, if anything, reflected their country-level economic and political systems, rather than
specific industry-by-industry considerations (McLeay 1999). Collectively, these features weaken the
concern about threshold endogeneity, especially within a given country at a given point in time.
Moreover, even if a country tailored its country-level thresholds to one or a few specific industries
(e.g., its most important ones), then this country-industry-specific choice would make the chosen
thresholds plausibly exogenous for all other industries, except the specifically targeted one(s), and
presumably these other industries would dominate the analysis.
Our identifying assumption requires further that differences and changes in a given industry’s
firm-size distribution across countries and over time are uncorrelated with innovation activity in a
given country, industry, and year. Observed industry-level firm-size distributions, however, vary
across countries and over time for several reasons (e.g., industry-specific economic policies,
differential growth across industries), which in turn are potentially correlated with innovation. This
endogenous variation in industry-level firm-size distributions across countries and over time gives rise
to important reverse causality, correlated measurement, and omitted variable concerns. For example,
innovation in an industry of a given country may cause firm growth, which in turn increases the share
of firms facing a mandate in the respective industry. Similarly, if some firms engage in avoidance
behavior to stay below the threshold, then such behavior could reduce innovation or slow firm growth,
thereby decreasing the share of mandated firms. Conversely, subsidies may spur innovation and firm
growth, increasing the share of firms required to report.
To ensure that our regulatory variation is free of such endogenous firm-size variation, we
follow Breuer (2019) and use one standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries
20

and years to calculate the share of reporting firms above a given country’s exemption thresholds in a
given year. This approach is in spirit of Currie and Gruber (1996) and Mahoney (2015). The resulting
standardized measure of regulatory intensity is purged of endogenous variation related to countryindustry-specific differences and changes in the firm-size distributions across countries and over time,
addressing concerns about reverse causality, correlated measurement, and correlated omitted variables
due to industry-structure endogeneity. 23
5.2. Enforcement Reform
In the second design, we exploit the enforcement reform in Germany as a major shift in the
effective regulation of limited-liability firms’ reporting over time and use the following temporal
difference-in-differences analysis with a continuous treatment variable:

Ydit β LimitedSharedi × Postt + α dt + δ it + φdi + ε dit ,
=
where Ydit is the dependent variable (e.g., the share of innovating firms) in a given county (or district)
d , industry i , and year t ; LimitedSharedi captures cross-sectional variation in the intensity of the

reporting regulation at the county-industry level, measured as the average share of limited-liability
firms among all (limited- and unlimited-liability) firms in a given county d and industry i in the preenforcement period (2002 to 2006); Postt is an indicator taking the value of one for all years after the
enforcement reform (2008 to 2013); α it is a county-year fixed effect, δ it is an industry-year fixed
effect, and φdi is a county-industry fixed effect. 24

For a detailed description of the construction of the standardized firm-size distributions and the necessary assumptions
underlying this research design, see Breuer (2019).
24 We measure the share of limited-liability firms in the population covered by the MEP. Aside from the confidential
German census data, this panel is the most comprehensive database, spanning various types of firms, including soleproprietorships, partnerships (e.g., OHG and KG), and corporations (e.g., GmbH and AG). Inclusion in the MEP is
independent of the reporting mandate and the share is not computed based on survey responses, but the actual share in
the MEP population.
23

21

The basic idea behind this market-level difference-in-differences design is that industries in
counties with a greater share of limited-liability firms should be more affected by the enforcement
increase for the reporting mandate pertaining to limited-liability firms.

This county-industry

“exposure” should then explain changes in innovative activities at the county-industry level around
the enforcement reform, if there are any. The key identifying assumption of this design is that, absent
the enforcement reform, changes in county-industries’ innovation activity over time would have been
unrelated to the (pre-existing) share of limited-liability firms in a given county and industry, which is
essentially a parallel-trends assumption.
In supplemental tests, we complement this continuous-treatment, market-level design with
two firm-level (and more conventional) difference-in-differences designs. In the first firm-level
alternative, we compare the innovation activity of limited-liability firms with the activity of unlimitedliability firms before and after the enforcement reform. In the second alternative, we compare the
innovation activity of private (limited-liability) firms with the activity of public firms before and after
the enforcement reform. These two alternative designs differ in the choice of the control group.
Unlimited-liability firms were not required to report publicly before or after the reform. By contrast,
public (limited-liability) firms were required to report publicly and this requirement was strictly
enforced by the respective stock exchanges before and after the reform.
An important assumption for the firm-level analysis to provide unbiased estimates is that there
are no spillovers from treated to control firms (or vice versa). We, however, expect that increased
reporting due to the enforcement reform has spillover effects, affecting all firms operating in a product
or service market (or even related markets). These effects could be positive or negative. Accordingly,
the magnitude of the firm-level estimates are either overstated (in case of negative competition
spillovers) or understated (in case of positive information spillovers). Nevertheless, the firm-level
estimates can be informative with respect to distributional effects, especially when interpreted in
22

conjunction with the market-level estimates. For example, the firm-level estimates allow us to discern
whether a null result in the aggregate is due to a one-for-one redistribution of innovative activity
between treated and control firms or rather due to the absence of a treatment effect.

6. Results
6.1. Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for our treatment and outcome variables. (For a list of
variable definitions, refer to the Variable Appendix.) In the European sample (Panel A), our main
variable of interest is the reporting intensity variable “Reporting,” which captures the share of firms
subject to full reporting requirements in a country and two-digit industry. The distribution of this
intensity measure exhibits several notable features. The average (median) intensity for two-digit
industries is 22% (12%). The intensity measure spans the full range from 0% to 100%, with the
majority of the intensity values falling between 5% and 25%. These statistics suggest that the
treatment variable primarily captures variation in mandatory reporting among the largest firms in a
given industry (i.e., the largest 5 to 25% of firms in a given industry are required to report fully). These
firms are likely of substantial importance for market- or industry-level outcomes. However, the
intensity variable also extends to relatively small firms in many industries, allowing us to not merely
capture a local effect, but rather an average effect over a meaningful range of firm sizes. The
alternative treatment variable “Reporting and Auditing” captures the share of firms facing mandates
for reporting and auditing. It has very similar statistics as “Reporting” but allows us to check if the
results are different if reported financials are audited and hence more credible.
In the German sample (Panels B and C), the three treatment variables of interest are the share
of limited firms (“Limited Share”), an indicator for limited firms (“Limited”), and an indicator for
private firms (“Private”). The share of limited firms (“Limited Share”), calculated for all firms in a

23

given county, industry, and year in the MEP data, ranges from 0% to 100%. Its average (median) is
59% (60%) at the market level (Panel B). In contrast, the share of “limited” firms in the firm-level
data is 97% (Panel C). The remaining 3% are unlimited-liability firms of a particular type (KG, OHG),
which are the most comparable to the limited firms. Similarly, the share of “private” firms in the firmlevel data is 99%. The remaining 1% are publicly listed firms. The rarity of unlimited and publicly
listed firms in the firm-level data is in part due to representative sampling and in part due to better
coverage of limited firms in the MIP data. The limited number of control firms reduces the power of
firm-level analyses, which further supports our market-level design in the German setting. As noted
earlier, the market-level design also addresses spotty time series at the firm level in the MIP data, which
poses a challenge in a time-series difference-in-differences design. Given the random sampling and
replacement of the firms in the MIP data, we can exploit changes at the market rather than firm-level
over time without substantial concerns about endogenous sample selection or attrition over time.
With respect to innovation outcomes, the descriptive statistics for the European sample (Panel
A) suggest that 36% (33%) of firms in the average (median) two-digit industry are innovating (i.e.,
introducing new-to-the-firm or new-to-the-market products, services, or processes). 25 A little less
than half of these innovations (16% on average) are not only “new to the firm,” but entirely “new to
the market.” By contrast, the share of patenting firms is only between 1% (0%) to 6% (2%) in the
average (median) industry, highlighting that patenting captures only a very small share of corporate
innovation. These statistics suggest that innovative activities are widespread in the economy, i.e.,
performed by a large share of firms, but only few firms use patenting as a strategy to protect their

The Community Innovation Survey defines an innovation as “the introduction of a new or significantly improved
product, process, organisational method, or marketing method by your enterprise. An innovation must have characteristics
or intended uses that are new or which provide a significant improvement over what was previously used or sold by your
enterprise. However, an innovation can fail or take time to prove itself” (Community Innovation Survey 2014a). For more
detail and examples, refer to the methodological notes for the Community Innovation Survey (2014b) and the Online
Appendix.
25

24

innovations.
In the German sample, we find very similar patterns as in the European sample, although the
German sample is slightly more tilted toward innovative firms. In the average county, 55% (60%) of
firms are innovating in a given year, but again only 8% (8%) of firms apply for patents in a given year
and county in Panel B (C). The share of firms with entirely new-to-the-market innovations is 29% in
Panel B and 30% in Panel C. In sum, there is a substantial share of innovating firms in our sample.
6.2. Reporting Regulation in Europe
6.2.1. Main Effect of Regulation on Innovation
We begin our analysis by investigating the impact of reporting regulation on aggregate
innovation in the European sample. Table 2 presents country-industry-level regressions for various
measures of innovation activity on reporting intensity. 26 Innovation activity is measured at the twodigit industry level using population-weighted survey responses from the Community Innovation
Surveys. At this relatively high level of aggregation, the analysis captures potential spillovers within
broader industry groupings. The population-weighting ensures the representativeness of the aggregate
innovation measures in terms of firm size and industry within a country. 27
In Panel A, mandatory reporting intensity is not significantly associated with the average
innovation spending (columns 1 and 2). However, reporting intensity is significantly negatively
associated with the share of innovating firms (column 3). This share captures firms adopting products,

26 See Tables 3 and 4 in Breuer (2019) for a validation of simulated reporting intensity and an assessment of correlated
factors.
27 Stratified random sampling was used to ensure the sample was representative. The stratification of the sample was based
on the economic activity of the enterprise (NACE Rev.2 classification), on the enterprise size, and in some countries also
on the geographical region (NUTS2 level). Weights are included to the responses to compensate for sampling design and
unit non-response. The population weights ensure that the averages are representative for the whole industry and country.
For example, in the few countries where the survey is not mandatory, it allows us to take into account that larger firms are
more likely to respond to the survey compared to smaller firms. In addition, some countries oversampled larger firms in
their survey, and by using population weights we adjust for such biases.

25

processes, or services that are new to the firm or new to the market. Next, we decompose this broad
measure of innovation activity into its key components. We find that mandatory reporting or
mandatory reporting and auditing exhibit negative associations with all the key components, albeit at
varying levels of significance: the share of firms reporting new-to-the-market innovations (columns 5
and 6), product innovations (columns 7 and 8), and process innovations (columns 9 and 10). In Panel
B, we document similar evidence using total innovation spending and the total number of firms with
innovations as our outcomes. By using totals, rather than simple averages, we essentially present sizeweighted, aggregate results.
In terms of economic magnitude, our estimates imply that increasing the share of limitedliability firms that are subject to mandatory reporting by, for instance, 10 percentage points is
associated with a 1.2 percentage-point decrease in the share of innovating firms (column 1 of Panel
A). Considering the range in the reporting intensity, this effect is economically meaningful (but also
plausible). Importantly, this estimate represents the net effect at the two-digit industry level. It is net
of any redistribution across firms as well as positive spillovers among customers, suppliers, and
competitors within the same industry, including any potential financing benefits. 28 Moreover, it is net
of any long-run changes in the industries (e.g., a shift toward arm’s length contracting and greater
entry into the industry) spurred by greater industry-wide transparency.
Collectively, the results in Table 2 provide a first indication that reporting mandates reduce
corporate innovation even after allowing for industry-wide redistribution and spillovers.

The

aggregate results, while economically significant, are statistically tenuous. The tenuous nature likely
reflects not only low statistical power (relatively few observations at the two-digit industry-country

28 In subsequent sections, we explore the channels that make up the net effect of mandatory reporting. We disentangle
the direct and indirect (redistribution and spillover) effects in section 6.2.2 and investigate the relative importance of
financing benefits vis-à-vis proprietary costs in section 6.4.

26

level), but also the existence of countervailing forces, i.e., a negative direct impact for the firms that
are forced to report vs. positive indirect effects or spillovers on the other firms in the market.
Consistent with potentially important spillovers and redistribution, the results in Table 2 document
that the number of innovating firms appears to decline, while aggregate innovation spending appears
unaffected. Together, these results already hint at a redistribution of innovative activity toward a
limited number of (likely larger) firms, resulting in a concentration of innovation in the economy.
6.2.2. Direct vs. Indirect Effects of Reporting Regulation
To explore the forces underlying the aggregate effect, we decompose the net effect of reporting
regulation in a market into the direct effect of firms’ own reporting mandates and the indirect spillover
effects resulting from other firms’ reporting mandates.
To empirically implement this decomposition, we construct reporting intensities capturing the
extent to which other, yet related firms are subject to reporting mandates. We identify such related
firms using input-output linkages. Specifically, for each focal industry, we construct reporting
intensities for its input (“supplier”) and output (“customer”) industries. We then weight the reporting
intensities of supplier and customer industries with their respective shares of inputs to and outputs
from the respective focal industry. The resulting supplier and customer reporting intensities differ
from the focal industry’s reporting intensity because many but not all suppliers and customers operate
in the same two-digit industry as firms in the focal industry. This feature allows us to separately
identify the impact of mandatory reporting imposed on a set of firms (including their within-industry
competitors) from the impact of mandates imposed on firms’ suppliers and customers.
Table 3 presents the estimates from country-industry-level regressions of innovation activity
on a focal industry’s own reporting intensity and its supplier and customer reporting intensities.
Controlling for supplier and customer reporting intensities, we continue to find that more extensive

27

reporting mandates in a given industry decrease corporate innovation, consistent with our results in
Table 2. Compared to these results, however, the decline in innovation is now more pronounced (for
all proxies). This result makes sense because in this specification offsetting spillovers from suppliers
and customers that face reporting mandates are separately estimated. Consistent with the notion that
firms benefit from these spillovers, the coefficients on the supplier and customer intensities are
typically positive and often statistically significant.
In terms of economic magnitude, our estimates imply that a 10 percentage-point increase in
the share of firms subject to mandatory reporting is associated with a 2.2 percentage-point decrease
in the share of innovating firms, after excluding supplier and customer spillovers (column 3 of Panel
A in Table 3). The same increase in the reporting share is associated with only a 1.2 percentage-point
decrease when including supplier and customer spillovers (column 3 of Panel A in Table 2). These
comparisons nicely illustrate the positive spillovers from reporting mandates for customers and, in
particular, suppliers. The results also highlight why it is important to conduct the regulatory analysis
at an aggregate level, as otherwise one does not capture the net impact.
The results in Table 3 suggest the industry-level net effect of reporting mandates combines
negative direct effects with positive indirect effects on corporate innovation. They are consistent with
the notion that reporting mandates redistribute firms’ gains from innovation to other related firms.
For instance, customers could strike tougher bargains with their suppliers when they see that
(reporting) suppliers have relatively high margins.
To further explore the redistribution of gains from innovation, Table 4 presents estimates
from regressions of aggregate profitability (or productivity) on a focal industry’s own reporting
intensity and its supplier and customer reporting intensities. We find that imposing mandates on
suppliers and customers enhances the aggregate profitability in the focal industry (columns 1 and 2),

28

consistent with a redistribution of gains from innovation. 29 We further find that the increase in
profitability due to supplier and customer mandates is primarily captured by larger firms (columns 3
and 4), as shown by an increase in the covariance between firms’ market share (or size) and their
profitability (in the vein of Olley & Pakes 1996; Bartelsman et al. 2013). Firms’ own reporting
mandates, by contrast, tend to hurt firms with high market shares and/or profitability, as shown by
negative (albeit not statistically significant) coefficients for the own reporting intensities.
In sum, the results in Table 4 are consistent with a redistribution of innovation gains from
firms facing mandates, especially profitable ones, to other firms, especially larger ones. Thus, one
potential economic consequence of mandatory financial reporting is a concentration of innovation
activity among larger firms in industries that are relatively less affected by the reporting mandate.
6.3. Enforcement Reform in Germany
6.3.1. Main Effect of Regulation on Innovation
We also examine the impact of mandatory reporting in a single-country setting, exploiting the
German enforcement reform.

This setting, unlike the European one, does not allow us to

accommodate broader country-wide, within-industry spillovers in the estimation. Here, we have to
define markets more narrowly at the regional level, aggregating at the county and two-digit-industry
level. It, however, provides a more powerful setting to investigate the direct impact of mandatory
reporting on affected firms, because we can exploit finer local variation in the reporting mandate and
observe more detailed outcomes (e.g., firms’ returns to innovation). These features also allow us to

We refer to revenue productivity as “profitability” because it essentially represents a ratio-based measure of profits
(Foster et al. 2008). We tabulate the results for labor productivity, a simple measure which relates firms’ sales to their
amount of labor. The results are robust to using a measure of total factor productivity, which relates firms’ sales to their
labor and capital inputs. In the European setting, we rely on these admittedly coarse profitability measures, because many
firms are exempt from reporting their profitability (limiting the availability of firms’ profit information in the Amadeus
data). In the following German setting, by contrast, we can use direct profitability measures specifically tied to firms’
return to their innovation as reported in their survey responses.
29

29

shed more light on the channels through which reporting regulation affects corporate innovation in
the aggregate.
Table 5 presents the estimates from county-industry-level regressions of innovation activities
on the interaction of the share of limited firms and a post-enforcement indicator. This interaction
essentially captures the increase in the effective strength of the reporting mandate at the local market
level. That is, the enforcement reform had a larger effect in markets with a high share of limited firms,
which after the reform face a much more stringent reporting mandate. 30
In column 1 of Panel A, we find that the increase in the strength of the mandate is associated
with significantly lower innovation spending. Figure 1 plots the innovation spending effect over time.
Consistent with the parallel trends assumption, we do not observe a differential trend between markets
with higher vis-à-vis lower shares of limited firms in the pre-enforcement period. After the reform,
innovation spending declines, at first gradually and then stabilizes at a significantly lower level. 31 In
addition to innovation spending, we find that the share of innovating firms (broadly defined) declines
after the enforcement reform. Similar declines are also observed for the individual components of
this measure: the share of firms with new-to-market innovations, product innovations, and process
innovations. Panel B documents that these declines are also observed for total spending and the total
number of firms with any of these types of innovation, which implies that the results are not only
present for the average firm in an industry and county, but also come through in size-weighted,
aggregate results.
Collectively, the results in Table 5 suggest more extensive mandatory reporting reduces

See Figure A1 in Breuer (2019) for evidence that county-industries with greater limited-liability-firm shares exhibit larger
increases in public financial reporting after the enforcement reform than county-industries with lower shares.
31 The enforcement regime became effective for fiscal years ending December 31, 2006, and later. There is an
approximately 12-months lag between the fiscal-year end and the publication date. Between December 31, 2006 and
December 31, 2007, 123,446 financial statement were publicly available. The following year, 1,079,235 financial statements
were publicly available, covering nearly all limited liability firms in Germany (Bundesanzeiger 2019).
30

30

innovation activity in local markets. These results are consistent with and corroborate the earlier
findings in the European setting. The negative impact of mandatory reporting is estimated with
greater power at the local level than in the European setting, as evidenced by much higher significance
levels. This increase in power is likely driven by two factors: (i) the larger number of observations and
(ii) the local market design, which is less aggregated and hence accommodates fewer offsetting
spillovers. As such, the local market results primarily capture the direct impact of the mandate on
innovation, not the net impact including spillovers. This feature could for instance explain why we
find a negative innovation spending effect in the German setting, whereas we fail to find one in the
more aggregated design in the European setting. To explore this explanation, we next examine
whether the local impact of mandatory reporting depends on the number of firms in the market, which
can provide offsetting spillovers.
6.3.2. Heterogeneous Effects in Competitive vs. Monopolistic Markets
In this section, we estimate separate effects for the enforcement reform in local markets with
many firms (more competitive) and few firms (more monopolistic). Table 6 provides estimates from
county-industry-level regressions of innovation on the strength of the mandate, separately for local
markets with an above median number of firms (“high”) and markets with a below median number
of firms (“low”). We find that mandatory reporting is more negatively associated with innovation
spending and innovating firms in markets with few firms, i.e., in regional oligopolies or monopolies.
Notably, the decline in spending in markets with few firms appears to be driven by local monopolists
stopping innovation activities altogether (column 4). 32
The results in Table 6 provide an explanation for why we observe negative spending effects
32 In supplemental tests, we document that the impact is concentrated along the extensive margin in the local market
design (Table A1). In the firm-level design, the impact of the mandate occurs primarily at the intensive margin, as this
design focuses on firms operating in the more crowded markets (due to the implicit requirement of the fixed effects, which
require at least one control firm in the same county-year and industry-year).

31

in the local market design, yet do not observe a clear decline in the more aggregated European setting.
When aggregating to the local market in the German setting, local markets with few firms tend to
dominate or be overrepresented compared to a sample using firm-level observations. In these
markets, local monopolists appear to stop innovating. At the economy-wide level (European setting),
the spending declines of local monopolists are less relevant or offset by the shift in innovation
activities to other larger firms in the economy, as suggested by our results in Table 2 and Table 4.
Collectively, the results in Table 6 suggest that mandatory reporting primarily discourages
innovation activity of local monopolists. They make sense considering that local monopolists cannot
benefit from offsetting information spillovers from other local firms’ reporting, whereas firms in
crowded markets at least benefit from other firms’ reporting. The results in Table 6 are further
consistent with the idea that, absent any reporting mandate, local monopolists can protect their rents
from innovation via secrecy. Firms in more crowded markets, by contrast, are less likely to earn
substantial rents to begin with and cannot easily hide their profits and rents given the proximity of
their competitors, which facilitates the dissipation of proprietary information even absent reporting
mandates (e.g., via employee poaching) (Li et al. 2017; Glaeser 2018). To shed light on the importance
of proprietary costs from financial reporting for the negative innovation effect, we explicitly
investigate the effects on profitability and economic gains from innovation in the next section.
6.4. Channels and Alternative Explanations
6.4.1. Proprietary Costs vs. Innovation Efficiency
Our results are consistent with reporting regulation discouraging corporate innovation,
because it dissipates firms’ gains from innovation. However, an alternative interpretation is that our
findings reflect improved innovation efficiency. Information on other firms’ innovative activities can,
for example, help firms identify worthwhile activities and avoid duplicate efforts. To distinguish

32

between these potential explanations, we investigate several measures that reflect the economic returns
to innovation. We expect to observe lower returns if mandatory reporting dissipates gains from
innovation, whereas we expect to observe unchanged or even improved returns if a reporting mandate
enhances innovation efficiency.
Table 7 presents the estimates from county-industry-level regressions of various returns to
innovation measures on the effective strength of the German reporting mandate. We find that an
increase in the strength of the mandate is negatively associated with firms’ profit margins, sales from
new-to-market innovations, the share of sales from new-to-market innovations among total sales, the
share of sales increases from quality improvements, and cost reductions from process improvements
(all at the county-industry level). 33 Thus, the returns to innovation decline across the board after the
enforcement reform strengthened the reporting mandate in Germany.
In sum, the results in Table 7 support the interpretation that the channel for the effect of
reporting mandates on innovation is the proprietary costs of reporting. They do not appear consistent
with the alternative interpretation that reporting mandates enhance the efficiency of innovations.
Further supporting this conclusion are the results of our earlier analyses showing declines not just in
innovation inputs (e.g., spending), but especially in innovation outputs (e.g., product, process, or
service innovations). Notably, we find that even new-to-the-market innovations decline, which is
inconsistent with a mere reduction of duplicate efforts.
6.4.2. Financing Frictions
Another potential channel through which reporting regulation could affect innovation is

33 We calculate the aggregate percent of sales from new-to-market innovations by weighting the reported percentages with
available sales data. By contrast, we aggregate the share of sales increases due to quality improvements by simply calculating
the total and taking its logarithm (plus one) as the data does not allow us to observe the sales increase amount relative to
which the survey respondents stated the percentage number.

33

through its impact on firms’ ability to finance new investments (e.g., Brown et al. 2009; Kerr & Nanda
2015; Brown & Martinsson 2018; Park 2018). Our results are inconsistent with the notion that this
channel is large enough to (over)compensate the decline in industry-wide due to proprietary costs.
Arguably, this outcome is not particularly surprising in our setting. Capital-market benefits often
motivate firms’ voluntary reporting. That is, firms that, on net, benefit from more disclosure can
always provide it voluntarily. As a result, mandatory reporting effectively expands the reporting of
firms, for whom the capital-market benefits of public reporting do not outweigh the corresponding
costs (e.g., proprietary costs). In our sample of private firms, the capital-market benefits from public
reporting are limited for most firms because they obtain financing from a limited number of capital
providers (e.g., owner-managers and relationship banks) with whom they can and do communicate
privately. The private communication allows firms to inform their main capital providers and to
reduce financing frictions, but avoids the leakage of proprietary information.
Although we expect the capital-market benefits from a mandate to be smaller for private firms,
there may still be instances in which the mandate has financing benefits for some firms in the industry
or the industry as a whole (e.g., due to spillovers, standardization, and reduction of duplicate
information collection efforts; Minnis & Shroff 2017). 34 Consistent with this line of reasoning, Table
8 documents that firms report fewer external financing constraints as an impediment to innovation
after the enforcement reform strengthened the reporting mandate in Germany. We also find some
evidence suggesting fewer internal financing constraints. These results are consistent with a large
literature in accounting (Leuz & Wysocki 2016) and suggest mandatory reporting comes with capitalmarket benefits, in our case at the market level. Still, these benefits are not large enough to produce
a positive net effect with respect to market-wide innovation.

See, for example, Garmaise and Natividad (2016) for information spillovers from transparent firms to others and
improved access to credit. See (Zingales 2009) and Leuz (2010) for overviews on the benefits of mandatory reporting.

34

34

The documented reduction in financing constraints also allays concerns that the negative
impact on innovation documented in the German setting is due to confounding influences from the
financial crisis during our sample period. In particular, our evidence is inconsistent with the concern
that the financial or ensuing economic crisis may have hit limited-liability firms harder than unlimitedliability firms (e.g., as a result of limited collateral), which in turn could spuriously result in a negative
innovation effect. 35
6.5. Other Measures of Corporate Innovation
Our results are based on fairly broad, yet concrete innovation measures derived from firms’
confidential responses to the Community Innovation Surveys. These survey-based measures are
frequently used in innovation research and policy. In contrast, studies in accounting, finance, and
economics tend to rely on patents and accounting information (R&D expenses) to measure corporate
innovation activity. In this section, we investigate the impact of reporting regulation on these
alternative measures of innovation to align our findings with the literature and also to validate the
survey responses used to measure innovation.
6.5.1. Patents
Patents reflect innovation but they also represent one particular form with which firms protect
rents from innovation. Moreover, patents grant formal legal protection only in exchange for mandated
disclosure of patent information. These features have two important implications. First, patents
capture only a subset of innovations. Supporting this claim, our descriptive evidence documents that

In untabulated robustness tests, we find that our inferences remain unchanged when controlling for firms’ local
exposures to the financial distress of a major German bank (Commerzbank) during the financial crisis (Huber 2018). The
dynamics of the treatment effect shown in Figure 1 also contradict the influence of a temporary financial and economic
crisis between 2007 and 2010. Moreover, it is worth noting that our results are consistent across the two settings. In the
European setting, we do not exploit any regulatory reforms or changes that overlap with crises times but instead rely on a
cross-sectional identification strategy. In sum, it is unlikely that financial or economic crises during our sample period
confound our results.
35

35

only a small fraction of all innovation activity is patented (in line with, e.g., Arundel & Kabla 1998;
Argente et al. 2020; Granja & Moreira 2020). Second, patents are a form of disclosure. As such, firms’
patenting and reporting strategies are intertwined (e.g., Glaeser et al. 2019; Reeb & Zhao 2020).
These institutional features render the effect of mandatory reporting on corporate patenting
ambiguous. On the one hand, a mandate could decrease patents through their negative impact on
innovation activity. On the other hand, the increase in reporting due to the mandate makes it more
important for firms to protect their innovations in some other way (as secrecy is less effective), which
in turn could increase the use of patents. Thus, patents are arguably a problematic measure of
innovative activity when studying the aggregate impact of reporting mandates.
Consistent with an ambiguous relationship, we find in Table 9 that reporting mandates are
positively associated with patenting in the aggregate design of the European setting (Panel A), whereas
they are negatively associated with patenting in the local market design of the German setting (Panel
B). The positive association in the aggregate design likely reflects the increased use of patenting to
protect firms’ remaining innovations. In the local market design, however, the negative association
reflects that local monopolists do not have (m)any remaining innovations to protect, as they often
stop innovating altogether. In line with this interpretation, Panel C shows (using the firm-level design)
that firms’ survey responses indicate that secrecy has become less important after the reform
effectively expanded the mandate. At the same time, the importance of patenting and actual patent
applications increase after the reform (Panel C). Note that the firm-level analysis by construction is
tilted towards more crowded markets (as it weighted by each firm-year). Firms in these markets reduce
their innovation spending only along the intensive margin, but do not stop innovating altogether.
Accordingly, these firms shift from secrecy toward patenting for their remaining innovations. Thus,
our local-market and firm-level results are internally consistent.

36

Besides illustrating the ambiguous relation between mandatory reporting and patenting, the
results in Table 9 document that firms’ responses to the Community Innovation Survey align with
their actual patenting behavior recorded in PATSTAT. In each of the panels of Table 9, the respective
treatment variable is associated with firms’ survey responses in the same direction as it is with firms’
actual patenting behavior. This correspondence validates the survey-based innovation measures.
Lastly, the patenting results in Table 9 reinforce the proprietary costs explanation for the
negative effect of reporting on corporate innovation. In column 3 of Panel A, we find that reporting
mandates increase the share of patent citations originating from competitors in the same country-industry.
This finding is consistent with the interpretation that reporting mandates increase within-industry
competition by revealing the profitability of innovative firms to which innovative firms respond by
increasing their patenting (which in turn competitors have to cite).
6.5.2. Accounting Information
Financial statements reflect firms’ innovation activity in various, though imperfect ways. The
balance sheet, for example, provides information on the investments in tangible and some intangible
assets. Most intangible assets, however, do not make it onto the balance sheet (e.g., Lev 2001). In
addition to the balance sheet, the income statement can, for example, provide an estimate of firms’
R&D expenses. Often, however, these expenses are not broken out separately and buried in other
expense line items (e.g., Koh & Reeb 2015). The absence of comprehensive and innovation-specific
items hampers the usefulness of individual accounting line items for our purpose of assessing the
aggregate impact of reporting mandates. This issue is compounded by the fact that reporting mandates
mechanically affect the availability of accounting-based innovation measures through their impact on
the availability of accounting information (e.g., for database providers). For example, aggregate R&D
may appear to be increasing after a reporting mandate simply because it forces more firms to disclose

37

R&D expenses. With these caveats in mind, we examine the relation between mandatory reporting
and accounting-based innovation measures, on one hand to check for consistency with our main
results and on the other hand to make our results comparable to other studies in the literature.
Consistent with our earlier results, reporting mandates are negatively associated with measures
of innovation derived from accounting numbers (Table 10). We find that reporting mandates are
negatively associated with investments in tangible and, in particular, intangible assets. We further find
some evidence that reporting mandates are negatively associated with firms’ R&D intensity (defined
as R&D expenses over sales), albeit insignificantly. The lack of significance is likely a consequence of
power as the coefficient magnitudes are sizeable. The R&D intensity results are estimated based on a
severely restricted subsample, as only few European companies provide as a separate R&D line item
in the income statement and hence is often missing in the Amadeus database. Despite these
limitations, the results for the accounting-based innovation measures support our conclusion that
mandatory reporting reduces corporate innovation.

7. Discussion of the Results
Using multiple settings and detailed innovation input and output data, we consistently find
that mandatory reporting reduces the prevalence of corporate innovation activities. This decline in
the prevalence of innovation activity does not appear to reflect a reduction in wasteful duplication of
innovation efforts and a corresponding increase in innovative efficiency. Instead, the results point to
reduced incentives to innovate, even after accounting for positive spillovers within broad two-digit
industries. The latter also provides a plausible explanation for why Breuer (2019) finds that reporting
mandates spur competition, yet do not appear to have positive (or may even have negative) effects on
industry-level productivity growth. We emphasize, however, that the question of whether the negative
net impact of mandatory reporting on industry-level innovation generalizes to the economy-wide level

38

is unclear. Our country-industry analysis neglects potential cross-industry and cross-country spillovers
in the aggregation. What appears clear though is that reporting mandates have important distributional
consequences: some firms win, others lose. As we discuss here, this distributional impact can have
important ramifications for market structure and innovation incentives at the economy level.
Our evidence is consistent with the notion that reporting regulation deters corporate
innovation due to the dissipation of proprietary information to competitors and contracting partners
(e.g., suppliers). Looking at our evidence as well as related work, we surmise that three interrelated
economic mechanisms are at play. First, reporting mandates diminish firms’ bargaining power and
rents (Melitz & Ottaviano 2008; Breuer 2019), limiting the rewards from innovation. Consistent with
this mechanism, we find negative effects on profit margins and positive effects from customer and
supplier reporting, both of which are consistent with learning and increased bargaining power.
Second, reporting mandates have been shown to shorten the duration of firms’ contracting
relationships (Dewatripont & Maskin 1995; Hombert & Matray 2016; Breuer et al. 2018; Sutherland
2018), which in turn likely hurts the incentives for long-term investments such as R&D. Third,
reporting mandates increase the number of contracting partners (Berger et al. 2001; Asker & Ljungqvist
2010; Saidi & Zaldokas 2019), reducing the efficacy of secrecy as a strategy to protect proprietary
information and know-how about innovative products, services and processes. Broadly speaking, the
three mechanisms are consistent with a shift away from relationships and the notion that disclosure
regulation is integral to and furthers arms’ length transactions (e.g., Leuz & Wüstemann 2004).
We find the strongest effects from mandatory reporting among smaller firms and in local
markets with few existing competitors. This pattern suggests smaller, local monopolists in niche
markets are particularly affected. Without a mandate, these firms can essentially hide their existence
and profitability. By contrast, firms operating in already crowded and competitive markets earn limited
rents and are well known, so they cannot hide much, irrespective of financial reporting. Similar
39

arguments can be made for firms that already make very active use of patenting and hence have to
provide substantial and detailed information about their innovations. They are likely less affected than
smaller and lesser known firms in nice markets using primarily secrecy to protect their innovations.
Consistent with this line of arguments, we find the strongest effects of reporting regulation
along the extensive instead of the intensive margins of innovation spending, innovation outputs, and
patenting. An interesting implication of these findings and patterns is that mandatory reporting
appears to lead to a concentration of innovative activity at larger firms operating across several
industries. Consistent with such a concentration, Bernard (2016) and Breuer (2019), analyzing market
entry effects, document that it is predominantly larger competitors that enter into local niche markets
in response to reporting mandates.

As a result, reporting mandates can reduce market-share

concentration in local markets and narrow industries as shown in Breuer (2019), but still increase the
concentration of market power at the national level and across industries (Rossi-Hansberg et al. 2019).
Such concentration of market power and innovative activity among larger firms is consistent with
recent and broader trends in innovation activity (Rammer & Schubert 2018; EU 2019a). Similar to
other information technologies (e.g., Begenau et al. 2018; Farboodi et al. 2019), reporting mandates
appear to disproportionally benefit larger firms. It is plausible that the direct effect of a mandate on
corporate innovation tends to hit larger firms less than smaller firms. Larger firms often disclose
much more information voluntarily (e.g., Buzby 1975; Dedman & Lennox 2009; Breuer et al. 2020),
can hide sensitive information through complexity (e.g., Bens et al. 2011), and face smaller, resourceconstrained competitors. At the same time, the indirect (spillover) effect of a reporting mandate tends
to benefit larger firms more than smaller firms. The former can exploit investment opportunities that
are revealed by a competitor or contracting partner through the mandate more easily, given, among
others, their financial resources, data-processing capabilities, and existing advertising channels.

40

8. Conclusion
In this study, we examine the effects of financial reporting regulation on market- and
economy-wide innovation activity. We analyze two different settings: threshold-based reporting
mandates in the EU and a major enforcement reform in Germany, both of which give rise to plausibly
exogenous differences in the intensity with which European and German firms face reporting
mandates. The two settings have different advantages and drawbacks, but provide remarkably findings
and conclusions.
We find evidence that requiring firms to publicly disclose their financial reports reduces firms’
innovation incentives. At the same, it increases firms’ propensity to use patenting as a means to
protect their innovations. Notably, these findings hold at the firm and at the market level. Our
evidence is consistent with the notion that mandatory reporting deters firms’ incentives to innovate
and generate proprietary know-how because of concerns about the loss of proprietary information.
Importantly, this result holds in the aggregate after accounting for potential within-industry spillovers.
Our evidence indicates that reporting mandates redistribute existing rents from innovating firms to
other firms (e.g., competitors, customers, or suppliers), typically larger ones. However, the positive
spillovers are not large enough to fully offset the decline in the number of innovating firms at the
industry level. In summary, our evidence suggests that proprietary costs and the ensuing reduction
or, at least, concentration of corporate innovation are an important consideration for regulators and
policy makers when setting reporting regulation.
In closing, we highlight the following caveats. While we are ultimately interested in whether
innovation activity is lost to the economy due to reporting regulation, our ability to speak to this
motivating question is constrained by two important limitations. First, our highest level of aggregation
is at the country-industry level, not the economy level. We choose the country-industry level because

41

industry level variation enhances power (more observations) and affords identification with respect to
reporting regulation, which is endogenous at the economy level. Compared to the commonly used
firm-level analysis, this aggregation level makes an important step toward accommodating spillovers
among related firms. However, it neglects potential spillovers across broad industries and country
boundaries. Second, our survey-based innovation measures best capture the prevalence of innovation
activity rather than its aggregate value.

While our measures are more innovation-specific and

comprehensive than most other measures (e.g., patents or accounting information), they do not
perfectly capture the value-weighted aggregate of innovation activity, which would be the ideal
measure necessary to conclusively answer our motivating question.

42

References
Accountancy Europe, 2019. Audit Exemption Thresholds in Europe (2019 update). Accountancy in
https://www.accountancyeurope.eu/wpEurope,
Available
at:
content/uploads/181114_Audit-exemption-thresholds-in-Europe_2018_surveyupdate_3.pdf
Acs, Z., Audretsch, D., 1990. Innovation and Small Firms. The MIT Press.
Acs, Z.J., Audretsch, D.B., 1987. Innovation, Market Structure, and Firm Size. Review of Economics
and Statistics 69, 567-574
Acs, Z.J., Audretsch, D.B., 1988. Innovation in Large and Small Firms: An Empirical Analysis.
American Economic Review 78, 678-690
Allen, A., Lewis-Western, M.F., Valentine, K., 2018. The Innovation Consequences of Financial
Regulation for Young Life-Cycle Firms. Working paper
Amernic, J.H., 1985. The roles of accounting in collective bargaining. Accounting, Organizations and
Society 10, 227-253
Aobdia, D., 2015. Proprietary Information Spillovers and Supplier Choice: Evidence from Auditors.
Review of Accounting Studies 20, 1504-39
Aobdia, D., Cheng, L., 2018. Unionization, product market competition, and strategic disclosure.
Journal of Accounting and Economics 65, 331-357
Argente, D., Baslandze, S., Hanley, D., Moreira, S., 2020. Patents to Products: Product Innovation
and Firm Dynamics. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3577811
Arrow, K., 1962. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention. In: The Rate and
Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors. National Bureau of Economic
Research, pp. 609-626.
Arrunada, B., 2011. Mandatory Accounting Disclosure by Small Private Companies. European Journal
of Law and Economics 32, 377-413
Arundel, A., 2001. The relative effectiveness of patents and secrecy for appropriation. Research Policy
30, 611-624
Arundel, A., Kabla, I., 1998. What percentage of innovations are patented? Empirical estimates for
European firms. Research Policy 27, 127-141
Asker, J., Ljungqvist, A., 2010. Competition and the Structure of Vertical Relationships in Capital
Markets. Journal of Political Economy 118, 599-647
Ball, R., 1980. Discussion of Accounting for Research and Development Costs: The Impact on
Research and Development Expenditures. Journal of Accounting Research 18, 27-37
Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., Scarpetta, S., 2013. Cross-Country Differences in Productivity: The
Role of Allocation and Selection. American Economic Review 103, 305-334
43

Barth, M.E., Landsman, W.R., Taylor, D.J., 2017. The JOBS Act and Information Uncertainty in IPO
Firms. The Accounting Review 92, 25-47
Begenau, J., Farboodi, M., Veldkamp, L., 2018. Big data in finance and the growth of large firms.
Journal of Monetary Economics 97, 71-87
Bens, D.A., Berger, P.G., Monahan, S.J., 2011. Discretionary Disclosure in Financial Reporting: An
Examination Comparing Internal Firm Data to Externally Reported Segment Data.
Accounting Review 86, 417-449
Berger, A.N., Klapper, L.F., Udell, G.F., 2001. The ability of banks to lend to informationally opaque
small businesses. Journal of Banking & Finance 25, 2127-2167
Berger, P.G., 2011. Challenges and opportunities in disclosure research—A discussion of ‘the financial
reporting environment: Review of the recent literature’. Journal of Accounting and Economics
51, 204-218
Berger, P.G., Choi, J.H., Tomar, S., 2019. Breaking it Down: Competitive Costs of Cost Disclosures.
Working paper; available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3358435
Berger, P.G., Hann, R.N., 2007. Segment Profitability and the Proprietary and Agency Costs of
Disclosure. Accounting Review 82, 869-906
Bernard, D., 2016. Is the risk of product market predation a cost of disclosure? Journal of Accounting
and Economics 62, 305-325
Bernard, D., Burgstahler, D., Kaya, D., 2018. Size management by European private firms to minimize
proprietary costs of disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 94-122
Bersch, J., Gottschalk, S., Müller, B., Niefert, M., 2014. The Mannheim Enterprise Panel (MUP) and
Firm Statistics for Germany ZEW-Centre for European Economic Research Discussion
Paper, 14-104
Beyer, A., Cohen, D.A., Lys, T.Z., Walther, B.R., 2010. The financial reporting environment: Review
of the recent literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics 50, 296-343
Bhattacharya, S., Chiesa, G., 1995. Proprietary Information, Financial Intermediation, and Research
Incentives. Journal of Financial Intermediation 4, 328-357
Bhattacharya, S., Ritter, J.R., 1983. Innovation and Communication: Signalling with Partial Disclosure.
Review of Economic Studies 50, 331-346
Bönte, W., Wiethaus, L., 2007. Knowledge Disclosure and Transmission in Buyer–Supplier
Relationships. Review of Industrial Organization 31, 275-288
Breuer, M., 2019. How does financial reporting regulation affect industry-wide resource allocation?
Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3063320
Breuer, M., Hombach, K., Müller, M.A., 2018. How does financial reporting regulation affect firms'
banking? Review of Financial Studies 31, 1265-1297
Breuer, M., Hombach, K., Müller, M.A., 2020. The Economics of Firms' Public Disclosure: Theory
44

and Evidence. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3037002
Brown, J.R., Fazzari, S.M., Petersen, B.C., 2009. Financing Innovation and Growth: Cash Flow,
External Equity, and the 1990s R&D Boom. Journal of Finance 64, 151-185
Brown, J.R., Martinsson, G., 2018. Does Transparency Stifle or Facilitate Innovation? Management
Science forthcoming
Bundesanzeiger, 2019. Query of financial statements at official website of federal gazette. Accessed
on 09/04/2019: https://www.bundesanzeiger.de/ebanzwww/wexsservlet
Buzby, S.L., 1975. Company Size, Listed Versus Unlisted Stocks, and the Extent of Financial
Disclosure. Journal of Accounting Research 13, 16-37
Chaplinsky, S., Hanley, K.W., Moon, S.K., 2017. The JOBS Act and the Costs of Going Public. Journal
of Accounting Research 55, 795-836
Christensen, H.B., Hail, L., Leuz, C., 2016. Capital-Market Effects of Securities Regulation: Prior
Conditions, Implementation, and Enforcement. Review of Financial Studies 29, 2885-2924
Cna Interpreta, 2011. Study on Accounting requirements for SMEs. Directorate-General for
Enterprise and Industry
Community Innovation Survey, 2014a. The Harmonised Survey Questionnaire, 23 July 2014.
Community Innovation Survey, 2014b. Methodological Notes for CIS 2014 Questionnaire,
November 28.
Costello, A.M., 2013. Mitigating incentive conflicts in inter-firm relationships: Evidence from longterm supply contracts. Journal of Accounting and Economics 56, 19-39
Currie, J., Gruber, J., 1996. Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the Medicaid
Eligibility of Pregnant Women. Journal of Political Economy 104, 1263
D’Acunto, F., Prokopczuk, M., Weber, M., 2018. Historical Antisemitism, Ethnic Specialization, and
Financial Development. The Review of Economic Studies 86, 1170-1206
Dambra, M., Field, L.C., Gustafson, M.T., 2015. The JOBS Act and IPO volume: Evidence that
disclosure costs affect the IPO decision. Journal of Financial Economics 116, 121-143
Darrough, M.N., Stoughton, N.M., 1990. Financial Disclosure Policy in an Entry Game. Journal of
Accounting and Economics 12, 219-243
Dass, N., Nanda, V.K., Xiao, S.C., 2018. Intellectual Property Protection and Financial Markets:
Patenting
vs.
Secrecy.
Working
paper;
Available
at
SSRN:
www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=2648770
Dedman, E., Lennox, C., 2009. Perceived competition, profitability and the withholding of
information about sales and the cost of sales. Journal of Accounting and Economics 48, 210230
Dewatripont, M., Maskin, E., 1995. Credit and Efficiency in Centralized and Decentralized
45

Economies. Review of Economic Studies, 541
EU, 2017. Annual report on European SMEs 2016/2017 Focus on self-employment.
https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/26563/attachments/1/translations/en/renditi
ons/native
EU, 2019a. Annual report on European SMEs 2018/2019: Research & Development and Innovation
by
SMEs.
https://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/38365/attachments/2/translations/en/renditi
ons/native
EU,

2019b.
Fact
Sheets
on
the
European
Union
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/factsheets/en/sheet/35/company-law

Company

Law.

European Commission, 2019. Study on the accounting regime of limited liability micro companies.
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/business_economy_euro/company_reporting_an
d_auditing/documents/190605-study-micro-companies_en.pdf
Farboodi, M., Mihet, R., Philippon, T., Veldkamp, L., 2019. Big data and firm dynamics. American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings forthcoming
Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., Syverson, C., 2008. Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection
on Productivity or Profitability? American Economic Review 98, 394-425
Garmaise, M.J., Natividad, G., 2016. Spillovers in Local Banking Markets. Review of Corporate
Finance Studies 5, 139-165
Gassen, J., Muhn, M.N., 2018. Financial Transparency of Private Firms: Evidence from a Randomized
Field Experiment. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract=3290710
Gittelman, M., 2008. A Note on the Value of Patents as Indicators of Innovation: Implications for
Management Research. Academy of Management Perspectives 22, 21-27
Glaeser, S., 2018. The effects of proprietary information on corporate disclosure and transparency:
Evidence from trade secrets. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 163-193
Glaeser, S., Michels, J., Verrecchia, R.E., 2019. Discretionary Disclosure and Manager Horizon:
Evidence
from
Patenting.
Working
paper;
Available
at
SSRN:
www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=2939852
Glaeser, S., Omartian, J.D., 2019. Public Firm Presence, Financial Reporting, and the Decline of U.S.
Manufacturing. Working paper; Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3435834
Goldsmith-Pinkham, P., Sorkin, I., Swift, H., 2019. Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why, and How.
American Economic Review forthcoming
Graham, J.R., Harvey, C.R., Rajgopal, S., 2005. The economic implications of corporate financial
reporting. Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 3-73
Granja, J., Moreira, S., 2020. Product Innovation and Credit Market Disruptions. Working paper;
Available at SSRN: www.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3477726

46

Hail, L., Tahoun, A., Wang, C., 2017. Corporate Scandals and Regulation. Journal of Accounting
Research 56, 617-671
Harris, M.S., 1998. The Association between Competition and Managers' Business Segment Reporting
Decisions. Journal of Accounting Research 36, 111-128
Hedge, D., Herkenhoff, K., Zhu, C., 2018. Patent Disclosure Working paper
Holmstrom, B., 1989. Agency costs and innovation. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
12, 305-327
Hombert, J., Matray, A., 2016. The Real Effects of Lending Relationships on Innovative Firms and
Inventor Mobility. The Review of Financial Studies 30, 2413-2445
Huber, K., 2018. Disentangling the Effects of a Banking Crisis: Evidence from German Firms and
Counties. American Economic Review 108, 868-98
Hussinger, K., Keusch, T., Moers, F., 2018. Insider Trading and Corporate Innovation: The Real
Effects of Disclosure. Working paper
ICAEW, 2013. Financial Reporting Disclosures: Market and Regulatory Failures. Information for
Better Markets Initiative
Kerr, W.R., Nanda, R., 2015. Financing Innovation. Annual Review of Financial Economics 7, 445462
Kim, J., 2019. Mandatory Corporate Patent Disclosures and Innovation Working paper
Koh, P.-S., Reeb, D.M., 2015. Missing R&D. Journal of Accounting and Economics 60, 73-94
Lang, M., Sul, E., 2014. Linking industry concentration to proprietary costs and disclosure: Challenges
and opportunities. Journal of Accounting and Economics 58, 265-274
Leuz, C., 2004. Proprietary versus Non-Proprietary Disclosures: Evidence from Germany. In: Leuz
C, Pfaff D & Hopwood A (eds.) The Economics and Politics of Accounting. Oxford
University Press, pp. 164–197.
Leuz, C., 2010. Different approaches to corporate reporting regulation: how jurisdictions differ and
why. Accounting and Business Research 40, 229-256
Leuz, C., Triantis, A., Wang, T.Y., 2008. Why do firms go dark? Causes and economic consequences
of voluntary SEC deregistrations. Journal of Accounting and Economics 45, 181-208
Leuz, C., Wüstemann, J., 2004. The Role of Accounting in the German Financial System. In: Krahnen
JP & Schmidt RH (eds.) The German Financial System. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp.
450-481.
Leuz, C., Wysocki, P.D., 2016. The Economics of Disclosure and Financial Reporting Regulation:
Evidence and Suggestions for Future Research. Journal of Accounting Research 54, 525
Lev, B., 2001. Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting. Brookings Institution Press.

47

Li, Y., Lin, Y., Zhang, L., 2017. Trade Secrets Law and Corporate Disclosure: Causal Evidence on the
Proprietary Cost Hypothesis. Journal of Accounting Research 56, 265-308
Liberty, S.E., Zimmerman, J.L., 1986. Labor Union Contract Negotiations and Accounting Choices.
The Accounting Review 61, 692-712
Mahoney, N., 2015. Bankruptcy as Implicit Health Insurance. American Economic Review 105, 710746
Max-Planck-Institute, 2009. Rechnungslegung und Wettbewerbsschutz im deutschen und
europäischen Recht [Financial Accounting and Protection of Fair Competition in German and
European Law] Springer, Heidelberg.
McLeay, S., 1999. Accounting Regulation in Europe. In: McLeay S (ed.) Accounting Regulation in
Europe. Palgrave Macmillan UK, London, pp. 366-386.
Melitz, M.J., Ottaviano, G.I.P., 2008. Market Size, Trade, and Productivity. Review of Economic
Studies 75, 295-316
Minnis, M., Shroff, N., 2017. Why Regulate Private Firm Disclosure and Auditing? Accounting and
Business Research 47, 473-502
Nagaoka, S., Motohashi, K., Goto, A., 2010. Chapter 25 - Patent Statistics as an Innovation Indicator.
In: Hall BH & Rosenberg N (eds.) Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. NorthHolland, pp. 1083-1127.
Olley, G.S., Pakes, A., 1996. The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment
Industry. Econometrica 64, 1263-1297
Palmer, J.R., 1977. The use of accounting information in labor negotiations. National Association of
Accountants, New York :
Park, K., 2018. Financial reporting quality and corporate innovation. Journal of Business Finance &
Accounting 45, 871-894
Rammer, C., Peters, B., 2014. Dokumentation zur Innovationserhebung 2014: Innovationen im Bezug
zur Energiewende, Finanzierung von Innovationen. http://ftp.zew.de/pub/zewdocs/docus/dokumentation1502.pdf
Rammer, C., Schubert, T., 2018. Concentration on the few: mechanisms behind a falling share of
innovative firms in Germany. Research Policy 47, 379-389
Reeb, D.M., Zhao, W., 2020. Patents Do Not Measure Innovation Success. Critical Finance Review
9, 157-199
Rossi-Hansberg, E., Sarte, P.-D., Trachter, N., 2019. Diverging Trends in National and Local
Concentration.
NBER
Working
Paper
No.
25066;
Available
at:
www.nber.org/papers/w25066
Rothwell, R., 1978. Small and Medium Sized Manufacturing Firms and Technological Innovation.
Management Decision 16, 362-370

48

Roychowdhury, S., Shroff, N., Verdi, R., 2019. The Effects of Financial Reporting and Disclosure on
Corporate Investment: A Review. Journal of Accounting and Economics 68, 1-27
Saidi, F., Zaldokas, A., 2019. How Does Firms’ Innovation Disclosure Affect Their Banking
Relationships? Management Science forthcoming
Schmutzler, A., 2010. Is Competition Good for Innovation? A Simple Approach to an Unresolved
Question. Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics 5, 355-428
Schneider, C., Veugelers, R., 2010. On young highly innovative companies: why they matter and how
(not) to policy support them. Industrial and Corporate Change 19, 969-1007
Sutherland, A.G., 2018. Does credit reporting lead to a decline in relationship lending? Evidence from
information sharing technology. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 123-141
Valentine, K., 2018. Can Disclosure Regulation Impede Innovation? . Working paper
Vanhaverbeke, S., Balsmeier, B., Doherr, T., 2019. Corporate Financial Transparency and Credit
Ratings. Working paper
Verrecchia, R.E., 1983. Discretionary disclosure. Journal of Accounting and Economics 5, 179-194
Verrecchia, R.E., Weber, J., 2006. Redacted Disclosure. Journal of Accounting Research 44, 791-814
Vossen, R.W., 1998. Relative Strengths and Weaknesses of Small Firms in Innovation. International
Small Business Journal 16, 88-94
Wagenhofer, A., 1990. Voluntary Disclosure with a Strategic Opponent. Journal of Accounting and
Economics 12, 341-363
Wyatt, A., Abernethy, M., 2008. Accounting for Intangible Investments. Australian Accounting
Review 18, 95-107
ZEW,

https://www.zew.de/en/forschung/patent-firm-panel-infrastructure-panel2019a.
containing-patent-and-trademark-strategies-of-germancompanies/?cHash=b9baa6ff48fb34680a0b842ba61a3ecb

ZEW, 2019b. Mannheim innovation Panel. https://kooperationen.zew.de/en/zew-fdz/provideddata/mannheim-innovation-panel.html
Zhong, R., 2018. Transparency and firm innovation. Journal of Accounting and Economics 66, 67-93
Zhou, Y., 2018. A Lobbying Approach to Evaluating the Competitive Harm of Mandatory Disclosure
of Proprietary Information: The Case of Segment Reporting. Working paper; Available at
SSRN: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract_id=3106787
Zingales, L., 2009. The Future of Securities Regulation. Journal of Accounting Research 47, 391-425

49

Variable Appendix
VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
Panel A: Exemptions in Europe
Treatment
Source

Description

Amadeus

Share of firms above country-level reporting
threshold calculated using a standardized
firm-size distribution per industry

Auditing

Amadeus

Share of firms above country-level auditing
threshold calculated using a standardized
firm-size distribution per industry

Reporting and Auditing

Amadeus

Supplier Reporting

Amadeus/Eurostat

Customer Reporting

Amadeus/Eurostat

Reporting

Supplier Reporting and Auditing

Amadeus/Eurostat

Customer Reporting and
Auditing

Amadeus/Eurostat

Outcomes

Source

Innovation Spending

Eurostat

Innovating Firm

Eurostat

New-To-Market Innovation

Eurostat

Product Innovation

Eurostat

50

Minimum of “Reporting” and “Auditing”
Reporting share of domestic supplier
industries (calculated by weighting reporting
shares with domestic input shares for a given
focal industry using Eurostat’s FIGARO
input-output table)
Reporting share of domestic customer
industries (calculated by weighting reporting
shares with domestic output shares for a
given focal industry using Eurostat’s
FIGARO input-output table)
Minimum of reporting and auditing share of
domestic supplier industries (calculated by
weighting reporting shares with domestic
input shares for a given focal industry using
Eurostat’s FIGARO input-output table)
Minimum of reporting and auditing share of
domestic customer industries (calculated by
weighting reporting shares with domestic
output shares for a given focal industry
using Eurostat’s FIGARO input-output
table)
Description
Log of total innovation spending (includes
in-house and external R&D, acquisition of
external knowledge, equipment, machinery
or software for innovation purposes,
product design and professional
development of innovation activities and
marketing of innovation) plus one
Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that introduce new or significantly improved
products, processes, or services
New-to-the-market innovations (the
enterprise was the first one to market these
products/services)
Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that introduce new or significantly improved

Process Innovation

Eurostat

Sales per Employee

Amadeus

Sales per Employee and Capital

Amadeus

Market Share and Sales per
Employee

Amadeus

Market Share and Sales per
Employee and Capital

Amadeus

Patenting Firm

Eurostat

Patent Application Firm

PATSTAT

Competitor-Forward Cites

PATSTAT

Change in Tangible Assets
Change in Intangible Assets
R&D Intensity

Amadeus
Amadeus
Amadeus

products
Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that introduce new or significantly improved
services
Log sales less log employees
Log sales less 0.3 times log tangible assets
and 0.7 log employees
Covariance between market share and sales
per employee calculated as the difference
between the market-share weighted sales per
employee and the simple average of sales per
employee
Covariance between market share and sales
per employee and capital calculated as the
difference between the market-share
weighted sales per employee and capital less
and the simple average of sales per employee
and capital
Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that apply for a patent
Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that apply for a patent
Share of forward patent cites from
competitors in same country-industry
Log difference in tangible assets over time
Log difference in intangible assets over time
R&D expense scaled by sales

51

Panel B: Enforcement Reform in Germany
Treatment
Source
Limited Share

Description
Share of limited-liability firms among firms
in county, industry, and year

Creditreform

Creditreform

Indicator taking the value of one for limitedliability/affected firms (GmbH, GmbH &
Co. KG), and zero for unlimited-liability
firms (KG, OHG)

Creditreform

Indicator taking the value of one for private
limited-liability firms, and zero for publiclylisted firms (sample restricted to: GmbH,
GmbH & Co. KG, and AG)

Creditreform/Eurostat

Limited-liability share of local supplier
industries for a given industry (calculated by
weighting the limited share of supplier
industries of a given industry in a given
county by domestic input shares from
Eurostat’s FIGARO input-output table)

Customer Limited Share

Creditreform/Eurostat

Limited-liability share of local customer
industries for a given industry (calculated by
weighting the limited share of customer
industries of a given industry in a given
county by domestic output shares from
Eurostat’s FIGARO input-output table)

Post

Creditreform

Outcomes

Source

Limited

Private

Supplier Limited Share

Innovation Spending

MIP

Innovation Spending (Extensive)

MIP

Innovation Spending (Intensive)

MIP

New-To-Market Innovations

MIP

Innovating Firm

MIP

Indicator taking the value of one for years
after 2007, and zero before
Description
Log (plus 1) of total innovation spending
(includes in-house and external R&D,
acquisition of external knowledge,
equipment, machinery or software for
innovation purposes, product design and
professional development of innovation
activities and marketing of innovation)
Indicator taking the value of one for firms
with positive total innovation spending, and
zero for firms with zero spending
Log of total innovation spending (for firms
with positive spending only)
New-to-the-market innovations (the
enterprise was the first one to market these
products/services)
Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that introduce new or significantly improved
products, processes, or services

52

Product Innovation

MIP

Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that introduce new or significantly improved
products

Process Innovation

MIP

Indicator taking the value of one for firms
that introduce new or significantly improved
processes

Importance of Secrecy

MIP

Importance of secrecy as a means to protect
innovations (scale: 0 to 3)

Importance Patenting

MIP

Patent Applications
Patenting Firm
Profit Margin
Sales from New-to-Market
Innovations
Share of Sales from New-toMarket Innovations
Share of Sales Increase from
Quality Improvements

PATSTAT
PATSTAT
MIP

Importance of patents as a means to protect
innovations (scale: 0 to 3)
Log (plus 1) of number of applied patents
Patent application indicator
Level of profit margin (scale: 1 to 9)
Log (plus 1) of sales from new-to-market
innovations
Share of sales attributable to new-to-market
innovations
Log (plus 1) share of sales increase
attributable to quality improvements

MIP
MIP
MIP

Cost Reduction from Process
Improvements

MIP

Indicator taking the value of one for firms
with a cost reduction due to process
improvements

External Financing Constraint

MIP

Indicator taking the value of one for firms
for which external financing constitutes a
constraint to innovation

Internal Financing Constraint

MIP

Indicator taking the value of one for firms
for which internal financing constitutes a
constraint to innovation

Controls
Employees

Source
Description
Amadeus/Creditreform Log (plus 1) number of employees

53

Figures & Tables
Figure 1

REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
ENFORCEMENT IN GERMANY

Average Innovation Spending

5

0

-5

-10
2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007 2008
Year

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Notes: The figure presents the relation between innovation spending and the intensity of the
enforcement of reporting mandates over time. The black dots represent difference-indifferences coefficients for each year (with 2007 as the base year) from a regression of average
innovation spending at the county, industry, and year level on the share of affected (limited)
firms in the pre-enforcement period interacted with individual year indicators. The gray area
represents a pointwise 90% confidence interval.

54

Table 1
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Panel A: Exemptions in Europe (Country-Industry Level)
Variable
Market Level
Reporting
Reporting and Auditing
Supplier Reporting
Customer Reporting
Supplier Reporting and Auditing
Customer Reporting and Auditing
Innovation Spending
Simple Average
Innovation Spending
Total
Innovating Firm
Simple Average
Innovating Firm
Total
New-To-Market Innovations
Simple Average
New-To-Market Innovations
Total
Product Innovation
Simple Average
Product Innovation
Total
Process Innovation
Simple Average
Process Innovation
Total
Sales per Employee
Weighted Average
Sales per Employee and Capital
Weighted Average
Market Share and Sales per Employee
Covariance
Market Share and Sales per Employee and Capital
Covariance
Patenting Firm
Simple Average
Patent Application Firm
Simple Average
Actual Reporting
Simple Average
Competitor-Forward Cites
Simple Average
Change in Tangible Assets
Simple Average
Change in Tangible Assets
Weighted Average
Change in Intangible Assets
Simple Average
Change in Intangible Assets
Weighted Average
R&D Intensity
Simple Average
R&D Intensity
Weighted Average

N
Mean
SD
p1
p25
p50
p75
p99
31,953
0.220
0.271
0.001
0.054
0.123
0.252
1.000
31,953
0.159
0.176
0.001
0.050
0.111
0.209
1.000
16,971
0.224
0.264
0.009
0.092
0.143
0.210
0.997
16,662
0.244
0.264
0.009
0.103
0.164
0.245
0.999
16,971
0.158
0.155
0.009
0.088
0.136
0.187
0.993
16,662
0.178
0.158
0.009
0.098
0.156
0.220
0.997
6,316
11.206
2.949
0.000
10.147
11.543
12.828
16.725
6,326
16.067
3.857
0.000
14.847
16.630
18.282
22.056
6,662
0.362
0.221
0.000
0.196
0.333
0.496
1.000
6,672
218.280
598.071
0.000
11.398
43.480
153.798
2786.903
6,694
0.161
0.167
0.000
0.041
0.113
0.232
0.911
6,704
83.566
250.299
0.000
3.180
15.077
56.750
1104.041
6,703
0.258
0.207
0.000
0.101
0.215
0.370
1.000
6,713
146.072
422.455
0.000
7.000
28.590
101.414
1913.684
6,631
0.273
0.188
0.000
0.142
0.246
0.362
1.000
6,641
161.052
432.180
0.000
8.083
32.270
115.614
2210.229
30,977
12.676
1.481
9.766
11.780
12.544
13.302
17.518
30,802
9.341
1.122
7.127
8.652
9.234
9.832
12.876
30,273
1.089
0.916
-0.401
0.499
0.920
1.477
4.230
30,044
0.705
0.735
-0.584
0.242
0.570
1.012
3.262
3,198
0.059
0.120
0.000
0.000
0.016
0.062
0.562
31,936
0.008
0.025
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.004
0.114
31,953
0.194
0.270
0.000
0.022
0.074
0.231
1.000
11,773
0.022
0.072
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.012
0.307
31,688
-0.028
0.499
-2.642
-0.056
-0.001
0.067
0.618
31,353
0.015
0.575
-2.669
-0.037
0.031
0.116
1.049
30,865
-0.189
0.578
-2.898
-0.265
-0.150
-0.038
0.850
30,276
-0.062
0.776
-3.068
-0.223
-0.049
0.120
2.047
2,990
0.912
11.942
0.000
0.003
0.021
0.085
15.122
2,990
0.107
1.771
0.000
0.002
0.014
0.049
1.012

55

Panel B: Enforcement Reform in Germany (County-Industry Level)
Variable
Market Level
Limited Share
Supplier Share
Customer Share
Post
Innovation Spending ('000 Euros)
Simple Average
Innovation Spending ('000 Euros)
Total
Innovation Spending
Simple Average
Innovation Spending
Total
Spending (Extensive)
Simple Average
Spending (Extensive)
Total
Spending (Intensive)
Simple Average
Spending (Intensive)
Total
New-To-Market Innovations
Simple Average
New-To-Market Innovations
Total
Innovating Firm
Simple Average
Innovating Firm
Total
Product Innovation
Simple Average
Product Innovation
Total
Process Innovation
Simple Average
Process Innovation
Total
Importance Patenting
Simple Average
Importance Patenting
Total
Patent Applications
Simple Average
Patent Applications
Total
Patenting Firm
Simple Average
Patenting Firm
Total
Profit Margin
Simple Average
Profit Margin
Total
Sales from New-to-Market Innovation
Simple Average
Sales from New-to-Market Innovation
Weighted Average
Share of Sales from New-to-Market Innovation
Simple Average
Share of Sales from New-to-Market Innovation
Total
Share of Sales Increase from Quality Improvements Simple Average
Share of Sales Increase from Quality Improvements Total
Cost Reduction from Process Improvements
Simple Average

N
Mean
SD
p1
p25
p50
p75
p99
56,929
0.589
0.231
0.000
0.436
0.596
0.764
1.000
37,425
0.603
0.164
0.161
0.520
0.627
0.712
0.926
37,425
0.606
0.139
0.225
0.529
0.621
0.698
0.898
56,929
0.371
0.483
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
29,702
4,587.016
83,351.990
0.000
0.000
30.000
400.000
42,600.040
29,702
7,017.119
118,556.900
0.000
0.000
40.000
510.000
61,999.950
29,702
7.446
6.365
0.000
0.000
10.309
12.899
17.567
29,702
7.648
6.540
0.000
0.000
10.597
13.142
17.943
29,702
0.531
0.467
0.000
0.000
0.500
1.000
1.000
29,702
0.809
1.157
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
4.000
17,704
12.650
2.188
8.006
11.238
12.612
14.021
18.310
17,704
12.831
2.291
8.006
11.290
12.766
14.316
18.661
26,725
0.291
0.424
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.667
1.000
26,725
0.432
0.741
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
3.000
49,466
0.551
0.445
0.000
0.000
0.600
1.000
1.000
49,466
1.090
1.890
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
7.000
48,876
0.441
0.444
0.000
0.000
0.400
1.000
1.000
48,876
0.877
1.619
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
6.000
48,800
0.367
0.426
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
48,800
0.715
1.253
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
5.000
30,063
0.577
1.005
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
3.000
30,063
0.895
1.784
0.000
0.000
0.000
2.000
7.000
56,929
0.139
0.497
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
2.565
56,929
0.210
0.667
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
3.367
56,929
0.077
0.229
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
56,929
0.165
0.474
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
2.000
26,851
3.605
1.724
1.000
2.000
3.500
5.000
7.000
26,851
5.302
6.747
1.000
2.000
4.000
6.000
26.000
26,293
10.529
9.943
0.000
0.000
16.305
19.729
24.960
26,293
10.699
10.106
0.000
0.000
16.540
20.060
25.386
26,293
0.037
0.103
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.025
0.500
26,219
0.037
0.106
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.020
0.510
22,619
0.021
0.059
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.005
0.262
22,619
0.029
0.077
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.010
0.405
24,168
0.265
0.415
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.500
1.000

56

Cost Reduction from Process Improvements
External Financing Constraint
External Financing Constraint
Internal Financing Constraint
Internal Financing Constraint
Employees
Employees
Employees (Log)
Employees (Log)

Total
Simple Average
Total
Simple Average
Total
Simple Average
Total
Simple Average
Total

24,168
24,562
24,562
24,451
24,451
55,601
55,601
55,601
55,601

0.364
0.329
0.489
0.369
0.551
401.813
868.681
3.950
4.360

57

0.613
0.440
0.832
0.452
0.903
4,482.303
8,925.645
1.606
1.847

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
0.693
0.693

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
14.000
17.000
2.708
2.890

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
45.000
69.000
3.829
4.248

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
143.000
261.000
4.970
5.568

2.000
1.000
3.000
1.000
3.000
4,153.000
10,808.000
8.332
9.288

Panel C: Enforcement Reform in Germany (Firm Level)
Variable
N
Mean
SD
p1
p25
p50
p75
p99
Limited
129,739
0.972
0.166
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
Private
123,692
0.991
0.093
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
Post
135,437
0.565
0.496
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
Innovation Spending ('000 Euros)
51,500
4,083.832
85,419.280
0.000
0.000
10.000
280.000
36,300.000
Innovation Spending
51,500
6.646
6.417
0.000
0.000
9.210
12.543
17.407
Spending (Extensive)
51,500
0.533
0.499
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
Spending (Intensive)
27,449
12.470
2.156
8.006
11.002
12.429
13.816
18.120
New-To-Market Innovations
44,462
0.297
0.457
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
Innovating Firm
110,582
0.564
0.496
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
Product Innovation
108,796
0.453
0.498
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
Process Innovation
108,476
0.369
0.482
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
1.000
Importance Secrecy
38,191
0.991
1.257
0.000
0.000
0.000
2.000
3.000
Importance Patenting
55,249
0.591
1.079
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
3.000
Patent Applications
135,437
0.113
0.474
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
2.398
Patenting Firm
135,437
0.080
0.271
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
1.000
Employees
131,797
408.530
5,942.451
1.000
11.000
33.000
117.000
4,129.000
Employees (Log)
131,797
3.748
1.640
0.693
2.485
3.526
4.771
8.326
Notes: The table presents descriptive statistics for treatment and outcome variables. Corresponding variable definitions can be found in the “Variable Appendix” table.
Panel A provides the statistics for the country-industry (two-digit NACE) analysis in the European setting. Panel B provides the statistics for the county-industry (twodigit NACE) analysis in the German setting. Panel C provides the statistics for the firm-level analysis in the German setting. Simple averages are the unweighted averages
of variables within a given country, industry, and year. Weighted averages are computed as the market-share-weighted sums of variables (where the market share is
calculated using sales) within a given country, industry, and year. Totals are the sums of variables within a given country, industry, and year. Covariances are the
differences between weighted averages and simple averages of variables within a given country, industry, and year. Logarithm (plus 1) transformations are applied after
taking averages within a given country, industry, and year.

58

Table 2
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
EXEMPTIONS IN EUROPE
Panel A: Country-Industry Level (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Outcome
Innovation
Innovating
Spending
Firm
Market Level
Simple Average
Simple Average
Column
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Reporting

0.613
(0.90)

Reporting and Auditing
Country-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Clusters (Country-Year)
Adj. R2

X
X
6,129
1,394
127
0.614

-0.121**
(-2.05)
0.059
(0.07)
X
X
6,129
1,394
127
0.614

X
X
6,473
1,406
133
0.668

New-To-Market
Innovations
Simple Average
(5)
(6)
-0.046
(-1.11)

-0.081
(-1.30)
X
X
6,473
1,406
133
0.668

59

X
X
6,503
1,407
133
0.579

Product
Innovation
Simple Average
(7)
(8)
-0.098*
(-1.76)

-0.082*
(-1.68)
X
X
6,503
1,407
133
0.579

X
X
6,514
1,411
133
0.646

Process
Innovation
Simple Average
(9)
(10)
-0.100*
(-1.73)

-0.152**
(-2.61)
X
X
6,514
1,411
133
0.647

X
X
6,444
1,404
133
0.584

-0.024
(-0.43)
X
X
6,444
1,404
133
0.584

Panel B: Country-Industry Level (Aggregate 2-digit NACE)
Outcome
Innovation
Innovating
Spending
Firm
Market Level
Total
Total
Column
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Reporting

0.339
(0.40)

Reporting and Auditing
Country-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Clusters (Country-Year)
Adj. R2

X
X
6,135
1,393
127
0.677

New-To-Market
Innovations
Total
(5)
(6)

-286.206**
(-2.29)
0.200
(0.21)
X
X
6,135
1,393
127
0.676

X
X
6,489
1,419
133
0.579

-37.106
(-0.75)
-301.651**
(-2.59)
X
X
6,489
1,419
133
0.579

X
X
6,519
1,423
133
0.573

Product
Innovation
Total
(7)
(8)
-144.001*
(-1.77)

-45.600
(-0.99)
X
X
6,519
1,423
133
0.573

X
X
6,529
1,421
133
0.576

Process
Innovation
Total
(9)
(10)
-217.254**
(-2.31)

-145.309*
(-1.90)
X
X
6,529
1,421
133
0.576

X
X
6,460
1,418
133
0.561

-238.566***
(-2.67)
X
X
6,460
1,418
133
0.560

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the share of firms subject to full reporting (and auditing) requirements in the European
setting. In Panel A, the innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given country, industry, and year. In Panel B, the innovation measures are totals
calculated for a given country, industry, and year. “Reporting” is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country,
industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. “Reporting and Auditing” is the share of simulated firms
exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all
countries and years. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their
distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the country-industry level and the country-year
level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

60

Table 3
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
INNOVATION SPILLOVERS (EUROPE)
Panel A: Reporting only
Outcome
Market Level
Column
Reporting
Supplier Reporting
Customer Reporting
Country-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Clusters (Country-Year)
Adj. R2

Innovation
Spending
Simple Average
(1)

Innovating
Firm
Simple Average
(2)

New-To-Market
Innovations
Simple Average
(3)

Product
Innovation
Simple Average
(4)

Process
Innovation
Simple Average
(5)

0.032
(0.03)
-2.707
(-1.26)
3.010**
(2.51)
X
X
3,502
749
121
0.636

-0.221***
(-2.72)
0.394**
(2.52)
0.102
(1.06)
X
X
3,667
750
126
0.693

-0.053
(-0.85)
0.177
(1.58)
-0.006
(-0.08)
X
X
3,672
751
126
0.622

-0.182**
(-2.19)
0.390***
(2.80)
0.051
(0.55)
X
X
3,682
751
126
0.688

-0.210***
(-2.65)
0.375**
(2.53)
0.032
(0.38)
X
X
3,649
747
126
0.608

61

Panel B: Reporting and Auditing
Outcome
Market Level
Column
Reporting and Auditing
Supplier Reporting and Auditing
Customer Reporting and Auditing
Country-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Clusters (Country-Year)
Adj. R2

Innovation
Spending
Simple Average
(1)
-1.529
(-1.26)
-2.101
(-0.94)
2.004*
(1.66)
X
X
3,502
749
121
0.636

Innovating
Firm
Simple Average
(2)
-0.129
(-1.48)
0.223
(1.34)
0.028
(0.32)
X
X
3,667
750
126
0.691

New-To-Market
Innovations
Simple Average
(3)

Product
Innovation
Simple Average
(4)

Process
Innovation
Simple Average
(5)

-0.100
(-1.42)
0.122
(1.03)
-0.099
(-1.19)
X
X
3,672
751
126
0.623

-0.217**
(-2.45)
0.270*
(1.80)
-0.006
(-0.07)
X
X
3,682
751
126
0.687

-0.151*
(-1.80)
0.295*
(1.89)
-0.032
(-0.42)
X
X
3,649
747
126
0.607

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the shares of firms, suppliers, and customers subject to full reporting (and auditing)
requirements in the European setting. The innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given country, industry, and year. In Panel A, “Reporting” is the
share of simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry
across all countries and years. “Supplier Reporting” is the input-share-weighted intensity of reporting mandates in the supplier industries of a given country, industry,
and year. “Customer Reporting” is the output-share-weighted intensity of reporting mandates in the customer industries of a given country, industry, and year. In Panel
B, “Reporting and Auditing” is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using
a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. “Supplier Reporting and Auditing” is the input-share-weighted intensity of reporting and
auditing mandates in the supplier industries of a given country, industry, and year. “Customer Reporting and Auditing” is the output-share-weighted intensity of reporting
and auditing mandates in the customer industries of a given country, industry, and year. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects.
t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the country-industry level and the country-year level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively

62

Table 4
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
PROFITABILITY SPILLOVERS (EUROPE)
Panel A: Reporting Only
Outcome

Sales per Employee

Sales per Employee
and Capital

Market Share and
Sales per Employee

Market Level
Column

Weighted Average
(1)

Weighted Average
(2)

Covariance
(3)

-0.170
(-0.45)
1.339**
(2.15)
0.677*
(1.88)
X
X
16,169
1,125
372
0.792

-0.194
(-0.64)
1.391**
(2.43)
0.459
(1.29)
X
X
16,129
1,122
372
0.743

Reporting
Supplier Reporting
Customer Reporting
Country-Year
Industry-Year
Observations
Clusters (Country-Year)
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Adj. R2

63

-0.390
(-1.21)
1.094*
(1.93)
0.691**
(2.24)
X
X
15,937
1,121
368
0.490

Market Share and
Sales per Employee
and Capital
Covariance
(4)
-0.348
(-1.38)
1.139**
(2.31)
0.560**
(1.99)
X
X
15,845
1,120
369
0.491

Panel B: Reporting and Auditing
Outcome

Sales per Employee

Sales per Employee
and Capital

Market Share and
Sales per Employee

Market Level
Column

Weighted Average
(1)

Weighted Average
(2)

Covariance
(3)

-0.162
(-0.40)
1.634***
(2.66)
0.787**
(2.17)
X
X
16,169
1,125
372
0.792

-0.001
(-0.00)
1.484***
(2.70)
0.544
(1.56)
X
X
16,129
1,122
372
0.744

-0.465
(-1.26)
1.293**
(2.31)
0.713**
(2.29)
X
X
15,937
1,121
368
0.491

Reporting and Auditing
Supplier Reporting and Auditing
Customer Reporting and Auditing
Country-Year
Industry-Year
Observations
Clusters (Country-Year)
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Adj. R2

Market Share and
Sales per Employee
and Capital
Covariance
(4)
-0.298
(-1.00)
1.130**
(2.33)
0.624**
(2.24)
X
X
15,845
1,120
369
0.492

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of profitability (or productivity) measures on the shares of firms, suppliers, and customers subject to full reporting
(and auditing) requirements in the European setting. The profitability measures are sales-weighted averages or covariances (differences between sales-weighted and
equally weighted measures) in a given country, industry, and year. In Panel A, “Reporting” is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption
thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. “Supplier Reporting” is the inputshare-weighted intensity of reporting mandates in the supplier industries of a given country, industry, and year. “Customer Reporting” is the output-share-weighted
intensity of reporting mandates in the customer industries of a given country, industry, and year. In Panel B, “Reporting and Auditing” is the share of simulated firms
exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all
countries and years. “Supplier Reporting and Auditing” is the input-share-weighted intensity of reporting and auditing mandates in the supplier industries of a given
country, industry, and year. “Customer Reporting and Auditing” is the output-share-weighted intensity of reporting and auditing mandates in the customer industries of
a given country, industry, and year. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard
errors clustered at the country-industry level and the country-year level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

64

Table 5
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
ENFORCEMENT IN GERMANY
Panel A: County-Industry Level (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Outcome
Innovation
Innovating
Spending
Firm
Market Level
Simple Average
Simple Average
Column
(1)
(2)
Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2

-3.026***
(-4.06)
X
X
X
26,774
5,857
0.528

-0.132***
(-3.46)
X
X
X
47,283
8,193
0.393

65

New-To-Market
Innovations
Simple Average
(3)
-0.073
(-1.29)
X
X
X
23,597
5,459
0.412

Product
Innovation
Simple Average
(4)
-0.126***
(-3.30)
X
X
X
46,680
8,163
0.415

Process
Innovation
Simple Average
(5)
-0.086**
(-2.32)
X
X
X
46,592
8,156
0.322

Panel B: County-Industry Level (Aggregate: 2-digit NACE)
Outcome
Innovation
Spending
Market Level
Total
Column
(1)
Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2

-3.050***
(-4.02)
X
X
X
26,778
5,861
0.528

Innovating
Firm
Total
(2)

New-To-Market
Innovations
Total
(3)

-0.510***
(-6.09)
X
X
X
47,279
8,178
0.561

-0.213***
(-2.73)
X
X
X
23,597
5,460
0.377

Product
Innovation
Total
(4)
-0.462***
(-5.89)
X
X
X
46,672
8,150
0.550

Process
Innovation
Total
(5)
-0.340***
(-4.94)
X
X
X
46,589
8,148
0.440

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates in the German setting. In Panel A,
the innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given county, industry, and year. In Panel B, the innovation measures are totals calculated for a given county,
industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement period in a given
county and industry (“Limited Share”) and a post-enforcement reform indicator (“Post”). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year fixed
effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on
standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

66

Table 6
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
NUMBER OF FIRMS (GERMANY)
Outcome

Innovation Spending

Market Level
Number of Firms
Column

Simple Average
High
Low
(1)
(2)

Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2

-2.554
(-1.51)
X
X
X
12,273
2,466
0.500

-4.373***
(-4.56)
X
X
X
12,673
3,110
0.538

Innovation Spending
(Extensive)
Simple Average
High
Low
(3)
(4)
-0.005
(-0.03)
X
X
X
12,307
2,474
0.449

-0.313***
(-4.52)
X
X
X
12,642
3,108
0.508

Innovating Firm
Simple Average
High
Low
(5)
(6)
-0.100
(-1.09)
X
X
X
22,825
3,640
0.363

-0.132***
(-2.83)
X
X
X
23,234
4,446
0.403

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of innovation measures on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates for county-industries with a high visà-vis low number of firms in the pre-enforcement period (median split) in the German setting. The innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given
county, industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement period in a
given county and industry (“Limited Share”) and a post-enforcement reform indicator (“Post”). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year
fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based
on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

67

Table 7
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
ECONOMIC RETURNS TO INNOVATION (GERMANY)
Panel A: County-Industry Level (Average: 2-digit NACE level)
Outcome
Profit
Sales from
Margin
New-To-Market
Innovations
Market Level
Column
Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2

Simple Average
(1)
-0.356*
(-1.69)
X
X
X
24,768
5,787
0.535

Simple Average
(2)
-3.798***
(-3.30)
X
X
X
23,141
5,388
0.553

68

Share of Sales from
New-To-Market
Innovations

Cost Reduction
from Process
Improvements

Simple Average
(3)

Share of Sales
Increase from
Quality
Improvements
Simple Average
(4)

-0.017*
(-1.84)
X
X
X
23,088
5,329
0.403

-0.010*
(-1.65)
X
X
X
19,154
4,748
0.311

-0.085
(-1.54)
X
X
X
20,846
5,086
0.433

Simple Average
(5)

Panel B: County-Industry Level (Aggregate: 2-digit NACE level)
Outcome
Profit
Sales from
Margin
New-To-Market
Innovations

Share of Sales from
New-To-Market
Innovations

Market Level
Column
Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2

Total
(1)
-1.112**
(-2.40)
X
X
X
24,767
5,778
0.576

Total
(2)
-3.911***
(-3.35)
X
X
X
23,140
5,387
0.553

Cost Reduction
from Process
Improvements

Weighted Average
(3)

Share of Sales
Increase from
Quality
Improvements
Total
(4)

-0.021**
(-2.13)
X
X
X
23,016
5,323
0.415

-0.013
(-1.49)
X
X
X
19,165
4,765
0.266

-0.145*
(-1.89)
X
X
X
20,850
5,087
0.352

Total
(5)

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of profitability measures on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates in the German setting. In Panel A,
the innovation measures are simple averages calculated for a given county, industry, and year. In Panel B, the profitability measures are totals or sales-weighted averages
calculated for a given county, industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the preenforcement period in a given county and industry (“Limited Share”) and a post-enforcement reform indicator (“Post”). The regressions include county-industry, countyyear, and industry-year fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in
parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed),
respectively.

69

Table 8
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
FINANCING CHANNEL (GERMANY)
Outcome
Market Level
Column
Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2

External Financing Constraint
Simple Average
Total
(1)
(2)
-0.123*
(-1.78)
X
X
X
22,528
5,199
0.666

-0.403***
(-3.68)
X
X
X
22,535
5,197
0.580

Internal Financing Constraint
Simple Average
Total
(3)
(4)
-0.033
(-0.48)
X
X
X
22,418
5,191
0.663

-0.393***
(-3.49)
X
X
X
22,420
5,184
0.573

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of financing constraints on the intensity of enforcement of reporting
mandates in the German setting. The financial constraints measures are simple averages or totals calculated at the county,
industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is captured by the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms
in the pre-enforcement period in a given county and industry (“Limited Share”) and a post-enforcement reform indicator
(“Post”). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year fixed effects. We truncate the outcomes
at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are
based on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

70

Table 9
REPORTING REGULATION AND PATENTS
Panel A: Country-Industry Level in Europe (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Source
CIS Survey
Outcome
Patenting
Firm
Market Level
Simple Average
Column
(1)
Reporting
Country-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Clusters (Country-Year)
Adj. R2

0.041
(0.87)
X
X
3,106
1,292
66
0.542

PATSTAT
Patent Application
Firm
Simple Average
(2)
0.015***
(2.88)
X
X
31,298
2,188
387
0.645

71

PATSTAT
Competitor-Forward
Cites
Simple Average
(3)
0.058***
(3.27)
X
X
11,454
1,407
378
0.206

Panel B: County-Industry Level in Germany (Average: 2-digit NACE)
Source
CIS Survey
Outcome
Importance Patenting
Market Level
Simple Average
Total
Column
(1)
(2)
Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2

-0.375***
(-2.68)
X
X
X
27,976
5,621
0.726

-0.597***
(-2.68)
X
X
X
27,980
5,621
0.616

72

PATSTAT
Patent Applications
Simple Average
Total
(3)
(4)
-0.032
(-1.59)
X
X
X
54,947
8,560
0.691

-0.076**
(-2.48)
X
X
X
54,955
8,571
0.645

Panel C: Firm Level in Germany
Source
Outcome
Column
Limited×Post

CIS Survey
Importance Secrecy
(1)
(2)
-0.575***
(-3.59)

Private×Post
Controls
Firm FE
County-Year
Industry-Year FE (4-digit)
Observations
Clusters (Firm)
Adj. R2

X
X
X
X
32,275
9,130
0.943

CIS Survey
Importance Patenting
(3)
(4)
0.063
(0.74)

-0.233
(-0.86)
X
X
X
X
32,238
9,054
0.941

X
X
X
X
46,084
11,138
0.912

PATSTAT
Patent Applications
(5)
(6)
0.016**
(2.00)

0.150
(1.22)
X
X
X
X
46,150
11,048
0.913

X
X
X
X
112,106
22,418
0.882

0.086***
(3.03)
X
X
X
X
110,809
21,494
0.898

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of patenting measures on variation in reporting mandates. In Panel A, the patent measures are simple averages
calculated for a given country, industry, and year in the European setting using Eurostat and PATSTAT data. The treatment variation, “Reporting”, is the share of
simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all
countries and years. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered
at the country-industry level and the country-year level. In Panel B, the patent measures are simple averages and totals calculated for a given county, industry, and year
in the German setting using the MIP and PATSTAT data. The treatment variation is the interaction of the share of affected (limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement
period in a given county and industry (“Limited Share”) and a post-enforcement reform indicator (“Post”). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and
industry-year fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. In Panel C, the patent measures are calculated
at the firm-level in the German setting using the MIP and PATSTAT data. “Limited” is an indicator taking the value of one for affected (limited-liability) firms, and
zero for unaffected (unlimited-liability) firms. “Private” is an indicator taking the value of one for affected (private limited-liability) firms, and zero for unaffected
(publicly-listed limited-liability) firms. “Post” is an indicator taking the value of one for the post-enforcement reform period. The regressions include firm, county-year,
and industry-year fixed effects (where the industries are defined using four-digit NACE classifications). In all panels, we truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th
percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level. *, **, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

73

Table 10
REPORTING REGULATION AND ACCOUNTING INFORMATION
Outcome
Market Level
Column
Reporting

Change in Tangible Assets
Simple Average
Weighted Average
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.090***
(-2.92)

Reporting and Auditing
Country-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (Country-Industry)
Clusters (Country-Year)
Adj. R2

X
X
31,055
2,177
387
0.950

-0.019
(-0.43)
-0.019
(-0.49)
X
X
31,055
2,177
387
0.950

X
X
30,727
2,168
387
0.886

Change in Intangible Assets
Simple Average
Weighted Average
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.116**
(-2.50)

0.074
(1.44)
X
X
30,727
2,168
387
0.886

X
X
30,249
2,153
387
0.856

-0.168**
(-2.17)
-0.150**
(-2.56)
X
X
30,249
2,153
387
0.856

X
X
29,671
2,143
387
0.604

R&D Intensity
Simple Average Weighted Average
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
-1.528
(-1.45)

-0.182**
(-2.02)
X
X
29,671
2,143
387
0.604

X
X
2,695
310
90
0.417

-0.133
(-0.84)
-1.351
(-0.84)
X
X
2,695
310
90
0.416

X
X
2,691
311
89
0.258

-0.332
(-1.53)
X
X
2,691
311
89
0.259

Notes: The table presents estimates from regressions of financial-statement-based innovation measures on the share of firms subject to full reporting (and auditing) requirements
in the European setting. The innovation measures are simple averages or sales-weighted averages calculated for a given country, industry, and year. “Reporting” is the share of
simulated firms exceeding reporting-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries
and years. “Reporting and Auditing” is the share of simulated firms exceeding reporting- and auditing-related exemption thresholds in a given country, industry, and year using a
standardized firm-size distribution per industry across all countries and years. The regressions include industry-year fixed effects and country-year fixed effects. We truncate the
outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the countryindustry level and the country-year level. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

74

Online Appendix
(for online publication only)

Table of Contents
-

Community Innovation Survey: Definition of Innovation, Examples, and Methodology
Reporting Examples: Exempted Reporting and Full Reporting
Table A1: Reporting Regulation and Innovation – Innovation Spending Margins

Community Innovation Survey
Definition of Innovation
The following description is provided on the first page of the 2014 Community Innovation Survey
questionnaire (Community Innovation Survey 2014a):
An innovation is the introduction of a new or significantly improved product, process, organisational method, or
marketing method by your enterprise.
An innovation must have characteristics or intended uses that are new or which provide a significant improvement over
what was previously used or sold by your enterprise. However, an innovation can fail or take time to prove itself.
An innovation need only be new or significantly improved for your enterprise. It could have been originally developed or
used by other enterprises or organisations.
Innovation activities include the acquisition of machinery, equipment, buildings, software, and licenses; engineering
and development work, feasibility studies, design, training, R&D and marketing when they are specifically undertaken
to develop and/or implement a product or process innovation. This includes also all types of R&D consisting of
research and development activities to create new knowledge or solve scientific or technical problems.

Examples
The following examples are provided in the official methodological notes accompanying the 2014
Community Innovation Survey questionnaire (Community Innovation Survey 2014b):
Enterprise managers are unlikely to have difficulty in recognizing major innovations such as the iPhone, ABS braking
systems, new anti-cancer drugs, ‘sharing economy’ innovations such as Lyft, Uber and AirBandB, or financial
derivatives. For this reason, the examples given below describe innovations that can be significant but might not be
easy to recognize as an innovation. This should help the respondent to think of similar types of innovations in their own
enterprise.
4.1 Product innovations
Product innovations cover goods and services with characteristics or intended uses that differ significantly from
previous products produced by the enterprise. This includes new or significantly improved technical specifications,
components and materials, incorporated software, user friendliness or other functional characteristics.
The product innovations can consist of goods or services that are entirely new to the firm or new to the firm’s market,
or goods or services that have been significantly improved.
Product innovations exclude the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Minor changes or improvements.
Routine upgrades.
Seasonal changes (such as for clothing lines).
Customisation for a single client that does not include significantly different attributes compared to products
made for other clients.
Design changes that do not alter the function or technical characteristics of a good or service.
The simple resale of new goods and services purchased from other enterprises, but include goods and
services developed and produced by foreign affiliates for your enterprise.

4.1.1 Examples of new or significantly improved goods
•
•

Replacing existing materials with materials with improved characteristics (breathable textiles, light but strong
composites, environmentally-friendly plastics, etc).
Introducing new or improved components in existing product lines (cameras in mobile telephones, fastening

1

•
•
•

systems in clothing, hybrid technologies in cars, etc).
Equipment that incorporate software that improves user friendliness or convenience, such as toasters that
automatically shut off when the bread is toasted or GPS systems that identify the location of specific types of
shops or services.
Adding new functions: bicycle lights that can be recharged through a USB port, rubbish bins that signal when
they are full, products that can fold for easy storage, new smartphone apps, etc.
Wearable technology, clothing and accessories incorporating computer and advanced electronic
technologies

4.1.2 Examples of innovative services
•
•

•
•

Improving customers’ access, such as a home pick-up and drop-off service for rental cars, same-day delivery
of online purchases, etc.
’Sharing economy’ services such as Uber, Lyft, AirBandB, Listia (recycling and reusing goods), TaskRabbit,
etc. First time introduction of internet services such as banking, bill-payment systems, electronic purchase
and ticketing of travel and theatre tickets, social networking sites, online backup services, cloud-computing,
on-demand internet streaming media etc.
New forms of warranty, such as an extended warranty on new or used goods, or bundling warranties with
other services, such as with credit cards, bank accounts, or customer loyalty cards.
Installing gas heaters in outdoor restaurant and bar terraces or video on demand screens in the back of
airline, bus or train seats.

4.1.3 Differentiating between goods and services
A respondent may not always be sure if their innovative product is a good or a service. The respondent’s industrial
classification is not always a reliable indicator, since firms that are assigned to the manufacturing sector can produce
services and service sector firms can produce goods.
Goods are usually tangible, owned by the consumer, and can be used multiple times, for instance furniture, appliances,
electronic equipment, packaged software, and clothing. There are exceptions, such as food purchased in a
supermarket or diesel purchased from a refinery, which can only be used once, and downloaded movies and music,
which are intangible.
Services are usually intangible, can only be used once and are not owned by the consumer. They include banking,
retailing, hotel accommodation, insurance, educational courses, air travel, entertainment such as tours, theatres, and
sporting events, repair and renovation work, consulting, cloud computing, streaming video and music (in contrast to
downloadable video and music), etc.
Some aspects of utilities (gas, sewage, water, electricity, etc) and of construction can have characteristics of both a
good and a service. Many utilities appear to provide a product (gas, water, etc) to domestic and commercial users, but
they are intermediaries that often do not produce the product (gas or water), but only deliver it to their consumers.
Electrical generators are also classified as a service, even when they both produce and deliver electricity. Construction
enterprises that build houses or commercial buildings for clients act as a service, but a construction enterprise could
also build housing to sell. In the latter case the respondent might see their enterprise as producing a product instead of
a service.
In some cases, such as when construction firms build houses to sell, it may be best to leave it to the respondent to
determine if they are providing a product or a service.
4.2 Process innovations
Process innovations occur in both service and manufacturing sectors and include new or improved production
methods; logistics, delivery and distribution systems, and ‘back office’ activities, such as maintenance, purchasing, and
accounting operations. They include significant changes in specific techniques, equipment and/or software, intended to
improve the quality, efficiency or flexibility of a production or supply activity, or a reduction in environmental and safety
hazards.
Some process innovations, particularly involving logistics or distribution, are closely linked to organisational
innovations, such as for supply chain management. For these, it can be almost impossible to provide clear guidance on

2

the type of innovation. It is best left to the respondent to decide if the innovation is primarily a process innovation,
organisational innovation, or even both.
Process innovations exclude the following:
•
•
•

Minor changes or improvements.
An increase in production or service capabilities through the addition of manufacturing or logistical systems
that are very similar to those already in use.
Innovations that have an important client interface, such as a pick-up or delivery service (these are product
innovations).

4.2.1 Examples of innovative methods of producing goods or services
•
•
•
•

Installation of new or improved manufacturing technology, such as automation equipment or real-time
sensors that can adjust processes or 3D printing techniques.
New equipment required for new or improved products.
Computer-assisted product development or other technology to improve research capabilities, such as bioimaging equipment. More efficient processing that reduces material or energy requirements per unit of
output.
More efficient processing that reduces material or energy requirements per unit of output.

4.2.2 Examples of innovative logistics, delivery or distribution methods
•
•
•
•
•

Introduction of passive radio frequency identification (RFID) chips to track materials through the supply chain.
GPS tracking systems for transport equipment.
Automated feed-back to suppliers using electronic data exchange.
Content delivery network, large distributed system of servers deployed in multiple data centers across the
Internet to serve content to end-users.
Using natural energy sources for logistics, for instance wind energy in maritime logistics, use of
meteorological data and navigational algorithms to find and make use of optimum wind angles to reduce
energy consumption of ships.

4.2.3 Examples of innovative supporting activities
•
•

Introduction of software to identify optimal delivery routes.
New or improved software or routines for purchasing, accounting or maintenance systems.

4.3 Organisational innovations
Organisational innovations involve the implementation of a significant change in business practices, the organisation of
work responsibilities and decision-making, which includes training or education to increase skills and responsibilities;
and the organisation of external relationships with other enterprises or public institutions. They are intended to improve
the enterprise’s innovative capacity or performance characteristics, such as the quality or efficiency of workflows or
response time to opportunities and crises. Organisational innovations usually involve changes to more than one part of
the enterprise’s supply chain and are less technology dependent than process innovations.
Organisational innovations exclude the following:
•
•
•

•

Changes in management strategy, unless accompanied by the introduction of significant organisational
change.
Introduction of new technology that is only used by one division of an enterprise (for example in production).
These are usually process innovations.
Simple extensions of organisational changes that have already been implemented in the past or in one part
of the enterprise. For example, the reorganisation of work tasks in one establishment is not an organisational
innovation if the same reorganisation was already implemented in a different establishment owned by the
enterprise.
Mergers or acquisitions.

4.3.1 Examples of business practice innovations

3

•
•
•
•
•

Establishment of formal or informal work teams to improve the access and sharing of knowledge from
different departments, such as marketing, research, production, etc.
Introduction of quality control standards for suppliers and subcontractors.
Supply management systems to optimize the allocation of resources from sourcing inputs to the final delivery
of products.
First introduction of group or individual performance incentives.
First introduction of teleworking or a “paperless” office.

4.3.2 Examples of work organisation innovations
•
•
•
•
•

Reduction or increase in the hierarchical structure for decision making.
Change in responsibilities, such as giving substantially more control and responsibility over work processes
to production, distribution or sales staff.
Introduction of a High Performance Work System (HPWS) characterised by a holistic organisation featuring
flat hierarchical structures, job rotation, self-responsible teams, multi-tasking, a greater involvement of lowerlevel employees in decision making and the replacement of vertical by horizontal communication channels.
New training or education systems, such as regular videos on each employee’s work station that describe
ongoing challenges for the enterprise or provide skill upgrading, with the goal of improving the ability of
employees to recognize problems and take responsibility.
Creation of a new division, for example by splitting the management of marketing and production into two
divisions, or alternatively a change to integrate divisions.

4.3.3 Examples of external relations innovations
•
•

First use of outsourcing of research or production if it requires a change in how work flows are organised
within the enterprise.
First use of alliances that require staff to work closely with staff from another organisation, including
temporary staff exchanges.

4.4 Marketing innovations
Marketing innovations cover significant changes in how an enterprise markets its goods and services, including
changes to design and packaging. Many of them must be the first use by the enterprise. For example, the first use of
product placement on the internet for one product line is an innovation, but the second use of internet product
placement for a different product line or for a different geographical market is not an innovation.
Marketing innovations exclude the following:
•
•
•

Routine or seasonal changes, such as clothing fashions.
Advertising, unless based on the use of new media for the first time.
Design or packaging changes that alter the functionality or user characteristics, these are product
innovations.

4.4.1 Examples of design & packaging innovations
•
•
•

Novel designs of existing products such as flash card memory sticks designed to be worn as jewelry.
New designs for consumer products, such as appliances or kitchen units designed for very small apartments.
Adapting packaging for specific markets (different covers and typeface for children and adult versions of the
same book).

4.4.2 Examples of product promotion innovations
•
•
•
•

First time use of a new advertising media. For instance the first time use of product promotion on television,
radio, cinema, in books, films, internet, social media etc.
First time use of product seeding through opinion leaders, celebrities, or particular groups that are fashion or
product trend setters.
First time use of a loyalty program. A loyalty card, rewards card, point card, advantage card or club card.
Bundling existing goods or services in new ways to appeal to market segments.

4

•
•

Developing trademarks for new product lines.
Mobile marketing (applications). Providing customers with time and location sensitive, personalized
information that promotes goods and services.

4.4.3 Examples of product placement innovations
•
•
•
•
•
•

First use of in-store sales that are only accessible to holders of the store’s credit card or reward card.
First use of media programming for a specific institution, such as closed circuit television for hospitals, buses,
or trains that contain programs to stimulate specific product sales.
First use of direct marketing via email, telephone or mail using a customer database obtained through
individuals that visit websites for information or join ‘frequent user or buyer’ reward plans.
First use of exclusive retailing, such as only selling high-end products in special stores.
First use of franchising or distribution licenses.
First use of new concepts for product presentation.

4.4.4 Examples of pricing innovations
•
•
•

First use of variable pricing, with the price varying by time of purchase, location of purchaser, etc.
First use of penetration pricing or loss leaders to establish market share and brand recognition.
First use of discount systems such as loyalty cards.

Methodology
The Community Innovation Survey is commissioned by the EU Commission and conducted by
national research centers (e.g., the ZEW – Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research in
Germany). The survey data is based on a harmonized questionnaire sent to a representative sample
of firms. To ensure the quality and representativeness of the data, cognitive testing and non-responsebias corrections are applied by the respective research centers. The ZEW provides the following
abstract description of its data collection and the resulting Mannheim Innovation Panel (ZEW 2019b):
Since 1993, the ZEW – Leibniz Centre for European Economic Research has been gathering data regarding the
innovation behaviour of the German economy on an annual basis. The innovation survey covers firms from various
industries including mining, manufacturing, energy- and water- supply, waste disposal, construction, business-related
services and distributive services. The survey is representative for Germany and allows projections for the German firm
population as well as for individual industries and size classes. The survey is conducted on behalf of BMBF (Federal
Ministry of Education and Research) in cooperation with infas (Institute of Applied Social Science) and Fraunhofer ISI
(Institute for Systems and Innovation Research). The MIP is the German contribution to the European Commission’s
Community Innovation Surveys (CIS).
The annual innovation survey is designed as a panel survey including the same firms every year. Sample size varies
among the survey years. In 2010 e.g., more than 6000 firms answered the written questionnaire. Every two years the
sample is refreshed by a random sample of newly founded firms in order to substitute firms that are closing or left the
market through mergers. The MIP provides important information about the introduction of new products, services and
processes, expenditures for innovations, ways to achieve economic success with new products, new services and
improved processes. In addition, the MIP collects information on a number of competition-related issues which allows
studying various topics in industrial economics.

For more information on the sampling and testing, see Rammer and Peters (2014).

5

Reporting Examples
Exempted Reporting

Notes: The example reproduces the report published by Synergy Health Radeberg GmbH for fiscal year 2012 in the
Bundesanzeiger (i.e., the German Federal Gazette). For the fiscal year 2012, the firm qualified for “small” firm reporting
exemptions. The exempted reporting example features an abbreviated balance sheet (Bilanz) and brief notes (Anhang).

6

Full Reporting

7

8

Notes: The example reproduces the report published by Synergy Health Radeberg GmbH for fiscal year 2013 in the
Bundesanzeiger (i.e., the German Federal Gazette). For the fiscal year 2013, the firm no longer qualified for the “small” firm
reporting exemption and hence provides a full report. Full reporting features a management report (Lagebericht)
discussing business developments (1), the economic position (2), business risks (3), and future developments (4). In the
business developments section, the report reviews developments in the economy and industry (1.1), sales and profitability
by segments (1.2), investment activities (1.3), financing activities (1.4), employment (1.5), environmental and radiation
protection (1.6), and other changes during the fiscal year (1.7). With full reporting, the example company provides an
extended balance sheet (Bilanz), income statement (Gewinn- und Verlustrechnung), detailed notes (Anhang) including
additional information on balance sheet and income statement items (e.g., breaking out R&D related income) and a
statement of changes in non-current assets (Anlagespiegel), and an audit opinion (Bestätigungsvermerk).

9

Table A1
REPORTING REGULATION AND INNOVATION:
INNOVATION SPENDING MARGINS
Panel A: Market Level
Outcome
Margin
Market Level
Column
Limited Share×Post
County-Industry FE
County-Year FE
Industry-Year FE
Observations
Clusters (County-Industry)
Adj. R2
Panel B: Firm Level
Outcome
Margin
Column
Limited×Post
Private×Post
Controls
Firm FE
County-Year
Industry-Year FE (4-digit)
Observations
Clusters (Firm)
Adj. R2

Extensive
Simple Average
(1)
-0.180***
(-3.18)
X
X
X
26,780
5,864
0.491

(1)
-0.060
(-1.62)

Extensive

Innovation Spending

Intensive
Total
Simple Average
(2)
(3)
-0.347***
-0.590
(-3.65)
(-1.50)
X
X
X
X
X
X
26,779
14,105
5,860
3,579
0.500
0.555

Innovation Spending
(2)
-0.058
(-1.58)
X
X
X
X
36,771
9,599
0.697

X
X
X
X
36,896
9,755
0.692

(3)
-0.029
(-0.13)
X
X
X
X
15,228
4,592
0.846

Intensive

Total
(4)
-0.741*
(-1.80)
X
X
X
14,106
3,579
0.549

(4)
-0.337**
(-2.18)
X
X
X
X
15,783
4,696
0.864

Notes: Panel A presents estimates from regressions of the extensive and intensive margins of market-level innovation
spending on the intensity of enforcement of reporting mandates. The market level outcomes represent simple average at
the county, industry, and year. The enforcement intensity is instrumented by the interaction of the share of affected
(limited-liability) firms in the pre-enforcement period in a given county and industry (“Limited Share”) and a postenforcement reform indicator (“Post”). The regressions include county-industry, county-year, and industry-year fixed
effects (where the industries are defined using two-digit NACE classifications). t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on
standard errors clustered at the county-industry level. Panel B presents estimates from regressions of the extensive and
intensive margins of firm-level innovation spending on two different treatment indicators. “Limited” is an indicator taking
the value of one for affected (limited-liability) firms, and zero for unaffected (unlimited-liability) firms. “Private” is an
indicator taking the value of one for affected (private limited-liability) firms, and zero for unaffected (publicly-listed limitedliability) firms. “Post” is an indicator taking the value of one for the post-enforcement reform period. The regressions
include firm, county-year, and industry-year fixed effects (where the industries are defined using four-digit NACE
classifications). We truncate the outcomes at the 1st and 99th percentile of their distributions, after accounting for the fixed
effects. t-statistics (in parentheses) are based on standard errors clustered at the firm level. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level (two-tailed), respectively.

10

