NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIAL MARKET RISK PERCEPTIONS AND THE MACROECONOMY
Carolin Pflueger
Emil Siriwardane
Adi Sunderam
Working Paper 26290
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26290

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2019

This paper was previously circulated as “A Measure of Risk Appetite for the Macroeconomy.”
We thank Nick Barberis, Geert Bekaert, Pedro Bordalo, Michael Brennan (discussant), John
Campbell, Josh Coval, Robert Engle, Xavier Gabaix, Nicola Gennaioli, Sam Hanson, Espen
Henriksen (discussant), Bryan Kelly, Ralph Koijen (discussant), Arvind Krishnamurthy, Hanno
Lustig (discussant), Ian Martin, Thomas Maurer (discussant), Stijn van Nieuwerburgh, Monika
Piazzesi, Robert Ready (discussant), Larry Schmidt (discussant), Martin Schneider, Josh
Schwartzstein, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Larry Summers, Laura Veldkamp, and Luis Viceira
for helpful comments. We also benefited from the input of seminar participants at the 2018 AQR
Insight Award Presentation, BI-SHoF Conference 2017, CEF 2017, CITE 2017, Chicago Harris,
CMU Tepper, Columbia, Federal Reserve Board, FRBSF conference on Advances in Finance
Research 2017, Harvard, HEC-McGill Winter Finance Workshop, London School of Economics,
McGill Desaultels, NBER Fall 2017 Asset Pricing Meeting, NBER Fall 2018 Behavioral Finance
Meeting, the New York Fed, Northwestern Kellogg, SFS Cavalcade, SITE 2017, Stanford, State
Street, University of British Columbia, and University of Indiana. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26290.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Carolin Pflueger, Emil Siriwardane, and Adi Sunderam. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financial Market Risk Perceptions and the Macroeconomy
Carolin Pflueger, Emil Siriwardane, and Adi Sunderam
NBER Working Paper No. 26290
September 2019
JEL No. E03,E22,E44,G12
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel measure of risk perceptions: the price of volatile stocks (PVSt), defined as
the book-to-market ratio of low-volatility stocks minus the book-to-market ratio of high-volatility
stocks. PVSt is high when perceived risk directly measured from surveys and option prices is
low. When perceived risk is high according to our measure, safe asset prices are high, risky asset
prices are low, the cost of capital for risky firms is high, and real investment is forecast to decline.
Perceived risk as measured by PVSt falls after positive macroeconomic news. These declines are
predictably followed by upward revisions in investor risk perceptions. Our results suggest that
risk perceptions embedded in stock prices are an important driver of the business cycle and are
not fully rational.
Carolin Pflueger
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1307 E 60th St
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
cpflueger@uchicago.edu

Adi Sunderam
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 359
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
asunderam@hbs.edu

Emil Siriwardane
Harvard Business School
Baker LIbrary 261
Boston, MA 02163
esiriwardane@hbs.edu

An internet appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26290

1

Introduction

Classic accounts of economic boom and bust cycles (Keynes (1937); Minsky (1977); Kindleberger
(1978)) highlight the importance of financial markets in shaping economic fluctuations. In these
accounts, a negative fundamental shock causes perceptions of risk to rise. Investors then value the
safety of bonds and charge risky firms a high cost of capital. Consequently, real interest rates are
low, firms invest less, and a recession ensues. This risk-centric view of business cycles has been
formalized in recent theoretical work (Caballero and Farhi (2018); Caballero and Simsek (2018);
Cochrane (2017)), but it has proven difficult to establish empirically because common proxies for
financial market conditions are only weakly correlated with bond markets and the real economy.1
In this paper, we propose a new measure of risk perceptions based on financial market prices
and use it to assess how well risk-centric theories of the business cycle fit the U.S. experience
since 1970. We use financial market prices because they capture firms’ cost of capital, a key
channel through which perceptions of risk impact real outcomes in these theories. Our measure is
based on the intuition that the stock prices of the riskiest, most volatile firms should be particularly
sensitive to investor perceptions of risk. Thus, we measure perceived risk in the cross section of
publicly-traded equities using the price of volatile stocks (PV St ). Specifically, we define PV St as
the average book-to-market ratio of low-volatility stocks minus the average book-to-market ratio
of high-volatility stocks, so that PV St is high when volatile stocks have relatively high prices.
We structure our empirical analysis around a stylized model that highlights the central economic forces in risk-centric theories of the business cycle. The model provides a roadmap for our
empirical work by linking perceptions of risk, the price of volatile stocks, the real interest rate,
and real investment. In the model, risk aversion is constant, while expectations of risk vary over
time. We initially assume that investors have rational expectations so that subjective and objective
expected risk are equal. When they perceive risk to be high, investors value the safety of bonds
because of precautionary savings motives. At the same time, investors require a high return to
invest in the riskiest firms in the economy. Thus, the cost of capital for these firms is high and the
model analog of PV St is low. As in the standard Q-theory of investment, firms invest less when
1 As

we discuss further below, a recent literature, including the seminal work of Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al.
(2018), has shown that uncertainty impacts the macroeconomy because it causes firms to delay investment and hiring
decisions. This mechanism is complementary to the cost-of-capital channel that we highlight.

1

their cost of capital is high. The model therefore predicts that when perceived risk is high, PV St ,
real interest rates, and real investment should be low.
We begin our empirical analysis by confirming that PV St is indeed tied to investor perceptions
of risk. We show that PV St is negatively correlated with direct measures of perceived risk based on
option prices and equity analyst forecasts. We obtain similar results using surveys of loan officers
and businesses, as well as the newspaper-based measure of Baker et al. (2016). PV St is low when
banks report that they are tightening lending standards because they believe economic risk is rising
and when small businesses report that they are pessimistic about the economy. We show that PV St
also comoves with objective expected risk from statistical forecasting models, but the comovement
is weaker than with measures of subjective risk perceptions.
Using PV St , we then explore whether the economic linkages highlighted by the model appear
in the data, starting with the relationship between risky asset prices and real interest rates. In U.S.
quarterly data from 1970 to 2016, the contemporaneous correlation between PV St and the one-year
real interest rate is 64%, capturing the negative relationship between safe and risky asset prices in
risk-centric theories of the business cycle. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated
with a 1.3 percentage point increase in the real rate. The positive correlation between PV St and
the real rate holds in expansions and recessions, in high- and low-inflation environments, and
controlling for measures of credit and equity market sentiment (Greenwood and Hanson (2013);
Baker and Wurgler (2006)). We also rule out discretionary monetary policy as an omitted variable
driving both PV St and the real rate. Specifically, we show that monetary policy surprises do not
differentially affect the prices of high- and low-volatility stocks in narrow windows around the
Federal Reserve’s policy announcements.
Consistent with the core mechanism in risk-centric theories of business cycles, we find that both
PV St and the real rate are low when volatile firms’ cost of capital is high. In other words, investors
require a high return on capital for investing in volatile firms when PV St and the real rate are
low. Empirically, this means that low values of PV St and the real rate forecast high future returns
on high-volatility stocks relative to low-volatility stocks. Neither PV St nor the real rate forecast
differences in cash flows between high- and low-volatility stocks, further confirming that PV St
captures perceptions of risk, not growth. Moreover, PV St forecasts returns on volatile securities
in other asset classes, including U.S. corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, options, and credit default
2

swaps. The fact that PV St – and its correlation with the real rate – reflect common variation in
the compensation investors demand for holding volatile securities within several asset classes is
consistent with the idea that it captures risk perceptions that are relevant to the macroeconomy.
Next, we analyze the relationship between perceptions of risk and the real economy. We show
that low perceived risk as measured by PV St forecasts expansions in real investment, output, and
employment. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with an increase in the
investment-capital ratio of 0.4% over the next four quarters. Over the same horizon, output rises
0.7% relative to potential and the unemployment rate decreases by 0.3%. Investment and employment are over twice as sensitive to PV St as to the aggregate stock market, illustrating the importance of our focus on the cross section of stocks in measuring financial market risk perceptions.
Overall, our analysis suggests that risk-centric theories of the business cycle capture important
linkages between stock markets, bond markets, and the real economy.
After establishing the link between financial market risk perceptions and the macroeconomy,
we use our measure to investigate why perceptions of risk vary. Using our measure, we find
that risk perceptions decline on the heels of good news about the economy. We show that PV St
rises when GDP and corporate profit growth exceed the expectations of professional forecasters,
indicating that positive surprises lead investors to view the economy as less risky. We also confirm
that direct measures of perceived and realized risk fall when there is positive economic news. Thus,
perceptions of risk appear to be shaped by recent events.
In the last part of the paper, we ask whether risk perceptions are rational, as assumed in our
motivating model, or whether they over-extrapolate from recent news. Under rational expectations,
revisions in expected risk should be unpredictable because expectations should only change in
response to new information. By contrast, we find that high values of PV St , which indicate low
perceived risk, reliably predict that investors will revise their expectations of risk upwards over the
next two to three quarters. Put options provide further evidence that perceptions of risk are not
fully rational. If investors are rational, then riskier strategies should always have higher expected
returns. Instead, we show that there are several periods where high values of PV St forecast negative
returns to selling put options on high-volatility stocks relative to low-volatility stocks.
Collectively, these results suggest that perceptions of risk embedded in financial markets are not
fully rational, a possibility raised in the classical accounts of Keynes (1937), Minsky (1977), and
3

Kindleberger (1978). We illustrate one way to adjust the model to account for these findings, replacing rational expectations with diagnostic beliefs as in Bordalo et al. (2018). This modification
implies that investors over-extrapolate from recent news, which amplifies the baseline relationships between PV St , real interest rates, and investment in the model. It also allows the model to
generate the pattern of overreaction and subsequent reversal in subjective expectations of risk that
we observe in the data.
Our paper is related to several literatures in both macroeconomics and finance. Broadly speaking, theories of the business cycle have traditionally focused on either aggregate supply (Cooley
and Prescott 1995) or aggregate demand (Keynes 1937). Our paper belongs to a recent literature
arguing that perceptions of risk can influence aggregate demand through two complementary channels. First, as shown in the seminal work of Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al. (2018), heightened
uncertainty increases the option value of delay, leading firms to temporarily pause investment and
hiring. Second, when perceived risk is high, the cost of capital for risky investments is high, so
firms invest less. Our paper offers empirical support for this cost of capital channel, which has been
the subject of much recent theoretical work.2 We document that perceptions of risk embedded in
the stock market connect more broadly with the bond market and the business cycle, and that these
risk perceptions appear not to be fully rational.
Our paper is also related to a large body of work in finance seeking to link movements in asset
prices to the business cycle. This literature has generally provided limited support for theories
of risk-centric business cycles because canonical models imply that risk perceptions (and risk
preferences) can be inferred from the aggregate stock market (Campbell and Cochrane (1999);
Bansal and Yaron (2004)). It is well known that, unlike PV St , the aggregate stock market is only
weakly correlated with the real rate and real investment (Campbell and Ammer (1993); Caballero
(1999)).3 The difference in behavior between the aggregate stock market and PV St arises because
PV St emphasizes volatile firms, while the aggregate market is dominated by larger, low-volatility
2 See,

e.g., Gourio (2012), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015), Basu and Bundick (2017), Caballero and Farhi
(2018), and Caballero and Simsek (2018) for theoretical work on the cost of capital channel. To the extent that existing
work studies the link between risk and real interest rates, it has typically focused on the secular decline in global real
interest rates since the 1980s. See Laubach and Williams (2003); Cúrdia et al. (2015); Del Negro et al. (2017);
Kozlowski et al. (2018a,b), among others. By contrast, we find that risk perceptions are important for understanding
how real rates evolve over the business-cycle.
3 Cochrane (1991) shows that aggregate stock returns are contemporaneously correlated with changes in investment,
but similar to us he finds that removing the long-term trend in aggregate stock market valuations is important.

4

firms. Volatile public firms are a small part of the aggregate market, but we show that they are
similar in their investment behavior to private firms, which play a large role in the overall economy
(Davis et al. (2007); Asker et al. (2014); Zwick and Mahon (2017)). Thus, PV St likely captures
perceptions of risk that are relevant for a significant part of the U.S. economy.
The disconnect between the aggregate stock market and the real economy also motivates our
use of total volatility to measure risk in forming PV St . Volatility is a robust measure of risk that
does not rely on the assumption that the aggregate stock market fully captures all economic activity
– volatility increases with exposure to risks, regardless of what they are.4 Our use of market prices
in constructing PV St is complementary to approaches measuring risk perceptions using statistical
models of macroeconomic or financial volatility and to the newspaper-based approach of Baker
et al. (2016). Market prices reflect how investors’ forward-looking subjective expectations affect
firms’ cost of capital, a key channel in risk-centric theories of the business cycle. They are also
readily available over long sample periods and in real time.
Finally, our analysis of risk perceptions connects to work in behavioral finance studying how
investor sentiment and biased beliefs impact asset prices (e.g., De Long et al. (1990); Barberis
and Thaler (2003); Baker and Wurgler (2007); Gennaioli et al. (2015)). While this literature has
focused mainly on beliefs about the level of future cash flows, our results suggest that investor
sentiment may also be driven by beliefs about risk. We show that PV St is correlated with measures
of sentiment for both debt and equity markets, suggesting that variation in perceived risk induces
common movements in sentiment across markets. The link between PV St and credit markets also
implies that recent work connecting credit market sentiment to economic outcomes may in part
capture movements in risk perceptions that are common across markets.5
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the motivating model,
describes the data, and shows that PV St correlates with direct measures of investor risk perceptions.
Section 3 provides an empirical assessment of risk-centric theories of the business cycle using PV St
4 Our

results are distinct from past research on idiosyncratic risk in the stock market, which has focused on the
average return of high-volatility stocks (see Ang et al. (2006), among many others) or the average return on stocks
that are more exposed to the common factor driving idiosyncratic volatility (Herskovic et al. (2016). In contrast, we
measure time-series variation in expected returns of high-volatility firms and link it to interest rates and macroeconomic
fluctuations. In this sense, our results also complement past research on the relationship between risk premia in stocks
and bonds (Fama and French (1993); Lettau and Wachter (2011); Koijen et al. (2017)).
5 For instance, Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012); López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017); Bordalo, Gennaioli, and
Shleifer (2018); Mian, Sufi, and Verner (2017).

5

to measure perceived risk. In Section 4, we investigate why perceptions of risk vary and whether
these movements are fully rational. Section 5 discusses our results and concludes.

2

Motivating Framework and Construction of PV St

2.1

Motivating Framework

We begin with a simple model to organize our empirical analysis and formalize the key elements
of risk-centric theories of the business cycle. The model focuses on equilibrium relationships
between perceived risk, the price of volatile stocks, the real interest rate, and investment. The
real rate and firm stock prices are determined by investors who face time-varying risk. We start
by assuming that investors’ perceptions of risk are rational, though we relax this assumption in
Section 5.1. We model production as in the standard the Q-theory of investment, meaning that
firms invest up to the point where the expected return on a marginal unit of investment equals the
return required by investors (Tobin (1969), Hayashi (1982)). Consequently, investment fluctuates
in response to movements in asset prices. Though our setup is stylized, the economic forces that we
highlight are common across models of risk-centric business cycles (e.g., Gourio (2012), Jermann
(1998), Kogan and Papanikolaou (2012), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015), Caballero and Simsek
(2018)). All proofs can be found in the internet appendix.
2.1.1

Preferences

We assume a representative agent with constant relative risk aversion λ over aggregate consumption and time-discount rate β :
∞

U (Ct ,Ct+1 , ...) ≡

∑β

s=0

1−λ
s Ct+s

1−λ

.

(1)

The stochastic discount factor that determines asset prices is therefore:

Mt+1 =

C−λ
∂U/∂Ct+1
= β t+1
.
∂U/∂Ct
Ct−λ

(2)

We model log aggregate consumption growth ∆ct+1 as a simple heteroskedastic process: ∆ct+1 =
6

εt+1 , where εt+1 is normal, mean zero, serially uncorrelated, and heteroskedastic with conditional
variance given by:
Vt (εt+1 ) = exp(a − bεt ),

(3)

where b > 0. This assumption generates time variation in expected excess returns – and firms’
cost of capital – from exogenous changes in risk, as in Kandel and Stambaugh (1990), Bansal
et al. (2012), and much of the literature on risk-centric recessions. Following a negative shock,
volatility increases and future consumption becomes riskier, consistent with the evidence that risk
rises in recessions (Bloom (2014), Nakamura et al. (2017), and Basu and Bundick (2017)). The
exponential functional form for Vt (εt+1 ) ensures that it is positive.
2.1.2

Production

The production side of the model is a simplified version of the Q-theory framework described
in Campbell (2017) Chapter 7. Specifically, firms generate output according to a Cobb-Douglas
production function. We assume that capital is the only input for production: Yit = Zit Kit .6 Kit is
firm i’s capital in period t. Zit is firm i’s total factor productivity and we assume that it is driven by
the same heteroskedastic shock as consumption:7


1 2
Zit+1 = exp si εt+1 − si Vt (εt+1 ) .
2

(4)

Higher si means that firm i is riskier in the sense that its production is more volatile. The Jensen’s
inequality term − 12 s2i Vt (εt+1 ) ensures that expected total factor productivity is equalized across
firms, so the model isolates differences in risk across firms. To incorporate differences in firm risk

as simply as possible, we consider the case where there are two types of firms, H and L. We set
sH > sL , so H-firms are riskier than L-firms. We assume that si >
6 This

λ
2

for all firms, which ensures

simplification does not impact the model’s main qualitative predictions and allows us to focus on how perceptions of risk impact the cost of firm capital. It is well-documented that different assumptions about the capital share
affect the level of returns, but not their variability or correlation with other variables, which is our focus (e.g, Cochrane
(1991), Liu et al. (2009)).
7 As in many production-based models with heterogeneous firms (e.g., Zhang (2005)), we take a partial equilibrium
approach and do not derive consumption from production and investment decisions.

7

that an increase in perceived risk raises the cost of capital for all firms.8
Capital evolves according to Kit+1 = Iit + (1 − δ )Kit , where δ is the depreciation rate. We

make the standard assumption that this adjustment is costly and rises with the ratio of investment
 
to already-installed capital: Φit = φ KIitit Kit , where φ 0 > 0 when Iit > 0 and φ 00 ≥ 0 everywhere.
This assumption captures the idea that firms suffer production losses while new capital is being
installed and that these losses increase with the rate of new investment.
We abstract away from capital structure and corporate financing decisions by assuming that
firms are completely financed with equity and that there are no taxes. Thus, firm dividends are
given by Dit = Yit − Φit . For simplicity, we allow capital to depreciate fully each period (δ = 1),

so capital available for production in period t + 1 equals period t investment. We also assume
that after one period of production firms die and a new generation of firms is born.9 With these
assumptions, the time t and time t + 1 dividends for a firm born at t take a particularly simple form:
Dit = −Φit , Dit+1 = Zit+1 Kit+1 .

(5)

Firm i takes the stochastic discount factor Mt+1 as exogenous and maximizes the risk-adjusted
present value of current and future dividends:
Vit = max {Dit + Et [Mt+1 Dit+1 ]} .
Iit

2.1.3

(6)

Asset Prices

We link firm investment to financial markets using Cochrane (1991, 1996)’s insight that the market
return on a financial claim to the firm, Rit+1 , must equal the return on firm investment. The return
on firm investment is defined as the marginal benefit of an additional unit of investment divided by
 
0
its marginal cost: Rit+1 = Zit+1 /φ KIitit . The optimization problem (6) means that firm i’s investment return satisfies the asset pricing Euler equation 1 = Et [Mt+1 Rit+1 ], which in turn implies that
8 Assuming

that sL and sH are constant is a simplification to enhance tractability. Allowing sL and sH to vary over
time would not change our qualitative predictions.
9 These assumptions are made for tractability and shut off the dynamic response of investment to risk perceptions.
The model nonetheless captures the basic channel that investment rises when asset prices are high and the cost of
capital is low. As we show in Section 3.3, the dynamic empirical response of investment to changes in PV St is humpshaped. A quantitative account of our empirical results would therefore need to go beyond modeling the sign of the
investment response, as we do, and model investment dynamics.

8

the log expected return in excess of the log risk-free rate r f t equals:
ln Et [Rit+1 ] − r f t = si × λ × Vt (εt+1 ) .

(7)

Eq. (7) says that risky firms’ expected returns (i.e., cost of capital) should move more with
perceived risk Vt (εt+1 ) than safe firms’ – this simple observation is why we infer perceived risk
using the cross section of firms. Because expected returns are not observable in the data at time t,
our empirical measure of perceived risk uses firms’ market-to-book ratios. In the model, there is a
one-to-one relation between a firm’s market-to-book ratio and its expected equity return:10
Vit − Dit
Kit+1

=

1
Et [Rit+1 ]

(8)

.

The left-hand-side of Eq. (8) is Tobin’s Q: the ratio of firm i’s ex-dividend valuation to its capital.
In our empirical work, we will use the price of volatile stocks – the difference between the bookto-market ratios of low- and high-risk stocks – as our measure of perceived risk. In the model, we
use log book-to-market ratios for tractability and define the model analogue of PV St as:
PV Stmodel



KLt+1
= ln
VLt − DLt





KHt+1
− ln
VHt − DHt


.

(9)

Eqs. (7) and (8) imply that the price of volatile stocks is directly proportional to perceived risk:
PV Stmodel = ln Et [RL,t+1 ] − ln Et [RH,t+1 ] = − (sH − sL ) λ Vt (εt+1 ) .
2.1.4

(10)

Risk-Free Rate

The Euler equation for the log real risk-free rate r f t gives:

r f t = − ln β −
10 In

λ2
Vt (εt+1 ) .
2

(11)

reality, market-to-book ratios reflect both expected growth and expected returns. Thus, compared to using an
aggregate valuation ratio, an added advantage of using the cross-section of valuation ratios is that growth factors that
simultaneously move all stock valuations will be differenced out (e.g., Fama and French (1992), Polk et al. (2006),
Cochrane (2011)). We confirm in Section 3.2 that PV St in the data is mostly driven by variation in expected returns,
not expected growth.

9

2

The last term of Eq. (11) captures the precautionary savings motive, − λ2 × Vt (εt+1 ), which varies
with perceived risk. Eqs. (10) and (11) generate a key prediction of risk-centric theories of the

business cycle: when perceived risk is high, the price of risky assets is low, the precautionary
savings motive is strong, and the real risk-free rate is low. This implies that in the data we expect
both the real risk-free rate and PV Stmodel to decrease with perceived risk.
2.1.5

Real Investment

Real investment is determined by Eq. (7) – each firm invests up to the point where the expected
return on a marginal unit of investment equals the return required by investors to compensate for
the risk of the investment. Our results up to this point have not relied on a specific functional form
for the adjustment cost function φ . To derive investment in closed form, we assume that adjustment
costs are quadratic as is common in the literature (e.g., Liu et al. (2009)):


φ

Iit
Kit



Iit
1
=
+
Kit 2



Iit
Kit

2
.

(12)



Iit
We define the log investment-to-capital ratio of firm i as invit = ln 1 + Kit . Firm i’s equilibrium
investment-to-capital ratio then equals:
invit



λ
× λ × Vt (εt+1 ) .
= ln β − si −
2

(13)

Eq. (13) shows that investment decreases with perceived risk Vt (εt+1 ) provided that the firm is
risky (si > λ2 ). The relationship is stronger for riskier firms. Intuitively, the cost of capital of risky
firms is more sensitive to fluctuations in perceived risk, so their investment responses are stronger.
2.1.6

Equilibrium Summary

The following proposition summarizes the equilibrium.
Proposition 1: There is a unique equilibrium in which the real risk-free rate satisfies (11),
expected returns on firm i satisfy (7), and firm i’s investment is given by (13).

10

We next consider how the economy reacts following a positive macroeconomic shock by computing comparative statics with respect to log consumption growth εt . We work in the neighborhood of εt = 0 to simplify the expressions so they do not depend on εt .
Proposition 2: Suppose we have two types of firms H and L with sH > sL > λ2 . In the neighborhood of εt = 0, following a positive shock:
a) Perceptions of risk fall:
b) PV Stmodel rises:

dVt (εt+1 )
dεt

dPV Stmodel
dεt

= − exp(a)b < 0.

= λ (sH − sL ) exp(a)b > 0

c) Expected returns of high-volatility firms fall relative to low-volatility firms:
d(ln Et [RHt+1 ]−ln Et [RLt+1 ])
dεt

= −λ (sH − sL ) exp(a)b < 0.

= 12 λ 2 exp(a)b > 0.

d ( 1 (invHt +invLt ))
L
e) Aggregate investment increases: 2 dεt
= sH +s
2 − λ × λ × exp(a)b > 0.

d) The risk-free rate increases :

dr f t
dεt

f) The investment of volatile firms rises more:

2.2

d(invHt −invLt )
dεt

= λ (sH − sL ) exp(a)b > 0.

Risk-Centric Business Cycles: Empirical Implications

The comparative statics in Proposition 2 flesh out the main components of risk-centric theories
of the business cycle. Following a positive fundamental shock, investor perceptions of risk fall
(Proposition 2a). Thus, PV Stmodel rises because perceived risk disproportionately affects the valuations of risky firms (Proposition 2b). High valuations mean that the cost of capital is low for risky
firms going forward (Proposition 2c). At the same time, the risk-free rate rises because precautionary savings motives decline (Proposition 2d). Aggregate investment increases through a standard
Q-theory channel, and the effect is strongest for the riskiest firms because their valuations are most
affected by perceived risk (Propositions 2e and 2f).
The model predicts that a number of equilibrium relationships should be present in the data:
1. PV St should be low when investor risk perceptions are high.
2. The real risk-free rate and PV St should be positively correlated.
3. Low values of PV St and the real rate should both forecast high returns on high-volatility
stocks relative to low-volatility stocks.
4. High values of PV St should be accompanied by an expansion in aggregate investment.
11

5. PV St should rise and investor risk perceptions should fall following good news about fundamentals. If investors’ risk perceptions are rational, subsequent revisions in expected risk
should not be forecastable.
In the model, we hold risk aversion constant and assume that only perceptions of risk vary over
time. While our empirical analysis supports the assumed link between PV St and perceived risk, in
the data we cannot rule out that some changes in PV St reflect changes in risk aversion. It is clear
from Proposition 2 that changes in risk aversion would have similar macroeconomic implications
to changes in perceived risk. It is therefore important to verify in the data the model’s prediction
that PV St moves with direct measures of perceived risk, as we do in Section 2.4.

2.3

Construction of Key Variables and Summary Statistics

Having spelled out the central elements of risk-centric theories of the business cycle, we now
explore whether these economic linkages appear in the data. We start by summarizing the construction of our key variables. Details regarding our data construction are provided in the internet
appendix. Unless otherwise noted, our sample runs from 1970q2, when survey data on inflation
expectations begins, to 2016q2.
Valuation Ratios

The valuation ratios used in the paper derive from the CRSP-Compustat merged

database and include all U.S. common equities that are traded on the NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ.
At the end of each quarter and for each individual stock, we form book-to-market ratios. Book
equity comes from CRSP-Compustat Quarterly and is defined following Fama and French (1993).
If book equity is not available in CRSP-Compustat Quarterly, we look for it in the annual file and
then the book value data of Davis, Fama, and French (2000), in that order. We assume that accounting information for each firm is known with a one-quarter lag. At the end of each quarter, we use
the trailing six-month average of market capitalization when computing the book-to-market ratio
of a given firm. The six-month average is chosen to match the lag of the accounting data. In the
internet appendix, we explore many variants on this procedure and always obtain similar results.
Volatility-Sorted Portfolio Construction

At the end of each quarter, we use daily CRSP data

from the previous two months to compute equity volatility, excluding firms that do not have at least
12

20 observations over this time frame. We choose a two-month horizon to measure return volatility
to make the returns on the portfolios that comprise PV St directly comparable to the volatility-sorted
portfolios on Ken French’s website. We compute each firm’s volatility using ex-dividend returns.
At the end of each quarter, we sort firms into quintiles based on their volatility. The valuation
ratio for a quintile is the equal-weighted average of the valuation ratios of stocks in that quintile.
Quarterly realized returns in a given quintile are computed in an analogous fashion, aggregating
up from monthly CRSP data. The key variable in our empirical analysis is PV St , the difference
between the average book-to-market ratio of stocks in the lowest quintile of volatility and the
average book-to-market ratio of stocks in the highest quintile of volatility:


PV St = B/M

low vol,t



− B/M

high vol,t

.

(14)

Again, PV St stands for the “price of volatile stocks.” When market valuations are high, book-tomarket ratios are low. Thus, PV St is high when the price of high-volatility stocks is high relative
to low-volatility stocks.11 Throughout the analysis, we standardize PV St so regression coefficients
correspond to a one-standard deviation change in PV St .
Our empirical measure follows from the model, with one modification. For simplicity, there is
only a single macroeconomic shock that impacts all firms in the model. Thus, exposure to this single shock, i.e., market beta, is the way to measure a stock’s risk in the model. In practice, however,
investors likely care about many risk factors. Rather than taking a stand on what these factors are,
we empirically proxy for a stock’s risk with the volatility of its past returns. Volatility increases
with exposure to any risk factor, and thus is a robust measure of risk. We obtain qualitatively
similar but weaker results if we use risk measures tied to specific models like the CAPM.
The Real Rate

The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill yield net of survey expectations of

one-year inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. We use a shortmaturity interest rate because inflation risk is small at this horizon, so inflation risk premia are
unlikely to affect our measure of the risk-free rate. Our focus is on cyclical fluctuations in the
real rate, as opposed to low-frequency movements that are potentially driven by secular changes
11 We

use the level of book-to-market in our empirics to mitigate outliers when book values are close to zero. We
obtain similar results when defining PV St in terms of market-to-book ratios or log book-to-market ratios.

13

in growth expectations or demographic trends. To control for long-run trends as simply and transparently as possible, we use a linear trend to extract the cyclical component of the real rate. In the
internet appendix, we show that all of our results are essentially unchanged if we use the raw real
rate or employ more sophisticated filtering methods.
Summary Statistics

Table 1 contains summary statistics on our volatility-sorted portfolios. Panel

A of the table reports statistics on book-to-market ratios. High-volatility stocks have lower valuations than low-volatility stocks: on average, PV St is negative. The standard deviation of PV St
is about twice the magnitude of its mean, so there is substantial variation in the price of volatile
stocks over time. This variation is the focus of our empirical work.
Panel B shows that excess returns on the highest-volatility quintile of stocks are on average 2.7
percentage points per year lower than returns on the lowest-volatility quintile. This is related to
the well-known idiosyncratic volatility and low beta puzzles, which highlight that stocks with high
risk have historically underperformed (Ang et al. (2009)), potentially due to short sales constraints
(Stambaugh et al. (2015)). In contrast, the model presented above implies that volatile firms should
unconditionally earn higher returns. One way to address this limitation would be to add a force
that increases the demand for volatile securities on average, but leaves room for time variation in
their valuations. For instance, investor demand for volatile stocks might be the sum of demand
in a frictionless model plus a constant frictional demand due to leverage constraints as in Frazzini
and Pedersen (2014). The frictional demand component would tend to weaken the unconditional
relationship between risk and return, while the frictionless component generates the time variation
of interest for our analysis.

2.4

PVS and Perceptions of Risk

We begin our empirical analysis by confirming that movements in PV St are indeed tied to shifts in
investor perceptions of risk. In particular, we study how PV St relates to measures of expectations
of risk based on analyst forecasts, option prices, business and loan officer surveys, the newspaperbased measure of Baker et al. (2016), and statistical models. The results are reported in Table 2,
which contains two sets of regressions. In the first set, we run simple univariate regressions relating
PV St to our measures of expected risk. To verify that PV St reflects expected risk rather than
14

expected growth, our second set of regressions controls for cash flow expectations. All variables
are standardized to facilitate interpretation.
In rows (1)-(4), we relate PV St to measures of perceived risk that match its construction, quantifying the perceived risk of high-volatility firms relative to low-volatility firms. As we argue in
Section 5.2, the perceived risk of high-volatility public firms is likely to be relevant for the macroeconomy because private firms have similar investment behavior to high-volatility public firms and
private firms are a large part of the macroeconomy.
Row (1) of Table 2 examines how PV St relates to a measure of expected risk derived from the
Thompson Reuters IBES dataset of equity analyst forecasts. Specifically, we measure expected
earnings risk as the range of analyst forecasts for each firm’s earnings divided by the median forecast. We then define the expected risk of the volatility-sorted portfolio as the difference in median
dispersion between high- and low-volatility firms.12 In row (1), we examine the dispersion in forecasts of one-year ahead earnings. PV St is low when the expected risk of volatile firms based on
analyst forecasts is high. A one-standard deviation increase in expected risk is associated with
a 0.67 standard deviation decline in PV St . The univariate R2 in the regression is 61%. Panel A
of Figure 1 provides visual confirmation that PV St and the dispersion in one-year ahead earnings
forecasts are highly correlated. Since dispersion is sometimes used as a measure of investor disagreement, it is important to note that disagreement should drive up stock valuations (Harrison
and Kreps (1978); Scheinkman and Xiong (2003); Diether et al. (2002)). In contrast, we find that
the price of volatile stocks declines with the dispersion of analyst forecasts about volatile stocks,
consistent with dispersion capturing expectations of risk.
Row (2) shows that PV St is also correlated with dispersion in forecasts of one-quarter ahead
earnings. The univariate R2 is 28%, and a one-standard deviation increase in expected risk from
analyst forecasts is associated with a 0.45 standard deviation decline in PV St .13
12 We

would ideally measure analysts’ expectations of risk using their perceptions of the full distribution of future
earnings. However, in the IBES data, analysts only reports their mean estimate of future earnings. While across-analyst
dispersion is an imperfect measure of expected risk, we only need it to be positively correlated with true subjective
expectations of risk. Bachmann et al. (2013) show empirically that analyst dispersion is a good proxy for expected
risk.
13 The primary reason PV S is more strongly correlated with expected risk measured from one-year ahead forecasts
t
than one-quarter ahead forecasts is data availability. The one-year forecast field is better populated in IBES so it is less
noisy in the early sample. For the period when the one-quarter measure is relatively well populated, we obtain similar
results for the two measures.

15

Row (3) studies how PV St relates to expectations of risk derived from option prices. Using data
from OptionMetrics, we compute the difference in the median implied volatility of one-year at-themoney options for high- and low-volatility firms. When the option-implied volatility of volatile
firms is relatively high, PV St is relatively low. A one-standard deviation increase in expected risk
is associated with a 0.47 standard deviation decline in PV St .
Option-implied volatilities contain expectations of future volatility and premia for volatility
risk (Bollerslev et al. (2009)). If these risk premia are zero or constant, then options provide a
clean measure of expected future volatility. If they vary over time, they could bias the relation
between PV St and implied volatilities. However, risk premia cannot account for our results on
analyst forecasts, providing some comfort that movements in PV St reflect changing expectations
of risk. Moreover, to the extent that risk premia in options are driven by forces orthogonal to those
that drive PV St (e.g., supply and demand imbalances specific to option markets (Gârleanu et al.
(2009)), they will act as measurement error and bias us against finding a link between PV St and
option-implied volatilities. Taken together, our results suggest that PV St moves with investors’
expectations of risk, as predicted by the model.
In row (4) of Table 2, we take a statistical approach to measuring the expected risk of the
portfolio underlying PV St . We examine the forecasted difference in return volatility between the
low- and high-volatility portfolios, where we forecast the volatility of each portfolio with an AR(1)
model. We refer to this measure as an objective measure of risk because it derives from a statistical
model. Row (4) indicates that PV St correlates with this objective measure of expected risk, though
the R2 of 9% is lower than that for subjective measures of expected risk.
In rows (5)-(9), we show that PV St moves with broader measures of perceived risk relevant for
the macroeconomy. In row (5), instead of taking the difference in analyst dispersion between high
and low-volatility firms, we average analyst dispersion across all firms. Hence, this measure is high
when expected risk rises for all firms. The negative point estimates in row (5) indicate that PVS is
high when the perceived risk of all public firms is low; rows (1) and (2) imply that high-volatility
firms are also perceived to be safer than usual at these times.14
14 We

argue below that low-volatility firms are “bond-like” and relatively insensitive to fluctuations in perceived
risk. Consistent with this interpretation, in untabulated results we find that analyst dispersion for the lowest volatility
quintile is not correlated with PV St ,while dispersion for quintiles 2-5 is. These findings are also consistent with
previous work documenting that stock return volatilities of individual firms tends to rise and fall together over time
but that the magnitude of these movements is larger for volatile firms (Herskovic et al., 2016).

16

Figure 1: PV St and Expected Risk
Panel A: Analyst Expected Risk
1.5
1.0

Raw Value

0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0
−1.5
−2.0
1988

PVS
Analyst Expected Risk
1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

Date

Panel B: Bank Lending Standards

1

Standardized Series

0
−1
−2
−3
−4
1988

PVS
Net % of Banks Loosening
1992

1996

2000

2004

2008

2012

2016

Date
Notes: Panel A plots PV St against analyst expected risk of high-volatility stocks relative to low-volatility stocks. We construct analyst expected risk
at the firm-level based on the dispersion of analyst forecasts from Thompson Reuters IBES data, defined as the range of analyst forecasts of one-year
ahead annual earnings divided by the average forecast of earnings. The analyst expected risk of stocks in either the low or high-volatility stock
portfolio is the median of firm-level disagreement for firms in that portfolio. Panel B plots PV St against the net percentage of U.S. banks loosening
lending standards, taken from the Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS). For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in
CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios
based on the quintiles of volatility. PV St is the difference between the average book-to-market (BM) ratio of low-volatility stocks and the average
BM-ratio of high-volatility stocks. The internet appendix contains details on variable construction. Data is quarterly and the sample size depends
on availability.

17

In row (6), we use the Federal Reserve Board’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS)
to study risk perceptions from credit markets. Row (6) shows that PV St is high when loan officers
report that they are loosening lending standards, presumably because they perceive risk to be low.
A one-standard deviation loosening in lending standards is associated with a 0.5 standard deviation
higher value of PV St . Panel B of Figure 1 shows the relation visually. Our interpretation that
PV St reflects expected risk is further corroborated by row (7), which shows that PV St is high
when loan officers cite a “more favorable or less uncertain economic outlook” as the reason for
loosening lending standards. Row (8) shows that PV St is negatively correlated with small business
optimism about economic conditions, measured using survey data from the National Federation of
Independent Business (NFIB). Row (9) shows PV St is negatively correlated with the Baker et al.
(2016) measure of economic policy uncertainty. These results are consistent with the idea that
PV St captures a broad notion of perceived risk that operates simultaneously in many asset classes
and is relevant for the macroeconomy.
One concern with these results is that expectations of risk may comove with expectations of
the future cash flows. In particular, expected risk could be high when expected cash flows are
low, confounding our interpretation of PV St as a measure of perceived risk. In the second set of
regressions in Table 2, we control for expectations of cash flows using analyst long-term growth
forecasts from IBES.15 Across specifications, the same overall conclusion emerges: controlling for
cash flow expectations has little impact on the relationship with expected risk and typically adds
little to the overall R2 . In the internet appendix, we use univariate regressions to show directly that
expectations of cash flows have a low correlation with PV St .
The takeaway from this analysis is that PV St closely tracks perceptions of risk, validating
our use of PV St as a measure of perceived risk. The connection between PV St and expected
risk is strongest when using subjective measures from surveys or market data rather than objective
measures from statistical forecasting models. In the internet appendix, we relate PV St to additional
measures of aggregate macroeconomic and stock market risk. These additional results further
support the conclusion that PV St is related to expected risk, and that this connection is most evident
15 IBES

defines long-term growth as the “expected annual increase in operating earnings over the company’s next
full business cycle”, a period ranging from three to five years. For each stock, we construct the consensus analyst
forecast of ROE. We then compute the difference between the median forecast for high-volatility stocks and the
median forecast for low-volatility stocks, and control for this variable in our regressions relating PV St to expectations
of risk.

18

for subjective measures of risk that reflect both public and private firms. For the remainder of the
paper, we use PV St to measure perceived risk because PV St is more closely tied to firms’ cost of
capital and is available over a longer sample than the direct measures examined here.

3

The Price of Volatile Stocks and the Macroeconomy

In this section, we empirically assess risk-centric theories of the business cycle using PV St as a
measure of perceived risk. We explore links between PV St , real interest rates, volatile firms’ cost
of capital, and real outcomes. We find that when PV St is high, the price of safe bonds is low, so
the real rate is high. In addition, we use return forecasting regressions to show that PV St and the
real rate are both high when the cost of capital is low for risky firms. Turning to the real economy,
we document that high values of PV St forecast a boom in real investment, an expansion of output,
and an increase in aggregate employment with peak responses after four to six quarters. These
patterns are consistent with the predictions of our stylized model of risk-centric business cycles
from Section 2.1.

3.1

Real Rates

We begin by documenting the relationship between the detrended one-year real rate and PV St ,
running regressions of the form:
Real Ratet = a + b × PV St + εt .

(15)

To facilitate interpretation, we standardize PV St so regression coefficients correspond to a onestandard deviation move. We report Newey and West (1987) standard errors using five lags. In
the internet appendix, we also consider several other methods for dealing with the persistence of
these variables, including parametric corrections to standard errors, generalized least squares, and
bootstrapping p-values. Our conclusions are robust to these alternatives.
Column (1) of Table 3 shows that the real rate is positively correlated with PV St . In other
words, safe asset prices are low when the price of volatile stocks is high. The effect is economically
large and precisely measured. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with a 1.3
19

Figure 2: One-Year Real Rate and PVS

Detrended One-Year Real Rate (%)

6

Real Rate
Price of Volatile Stocks (Scaled)

4
2
0
2
4

1972 1977 1982 1987 1992 1997 2002 2007 2012 2017

Date
Notes: This figure plots the one-year real rate and the fitted value from a regression of the real rate on PV St . For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ
firms in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted
portfolios based on the quintiles of volatility. PV St is the difference between the average book-to-market (BM) ratio of low-volatility stocks and the
average BM-ratio of high-volatility stocks. The internet appendix contains details on variable construction. The one-year real rate is the one-year
Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in
percentage terms and linearly detrended to focus on business-cycle fluctuations. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

percentage point increase in the real rate. For reference, the standard deviation of the detrended
real rate is 2.0 percentage points. The R2 of the univariate regression is 41%.
Figure 2 presents the relation between PV St and the real rate visually. The plot shows that the
fitted value from the regression in Eq. (15), labeled “Price of Volatile Stocks (Scaled),” tracks the
real rate well since 1970. The relation holds in expansions and recessions (shown in gray), as well
as in both high- and low-inflation periods. We present formal evidence of subsample stability in
the internet appendix.
Column (2) of Table 3 indicates that our focus on the cross section of stock valuations is critical.
We find no relationship between the book-to-market ratio of the aggregate stock market and the
real rate. This non-result is not due to statistical precision. The economic magnitude of the point

20

estimate on the aggregate book-to-market ratio is quite small – a one-standard deviation movement
in the aggregate book-to-market ratio is associated with only a 0.17 percentage point movement in
the real rate. Moreover, the aggregate book-to-market ratio adds only one percentage point to the
R2 relative to our baseline regression in column (1), and the coefficient on PV St remains unchanged
when controlling for the aggregate book-to-market ratio.16
The finding that the aggregate market is only weakly correlated with the real rate, previously
documented in Campbell and Ammer (1993), might initially appear surprising in the light of our
model. Our stylized model contains only one aggregate risk factor and would therefore appear
to imply that the aggregate market should move with the real rate. One way to reconcile the
model with the data would be to assume that low-volatility firms are bond-like in the sense that
relatively insensitive to risk perceptions: sL ≈

λ
2

or even sL < λ2 . If the public stock market tends

to overweight these bond-like firms relative to the aggregate economy, this would dampen the
response of the aggregate stock market to risk perceptions, while strengthening the response of
PV St . Column (3) of Table 3 shows that low-volatility stocks do appear to be more bond-like:
their market values tend to rise when the real rate falls. We revisit the distinction between PV St
and the aggregate market in Section 5.2.
In column (4), we control for variables traditionally thought to enter into monetary policy: fourquarter inflation, as measured by the GDP price deflator, and the output gap from the Congressional
Budget Office (Clarida et al. (1999); Taylor (1993)). Both coefficients are noisily estimated and
statistically indistinguishable from the traditional Taylor (1993) monetary policy rule values of 0.5.
The internet appendix provides further evidence that our baseline result is not driven by inflation
and does not simply capture the component of monetary policy that is attributable to a standard
Taylor (1993) rule.
Columns (5)-(8) of Table 3 rerun the preceding regressions in first differences to ensure that
our statistical inference is not distorted by the persistence of either the real rate or PV St . We obtain
similar results.17 We again find no relationship between the real rate and the aggregate book-to16 As we discuss further in the internet appendix, the aggregate book-to-market ratio does enter significantly in some
variants of our baseline specification. However, the statistical significance is irregular across specifications, and the
economic significance is always negligible.
17 The coefficients are somewhat smaller in first differences, likely due to the fact that we use past realized volatility
as a proxy for expected risk in constructing PV St . This introduces measurement error into our variable, which is
amplified in first differences because perceived risk is somewhat persistent.

21

market ratio. Overall, the evidence in Table 3 indicates an economically meaningful and robust
relationship between the real rate and financial market risk perceptions.
3.1.1

Robustness

The relationship between the real rate and PV St is our first key result. Our preferred interpretation
is that both the price of volatile stocks and the natural, or frictionless, real risk-free rate respond to
changes in perceived risk. In the next two subsections, we address concerns that the relation between PV St and the real rate might instead be driven by (i) stock-level factors other than perceived
risk or (ii) discretionary monetary policy.
We address the first concern by sorting stocks by alternative characteristics that could explain
the comovement between PV St and the real rate and showing that volatility is the crucial firm characteristic. We run robustness tests for both the full and pre-crisis samples, in levels and in changes.
All regressions include the aggregate book-to-market ratio as a control and use Newey and West
(1987) standard errors using five lags. For reference, the first row of Panel A in Table 4 reproduces
our baseline results from columns (2) and (6) of Table 3.

Alternative Constructions of PV St
We first show that we obtain similar results for alternative definitions of PV St . In row (2) of
Table 4, we recompute PV St by value-weighting the book-to-market ratio of stocks within each
volatility quintile, as opposed to equal-weighting. In row (3), we obtain similar results sorting
stocks on volatility measured over a two-year window, rather than a two-month window. Our baseline result therefore captures changes in the valuation of stocks that historically have been volatile,
not changes in the volatility of low-valuation stocks. This distinction is important to our interpretation of PV St as a measure of investors’ risk perceptions relevant to the macroeconomy.

Relationship to Other Stock Characteristics
Rows (4)-(9) of Table 4 Panel A investigate whether stock return volatility is really the key
stock characteristic for the relationship between stock prices and the real rate. In row (4), we run
a horse race of PV St against the difference in yields between 10-year off-the-run and on-the-run
Treasuries, a measure of liquidity premia in the fixed income market (Krishnamurthy (2002), Kang
22

and Pflueger (2015)). The table reports the estimated coefficient on PV St . The explanatory power
of PV St for the real rate is unchanged, suggesting that PV St subsumes any information about the
real rate that is captured in the demand for liquid assets like on-the-run Treasuries.
Next, we test whether volatility simply proxies for another stock characteristic by controlling
for book-to-market spreads based on alternative characteristics. These tests help us rule out that
the PV St -real rate relationship captures the pricing of these alternative characteristics, including
leverage, growth, and the duration of cash flows. For an alternative characteristic Y , we construct
a book-to-market spread the same way we construct PV St . We report the coefficient on PV St ,
while controlling for the Y -sorted book-to-market spread and the aggregate book-to-market ratio.
We consider characteristics Y that capture alternative economic mechanisms through which the
real rate might correlate with PV St : cash flow duration, firm leverage, systematic risk (i.e., CAPM
beta), firm size, and value (i.e., book-to-market ratio).
Rows (5)-(9) show that in all cases the regression coefficient on PV St is essentially unchanged
relative to our baseline results. Row (5) shows that PV St is not capturing differences in the duration
of cash flows (Weber (2016)) between low- and high-volatility stocks, which would cause their
values to move mechanically with interest rates. We draw a similar conclusion when studying
leverage sorts in row (6). The results on CAPM beta in row (7) confirm that the relation between
PV St and the real rate is not simply picking up on aggregate stock market risk, suggesting that
investors care about risk factors that are broader than the aggregate stock market.18 In row (8), we
find that our volatility sorts do not simply proxy for size, despite the fact that smaller firms tend
to be more volatile. The value-sorted book-to-market spread is sometimes thought to capture the
value of growth options, so the results in row (9) suggests that the relation between PV St and the
real rate is not driven by growth options. In the internet appendix, we use double sorts to show
that the relationship between PV S and the real rate is not driven by industry, whether the firm is a
dividend payer, as well as the characteristics studied here.
Based on this analysis, we conclude that sorting stocks on volatility is key to our construction
of PV St . From a statistical perspective, it may not be surprising that there exists a cross section
18 As

we discuss in the internet appendix, there is a correlation between the real rate and the spread in valuations
of beta-sorted portfolios, confirming the intuition that the price of safe assets is high when prices of risky stocks are
low. However, the relationship between the real rate and PV St is stronger in univariate regressions and in horse races,
consistent with our interpretation of total volatility as a more robust measure of an individual stock’s risk.

23

of stocks that is correlated with real rates. The economic content of our findings is that volatility,
while not a fundamental firm characteristic, is a robust measure of risk. We therefore view these
results as supportive of our interpretation of PV St as a measure of investor risk perceptions.

Relationship to Other Financial Market Conditions
We next show that PV St has distinct explanatory power for the real rate compared to other
measures of financial market activity, including the BAA minus 10-year Treasury credit spread,
the Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012) credit spread, the Greenwood and Hanson (2013) measure of
credit market sentiment, the Baker and Wurgler (2006) measure of equity market sentiment, the
Kelly and Pruitt (2013) optimal forecast of aggregate equity market returns, and the Baker et al.
(2016) economic policy uncertainty index.
The first set of columns in Table 4 Panel B shows that PV St is correlated with many of these
measures, though the R2 s indicate that the magnitudes are generally not large. The second set
of columns in Panel B of Table 4 runs univariate regressions of the real rate on the alternative
measures. None of these measures is as correlated with the real rate as PV St , though the Baker and
Wurgler (2006) measure is highly correlated with the real rate. Moreover, the third set of columns
shows that the relationship between PV St and the real rate remains strong when controlling for
these alternative measures and that the R2 s increase substantially when adding PV St in all cases.
One potential reason that PV St contains information beyond these alternative measures is that
PV St is based on a long-short portfolio, and thus nets out factors affecting an entire asset class.
For instance, suppose equity market sentiment has a perceived risk component and an equity cash
flow component, while credit market sentiment shares the same perceived risk component but has
a distinct bond cash flow component. PV St should difference out optimism about aggregate equity
cash flows, which affects equity market sentiment, but not credit market sentiment.19 Consistent
with this logic, PV St is positively correlated with both the Greenwood and Hanson (2013) measure
of credit market sentiment and the Baker and Wurgler (2006) measure of equity market sentiment,
despite the fact that the two sentiment measures are negatively correlated.
19 Similar

logic suggests that effects like the inflation illusion (Modigliani and Cohn (1979), Cohen et al. (2005))
may contaminate the aggregate market’s valuation, but will affect PV St less.

24

3.1.2

Monetary Policy

We next rule out the possibility that discretionary monetary policy acts as an omitted variable
driving both PV St and the real risk-free rate. To formalize this concern, consider an extension of
the model presented in Section 2.1 where the central bank has the ability to set short-term real
interest rates. This extension could be microfounded by adding price-setting frictions to the model
(Woodford (2003)). In such a model, the key predictions outlined in Section 2.1 apply to the
unobservable “natural” real rate r f t and the “natural” rate of economic activity. By contrast, our
20
empirical analysis relies on the observable interest rate set by the central bank (denoted rM
f t ).

The basic prescription for optimal monetary policy when the natural real rate varies is simple.
Clarida et al. (1999) and Woodford (2003) show that a central bank seeking to stabilize prices will
lower the actual interest rate one-for-one when the natural real rate declines.21 If the central bank
deviates from this prescription and adjusts the actual interest rate less than one-for-one – perhaps
because it seeks to smooth nominal rates – output and investment will temporarily rise above their
natural levels. Thus, in the canonical New Keynesian framework, monetary policy is expansionary
when rM
f t is below the natural real rate and contractionary when it is above. We can therefore write
the observed interest rate as a sum of the natural rate and discretionary monetary policy:
rM
f t = r f t + ut ,

(16)

where the discretionary monetary policy term ut absorbs any deviations of the actual real rate from
the natural rate.22
Eq. (16) implies that the covariance between the observed real rate and PV St consists of two
terms:
Cov[rM
f t , PV St ] = Cov[r f t , PV St ] +Cov[ut , PV St ],
20 It

(17)

is important to note that the natural real rate and natural rate of output do not necessarily reflect the economy’s
long-run equilibrium, but instead represent the hypothetical values that would obtain in a world without sticky product
prices. Modeling the price-setting frictions needed to ensure that the central bank can affect the real risk-free rate
would unnecessarily complicate the analysis and is beyond the scope of this paper.
21 We do not require that the Federal Reserve reacts directly to PV S , only that perceived risk is reflected in both Fed
t
actions and the price of volatile stocks. For a comprehensive narrative account of financial market considerations in
Fed meetings, see Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2018).
22 For examples of such deviations, see e.g., Brainard (1967); Woodford (2003); Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012);
Stein and Sunderam (2018).

25

where the model predicts Cov[r f t , PV St ]>0. Our empirics in Table 3 necessarily use the observed
interest rate rM
f t rather than the natural real rate r f t , so we need to rule out the possibility that the
positive covariance in Table 3 is driven by discretionary monetary policy, ut .
Following the literature on identified monetary policy shocks, we rule out this potential bias using narrow windows around Federal Reserve announcement dates. The identification assumption
in this literature is that no information other than discretionary monetary policy is released in narrow windows around the Federal Reserve’s announcements of monetary policy decisions. Under
this assumption, we can regress the returns of the low-minus-high volatility portfolio on identified
monetary policy shocks to test whether discretionary monetary policy causes a shift in the relative price of volatile stocks. If discretionary monetary policy were an omitted variable driving the
positive empirical covariance between PV St and rM
f t , we would expect to obtain a negative slope
coefficient in this regression. For robustness, we use several approaches to identifying monetary
shocks, drawing on Romer and Romer (2004), Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Gorodnichenko and
Weber (2016), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2018).
The results in Table 5 indicate that discretionary monetary policy does not differentially impact
the price of high-volatility stocks relative to low-volatility stocks. The first set of columns regress
returns of the low-minus-high volatility portfolio on monetary policy surprises using quarterly data.
The estimated point estimates are not statistically distinguishable from zero and have inconsistent
signs. In the second set of columns, we narrow the window and focus on daily data. We again find
small and statistically insignificant effects. In all of these regressions, we exclude monetary policy
changes that occur outside of regularly scheduled meetings because such changes are often made
in response to financial market conditions. In the internet appendix, we obtain similar results when
including monetary policy surprises from unscheduled meetings. Overall, these results suggest
that Cov[ut , PV St ] is zero and support our interpretation that PV St and the natural real rate comove
because both respond changes in perceived risk.23
23 The

evidence in Section 3.3 further supports the conclusion that discretionary monetary policy does not drive the
positive correlation between PV St and the real risk-free rate. An increase in the real rate due to discretionary monetary
policy should lead to declines in macroeconomic activity (Christiano et al. (1999)). By contrast, we find that PV St
forecasts expansions.

26

3.2

Return Predictability

We have established that real interest rates and PV St are positively correlated in the data. In other
words, safe bond prices are high when perceptions of risk as measured by PV St are also high. We
next document that the correlation between the real rate and PV St is attributable to movements in
the cost of capital for volatile firms, as opposed to movements in their expected cash flows. We use
forecasting regressions to show that both the real rate and PV St are low when the expected return
(i.e., the cost of capital) for volatile stocks is high. This observation is consistent with the core
mechanism in risk-centric theories of the business cycle and makes it unlikely that PV St proxies
for expected cash flows, supporting our use of PV St as a proxy for expected risk.
3.2.1

The Low-minus-High Volatility Equity Portfolio

Standard present value logic (Campbell and Shiller (1988); Vuolteenaho (2002)) implies that variation in PV St must correspond to changes in either the future returns on a portfolio that is long
low-volatility stocks and short high-volatility stocks (i.e., the portfolio underlying PV St ) or the
future cash flow growth of the same portfolio. Thus, our findings in Table 3 imply that the real rate
covaries with either future returns or future cash flow growth for volatile stocks.
We run forecasting regressions to show that PV St and the real rate comove with expected future
returns for volatile stocks:
Rt→t+4 = a + b × Xt + ξt+4 ,

(18)

where Xt is either PV St or the real rate. To start, Rt→t+4 is the annual return of a portfolio that
is long the lowest volatility quintile of stocks and short the highest volatility quintile of stocks, so
a high forecasted Rt→t+4 corresponds to a low cost of capital for volatile firms. Panel A in Table
6 contains the results. We use Hodrick (1992) standard errors to be maximally conservative in
dealing with overlapping returns.
Column (1) shows that a high price of volatile stocks forecasts low returns on high-volatility
stocks relative to low-volatility stocks. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St forecasts a
15.1 percentage point higher annual return on the volatility-sorted portfolio. The annual standard
deviation of returns is 29.6%. The R2 of 0.26 is also large. For comparison, the aggregate pricedividend ratio forecasts aggregate annual stock returns with an R2 of 0.09 (Cochrane (2011)). Thus,
27

it appears that variation in PV St largely reflects variation in expected future returns, consistent with
much of the empirical asset pricing literature (e.g., Cochrane (2011)).
Column (2) makes the connection between the real rate and expected returns on the volatilitysorted portfolio. A one-standard deviation increase in the real rate forecasts an 8.1 percentage point
higher annual return on the volatility-sorted portfolio. When the real rate is high, high-volatility
stocks tend to do poorly relative to low-volatility stocks going forward. In other words, the cost of
capital for volatile firms is relatively low.
In columns (3) and (4), Rt→t+4 is the cash flow of the volatility-sorted portfolio, measured
as accounting return on equity (ROE). We find economically small and statistically insignificant
effects forecasting with either PV St or the real rate. PV St and the real rate contain little information
about the future cash flows of the volatility-sorted portfolio.
Taken together, columns (1)-(4) of Table 6 Panel A suggest that the real rate comoves with
PV St because it comoves with the cost of capital for volatile stocks. In the internet appendix,
we use the present value decomposition of Vuolteenaho (2002) to show that nearly 90% of the
comovement between the real rate and PV St can be attributed to the real rate’s ability to forecast
returns on volatile stocks. Consistent with our model’s predictions, when perceived risk is high,
safe asset prices are high and investors demand high compensation for holding volatile stocks.
Columns (5) and (6) of Panel A in Table 6 show that neither the real rate nor PV St forecast
the aggregate market excess return, echoing earlier findings by Campbell and Ammer (1993). This
again highlights the importance of our focus on the cross-section of stocks sorted by volatility.
3.2.2

Other Asset Classes

Next, we show that PV St captures common variation in the compensation investors demand for
holding volatile securities within several different asset classes, consistent with the idea that it is a
broad measure of risk perceptions relevant to the macroeconomy.
We use test asset portfolios from He et al. (2017), which cover six asset classes: U.S. corporate bonds, sovereign bonds, options, credit default swaps (CDS), commodities, and currencies.24
Within each asset class, we form a portfolio that is long the lowest-volatility and short the highest24 For

U.S. stocks, He et al. (2017) use the Fama-French 25 portfolios. We use our own volatility-sorted portfolios
for consistency and because this induces a bigger spread in volatility. We obtain qualitatively similar results with the
Fama-French 25.

28

volatility portfolio in the asset class, where volatility is measured with a 5-year rolling window
of prior monthly returns. The first three columns in Table 6 Panel B contain summary statistics
on the volatility-sorted portfolios in each asset class. In contrast to equities, the average returns of
long-short portfolios are negative for several asset classes, showing that the low-volatility premium
in U.S. equities (Ang et al. (2006)) is not a systematic feature of all asset classes.
The second set of columns in Table 6 Panel B shows that both PV St and the real interest rate
forecast quarterly returns on volatility-sorted portfolios for many asset classes. The top row shows
our results for U.S. equities. The remaining rows show economically and statistically significant
evidence that PV St and the real rate forecast long-short returns within three other asset classes:
U.S. corporate bonds, options, and CDS. There is also a positive, marginally significant correlation
between PV St and sovereign bond returns, and a positive but insignificant correlation between
PV St and commodity returns. We obtain similar results forecasting annual returns.
These regressions show that both PV St and the real rate reflect common variation in the compensation investors demand for holding volatile securities across a variety of asset classes. To
quantify the strength of this common variation, we compute for each asset class c the correlation
ρc between the low-minus-high volatility return in c and the average return of the low-minus-high
volatility trade in all other asset classes excluding c. For example, ρc for c = options computes the
correlation of the return on the volatility trade in options and the average return of the trade across
all asset classes except options. The average ρc is 0.42, comparable to common variation in value
and momentum strategies across asset classes (Asness et al. (2013)).

3.3

Real Outcomes

In risk-centric theories of the business cycle, changes in risk perceptions have real effects: when
perceptions of risk are high, risky firms invest less because their cost of capital is high. In the
previous subsection, we showed that when perceived risk as measured by PV St is high volatile
firms do face a high cost of capital. We now explore whether this high cost of capital has real
effects.
To do so, we trace out the response of different macroeconomic quantities to PV St using local

29

projections similar to Jordà (2005). We run regressions of the form:
yt+h = a + bhX × Xt + bhRR × RealRatet + bhy × yt + εt+h
where h is the forecast horizon and Xt is either PV St or the aggregate book-to-market ratio.
Panel A of Table 7 reports the results. In columns (1)-(4), we forecast the ratio of private nonresidential investment to capital. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with an
investment-capital ratio that is 0.22 percentage points higher at a one-quarter horizon. The magnitude is 0.35 percentage points at a four-quarter horizon. The standard deviation of the investmentcapital ratio is 1.16%, so these magnitudes are economically meaningful. In the internet appendix,
we also show that the investment rates of high-volatility firms are more sensitive to PV St than
the investment rates of low-volatility firms, consistent with the model in Section 2.1. In columns
(5)-(8) of Table 7, we report results for the output gap. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St
is associated with an output gap that is 0.32 percentage points more positive after one quarter, and
0.66 percentage points higher after four quarters. In columns (9)-(12) of the table, we report results
for the change in the unemployment rate. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated
with a 0.11 percentage point fall in the unemployment rate after one quarter, and a 0.27 percentage
point decline after four quarters.
In Figure 3 we depict these results visually, reporting impulse responses to a one-standard
deviation increase in PV St for horizons of h = 1, ..., 12 quarters. The figure shows that an increase
in PV St forecasts a persistent increase in private investment, peaking around six quarters and then
slowly reverting over the next six quarters. Forecasts for the output gap and unemployment are
somewhat less persistent, peaking after five quarters and then dissipating. In the internet appendix,
we complement these results with standard vector autoregression (VAR) evidence. These VARs
allow us to quantify the importance of PV St shocks using forecast error variance decompositions.
At a ten-quarter horizon, PV St shocks account for 14% of variation in the unemployment rate
and 38% of the variation in investment-to-capital ratios. For comparison, monetary policy shocks
account for 17% of variation in unemployment and only 5% of variation in the investment-tocapital ratio.
For comparison, Panel A of Table 7 also reports results using the aggregate book-to-market

30

Unemployment Rate (%)

Output Gap (%)

Investment-to-Capital (%)

Figure 3: Impulse Responses of the Macroeconomy to PVS (Local Projections)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0

0.5
0.0
0.5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Quarters After Increase in PVS
Notes: This figure plots the estimated impulse responses (and associated 95% confidence bands) of several macroeconomic variables to a onestandard deviation increase in PV St using local projections. We compute impulse responses using Jordà (2005) local projections of each macroeconomic outcome onto PV St . In all cases, we run regressions of the following form: yt+h = a + bhPV S × PV St + bhRR × Real Ratet + bhy × yt + εt+h .
We consider three different macroeconomic outcomes for the y-variable. The first is the investment-to-capital ratio, defined as the level of
real private nonresidential fixed investment (PNFI) divided by the previous year’s current-cost net stock of fixed private nonresidential assets
(K1NTOTL1ES000). The second is the real output gap, defined as the percent deviation of real GDP from real potential output. The third is the
change in the U.S. civilian unemployment rate. When forecasting the investment-capital ratio, yt+h is the level of the investment-capital ratio at time
t + h. For the output gap, yt+h is the level of the output gap at time t + h. Finally, for the unemployment rate, yt+h is the change in the unemployment
rate between t and t + h, and yt is the change between t − 1 and t. All macroeconomic variables come from the St. Louis FRED database and
are expressed in percentage points. PV St is defined as in the main text. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey
expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percentage points and linearly detrended.
For all regressions, we use Newey and West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

31

ratio instead of PV St in the local projections. The aggregate book-to-market ratio does not have
economically or statistically meaningful forecasting power for future investment and employment.
The point estimates show that the responses of investment and employment to PV St are two to
five times stronger (in absolute value) than their responses to the aggregate book-to-market ratio, depending on horizon. We do find some evidence that the output gap rises following an increase in the value of the aggregate stock market. However, the relation between PV St and future
macroeconomic activity is more robust across different macroeconomic aggregates. In the internet appendix, we show that the relationship between PV St and future economic outcomes remains
when controlling for both the aggregate book-to-market ratio and the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005)
term-structure factor, suggesting that PV St contains information about the macroeconomy that is
distinct from the information in those variables.
One might be concerned that Figure 3 suggests that PV St reflects variation in expected growth
rather than risk perceptions. For instance, more volatile stocks could have cash flows that are more
sensitive to aggregate growth. This alternative explanation is unlikely for a few reasons. For one,
we find no evidence that PV St forecasts the cash flows of volatile stocks, while it strongly forecasts
their future returns. In addition, if aggregate growth expectations were important, aggregate stock
market valuations should forecast real investment more strongly. We therefore believe that the
most natural interpretation of our results is that PV St captures risk perceptions, which in turn drive
the natural rate and real economic outcomes.

4

Why Do Perceptions of Risk Vary?

We have documented relationships between PV St , the real rate, and macroeconomic outcomes that
are consistent with risk-centric theories of the business cycle. When our measure indicates that
perceived risk is high, the price of safe bonds is high, the cost of capital for volatile firms is high,
and output and investment are forecast to contract. In this section we use PV St to investigate why
perceptions of risk vary over time. We first show that expectations of risk fall on the heels of good
news about the economy. We then provide evidence that investors over-extrapolate in the sense
that expectations of risk are predictably revised upwards after periods of low perceived risk.

32

4.1

PVS and Macroeconomic News

Early articulations of risk-centric theories of the business cycle (e.g., Keynes (1937), Minsky
(1977), and Kindleberger (1978)) posited that investors expectations of risk are shaped by recent events: following good news, investors expect future risk to be low. In Table 8 Panel A, we
examine this prediction in the data by regressing the 4-quarter change in PV St onto measures of
macroeconomic news. We standardize all variables to aid interpretation.
Column (1) shows a positive correlation between the 4-quarter change in PV St and the surprise
in real GDP growth relative to survey expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters
over the same period. A one-standard deviation higher real GDP growth surprise is associated
with a 0.6 standard deviation increase in PV St . Column (2) reveals similar results for the surprise
in corporate profit growth. A one-standard deviation increase in the corporate profit growth surprise
is associated with a 0.4 standard deviation increase in PV St . At the firm level, column (3) shows
that PV St comoves with the difference in contemporaneous cash flow growth (ROE) between lowand high-volatility firms. Finally, column (4) shows that PV St moves with recent conditions in
credit markets, consistent with our interpretation that PV St is a measure that extends beyond equity
markets. We measure credit market conditions as the 4-quarter change in charge-off rates on bank
loans. A one-standard deviation increase in charge-offs is associated with a 0.6 standard deviation
decrease in PV St . Column (5) shows that in a multivariate regression all four of these explanatory
variables appear to contain independent information. Overall, the results here show that perceived
risk falls on the heels of good news about the state of the economy.
In Table 8 Panel B, we directly examine the link between measures of realized and expected risk
and macroeconomic news that we assumed in the model. For compactness, we include all macroeconomic news measures in every column.25 In column (1), we show that the realized volatility of
high-volatility stocks falls relative to low-volatility stocks following good news. Columns (2)-(4)
repeat the analysis using three different measures of expected risk. Column (2) shows that analysts’ perceived risk of high-volatility firms declines when there is positive news about GDP and
corporate profit growth. The same general pattern emerges when we use the percentage of banks
loosening lending standards (column 3) and the NFIB Small Business Optimism Index (column 4)
25 The

fact that the real GDP surprise does not come in significant in columns (1) and (3) is a product of the
multivariate regression. In univariate regressions, it comes in negative and significant.

33

as our measures of expected risk.

4.2

PVS Forecasts Revisions in Expected Risk

We next examine whether the fluctuations in perceived risk we document are justified by economic
fundamentals. In other words, are expectations of risk rational, as assumed in the model in Section
2.1? If expectations of risk over-extrapolate from recent events, as proposed by Keynes (1937)
and Minsky (1977), then our results in Section 3 suggest that irrational perceptions of risk amplify
business cycle fluctuations.
If expectations are fully rational, two conditions should hold. First, forecast errors – the difference between the realized outcome and forecasted outcome – should be unpredictable. All
information available should be incorporated in the time-t expectation, so no information available
at time t should correlate with forecast errors. Second, revisions in expectations should be unpredictable because they should only occur in response to purely unpredictable news events (Coibion
and Gorodnichenko (2015)). To test these predictions, we construct several different measures of
forecast errors and revisions in expectations. We then try to forecast them with PV St . For each
measure, we first build a firm-level measure and then aggregate up to the portfolio level by taking
the median of high-volatility firms minus the median of low-volatility firms. The internet appendix
contains more information on the variable construction for this analysis and shows that PV St does
not forecast expectations of cash flows.
In row (1) of Table 9, we examine expectations of risk based on analyst forecasts. We ask how
expectations of the risk of quarterly earnings at quarter t + 3 are revised between quarters t and
t + 2. Row (1) shows that high values of PV St forecast an upward revision in expected risk over
the next two quarters. Intuitively, when PV St is high, analyst expectations of risk are low, and
analysts are likely to revise their views of risk upwards. This suggests that there are times when
investors underestimate risk and therefore overvalue volatile stocks. Eventually, investors realize
their mistake and revise their expectations of risk upward. Conversely, the results suggest that
when PV St is low, investors overestimate risk, underprice volatile stocks, and eventually revise
their expectations of risk downwards.
In row (2), we study revisions to the risk expectations embedded in stock options. We examine

34

revisions from quarter t to t + 3 in the expected volatility of stock returns that will be realized
between t + 3 and t + 4.26 The forecasting regression shows that a one-standard deviation increase
in PV St is associated with a revision in future expected risk that is 0.45 standard deviations higher.
Thus, like analyst forecasts, option prices suggest that when PV St is high and expected risk is low,
expected risk tends to be revised upwards. As discussed before, option-implied volatilities contain
both investor expectations of risk and volatility risk premia, so the results in row (2) could reflect
the ability of PV St to forecast changes in future volatility risk premia. However, this would not
account for the predictability of analyst-based revisions.27
The loan officer survey variable is not associated with a fixed future date, so we cannot construct true revisions in expectations of risk based on it. We can only examine the measure’s mean
reversion over time. Row (3) shows that the percentage of banks loosening lending standards tends
to fall after periods of high PV St . In untabulated results, we control for unconditional mean reversion in the survey variable by including its level in the regression, and find that the relationship with
PV St remains unchanged. In other words, even controlling for its unconditional mean reversion,
the percentage of banks loosening lending standards tends to fall after periods of high PV St .
Finally, rows (4) and (5) of the table provide an indication of what might cause revisions in
expected risk. PV St forecasts rising realized volatility for both the aggregate market return and the
volatility-sorted portfolio over the subsequent four quarters. In other words, realized risk increases
just as investors revise their expectations of risk upwards. The fact that PV St forecasts increases in
realized risk is consistent with mean reversion in objective risk, as assumed in our model in Section
2.1; however, if expectations of risk were fully rational, investors should anticipate this mean reversion and revisions in risk perceptions should not be predictable. Taken together, the evidence in
Table 9 therefore suggests that investors’ risk perceptions over-extrapolate from objective variation
in risk.
In Table 10, we use options data to examine errors in risk expectations at the firm level. Specif26 We

infer expectations of volatility using implied option volatilities from OptionsMetrics. By the law of total
variance, the implied volatility at time t contains both the time t expectation of volatility at t + 3 and the time-t
variance of expected returns at t + 3. In the internet appendix, we show PV St forecasts revisions in the expectation of
volatility, not the variance of expected returns. Ideally, we would use variance swaps, which isolate expectations of
future volatility, rather than options, but variance swaps are not broadly available for individual stocks.
27 Moreover, Dew-Becker et al. (2017) find that, on average, volatility risk is not priced for horizons beyond one
quarter. Their evidence therefore suggests that volatility risk premia in options are not a relevant for the 3-4 quarter
option maturities we consider.

35

ically, we define the volatility forecast error as the realized volatility of stock returns between t + k
to t + h minus the expected volatility of those returns implied by options prices at quarter t. We
then predict these errors using PV St and allow the forecasting relationship to vary based on the
stock’s volatility quintile. Formally, we run:
5

q

Realized Volatilityi (t +k,t +h)−IVi,t (t +k,t +h) = a+bPV S ×PV St + ∑ bq,pvs ·1it ×PV St +εi,t+h .
q=2

where IVi,t (t + k,t + h) is the implied volatility of firm i’s returns from t + k to t + h, measured at t.
The table shows that forecast errors are larger when PV St is high, particularly for high-volatility
stocks. The effect is economically significant. The standard deviation of the one-year forecast error
examined in columns (1) and (2) is 19%. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated
with an increase in the forecast error of 3% for low-volatility stocks and 5-6% for high-volatility
stocks. Column (2) shows that we obtain similar results if we include industry-time fixed effects,
which purge the regression of any volatility risk premia that are constant within an industry at a
given point in time. In columns (3) and (4) we examine forecast errors for the volatility of stock
returns between quarters t + 3 to t + 4 and find even stronger results. The standard deviation of
the forecast error is 27%. A one-standard deviation increase in PV St is associated with an increase
in the forecast error of 5% for low-volatility stocks and 10-13% for high-volatility stocks. These
results are consistent with the idea that investors underestimate risk when PV St is high, particularly
for volatile stocks.
Taken together, these results on forecast revisions and forecast errors suggest that expectations
of risk are not fully rational. Together with our finding that PV St is more correlated with subjective
than objective measures of risk, the evidence points towards a violation of rational expectations.

4.3

Forecasting Negative Returns

We next examine return forecasts as a complementary way of assessing whether the expectations
of risk underlying PV St are rational. We study the profitability of strategies that sell put options
because their returns depend directly on the accuracy of investors’ expectations of risk. Under
rational expectations, riskier strategies should always have higher expected returns. Assuming that
options on high-volatility stocks are riskier than options on low-volatility stocks, rational investors
36

should always require higher expected returns for selling puts on high-volatility firms. In contrast,
if investors underestimate risk when PV St is high, as our previous results suggest, then expected
returns to selling puts on high-volatility firms may be lower than returns to selling puts on lowvolatility firms at these times.
We compute the returns to selling puts using data from OptionMetrics, following the procedure
of Jurek and Stafford (2015). For each firm i and quarter t, this procedure finds the set of outof-the-money put options with the lowest maturity greater than 182 days. From this set, we then
select the put option that is closest-to-the-money and require that the delta of the option is at least
-0.4 to account for differences in volatility across firms and time. We sell this option at the best
bid price, hold it for one quarter, then buy it at the best offer price.28 At the portfolio level, we
take the equal-weighted average of high-volatility firm returns minus the equal-weighted average
of low-volatility firm returns.
Panel A of Figure 4 plots the realized returns to this strategy at time t + 1 as a function of PV St ,
as well as the fitted value from the forecasting regression and the 95% confidence interval for the
fitted value. We label forecast dates with significantly negative expected returns. The figure shows
that conditional expected returns were significantly negative in 2000q1 and 2000q2, as indicated
by the 95% confidence interval falling below zero. This suggests that when PV St is high, investors
underestimate risk and therefore charge too little when selling put options on volatile firms.
The option price data is available for a relatively short sample, so there are only two quarters
in which we forecast negative expected returns. Reassuringly, Figure 4 Panel B shows that the
periods when we forecast negative returns to selling puts on volatile stocks coincide with periods
when we forecast negative excess returns to holding volatile stocks themselves. Taken together, the
evidence on return predictability suggests that investors sometimes underestimate risk. At these
times, volatile stocks are too expensive and puts on volatile stocks are too cheap. Subsequently,
investors realize that they under-estimated risk and revise their expectations of risk upward. The
prices of volatile stocks then fall, and the prices of puts on volatile stocks rise. Investors underestimate risk enough that during the quarters with the highest values of PV St , we forecast significantly
negative returns to selling puts on volatile stocks and to holding volatile stocks.
28 Following

Jurek and Stafford (2015), we also assume the put writing strategy is twice levered. Leverage only
affects the level of returns, not our return forecasting results. The assumed amount of leverage is well within the
Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) margin requirements for single name options.

37

Figure 4: PV St and Negative Returns

1-Q Ahead Put Returns (%): High-Low Vol
-40
-20
0
20
40

Panel A: Returns to Selling Puts on Volatile Stocks

2000q1

2000q2

-2

-1.5

-1

-.5

0

.5

PVS
Expected
Realized

Expected: 95% Confidence Interval

1-Q Ahead Excess Stock Returns (%)
-20
0
20
40
60

Panel B: Returns on the Volatile Stocks

2006q3
2007q1
2006q2
2000q2

-40

2000q1

-2

-1.5

-1

-.5

0

.5

PVS
Expected
Realized

Expected: 95% Confidence Interval

Notes: Both panels of this figure relate PV St to future returns. In Panel A, we form a portfolio that sells out-of-the-money put options on highvolatility firms and buys out-of-the-money put options on low-volatility firms. In Panel B, we instead forecast excess returns on high-volatility
stocks alone (i.e., not the long-short portfolio underlying PV St ). In both cases, realized returns are depicted by orange dots in the graph. In addition,
we forecast returns at (t + 1) with PV St at time t and plot the fitted value from the regression in blue. The gray bands are the 95% confidence
interval for the fitted value in the regression and are based on Newey-West standard errors with five lags. In instances where the upper bound of
the 95% confidence interval is negative – meaning expected returns are negative and statistically significant – we label the realized return with the
date of the forecast. PV St is the difference between the average book-to-market (BM) ratio of low-volatility stocks and the average BM-ratio of
high-volatility stocks. The internet appendix contains details on variable construction. For both panels, data is quarterly and runs from 1996Q1 to
2016Q2.

38

5

Discussion and Conclusion

We have documented that the data support our model of risk-centric business cycles along multiple
dimensions. In particular, we have shown that PV St is low when direct measures of perceived
risk are high. Further, we have found a negative correlation between the prices of safe bonds and
perceived risk, as measured by PV St . As in risk-centric theories of the business cycle, this correlation reflects changes in expected returns that occur simultaneously across many asset markets.
Moreover, risk perceptions appear to be connected to the macroeconomy in the data. We find risk
perceptions, as measured by PV St , decrease on the heels of good macroeconomic news, and that a
decrease in perceived risk forecasts a boom in output and investment.
However, we have also documented some empirical patterns that our simple motivating model
does not capture. First, the model assumes that investors have rational expectations of risk, yet
the evidence in Section 4.2 suggests that investors overreact to recent news when forming expectations of future risk. Below we show how to accommodate these findings in the model by
loosening the assumption of rational expectations and instead assuming that investors have diagnostic expectations as in Bordalo et al. (2018). Second, the model suggests that the aggregate stock
market should have many of the same properties as PV St , while empirically the strong comovement between PV St , the real rate, and future economic activity distinguishes our measure from
the aggregate market. We provide evidence suggesting that PV St is a better measure of risk perceptions for the macroeconomy than the aggregate stock market because it better captures private
firms, which account for a large fraction of economic activity in the U.S.

5.1

Model with Diagnostic Beliefs

While the model in Section 2.1 features rational expectations, we find that PV St forecasts revisions
in expected risk. In this section, we augment the model in Section 2.1 with the diagnostic expectations of Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010, 2018); Bordalo et al. (2018) to rationalize this additional
evidence.
The key properties of subjective expectations of risk that we are trying to capture are that (i)
they fall after good news, and (ii) they fall too far, so that there are predictable upward revisions.
We now show that one can account for these features of the data by assuming that investors update
39

using diagnostic expectations, overweighting states of the world that are representative. Following
the assumptions in Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018, Chapter 5), under diagnostic expectations and
the subjective perceived time-t conditional mean and variance of εt+1 are:

Etθ (εt+1 ) = 0,
Vtθ (εt+1 ) =

(19)

Vt (εt+1 )
,
1 + θ (1 − exp(−bεt ))

(20)

where Vt (εt+1 ) continues to denote the objective conditional variance.29 For θ > 0, Eq. (20)
implies that investors tend to underestimate macroeconomic risk following a positive εt shock and
overestimate risk following a negative εt shock. In our model, objective risk falls after a positive
consumption surprise, but subjective risk falls even more. Thus, diagnostic beliefs capture the
over-extrapolation we document in the data.
Assuming that preferences and the firm’s problem are the same as in Section 2.1, the equilibrium under diagnostic expectations is characterized by the same equations as before (Eqs. (11),
(7), and (13)), simply replacing objective risk Vt (εt+1 ) with subjective risk Vtθ (εt+1 ).30 Similarly, the comparative statics in Proposition 2 that capture key elements of risk-centric theories
have the same signs as before and are amplified by a factor of (1 + θ ). In other words, diagnostic
expectations strengthen risk-centric economic fluctuations because investors’ expectations of risk
overreact to recent news.
Finally, we show that diagnostic expectations lead to predictable revisions in investor expectations of risk. We assume that at the end of period t investors learn the true volatility and revise
their beliefs to Vt (εt+1 ) = exp(a − bεt ). The following proposition gives the relationship between
the revision in beliefs and PV Stmodel .
29 This

result follows from Proposition 1 in Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018, Chapter 5) under the following assumph(ε |ε )
tions: The representativeness of state εt+1 is given by h̄(εt+1 )t , where h is the likelihood function and h̄ (εt+1 ) is the
t+1
reference likelihood. As in Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018, Chapter 6), we assume that agents’ reference distribution
is the distribution at the state in the absence of news, i.e. h̄ (εt+1 ) = h (εt+1 |εt = 0 ). The distorted likelihood hθ


h(ε |ε ) θ
equals hθ (εt+1 |εt ) = hθ (εt+1 |εt ) h̄(εt+1 )t
Z, where Z is a constant ensuring that the likelihood of different states
t+1
integrates up to one. The parameter θ indexes the degree of belief distortion, where θ = 0 corresponds to rational
expectations and θ > 0 implies that agents overweight representative states.
30 To ensure that subjective expected total factor productivity is equalized across firms, we continue to assume that

the representative investor perceives firm i’s total factor productivity Zi,t+1 = exp si εt+1 − 12 s2i Vtθ (εt+1 ) .

40

Proposition 3: Suppose we have two types of firms H and L with sH > sL >

λ
2

and that

investors have diagnostic beliefs (θ > 0). In the neighborhood of εt = 0, high values of PV Stmodel
forecast positive revisions in expected risk:
d(Vt [εt+1 ] − Vtθ [εt+1 ])
1
θ
> 0.
=
model
1 + θ λ (sH − sL )
dPV St
Proposition 3 formalizes the intuition in classical risk-centric accounts of the business cycle that
expectations of risk contain an element of overreaction (Keynes (1937), Minsky (1977)). Following
a good shock, investors lower their subjective expectations of risk too much, resulting in a value
of PV Stmodel that is too high. They then predictably revise their beliefs back up, so high values of
PV Stmodel forecast positive revisions in expectations of risk. Proposition 3 shows that the model
with diagnostic expectations can rationalize the finding that PV St positively forecasts revisions in
expected risk (Table 9) and volatility forecast errors (Table 10). These findings cannot be explained
by the rational model with θ = 0. A simple calculation shows that our empirical results imply
reasonable magnitudes for the belief distortion parameter, θ . Rows (1) and (4) of Table 2 Panel
B suggest that subjective expectations of risk move about twice as much in response to PV St as
objective expectations, which implies that we need θ ≈ 1, in line with the estimates of Bordalo
et al. (2018) and Bordalo et al. (2018).

5.2

PV St and the Aggregate Stock Market

We have seen that PV St comoves more strongly with the real rate and future real investment than
the aggregate stock market does. Moreover, in the data PV St does not forecast returns on the
aggregate market. The empirical disconnect between PV St and the aggregate stock market might
appear surprising in the light of the model in Section 2.1, where valuations of all firms are driven
by the same risk perceptions.
The model and data can be reconciled by noting that private firms are responsible for a substantial portion of aggregate real investment. Private firms make up roughly 50% of aggregate
non-residential fixed investment, 70% of private-sector employment, 60% of sales, and 50% of
pre-tax profits (Davis et al. (2007); Asker et al. (2014); Zwick and Mahon (2017)). In the internet

41

appendix, we find similar statistics in our data, as the ratio of public firm investment and R&D
(measured in Compustat) to aggregate investment is about 50% in our sample.
Crucially, high-volatility public firms appear to be a better proxy for private firms than lowvolatility public firms. In Table 11 we show that aggregate investment is significantly more correlated with the investment of high-volatility public firms than with the investment of low-volatility
public firms. The correlation of aggregate investment with high-volatility public firms’ investment
is 79%, while the correlation for low-volatility public firms is only 35%, indicating that the investment of public high-volatility firms is highly correlated with the investment of private firms. In
the internet appendix, we show that like private firms, high-volatility public firms are smaller, less
profitable, and invest more than low-volatility public firms. Taken together, these results suggest
that PV St measures risk perceptions relevant for real investments across the economy, not just for
the particular set of publicly-listed companies that enter the construction of our variable.
In the language of the model, we can express these results as follows. The aggregate stock market is dominated by large, low-volatility public firms that are relatively safe. For these bond-like
firms, we have sL ≈ λ2 , so low-volatility firms’ valuations and investment are relatively insensitive
to perceived risk. This implies that the aggregate stock market does not fluctuate much in response
to changes in risk perceptions. In contrast, both high-volatility public firms and private firms are
relatively risky and have sH > λ2 . This has two implications. First, the valuation of high-volatility
public firms (i.e., PV St ) fluctuates strongly in response to changes in perceived risk, making it a
good measure of risk perceptions. Second, the investment of both high-volatility public firms and
private firms – and hence aggregate macroeconomic investment – is sensitive to perceived risk.
This discussion of the aggregate stock market is also related to our measure of a firm’s riskiness.
In the model, a firm’s risk is captured by its beta with respect to the aggregate stock market, while in
the data we construct PV St using total stock return volatility to proxy for its risk. We use volatility
because it is a robust measure of risk that does not rely on the assumption that the aggregate stock
market fully captures all economic activity. Intuitively, volatility increases with exposure to risks,
regardless of what they are.
In the model, fluctuations in real investment are driven by expectations of macroeconomic risk.
Our empirical approach seeks to measure these expectations using financial market prices, rather
than statistical measures of risk derived from the past realization of macroeconomic aggregates for
42

three reasons. First, financial market prices are the channel through which perceived risk affects
real outcomes in risk-centric theories of the business cycle. Second, financial market variables capture the forward looking expectations of investors. Third, macroeconomic quantities are available
at lower frequencies, making statistical models of risk necessarily imprecise.
Finally, our analysis emphasizes fluctuations in stock markets, bonds markets, and the real
economy, rather than the unconditional properties of prices and economic activity. We do not address longstanding issues in finance like the equity premium puzzle or the low-volatility anomaly.

5.3

Conclusion

This paper proposes a new measure of risk perceptions relevant to the macroeconomy, PV St . Our
measure is based on the idea that when investors perceive risk to be high, they are only willing to
pay low prices for volatile assets. Using PV St , we present empirical evidence that supports classic
narratives of economic booms and busts emphasizing financial market conditions. Our measure
indicates that investors’ expectations of risk fall on the heels of positive macroeconomic news.
When perceived risk, as measured by PV St , is high real risk-free rates are low, the cost of capital
for risky firms is high, and real investment is forecast to decline.
Our findings suggest that subjective expectations of risk may not be fully rational. Given the
link between risk perceptions and the broader economy, future work measuring the risk perceptions
of individual actors in the economy, such as investors or firm managers, and studying how their
perceptions of risk affect real economic decisions is likely to be fruitful.

43

References
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2006). The cross-section of volatility and expected
returns. Journal of Finance 61(1), 259–299.
Ang, A., R. J. Hodrick, Y. Xing, and X. Zhang (2009). High idiosyncratic volatility and low
returns: International and further US evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 91(1), 1–23.
Asker, J., J. Farre-Mensa, and A. Ljungqvist (2014). Corporate investment and stock market listing:
A puzzle? Review of Financial Studies 28(2), 342–390.
Asness, C. S., T. J. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2013). Value and momentum everywhere.
Journal of Finance 68(3), 929–985.
Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. R. Sims (2013). Uncertainty and economic activity: Evidence
from business survey data. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5(2), 217–49.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2006). Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns. Journal
of Finance 61(4), 1645–1680.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2007). Investor sentiment in the stock market. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21(2), 129–152.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 131(4), 1593–1636.
Bansal, R., D. Kiku, A. Yaron, et al. (2012). An empirical evaluation of the long-run risks model
for asset prices. Critical Finance Review 1(1), 183–221.
Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
puzzles. Journal of Finance 59(4), 1481–1509.
Barberis, N. and R. Thaler (2003). A survey of behavioral finance. In G. M. Constantinides,
M. Harris, and R. M. Stulz (Eds.), Financial Markets and Asset Pricing, Volume 1 of Handbook
of the Economics of Finance, pp. 1053–1128. Elsevier.
Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2017). Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand. Econometrica 85(3), 937–958.
Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market’s reaction to federal
reserve policy? Journal of Finance 60(3), 1221–1257.
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77(3), 623–685.
Bloom, N. (2014). Fluctuations in uncertainty. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(2), 153–76.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2018). Really uncertain
business cycles. Econometrica 86(3), 1031–1065.

44

Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen, and H. Zhou (2009). Expected stock returns and variance risk premia.
Review of Financial Studies 22(11), 4463–4492.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, R. La Porta, and A. Shleifer (2018). Diagnostic expectations and stock
returns. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2018). Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles.
Journal of Finance 73(1), 199–227.
Brainard, W. (1967). Uncertainty and the effectiveness of policy. American Economic Review 57,
411–425.
Caballero, R. J. (1999). Aggregate investment. Handbook of macroeconomics 1, 813–862.
Caballero, R. J. and E. Farhi (2018). The safety trap. Review of Economic Studies 85(1), 223–274.
Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2018). A risk-centric model of demand recessions and macroprudential policy. NBER Working paper 23614.
Campbell, J. (2017). Financial Decisions and Markets: A Course in Asset Pricing. Princeton
University Press.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. Ammer (1993). What moves the stock and bond markets? A variance
decomposition for long-term asset returns. Journal of Finance 48(1), 3–37.
Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation
of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107(2), 205–251.
Campbell, J. Y. and R. J. Shiller (1988). The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends and discount factors. Review of Financial Studies 1(3), 195–228.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (1999). Monetary policy shocks: What have
we learned and to what end? In J. B. Taylor and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, pp. 65–148. Elsevier.
Cieslak, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2018). The economics of the Fed put. Technical report,
Duke University and University of California at Berkeley.
Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (1999). The science of monetary policy: A New Keynesian
perspective. Journal of Economic Literature 37(4), 1661–1707.
Cochrane, J. H. (1991). Production-based asset pricing and the link between stock returns and
economic fluctuations. Journal of Finance 46(1), 209–237.
Cochrane, J. H. (1996). A cross-sectional test of an investment-based asset pricing model. Journal
of Political Economy 104(3), 572–621.
Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. Journal of Finance 66(4), 1047–
1108.
45

Cochrane, J. H. (2017). Macro-finance. Review of Finance 21(3), 945–985.
Cochrane, J. H. and M. Piazzesi (2005). Bond risk premia. American Economic Review 95(1),
138–160.
Cohen, R. B., C. Polk, and T. Vuolteenaho (2005). Money illusion in the stock market: The
Modigliani-Cohn hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(2), 639–668.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012). Why are target interest rate changes so persistent?
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4, 126–162.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015). Information rigidity and the expectations formation
process: A simple framework and new facts. American Economic Review 105(8), 2644–2678.
Cúrdia, V., A. Ferrero, G. C. Ng, and A. Tambalotti (2015). Has US monetary policy tracked the
efficient interest rate? Journal of Monetary Economics 70, 72–83.
Davidson, R. and J. MacKinnon (1993). Estimation and Inferences in Econometrics. Oxford
University Press.
Davis, J. L., E. F. Fama, and K. R. French (2000). Characteristics, covariances, and average returns:
1929 to 1997. Journal of Finance 55(1), 389–406.
Davis, S. J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, J. Miranda, C. Foote, and E. Nagypal (2007). Volatility
and dispersion in business growth rates: Publicly traded versus privately held firms. NBER
macroeconomics annual 21, 107–180.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990). Noise trader risk in
financial markets. Journal of Political Economy 98(4), 703–738.
Del Negro, M., D. Giannone, M. P. Giannoni, and A. Tambalotti (2017). Safety, liquidity, and the
natural rate of interest. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2017(1), 235–316.
Dew-Becker, I., S. Giglio, A. Le, and M. Rodriguez (2017). The price of variance risk. Journal of
Financial Economics 123(2), 225 – 250.
Diether, K. B., C. J. Malloy, and A. Scherbina (2002). Differences of opinion and the cross section
of stock returns. Journal of Finance 57(5), 2113–2141.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of
Finance 47(2), 427–465.
Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
Journal of Financial Economics 33(1), 3–56.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ramírez (2015). Fiscal
volatility shocks and economic activity. American Economic Review 105(11), 3352–84.
Frazzini, A. and L. H. Pedersen (2014).
nomics 111(1), 1–25.

Betting against beta.

46

Journal of Financial Eco-

Gârleanu, N., L. H. Pedersen, and A. M. Poteshman (2009). Demand-based option pricing. Review
of Financial Studies 22(10), 4259–4299.
Gennaioli, N., Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2015). Expectations and investment. In M. Eichenbaum
and J. A. Parker (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 30.
Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2010). What comes to mind. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125,
1399–1433.
Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2018). A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial
Fragility. Princeton University Press.
Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajšek (2012). Credit spreads and business cycle fluctuations. American
Economic Review 102(4), 1692–1720.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and M. Weber (2016). Are sticky prices costly? Evidence from the stock
market. American Economic Review 106(1), 165–199.
Gourio, F. (2012). Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review 102(6), 2734–66.
Greenwood, R. and S. G. Hanson (2013). Issuer quality and corporate bond returns. Review of
Financial Studies 26(6), 1483–1525.
Harrison, J. M. and D. Kreps (1978). Speculative investor behavior in a stock market with heterogeneous expectations. Quarterly Journal of Economics 92(2), 323–336.
Hayashi, F. (1982). Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation. Econometrica,
213–224.
He, Z., B. Kelly, and A. Manela (2017). Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many
asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 126(1), 1–35.
Herskovic, B., B. Kelly, H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2016). The common factor in
idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications. Journal of Financial Economics 119(2), 249–283.
Hodrick, R. (1992). Common risk factors in currency markets. Review of Financial Studies 5(3),
357–386.
Jermann, U. J. (1998). Asset pricing in production economies.
nomics 41(2), 257–275.

Journal of Monetary Eco-

Jordà, O. (2005). Estimation and inference of impulse responses by local projections. American
Economic Review 95(1), 161–182.
Jurek, J. W. and E. Stafford (2015). The cost of capital for alternative investments. Journal of
Finance 70(5), 2185–2226.
Kandel, S. and R. F. Stambaugh (1990). Expectations and volatility of consumption and asset
returns. Review of Financial Studies 3(2), 207–232.
47

Kang, J. and C. E. Pflueger (2015). Inflation risk in corporate bonds. Journal of Finance 70(1),
115–162.
Kelly, B. and S. Pruitt (2013). Market expectations in the cross-section of present values. Journal
of Finance 68(5), 1721–1756.
Keynes, J. M. (1937). The general theory of employment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 51(2),
209–223.
Kindleberger, C. P. (1978). Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. New
York: Basic Books.
Kogan, L. and D. Papanikolaou (2012). Economic activity of firms and asset prices. Annual Review
of Financial Economics 4(1), 361–384.
Koijen, R. S., H. Lustig, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2017). The cross-section and time-series of
stock and bond returns. Journal of Monetary Economics 88, 50–69.
Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2018a). The tail that keeps the riskless rate
low. In M. Eichenbaum and J. A. Parker (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Volume 33.
Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2018b). The tail that wags the economy:
Beliefs and persistent stagnation. NBER Working paper 21719.
Krishnamurthy, A. (2002). The bond/old-bond spread. Journal of Financial Economics 66(2),
463–506.
Laubach, T. and J. C. Williams (2003). Measuring the natural rate of interest. Review of Economics
and Statistics 85(4), 1063–1070.
Lettau, M. and J. A. Wachter (2011). The term structures of equity and interest rates. Journal of
Financial Economics 101(1), 90–113.
Liu, L. X., T. M. Whited, and L. Zhang (2009). Investment-based expected stock returns. Journal
of Political Economy 117(6), 1105–1139.
López-Salido, D., J. C. Stein, and E. Zakrajšek (2017). Credit-market sentiment and the business
cycle. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3), 1373–1426.
Mian, A., A. Sufi, and E. Verner (2017). Household debt and business cycles world wide. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 132(4), 1755–1817.
Minsky, H. P. (1977). The financial instability hypothesis: An interpretation of keynes and an
alternative to "standard" theory. Nebraska Journal of Economics and Business 16(1), 5–16.
Modigliani, F. and R. A. Cohn (1979). Inflation, rational valuation and the market. Financial
Analysts Journal 35(2), 24–44.
Nakamura, E., D. Sergeyev, and J. Steinsson (2017). Growth-rate and uncertainty shocks in consumption: Cross-country evidence. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9(1), 1–39.
48

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2018). High frequency identification of monetary non-neutrality:
The information effect. Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3), 1283–1330.
Newey, W. K. and K. D. West (1987). A simple, positive semi-definite, heteroskedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix. Econometrica 55(3), 703–708.
Polk, C., S. Thompson, and T. Vuolteenaho (2006). Cross-sectional forecasts of the equity premium. Journal of Financial Economics 81(1), 101–141.
Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2004). A new measure of monetary shocks: Derivation and
implications. American Economic Review 94(4), 1055–1084.
Scheinkman, J. A. and W. Xiong (2003). Overconfidence and speculative bubbles. Journal of
Political Economy 111(6), 1183–1220.
Stambaugh, R. F., J. Yu, and Y. Yuan (2015). Arbitrage asymmetry and the idiosyncratic volatility
puzzle. Journal of Finance 70(5), 1903–1948.
Stein, J. C. and A. Sunderam (2018). The Fed, the bond market, and gradualism in monetary
policy. Journal of Finance 73(3), 1015–1060.
Taylor, J. B. (1993). Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 39, 195–214.
Tobin, J. (1969). A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory. Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 1(1), 15–29.
Vuolteenaho, T. (2002). What drives firm-level stock returns? Journal of Finance 57(1), 233–264.
Weber, M. (2016). Cash flow duration and the term structure of equity returns. Working paper,
University of Chicago.
Woodford, M. (2003). Optimal interest-rate smoothing. Review of Economic Studies 70(4), 861–
886.
Zhang, L. (2005). The value premium. Journal of Finance 60(1), 67–103.
Zwick, E. and J. Mahon (2017). Tax policy and heterogeneous investment behavior. American
Economic Review 107(1), 217–48.

49

TABLES
Table 1: Summary Statistics for Volatility-Sorted Portfolios and the Real Rate
Panel A: Book-to-Market Ratios of Volatility Sorted Portfolios

5
Mean
Std Dev
Min
Median
Max

1.04
0.45
0.45
0.92
3.10

High Volatility → Low Volatility

PVS

4

3

2

1

1-5

0.87
0.31
0.48
0.78
2.13

0.83
0.26
0.48
0.78
1.80

0.82
0.25
0.51
0.74
1.71

0.86
0.28
0.54
0.75
1.70

-0.18
0.37
-1.72
-0.12
0.63

Panel B: Realized Excess Returns of Volatility Sorted Portfolios

Mean
Std Dev
Median
Min
Max

5

4

3

2

1

1-5

7.44
39.17
-0.11
-44.87
74.19

9.65
31.19
6.83
-37.31
55.22

12.04
25.07
12.07
-31.72
45.14

11.15
19.99
13.13
-29.25
35.82

10.15
15.42
12.60
-22.28
27.32

2.71
29.57
9.47
-49.51
50.48

Panel C: Real Rate

Raw Real Rate
Detrended Real Rate

Mean

Volatility

Median

Min

Max

1.86
0.00

2.30
1.96

2.18
-0.21

-1.86
-4.62

8.72
5.81

Notes: This table presents summary statistics for portfolios formed on volatility. For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute
volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of
volatility. Panel A shows summary statistics on the average book-to-market (BM) ratio within each quintile. The internet appendix contains details
on variable construction. Panel B displays summary statistics on the realized excess returns of each quintile (in percentage terms). The mean,
volatility, and median returns are all annualized. Data is quarterly and runs from 1970Q2 through 2016Q2. The riskless rate for computing excess
returns and quarterly returns on the Fama and French (1993) factors are aggregated using monthly data from Ken French’s website. The one-year
real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional
Forecasters, expressed in percentage points. We detrend the real rate using a linear trend. We explore alternative de-trending methodologies in the
internet appendix.

50

Table 2: PVS and Perceptions of Risk
PV St = a + b × Xt
X-variable

N

b

t(b)

R2

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

High-Minus-Low Volatility Stocks:
Analyst σt (EPSt+5 )
Analyst σt (EPSt+1 )
Option-Implied σtIV (Rett,t+4 )
Objective σt (Rett,t+1 )

110
110
80
184

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

All-Firms: Analyst σt (EPSt+5 )
% Banks Loosening
% Banks Loosening b/c of Outlook
Small Business Optimism
Baker et al. (2016) Policy Uncertainty

110 -0.71 -8.27 0.70
105 0.50 3.46 0.32
90 0.48 2.51 0.27
170 0.49 2.84 0.22
126 -0.41 -3.49 0.23

-0.67 -5.06 0.61
-0.45 -2.49 0.28
-0.47 -2.53 0.24
-0.31 -2.13 0.09

PV St = a + b × Xt + c × Et [LTG]
N
110
110
80
109

b

t(b)

R2

-0.63 -5.08 0.61
-0.38 -2.24 0.29
-0.70 -5.75 0.62
-0.38 -2.52 0.34

110 -0.77 -8.60 0.70
105 0.55 5.16 0.56
90 0.61 4.65 0.56
110 0.54 3.57 0.41
110 -0.39 -3.35 0.34

Notes: This table shows contemporaneous regressions of PV St on measures of investor risk perceptions. For each firm i and date t, we proxy for the time-t expected volatility of earnings-per-share (EPS)
at time t + h, denoted σit (EPSt+h ), using the range of analyst EPS forecasts divided by the absolute value of the median analyst EPS forecast. At the portfolio level, σt (EPSt+h ) is the cross-sectional
median for high-volatility stocks minus the median for low-volatility stocks, where stocks are designated as high or low volatility at time t based on their past 60 days of realized returns. When building
σt (EPSt+5 ) for row (1), we choose for each (i,t) the shortest forecast horizon h such that the EPS forecast is at least two fiscal periods away. In calendar time this is generally between five and six quarters
from date t, i.e. h ≈ 5. For this horizon, we use annual EPS forecasts. σt (EPSt+1 ) in row (2) is built using one-quarter ahead quarterly EPS forecasts. The variable Option-Implied σtIV (Rett,t+4 ) in row
(3) is the median at-the-money one-year implied volatility of high-volatility firms minus the median for low-volatility firms. Options data comes from OptionsMetrics. In row (4), we use a statistical
model to forecast the average volatility of high-volatility stocks minus low-volatility stocks. Denote the average realized quarterly volatility of high-volatility firms at time t by rvH,t and the same quantity
for low-volatility firms by rvL,t . We fit an AR(1) model to rvH,t − rvL,t and use the time-t expectation of rvH,t+1 − rvL,t+1 from the AR(1) model to form Objective σt (Rett,t+1 ). Row (5) is based on the
analyst dispersion measure from row (2), but we average across all of the volatility-sorted portfolios instead of taking the difference in analyst dispersion between high- and low-volatility firms. Row (6)
uses the net percent of U.S. banks loosening lending standards and row (7) uses the net percent of U.S. banks loosening lending standards because “more favorable or less uncertain conditions”, both taken
from the Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS). Row (8) uses the NFIB Small Business Optimism index. Row (9) uses the Baker et al. (2016) economic policy uncertainty index,
which draws on newspapers, temporary tax measures, and economic forecaster disagreement. PV St is the average book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high- volatility stocks. The first set of regressions in
the table are univariate regressions of PV St on the measures of expected risk. In the second set of regressions, we include IBES analyst expectations of long-term growth for the high-minus-low volatility
portfolio (Et [LTG]), as described in Table A.11 of the Internet Appendix. t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Data is quarterly and sample periods depend on
data availability, though the full sample for PV St spans 1970Q2 to 2016Q2. All variables are standardized to have a mean of zero and variance one. See the internet appendix for more details on variable
construction.

Table 3: The Real Rate and PVS
Dep. Variable:

One-Year Real Rate
Levels

PVS

(1)

(2)

1.27**
(5.36)

1.27**
(5.01)

First-Differences
(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

1.26**
(4.99)

0.39**
(2.73)

0.43**
(2.65)

(7)

0.37**
(2.36)

BM Low-Vol

0.84**
(3.11)

0.12*
(1.80)

BM High-Vol

-1.55**
(-5.39)

-0.41**
(-2.70)

Aggregate BM

-0.17
(-0.71)

-0.06
(-0.18)

(8)

0.08
(0.88)

0.13
(1.16)

Output Gap

0.02
(0.24)

0.36**
(2.53)

Inflation

-0.10
(-0.75)

0.22
(1.16)

Constant

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

-0.01
(-0.19)

-0.01
(-0.18)

-0.01
(-0.19)

-0.02
(-0.33)

Adj. R2
N

0.41
185

0.41
185

0.42
185

0.41
185

0.13
184

0.12
184

0.13
184

0.19
184

Notes: This table reports regression estimates of the one-year real rate on PV St . For all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute
volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles
of volatility. Within each quintile, we compute the average book-to-market (BM) ratio. PV St is defined as the difference in BM ratios between the
bottom and top quintile portfolios. Aggregate BM is computed by summing book equity values across all firms and dividing by the corresponding
sum of market equity values. Aggregate BM and PV St are standardized to have mean zero and variance one, where we standardize separately for
the levels and first differences regressions. The internet appendix contains full details on variable construction. The output gap is the percentage
deviation of real GDP from the CBO’s estimate of potential real GDP. Inflation is the annualized four quarter percentage growth in the GDP
price deflator from the St. Louis Fed (GDPDEF). The one-year real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations
of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percentage points and linearly detrended. We also
independently detrend the output gap, inflation, and the aggregate book-to-market ratio. Results using the raw series for all variables are contained
in the internet appendix. t-statistics are listed below each point estimate in parentheses and are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors
with five lags. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and ** indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

52

Table 4: Robustness: The Real Rate and PVS
Panel A: Alternative Constructions and Other Stock Characteristics
Levels

First-Differences

Full

Pre-Crisis

b

t(b)

R2

b

1.27

5.01

0.42

1.51

Alternative Constructions:
(2) Value-Weight
1.12
(3) 2-Yr Volatility
1.42

4.48
6.27

0.32
0.52

Horse-Races:
(4) Liquidity
(5) Duration
(6) Leverage
(7) CAPM Beta
(8) Size
(9) Value

6.54
4.26
6.15
5.50
2.48
4.97

0.47
0.42
0.44
0.41
0.42
0.43

(1)

Baseline

1.40
1.19
1.51
1.27
1.12
1.53

Full
b

t(b)

R2

b

7.61 0.47

0.43

2.65

0.13

0.63

3.67 0.20

1.42
1.62

6.01 0.41
8.20 0.54

0.31
0.26

2.45
2.32

0.08
0.05

0.40
0.43

2.59 0.10
4.21 0.10

1.58
1.33
1.66
1.48
1.47
1.73

7.73
5.24
7.57
7.73
3.80
7.03

0.51
0.49
0.48
0.48
0.47
0.48

0.36
0.43
0.57
0.31
0.61
0.69

2.14
3.13
2.87
2.55
2.42
3.05

0.15
0.12
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.16

0.56
0.61
0.74
0.50
0.74
0.80

3.02
4.31
3.34
4.35
2.59
3.24

t(b)

R2

Pre-Crisis
t(b)

R2

0.21
0.20
0.21
0.22
0.20
0.22

Notes: This table reports a battery of robustness exercises for the relationship between PV St and the real rate documented in Table 3. Specifically, we report time-series regression results of the following
form: Real Ratet = a + b × PV St + θ Xt + εt , where PV St is the average book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high volatility stocks. We run this regression in levels and in first differences and, in each case,
we standardize PV St (or its first-difference) to have a mean of zero and variance of one over the full sample. Xt is a one of several control variables. For all specifications, the table reports the estimated
coefficient on PV St . Row (1) repeats our baseline result from Table 3, columns (2) and (6). Row (2) uses value weights instead of equal weights when forming PV St . Row (3) constructs PV St using the
past two years of return volatility, as opposed to the past two months. In rows (4)-(9), we run horse races of PV St against several other variables. Row (4) controls for the spread between off-the-run and
on-the-run Treasury yields (Krishnamurthy (2002)). In rows (5)-(9), we control for the book-to-market spread based on other characteristic sorts. The CAPM beta is based daily stock returns over a rolling
two-month window. See the internet appendix for a description of each characteristic, details on variable construction, and alternative CAPM betas. The one-year real rate is the one-year Treasury bill
rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percent and linearly detrended. The listed t-statistics are computed
using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Italic point estimates indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and bold indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Data is quarterly and the full sample spans
1970Q2-2016Q2, while the pre-crisis sample ends in 2008Q4.

Table 4: Robustness: The Real Rate and PVS
Panel B: Other Measures of Financial Conditions
PV St = a + b × Zt
Z-variable
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

BAA-10Y Spread
GZ Spread
Credit Sentiment
Equity Sentiment
Et [Mkt-Rft,t+4 ]
Policy Uncertainty

N
185
151
133
182
180
126

b

t(b)

R2

-0.43 -3.32 0.18
-0.53 -4.12 0.23
0.35 3.21 0.15
0.49 3.47 0.24
-0.27 -1.26 0.06
-0.41 -3.49 0.23

RealRatet = a + c × Zt
c

t(c)

-0.60 -2.77
-0.33 -1.53
0.16 0.78
1.21 6.33
-0.20 -0.62
-0.85 -6.54

R2

0.09
0.02
0.00
0.37
0.00
0.30

RealRatet = a + c × Zt + d × PV St
d

t(d)

R2

1.24
1.40
1.16
0.89
1.30
0.60

5.08
6.15
4.47
3.97
6.04
2.75

0.41
0.48
0.35
0.52
0.41
0.38

Notes: This table compares other measures of financial conditions and market sentiment to PV St , the average book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high volatility stocks. The first set of results shows
univariate regressions of PV St on each alternative financial market measure. The second set of results shows univariate regressions of the real rate on each alternative measure of financial market conditions.
The last set of results regresses the real rate on both PV St and each alternative measure. In rows (1)-(4), the alternative variables are the spread between Moody’s BAA corporate bond yields and the 10-year
Treasury yield, the credit spread index from Gilchrist and Zakrajšek (2012), credit market sentiment from Greenwood and Hanson (2013) (four-quarter moving average), and equity market sentiment
(orthogonalized) from Baker and Wurgler (2006), respectively. In row (5), we use the procedure in Kelly and Pruitt (2013) to form a statistically optimal linear forecast of one-year ahead excess stock
market returns. Row (6) uses the Baker et al. (2016) economic policy uncertainty index. The listed t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Data is quarterly and
the sample spans 1970Q2-2016Q2. See the internet appendix for details on variable construction. In all regressions, we standardized both PV St and the other measures of financial market conditions to
have mean zero and variance one. The one-year real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters,
expressed in percentage points and linearly detrended.

Table 5: Volatility-Sorted Returns and Monetary Policy Surprises
Low-High Vol Rett→t+1 = a + b × MP Shockt→t+1 + εt→t+1

Quarterly Data
MP Shock

Daily Data

Sample

b

t(b)

b

t(b)

Start

End

Romer and Romer (2004)

0.71

0.44

0.27

0.77

1970.Q1

1996.Q4

Bernanke and Kuttner (2005)

-1.65

-0.07

-1.08

-0.49

1989.Q2

2008.Q2

Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016)

1.60

0.03

3.67

0.94

1994.Q1

2009.Q4

Nakamura and Steinsson (2018)

12.83

0.20

5.29

1.03

1995.Q1

2014.Q1

Notes: This table reports regressions of volatility-sorted returns onto monetary policy shocks. Volatility-sorted returns are returns on the lowest minus highest volatility quintile portfolios. For all NYSE,
AMEX, and NASDAQ firms in CRSP, we compute volatility at the end of each quarter using the previous sixty days of daily returns. We then form equal-weighted portfolios based on the quintiles of
volatility. Quarterly return regressions aggregate daily monetary policy shocks by summing over all shocks within a quarter. The Romer and Romer (2004) shock is the change in the intended federal
funds rate inferred from narrative records around monetary policy meetings, after controlling for changes in the Federal Reserve’s information. The Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) shock is derived from
the price change in federal funds future contracts relative to the day before the policy action. The Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) shock is derived from the price change in federal funds futures from
10 minutes before to 20 minutes after a FOMC press release. The Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) shock is the unanticipated change in the first principal component of interest rates with maturity up to
one year from 10 minutes before to 20 minutes after a FOMC news announcement. Starting in 1994, we consider only policy changes that occurred at regularly scheduled FOMC meetings. Prior to 1994,
policy changes were not announced after meetings so the distinction between scheduled and unscheduled meetings is not material. In the internet appendix, we repeat the analysis for all policy changes.
The listed t-statistics are computed using Davidson and MacKinnon (1993) standard errors for heteroskedasticity in small samples.

Table 6: PV St , the Real Rate, and Future Returns to Volatile Assets
Panel A: Forecasting Returns and Cash Flows
Volatility-Sorted Portfolio (Low-High)
Rett→t+4
(1)
PVSt

ROEt→t+4
(2)

15.08**
(4.11)

Real Ratet

(3)

VW-Mkt − Rft→t+4
(4)

-1.35
(-1.40)

Constant

2.41
(0.60)

4.13**
(2.13)
2.49
(0.59)

Adj. R2
N

0.26
181

0.07
181

(5)

(6)

-2.31
(-0.90)

10.95**
(8.31)

0.48
(0.96)
10.93**
(8.29)

6.98**
(2.74)

0.03
(0.03)
6.95**
(2.73)

0.02
181

0.01
181

0.01
181

-0.01
181

Notes: This table reports several return forecasting regressions where the predictor variables are either the real interest rate or PV St , the average book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high volatility stocks.
We standardize PV St to have mean zero and variance one for the full sample. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the
Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percentage points and linearly detrended. The columns listed under “Volatility-Sorted Portfolio (Low-High)” pertain to an equal-weighted portfolio that is
long low-volatility stocks and short high-volatility stocks. Rett→t+4 is the realized stock market return between t and t + 4 for the low-minus-high volatility portfolio. ROEt→t+4 is the accounting return on
equity between t and t + 4 for the low-minus-high volatility portfolio, which we compute following Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003). VW-Mkt − Rf is the excess return of the CRSP Value-Weighted
index obtained from Ken French’s website. t-statistics are listed below point estimates in parentheses. We use Hodrick (1992) standard errors. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1, and ** indicates a
p-value of less than 0.05. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2. All returns are expressed in percentage points.

Table 6: PV St , the Real Rate, and Future Returns to Volatile Assets
Panel B: Evidence from Other Asset Classes
Forecasting Low-High Vol Rett→t+1 with
PV St
Real Ratet
Asset Class

N

Mean

Volatility

b

t(b)

R2

b

t(b)

R2

U.S. Stocks
U.S. Corporate Bonds
Sovereign Bonds
Options
CDS
Commodities
FX

184
136
50
88
31
89
120

2.7
-3.1
-10.9
-16.0
-7.0
10.3
1.2

29.6
8.9
19.5
17.8
6.4
35.4
10.8

5.30
2.37
2.89
1.94
1.78
1.24
-0.22

5.07
3.39
1.81
2.41
4.44
0.51
-0.65

0.12
0.27
0.09
0.03
0.48
-0.01
-0.01

1.57
0.51
0.46
1.07
0.77
-0.34
-0.57

2.81
1.88
0.60
1.89
2.45
-0.26
-1.49

0.04
0.03
-0.02
0.02
0.11
-0.01
0.02

Notes: This table reports summary statistics and forecasting results for portfolios sorted on volatility in other asset classes. For U.S. stocks, the low-minus-high vol return is defined as in Panel A. For other
asset classes, we use the portfolios in He et al. (2017) as test assets. Within each asset class and in each quarter, we sort the test portfolios based on their trailing 5-year monthly volatility. We then form a
new portfolio that is long the lowest-volatility portfolio and short the highest-volatility portfolio within each asset class. For U.S. stocks, we use our own low-minus-high volatility portfolio based on all
CRSP stocks. The reported mean and the volatility are annualized and in percentage terms. The columns under “Forecasting Low-High Vol Rett→t+1 ” report the point estimate, t-statistic, and adjusted R2
from forecasting one-quarter ahead returns on the low-minus-high volatility trade within each asset class using PV St or Real Ratet . t-statistics are based on Newey-West (1987) standard errors with two
lags. The real rate is the one-year Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percentage points and
linearly detrended. PV St is the average book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high volatility stocks. We standardize PV St to have mean zero and variance one for our full sample (1970Q2-2016Q2). Quarterly
return data from He et al. (2017) ends in 2012 and data availability varies with asset class. All returns are expressed in percentage points.

Table 7: PVS and Real Outcomes
Investment-to-Capital
h=1
(1)
PVSt
Agg. B/Mt

Output Gap

h=4
(2)

(3)

h=1
(4)

(5)

∆Unemployment Rate
h=4

(6)

(7)

h=1
(8)

(9)

h=4
(10)

(11)

0.22**

0.35**

0.32**

0.66**

-0.11**

-0.27

(4.66)

(3.56)

(3.27)

(2.35)

(-3.17)

(-1.36)

(12)

-0.09

-0.16

-0.22**

-0.68**

0.02

-0.07

(-1.59)

(-1.53)

(-2.17)

(-2.40)

(0.85)

(-0.57)

Notes: This table reports the results of running Jordà (2005) local projections of macroeconomic outcomes onto either PV St or the aggregate book-to-market ratio. In all cases, we run regressions of the
following form:
yt+h = a + bhX × Xt + bhRR × Real Ratet + bhy × yt + εt+h
where Xt is either PV St or the aggregate book-to-market ratio (Agg B/M). The table reports the estimation results for bhX . PV St is the average book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high volatility stocks and
is standardized to have a mean of zero and variance of one. The aggregate book-to-market ratio is linearly detrended, then standardized to have a mean zero and variance one. The real rate is the one-year
Treasury bill rate net of one-year survey expectations of the inflation (the GDP deflator) from the Survey of Professional Forecasters, expressed in percentage points and linearly detrended. We consider
three different macroeconomic outcomes for the y-variable. The first is the investment-capital ratio, defined as the level of real private nonresidential fixed investment (PNFI) divided by the previous year’s
current-cost net stock of fixed private nonresidential assets (K1NTOTL1ES000). The second is the real output gap, defined as the percent deviation of real GDP from real potential output. Lastly, we
consider is the change in the U.S. unemployment rate. When forecasting the investment-capital ratio, yt+h is the level of the investment-capital ratio at time t + h. For the output gap, yt+h is the level of
the output gap at time t + h. Finally, for the unemployment rate, yt+h is the change in the unemployment rate between t and t + h, and yt is the change between t − 1 and t. All macroeconomic variables
come from the St. Louis FRED database and are expressed in percentage points. t-statistics are listed below each point estimate in parentheses and are computed using Newey-West standard errors with
five lags. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and ** indicates a p-value of less than 0.05. Data is quarterly and spans 1970Q2-2016Q2.

Table 8: What occurs in the rest of the economy during the build up of PVS?
Panel A: PVS and Good News
Dependent Variable
(1)
Real GDP Surpriset−4→t

(2)

∆4 PV St
(3)

(5)

-0.61**
(-5.12)

0.24**
(2.68)
0.23**
(2.42)
-0.19**
(-3.89)
-0.45**
(-8.11)

0.38
158

0.56
158

0.56**
(3.86)

Corporate Profit Surpriset−4→t

0.43**
(4.39)

LMH-Vol ROEt−4→t

-0.27**
(-3.21)

∆4 Bank Net Chargeoffst
Adj. R2
N

(4)

0.31
181

0.17
181

0.07
181

Notes: This table reports univariate regressions of four-quarter changes in PV St on: (1) the surprise in real GDP growth, defined as realized real
GDP growth from time t − 4 to t minus the expected annual growth forecast at time t − 4 made by the Survey of Professional Forecasters; (2) the
surprise in corporate profit growth, defined as realized corporate profit growth from time t − 4 to t, taken from U.S. Burueau of Economic Analysis
NIPA tables, minus the expected annual growth forecast at time t − 4 made by the Survey of Professional Forecasters; (3) the trailing annual ROE of
the low-minus-high volatility portfolio; and (4) the four-quarter change in bank net chargeoff rate, taken from bank call reports. PV St is the average
book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high- volatility stocks. The operator ∆4 Zt denotes Zt - Zt−4 for variable Z. In each regression, we include a
constant and standardize all variables to have mean zero and variance one. In all cases, t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard
errors with five lags. Data is quarterly and depends on data availability, though the full sample for PV St spans 1970Q2 to 2016Q2. See the internet
appendix for more details on variable construction.

Table 8: What occurs in the rest of the economy during the build up of PVS?
Panel B: Realized Risk, Expected Risk, and Good News
Dependent Variable
Real GDP Surpriset−4→t
Corporate Profit Surpriset−4→t
60

LMH-Vol ROEt−4→t
∆4 Bank Net Chargeoffst
Adj. R2
N

∆4 HML-Realized Vol
(1)

∆4 σt (EPSt+5 ) ∆4 (% Banks Loose)
(2)
(3)

∆4 Small Business Opt.
(4)

-0.12
(-1.23)
-0.44**
(-3.28)
-0.05
(-0.51)
0.27**
(3.17)

-0.38**
(-3.00)
-0.14**
(-2.06)
0.04
(0.55)
0.31**
(3.82)

-0.03
(-0.21)
0.54**
(4.99)
0.14**
(2.03)
-0.23**
(-3.00)

0.36**
(3.28)
0.16*
(1.85)
0.06
(0.79)
-0.17**
(-2.80)

0.34
158

0.43
106

0.47
101

0.27
158

Notes: This table reports univariate regressions of four-quarter changes of various measures of realized and expected risk on: (1) the surprise in real GDP growth, defined as realized real GDP growth
from time t − 4 to t minus the expected annual growth forecast at time t − 4 made by the Survey of Professional Forecasters; (2) the four-quarter change in analysts’ expected risk for high-volatility versus
low-volatility firms as described in Table 2; (3) the trailing annual ROE of the low-minus-high volatility portfolio; and (4) the four-quarter change in bank net chargeoff rate, taken from bank call reports.
In terms of our risk measures, in column (1), we use the change in the average realized stock return volatility of high-volatility firms minus that of low-volatility firms. In column (2), we use the change
in expected analyst uncertainty over earnings (see Table 2 for a complete description). In column (3), we use the change in the net percent of U.S. banks loosening lending standards, taken from the
Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey (SLOOS). In column (4), we use the change in the NFIB Small Business Optimism index. The operator ∆4 Zt denotes Zt - Zt−4 for variable Z. In each
regression, we include a constant and standardize all variables to have mean zero and variance one. In all cases, t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Data is
quarterly and depends on data availability.

Table 9: PVS and Revisions in Expectations of Risk
Y = a + b × PV St + ε

b

t(b)

Adj. R2

N

(1)
(2)
(3)

Expected Risk:
σt+2 (EPSt+3 ) − σt (EPSt+3 )
IV (Ret
IV
σt+3
t+4 ) − σt (Rett+4 )
∆4 Prc. of Banks Looseningt+4

0.38
0.45
-0.83

2.35
3.17
-8.64

0.10
0.17
0.53

94
80
98

(4)
(5)

Realized Risk:
∆4 σt+4 (Mkt-Rf)
∆4 σt+4 (HML-Vol)

0.21
0.34

1.97
1.90

0.04
0.11

181
181

Notes: This table uses PV St to forecast future revisions in expected risk. In row (1), we compute revisions in expected earnings-per-share (EPS)
volatility using the Thompson Reuters IBES database of analyst forecasts. For each firm i and date t, we proxy for the time-t expected EPS volatility
at time t + 3, denoted σit (EPSt+3 ), using the range of analyst annual EPS forecasts divided by the absolute value of the median analyst EPS forecast.
For each (i,t), we choose the shortest forecast horizon h such that the quarterly earnings are at least two fiscal quarters away, which in calendar
time is generally between 3 and 4 quarters from date t. For each firm i, we define the revision in expected earnings growth volatility at time as
σi,t+2 (EPSt+3 ) − σi,t (EPSt+3 ). At the portfolio level, σt+2 (EPSt+3 ) − σt (EPSt+3 ) is the cross-sectional median revision for high-volatility stocks
minus the median revision for low-volatility stocks. In row (2), we use option implied volatilities to define revisions in expected return volatility.
For each firm i and date t, denote σi,tIV (t + 4) as the option implied volatility of returns between quarters (t + 3) and (t + 4). The time-(t + 3) revision
IV (t + 4) − σ IV (t + 4). We aggregate this option-based measure of revisions to the portfolio
in expected volatility based on option prices is then σi,t+3
i,t
level in a similar manner to our IBES-based measure. Options data comes from OptionsMetrics. Row (3) regresses ∆4 Prc. of Banks Looseningt+4
on PV St , where Prc. of Banks Loosening is the net percent of U.S. banks loosening lending standards from the Federal Reserve Senior Loan Officer
Opinion Survey (SLOOS) and ∆4 denotes the four-quarter difference operator. In rows (4) and (5), we instead use PV St to forecast changes in future
realized risk, as opposed to changes in expectations of risk. σt (Mkt-Rf) is the realized quarterly volatility of the CRSP value-weighted index at time
t. σt (HML-Vol) is the average volatility of high-volatility stocks at time t minus the average volatility of low-volatility stocks. PV St is the average
book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high- volatility stocks. We include a constant in all regressions and all variables are standardized to have mean
zero and unit variance. t-statistics are computed using Newey-West (1987) standard errors with five lags. Data is quarterly and depends on data
availability, though the full sample for PV St spans 1970Q2 to 2016Q2. See the internet appendix for more details.

61

Table 10: PVS and Implied Volatility Forecast Errors

Dependent Variable

Realized Volatility(t + k,t + h) − IVt (t + k,t + h)

k = 0, h = 4
(1)
PV St
q=2

PV St × 1it

q=3

PV St × 1it

q=4

PV St × 1it

q=5

PV St × 1it
FE
R2
N

k = 3, h = 4

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.03**
(3.96)
0.01**
(2.57)
0.02**
(3.28)
0.03**
(2.73)
0.02
(1.28)

0.01**
(2.50)
0.01**
(3.32)
0.03**
(3.41)
0.02*
(1.80)

0.05**
(4.01)
0.02**
(2.93)
0.03**
(4.47)
0.05**
(3.31)
0.08**
(3.15)

0.01**
(2.14)
0.03**
(3.40)
0.04**
(2.82)
0.05**
(2.28)

0.05
38,135

(industry × t)
0.53
38,010

0.08
37,811

(industry × t)
0.51
37,687

Notes: This table uses PV St to predict errors in volatility forecasts from firm-level options. For each firm i, we define the error in volatility forecasts
in options as the realized volatility in stock returns between t + k and t + h, minus the time-t option implied volatility for returns over the same
horizon. For k = 3 and h = 4, we use the term structure of implied volatilities at time t to back out the implied volatility of returns for the horizon
t + k to t + h, under the assumption that quarterly returns are not autocorrelated. We then run the following panel regression:
5

q

5

q

Realized Volatilityi (t + k,t + h) − IVi,t (t + k,t + h) = a + ∑ aq · 1it + bPV S × PV St + ∑ bq,pvs · 1it × PV St + εi,t
q=2

q

q=2

where 1it is an indicator function for whether firm i is in volatility-quintile q at time t. PV St is average book-to-market ratio of low-minus-high
volatility stocks and in all regressions is standardized to have mean zero and variance one for the period 1970q2-2016q2, the period of our main
analysis for most of the paper. We use all firms in the CRSP-OptionMetrics merged database. The row FE indicates whether a fixed effect was
included in the regression, where industries are defined using the 30 industry definitions from Ken French’s website. t-statistics are listed below
point estimates and are double-clustered by firm and by quarter. * indicates a p-value of less than 0.1 and ** indicates a p-value of less than 0.05.
The full sample runs from 1996Q1-2016Q2. The size of the subsamples that include fixed effects do not match their full-sample counterparts
because we drop fixed-effect groups of size one.

62

Table 11: High-Volatility and Low-Volatility Firm Investment

Aggregate I/K
Low-Vol
Medium-Vol
High-Vol

Aggregate I/K
1
0.35
0.59
0.79

Low-Vol
0.35
1
0.87
-0.08

Medium-Vol
0.59
0.87
1
0.27

High-Vol
0.79
-0.08
0.27
1

Notes: This table shows the correlation of aggregate investment (private nonresidential fixed investment divided by the aggregate capital stock)
with the investment rates of firms sorted into volatility terciles. At each date t, we compute the trailing 60-day volatility of each firm in the CRSPCOMPUSTAT merged database and them sort stocks into terciles based on their volatility. The investment rate for each firm is defined as the
trailing four-quarter sum of CAPX and R&D, scaled by the book value of assets at t − 4. The investment rate within each tercile is the average rate
across firms in that tercile. Data is quarterly and spans 1990Q1-2016Q2. We start in 1990Q1 because the level of total investment in COMPUSTAT
quarterly data aligns with total investment from COMPUSTAT annual from that point forward.

63

