                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            NONLINEAR TAXATION OF RISKY ASSETS AND INVESTMENT,
                        WITH APPLICATION TO MINING




                          Jeffrey   K. MacKie-Mason




                          Working Paper No. 2631




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                June 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opiniona
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper #2631
                                        June 1988


             NONLINEAR TAXATION OF RISKY ASSETS AND INVESTMENT,
                         WITH APPLICATION TO MINING


                                   ABSTRACT


     An intertemporal capital asset valuation approach is applied to

analyzing the effects of nonlinear taxes on asset values and optimal

investment decisions.   The method is quite general, and is illustrated

both analytically and numerically, The paper studies the effects of

nonlinearities in the corporate income tax, including the percentage

depletion allowance, on mine values and investment decisions. Although

the tax policies are found to have the expected effects on asset values,

the effects on investment decisions are sometimes perverse.   An increase

in the income tax rate may encourage investment;   an increase in the dep-

letion allowance subsidy may discourage investment.




                                        Jeffrey MacKie-Mason
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of Michigan
                                        Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
                  Nonlinear Taxation of Risky Assets and Investment,
                             With Application to Mining
                                       Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason




INTRODUCTION
     It is generally known that nonlinearities,      asymmetries, and nondifferentiable kinks can
play   a substantial and oft-times perverse role in determiningthe effects of tax policies on
behavior. The typical treatment in the literature, however, is to treat policies as symmetric
and linear. Nonlinearities sometimes turn interesting questions into intractable problems;
but nonlinear effects should not always be ignored.
    The combination of nonhinearities in the corporate tax system and significant uncer-
tainty make it difficult to model the impact of tax policies on the value of a firm's assets
and its investment decisions. Recently, Gordon [1985], Bulow and Summers [1984], Gor-
don and Wilson 1986] and others have investigated the efficiency costs from taxing risky
assets. Their papers have been primarily concerned with a simple tax on capital income.
We emphasize, instead, the effects of some of the actual complexities of corporatetaxation,
such as asymmetric loss treatment and revenue subsidies.
   In this paper we treat asset valuation and investment decisions by mining firms, al-
though the methods employed are generally applicable to a wide range of problemsfaced by
economic agents. The existence of special, nonlinear, tax provisions applicable to mining
operations and an unusuallyhighdegree of priceuncertaintysuggest that if the interactions
between nonlinear taxes and uncertainty are important, mining should be an especially
interesting case.1

                   Thie is a subtantia1lyrevised version of Chapter 1 from my dissertation. I would like
to thank Jerry Hausman, Diderik Lund, Bruce Meyer, Bob Pindyck, Jim Pterba, and two anonymous
refereee for helpful discussion and Buggestions. Financial support was received from the National Science
Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.

 1
        In the conclu,ion to the paper we briefly review other papers which specifically treat the valuation
of mining resources under uncertainty. The emphasis of this paper on the interaction between nonlinear
taxes and uncertainty does not appearin the existing natural resource literature,


                                                     1
   When cash flows from an asset are nonlinear in random variables, we know from
Jensen's Inequality that standard discounted expected cash flows will not correctly mea-
sure asset value. We apply a general equilibrium model of intertemporalasset valuation
to determine equilibrium mine values, and to evaluate optimal investment policy, under
different tax regimes. With restrictive assumptions,   the method yields analytical results
which provide insight into some of the complicated interactions between nonlinear taxes
and uncertainty. We then present numerical results for a more general problem which
captures several operating characteristics of a mining venture.
   In the course of demonstrating a feasible method for analyzing the effects of some
nonlinear taxes on asset valuation and risky investment decisions, we present some new
results on tax policy effects. For example, althoughthe value of a mine is decreasing in the
rate of corporate income taxation, an increase in the tax rate may encourage investment.
Investment can be encouraged because of the nonlinearity of tax liabilities in stochastic
output price. Firms may delay investment in mines in anticipationof higher future prices.
Increasing the corporate tax rate increases tax liability more when prices are high than
when they are low, reducingthe speculative value of delaying investment.
    We also analyze the effects of the percentage depletionallowance (PDA). The depletion
allowance is an unambiguous subsidy to the value of mining assets. Nonetheless, while
increasing quasi-rents, the PDA subsidy can in fact discourage investment in some mining
projects. Increasing the PDA lowers the marginal tax rate when prices are high, without
changing the tax rate when prices are low. Thus, an increase in the PDA may increase the
expected value of future production sufficiently for firms to delay investments in current
production. Further, the depletionallowance may also increase the probability that firms
will shut down marginal existing projects. Again, a higher allowance rate provides an
incentive for the firm to bear the costs of waiting to produce, against the possibility that
price will rise and that the subsidy will be larger.
    In Section 2 of the paper we briefly describe the types of taxes that are applied to
mining ventures, with emphasis on nonlinearities in the corporate income tax and the
percentage depletion allowance. This section motivates the need for more sophisticated
valuation techniques than are typically employed. We develop the analytical method in
                                              2
Section 3. The method is essentially     an application of an intertemporalgeneral equilibrium
asset pricing model. Placing the analysis in a continuous-time setting generates feasible
statements of the asset valuation and optimal investment problems. We investigate some
of the effects of taxes on L:set value in this section. Then, in Section 4, we consider
the effects of taxes on the optimal investment decision. We also implement a numerical
solution to a fairly general valuation problem, which captures many aspects of a realistic
mining venture. Section 5 concludes       the paper.

TAXATIONAND MINiNG FIRMS
   Overview of Taxes on Mining Firms
  Mining operations have typically attracted a large and specialized aet of tax policies.
Much of the literature on exhaustible resources has considered the effects of different taxes
on mining output and prices, usually in the context of a Hotelling [1931] model with no
uncertainty or new investment.2 More recently, some authors have begun to investigate
taxes on mining underuncertainty, and with new investment. These studies have depended
primarily on Monte Carlo-type simulations, with a focus on finding the "best" tax policy
from a given set, according to some criterion.3
    Among the many tax provisions applicable to mining firms is the usual corporate in-
come tax with its provisions for depreciation of tangible capital assets. However, much
of the value of mining assets is treated differently than it would be under the standard
depreciation rules. Most of the costs of exploring for and developing new mining deposits
are labelled as "intangible" costs, and are expensible under the U.S. corporate tax code.
The primary asset — the mineral reserves themselves — have traditionally been called a
"depletable" asset, and firms take a "depletion" deduction, based on gross revenues, rather
than a cost-baseddepreciationdeduction.4
   Other taxes on mining ventures include bonus and royalty payments, usually for lease
rights on nationalized resources; severance or output taxes; property taxes; and, various
 2 See                           for a survey, Dasgupta and Heal [1979].
           e.g. Burness [1976], and
    See,     Gamponia and Mendelsohn [1985] and Virmani [1986].
           e.gc
   It has long been recognized that depletion allowance ruln in the U.S. have little to do with the decline
   in the economic value of the resource. Further, since the capital gain in Srrn value when a deposit is
   discovered is not taxed the depletion deduction is generallyrecognised as a policy-motivated subsidy.

                                                    3
sorts of rent taxes which are intended to tax the rents to mineral resource ownership,
without distorting the firm's operating and investment decisions.5
    We focus on the corporate income tax with a percentage depletion allowance in this
paper. To simplify the analysis, we assume that all nondepletable assets are treated as
intangibles, and thus are expensed rather than depreciated. For new, risky projects, much
of the investment is for exploration and development, so this latter assumption is not
entirely unrealistic.
    Income taxes on net losses are not refundable, and at best can be carried into other
years to offset postive taxable income in those years. As will be shown below, the PDA
creates yet another nonlinearity in tax liabilities. The effect of these nonlinearities can be
surprising. We will show that an increase in the income tax rate may actually encourage
a firm to undertake an investment, even though the value of the project is decreased.
    The percentage depletion allowance (PDA) has long been controversial, while account-
ing for a fairly large reduction in tax receipts. The Treasury Department recently estimated
that repealing the FDA for independentoil and gas producers would save the government
$1.4 billion in 1986, and a total of $12 billion through 1990 (Clark [1985]).6 Since it has
been recognized that the PDA is a subsidy, its proponents have argued that is a desirable
mechanism for compensating firms for the riskiness of mining, and for providingincentives
for investing is these enterprises.7Although the FDA is likely to encourage investment in
many cases, investmentsin some situations will be discouraged. The FDA also distorts
operating decisions on existing projects. For instance, the PDA may lead firms to shut
down projects earlier than would otherwise be optimal.
      The Representative Project
   We take the viewpoint of an individual mining firm making incremental investment
decisions under uncertainty. We suppose that there is a known quantity of reserves at a
particular site, and the firm owns the right to develop the mine and extract the reserves.
  &   Garnaut and Clunies-Rose [1975] present a theoretical treatment of a rent tax; see, e.g., Gamponia
      and Mendelsohn [198$] for the distortions that feaeible rent taxes are likely to introduce.
      Percentage depletion has not been available to the major" oil and gas producers since 1975. Percentage
  6

      depletion is still available to all producers in moet hard-rock mining industries.
      Oil and gas industrylobbyists argued during the recent tax reformdebates that the PDA and expensing
      of intangibles are two of the moet important incentives for outside sources to inveet in drilling projects.
      See Glen [1985] and Clark [1985].

                                                        4
The firm is uncertain about the future evolution of prices, with that uncertaintyincreasing
as the length of the forecast increases.8 We place no restrictionson preferences other than
that investors have time-additive, risk-averse expected utility functions.
    The firm can develop thE mine at a known and fixed investment cost, I. Production
technology is such that the firm can produce any amount of output per year up to a
                       .
capacity constraint, The firm can shut down the mine temporarily, and reopen later if
conditions warrant, although in general closing and opening will have a fixed cost. The
firm can also abandon a mine. (More general technologies and operating policies can also
be valued by the methods presented.)
   Price is exogenous but stochastic; its dynamics are described by


                                        dp=cspdt+cpdz                                                (1)

where z is a standard Wiener process with unit varianceand zero mean; i.e., p(t) follows
an Ito process.9 Today's spot price is known,but uncertaintyincreases the further out the
firm forecasts; the variance of p(s) is u2p2(s — t).1° The firm plans to sell its output on
the spot market.
    For simplicity, we assume that unit productioncosts are known and constant, c. Intro-
ducing uncertainty or curvature to the cost function is straightforward.'1
    We will specify the details of the tax code in Section 3; for now we refer to net annual
tax liabilities as TAX. The annual cash flows from an existing mine are


                                        (p—c)q—F— TAX                                                 (2)

where F represents any fixed costs incurred during the period.
    In an earlier version of this paper Macifie-Mason ]1954a], geological uncertainty was incorporated
    in two ways: first by assuming that there is uncertainty about the total amount of reserves to be
    discovered; and eecond, by assuming that the unit production cost was uncertain and changing over
    time. Although some interesting results on the role of geological uncertainty emerged, the qualitative
    implicatione for investment decisions were unchanged.
    For an introduction to the mathematics of lbS processes, see Merton [1981].
             ignoring the general equilibrium effects of the PDA by specifying prices exogenously. It is
 10 We are
    worth noting however, that equation (1) is consistent with the simple Hotelling rule for exhaustible
    resource industry equilibrium: set a = 0 and a = r (the rate of interest), and prices will grow with
    certainty at the rate of interest.
    See MacKie-Mason ]1984a] for cost uncertainty.

                                                    S
    It will be an object of Section 3 to determine the value of a mining project. It is
clear that we cannot simply take the expected discountedvalue of cashflows as the asset's
value. First, since   the TAX function is nonlinear, and price is stochastic, the expected
value is difficult to calculate; by Jensen's Inequality, the expected value of the function is
not simply equal to the TAX function applied to the expected value of price and the other

parameters.
   More importantly, we allow investors to have general, risk-averse preferences. The
appropriate discount rate will not in general be the risk-free rate of interest. As is well-
known, there may not even be a well-defined risk-adjusted rate of discount; each stochastic
componentof cash flow must be discounted according to its own risk characteristics. Fur-
ther, since the firm can take operating decisions which may affect the riskiness of cash
flows (adjustments in the output rate; shutdown and re-opening), the appropriate rates of
discount will in general be endogenous.
   Thus, we simply state that the value of an existing mine is M(x, t; ti), where x is
a vector of stochastic state variables, is a vector representing the operating options
available to the firm (e.g., shutdown, rate of output, etc.), and t represents calendartime
A value-maximizing firm will have    to solve a stochastic dynamic programming problem
                                                i
to chose the operating, or control variables to maximizethevalue of the existing mine.
Then, when considering the value of the ("lease") right to invest in and develop a new
mine, we will represent that value as L(M,I, t) The value of the right to develop a mine
depends on the value of a developed mine, the investment cost, and calendar time. The
optimal investment decision, then, is to choose when to make the investment, I, so as to
maximize the value of the ownership, or lease right, L.
   The next section of the paper will present a method for determining the values M
and L in a dynamic capital market equilibrium. We will then use the resulting valuation
functions to investigatethe effects of tax policies on asset value and investment decisions.

VALUING RISKY MINrNG ASSETS
   An InterternporalCAPM and the        Value   of Risky Assets
    Supposethe firm wishes to value an asset which depends on an (a x 1) vector of st
variables, x, and a control policy functional, b 'I', 'P a compact space. (The asset can

                                                6
be, for instance, an existing mine, or a lease right to develop a new mine.) We assume
that the state variables are generatedby a joint Ito diffusion process,


                                     dx = a(x,t,b)dt + E(x,)dz                                         (3)


where    a is an (n x 1)                         E an (n x n) matrix-valuedfunction.
                            vector-valued function, and
The instantaneous expectation and covariance of the x1 are given by E(dx) = (x,                        )
and Cov(dx,dx) = a12 (x,sb), respectively.

   Define the value of the asset to the firm at time t    V(x, t,as          ).
                                                                    A firm's shareholders

and/or managers may have concave preferences over income lotteries, so the risk charac-
teristics of the project may affect its value to the firm. As a result the correct rate of
discount is endogenousand will depend on project characteristics, investor and manager
preferences, and the firm's optimal control decisions. Thus, we cannot directly specify the
value function, V(.). Rather, we use capital market conditions to determine what the value
of the project must be in equilibrium.
    We need an intertemporal capital asset pricing model which yields equilibrium in as-
set markets with taxes on corporate cash flows, If we make the assumptions of Merton
[1973b[—essentially those of perfect markets, homogeneous expectationsand time-additive
von Neumann-Morgensterninvestor preferences—then it is possible to generalize Merton's
result so that in equilibrium,security returns must satisfy the relationship


                                               —   r = .\aM/aM                                         (4)

where    ,  the instantaneous expected after-taxrate of return on security 1; r is the risk-
             is

free interest rate;    o
                       and a1M are the instantaneous covariance of the market portfolio
 with itself and with security i, respectively; and A     (Lm — r)/aM.'2 By adding an

 assumptionof free entry and exit, Constantinides [19781 points out that equation (4) must
 also hold for investment projects viewed as assets.

 12   Equation (4) is just a statement for asset markets of the fundamental principle of no excess returns
      in competitive equilibrium, which must hold in an intertemporal setting as well as in a static model.
      The results states that in equilibrium, an asset muet earn a return equal to the risk-free rate plus a
      premium for systematic risk.

                                                      7
    Following Constantinides[1978], we can now derive a partial differential equation, the
solution of which yields the value of the project. Defining 11AT (x,t;t,b) as the after-tax


     ,,
V (x, t) must solve (subscriptson V indicate differentiation)
                                                                        ,
instantaneous rate of cash flow from the asset, given control policy we can show that



                       —   rV + Vt                                             =0
                                     +L(n   —
                                                 APMCi)   V+                              (5)
                                      t=1                      tEauVia}
                                                                i=lj=1
subject to appropriate boundary conditions, where PiM is        the instantaneous correlation
coefficient between dz and the market return.
   Equation (5)    the fundamentalvaluationresult. Assuming the existence of a unique
                  is

maximizing control policy Y, the value of the project can be determined from (5) and the
boundary conditions. Parabolic partial differential equations of this sort are often solved
numerically in finance applications; for a survey of methods, see, e.g., Geske and Shsstri
[1985] and Brennan and Schwartz ]1978[. For some simple problems, the solution to (5)
can he obtained analytically; this will be the case for some of the examples considered
below.
   Anotherway of looking at the valuation equation leads to a second solution approach,
and suggests the intuition for the valuation method. Suppose a firm whose managers
and investors are risk-neutralwishes to value an asset. Let the drift vector and variance-
covariance matrix for a stochastic vector * be & and E. A risk-neutral firm values the
project by its discounted cash flows


                       i'(*,t;   )   = maxEeJ0°° HAT(*, &, u)edu

where Ee is the expectationoperator conditional on all information known at time t = 0.
From the theory of stochastic optimal control, we can show that V must satisfy



                 max{I1AT
                                 r
                             - +9 + E&i7 +
                                           i=1            i=1j=1
                                                                         =0

subject to the appropriate boundary conditions. Constantinides [1978] noted that if we
redefine the state equation, (3), by replacing       a
                                                with &        —          then the two
                                                 8
valuation equations, (5) and (7), are identical. (It is straightforward to show that the
boundaryconditions in the two problems are identical.) Thus, capital market equilibrium
requires that the firm value a project as if preferences were risk-neutral,subject to replacing
the drift vector a with      is.

   This approach makes clear that the valuationmethod has the effect of requiring that
each stochastic component of cash flow be discounted at a rate (possibly endogenous)

appropriate to its riskiness. The method can be viewed as "correct" way of calculating
a risk-adjusted discounted present value, where each stochastic component gets its own
risk-adjusted discount rate. Since the problem can be reduced to an expected discounted
cash flow calculation, an alternative solution approach to solving the partial differential
equation in (5) is to evaluate (6) analytically or by Monte Carlo methods. In Section 4 we
shall discuss instances in which the Monte Carlo approach has advantages over the more
direct solution.
     We now have two straightforwardroutes for finding project value: solve equation (5),
or replace     a with is and solve equation (6). Neither requires us to substantially restrict
the firm's treatment of risk. The method is analytically tractable in simple problems,
and is well-suitedto numerical methods of analysis when more realism is desired. In the
remainder of the paper, we will apply the valuation method to analyses of the effects of
nonlinear tax policies on risky mining assets and investment decisions.
    Statement of Tax Rules and Operating Options
    We assume that the mine produces at a fixed rate of per year. Further, once oper-

ating, the mine remains open and in operation until the reserves are exhausted. These
simplifications allow us to obtain analytical results, which permit an intuitive understand-
ing of the interaction between nonlinear taxes and uncertainty. (Section 4 introduces a
more flexible operatingpolicy.) We also assume that the quantity of reserves available for
extraction from the mine is fixed and known at the date of evaluation.'3
    We will considertwo different rules for corporatetaxation. The first allows for full loss
refunds; i.e., if the firm has a taxable loss in a period, the government refunds the negative
tax liability. The second rule, at the other extreme, allows for no loss refunds: the firm
 '   See   MacKie-Mason [1984a] for various treatmerite of geological uncertainty.

                                                      9
never collects negative taxes. The actual U.S. rules fall somewhere in-between, allowing
firms to carry losses backwards as offsets to positive taxable income during the previous
three years (leading to downward revisioas of pa.st tax liabilities, and tax refunds), or to
carry losses forward to offset future positive taxable income for up to 15 years.'4
      Weassume that all capital expenditures on the mine are either expensible as "intan-
gibles" or are treated as depletable, and subject to the PDA rules. Setting the rate of the
depletion allowance to zero for a moment, the tax liabilities under the full-refunds and
no-refunds rules are then:


                                             TAX = r(p — c)j


                                         TAXN     =rmax[p—c,04
where (F, N) indicate "full refunds" and "no refunds", respectively. (We have suppressed
fixed costs for simplicity.)
   The percentagedepletionallowance rules essentially state that firms may deduct 1006
percent of gross income from taxable income, subject to a limitation of 50 percent of net
income. However, since the PDA is an voluntary deduction, the firm does not have to
subtract 50% of a negative amount if net income is negative.15 The firm's tax liability
under the full-refunds rule is then

                                 3'r(p — c) — r min[Ep,7, .5(p — c)4], if p c
                     TAXF                                                                                   (8')
                                       —
                                 1 r(p c)q,                            otherwise
This can be conveniently simplified as

          many firms, the csrryback provision means that they effectively face a full refund rule; as long
 14 For
      as their losses in a given year don't exceed the sum of positive taxable income over the previous
      three years, they obtain immediate tax loss refunds. Interactions with various tax credits and other
      provisions of the law complicate this somewhat; see Altshuler and Auerbach [1986]. For other firms,
      who carry large and persistent losses so that sufficient positive income is not likely to he earned for
      many years, ths need to rely on carryforwards means that—after discounting—these firms effectively
      face something like the no-refunds nile. Auerbach and Poterba [1986] have found that once a firm
      enters a state of tax loss, persistence in that state ts quite high, and the marginal effective refund rate
      on tax losses can be relatively low. Other firms fall between these two extremes.
 'a   I am grateful to David R.omer for alerting me to this possibility.

                                                        10
              TAX =                  —
                                         c)q,   .5r(p — c) + .5rqmax[ — coI}         (TAXF)
                        min{r(P
where     =            Likewise, the firm's tax liability when there are no loss refunds can be
written as


           TAXN    =                —
                                        c, OJ — .5(maxfp — c, 0J — max — c,          (TAXN)
                       r{max[P                                                o})}
   The firm's tax liability under the two different rules is illustrated in Figure 1 and in
Figure 2. (The horizontal axis is measured in pre-tax net income, but unit costs, c, and
          ,
output, are held constant, so only p is increasing.) ConsiderFigure 1, in which the firm
receives full loss refunds. Without a PDA, the government taxes the constant fraction r of
net income. With a PDA, the government takes a lower base fraction, .5r, if net income is
positive, but when the firm is fortunate (stochastic price, a.nd hence net income, is high)
the government takes an additional bite through its contingent claim (the max[., . term in
(TAXF)); when net income is negative, the government still refunds the fraction r. The
additional, contingent, claim occurs when p >        where p" =
                                                             p,         (--)
                                                                          x c, from equation
(TAXF'); that is, when p is sufficiently high that 1005 percent of gross revenue is less than
50%  of net income. We refer to the difference between total tax take with a PDA and the
part due to the linear income tax rate as "cream-skimming". The marginal tax rate when
there is no PDA is r; when there is a PDA, the marginal tax rate is r for negativetaxable
income, and .5r when the taxable income is low, but positive. However, when the state
                                         .
of the world is good (the max[., term is positive), the government "skims the cream" off
the top with a higher marginal rate on net income of (1 —
      To value the mine asset, we now follow one of the two related methods outlined above.
We can either substitute the period cash flows into the stochastic Bellman equation, (5),
and directly solve this partial differential equation, or recognize that if we modify the
stochastic process describing the evolution of prices by replacing a with &, the solution to
(5) is simply the expected present value of the firm's period cash flows, discounted at the

 16
      Obviously the depletion   rate, 5 must be   lees than .5.

                                                        11
                            TM




                                                                (p-c)q




Figure 1. Tax Liabilities with Full Loss Offsets

                            TAX




                                             Ps                  Cp—c)q




Figure 2. Tax Liabilities with No Loss Offsets

risk-freerate. That is, letting 11AT denote the after-tax cash flows, the value of the mine
asset is

                                            12
                                  M(p, t) = Eo    f   IIAT(p, t)e_tdt                                (10)

where     the appropriate cash-flow formulationis used depending on the loss-refund rule, and
with the stocahstic drift in p taken to be &.
                                                                     .
    The nonlinearities due to the nondifferentiable max[., and min[.,'] terms in the tax
liabilities will cause difficulties when we try to evaluate the expected value of cash flows
using the valuation rule. However, the same assumptions we adopted to develop the
valuation equation enable us to derive an everywhere differentiable, explicit function for
the expected present value of the various contingent tax liabilities. Let


                                   W(p,t, c) = Eoe' max[p — c,01                                     (11)

where Eo is the conditional expectation operator at time zero over the distribution of p.

W(p,t,c) is the market value at time zero of a claim on the greater of p(t) c and zero.
                                                                           —


Since c is known and nonstochastic,this is the same as the value of an option to pay c at
time t for an asset whose price is p(t). If p—c> Oat t, the owner of the option exercises it,
paying   and getting an asset worth p. If p — c < 0 at t, the option is "out of the money",
           c

and the owner does nothing; the option is worthless. This is the description of a European
call option; a method for finding its value and a proof of W(.,., .)' differentiability is
developed in Merton [19761.17 In the full refunds case, for example, the firm "owns a call
option on .5r of net income if p > c, and the government "owns" a similar call on .5r of
  —   c   if   >
      The explicit value of this claim is'9


                                W(p,t,c) = estpo(dj) — e_tc(d2)                                       (12)

 where


 '
 LI   For an introduction to optLons and their use in investment analysis, see Mason and Merton [1986J.
      Majd and Myers [t984] also view tax liabii.ites on stachastic income as contingent claims similar to
 '    financial options contracts.
      This formula can be calculated directly by realizing that p is distributed lognormally, and evaluating
      the integral expression for the expectation.

                                                      13
                                                +           —   s + 4]t
                                     d1= ln[po/c [r

                                     d2 = d1    —


   We can now    write an explicit formulation for the value of an existing, open mine under
either of the two corporate tax loss rules:


                  PT
  !JF(Pt) = J          (1   —
                                r)(poe   —
                                             c)e_t
                                               —
                                                   c(d2)) —   (p0et(1) — c(d2))ledt      ((13))
                        .5r[(Poe(di)


MN(p,t)   =
              f   {(POe5t_c)et_.5r[(POe(dl)
                                                                 —
                                                                     c(dZ))+(poeat(l) c(2))] }dt
                                                                                           (14)

where j3 =      and d is equal to d defined above, with = 3p substituted for p T is

the number of years required to mine the known reserves at the constant rate per year.
In the case of full refunds, the firm pays a base corporatetax rate of r, whether net income
is positive or negative. Then, if net income is positive, the firm gets back a contingent
claim equal to half of its tax liability, but the government takes a "cream-skimming" claim
equal to the difference between 50% of net income and 8% of gross revenues if price is high
enough,   p> c//3.
    When there are no loss refunds, the firm gets to keep its net income, less the base

corporate tax claim of .5r times positive net income, and less the government's "cream-
skimming" claim if p> c//3.
    Having found an explicit solution to the value of the stochastic and dynamic cash flows
of a mine, we can investigatethe effects of the tax policies on mine value, and observe how
tax policy interacts with uncertainty.
                                                       14
   Effect of Tax Policy Changes on Asset Value
   Consider first the corporate tax with full loss refunds.

Result     1.   If the expected   discounted pre-tax profits      of the mine are positive (negative),
then an increasein the (symmetric) corporate tax rate will lower (raise) the value of the
mine.

Proof. Differentiating(13) with respect to r and rearranging,


                dMF =
                         1T { —(p0et
                                            —
                                                cert)q + .5q [W(p, t, c)      W(,t, c)] }dt              (15)

Period-by-period,the integrand must be negative if expected period profits, (p0e— —
        are positive, and conversely.20 The result follows by taking the integral over the

life of   the mine.1

    The result is fairly intuitive. Equation (15) shows that the effect of a corporatetax rate
increase is to raise the magnitude of ordinary tax payments (the first term), and also to
raise the value of the PDA subsidy to the firm (the second term). Since the PDA subsidy
in a given year can never be larger than the a fraction (50%) of the ordinarytax liability,
the first effect dominates. An increase in the tax rate will              only benefit mines      which are
expected to lose money, since loss refunds will provide a net subsidy to the firm, and the
subsidy will increase.
   It is straightforwardto show that an increase in the corporate tax rate always decreases
the value of a mine when there are no loss refunds. In this case, the ordinarytax payments
increase, and the value of the PDA subsidy increases, but by a proportionately smaller
amount. Since only positive taxes are ever paid, the net effect must be to reduce the
discounted present value of cash flows, and mine value decreases.

    Similarly, we can calculate the comparative static for mine value as the PDA rate
changes.

 20 This is true because the
                             upper limit on W(p, t, c) is equal to expected period profits, and the lower limit
    on W(, i, c) is zero so the difference can never be as great as twice expected profits. By examination,
    the difference is always positive.

                                                      15
Result 2. The value of a mine is strictly increasing in the percentage depletionallowance
rate.

Proof. For the case with full loss refunds,

                                    j]I4F —      [TaW(ftt)                                           (16
                                     dS         Jo        35
Since   = (')p, the sign on        the partial derivative in the integrand is the opposite of
the sign of      The value of a European call is increasing in the price of the underlying
asset;21 the result follows directly.I

    The intuition for this result can he easily seen by looking at Figure (1). Increasing
the PDA rate raises the critical value, p", and lowers the slope of the "cream-skimming"
region. Thus, tax liabilities will be weakly lower in all states of the world, and strictly
lower when price is high enough. The government's "cream-skimming" is reduced, making
the tax liability function less convex; loosely speaking, reducingthe convexity of a function
decreases its expected value.
   The same result is easily derived for the case of no loss refunds, since the PDA subsidy
is only operative when net income is positive.22
    Another way to see the role of uncertainty when evaluating the FDA is to consider
the difference between the equilibrium (market) value of the subsidy and the value of the
subsidygiven an expected price forecast. A naive evaluation ofthe tax policy might use the
latter approach, first forecasting an expected price path, and then, given expected output
prices, calculate the value of the subsidy. These are the type of calculations prepared
by the U.S. Treasury Department.23 However, since the FDA is a nonlinear function of
stochastic revenues, this approach violates Jensen's Inequality.
21 See,
        e.g. Black and Scholes [1973].
22 That the PDA
                    always increases asset value depends importantly on the details of the tax code. If the
   law required firms to deduct tax-loss carryforwards from taxable income before the PDA's 50% of net
   income limitation ie calculated, then the value of marginal mince—those whose aeeet value is nearly
   serb without a PDA—will be decreased by the PDA. Since this change generally lowers the tax rate
   on Ion refunds to Sc, this PDA rule essentially lowers a nondietortionary cash-flow tax on gains and
   losses to Sc, whilegiving the government a cream-skimmingcontingent claim. Lowering the cash-flow
   tax rate has little effect on marginal asset values, but adding the cream-skmming claim lowers asset
   values. This case is worked out in greater detail in MacKie-Mason [1984a[.
23 See, e.g., Clark
                    [1985[.

                                                     16
   It is easy to see that the value of the FDA subsidy to firms is actually less than the
value calculated by the erroneous method. This can be seen in Figure (i). Since the FDA
convexifies the government's tax claim on stochastic revenues, the following relationship
can be shown:


                                     E[TAX(p)]> TAX(E[pj)                                             (17)

The government gets the "cream-skimming" claim when a mine pays off well, but doesn't
give anything extra back to the firm when revenues are low.
    We now summarize the effects of the FDA on asset value. The realized value of the
subsidy is greater as the quasi-rents on a project are greater; i.e., the subsidy increases
with realized net income. The subsidy has the smallest effect on the asset value of projects
which are marginal. In this sense, it can be said that the FDA is primarily a windfall
subsidy to inframarginal projects. Further, the economic value of the subsidy is less than
calculations which ignore uncertainty suggest, because if prices fortuitously increase, the
government skims the cream off the project.
    The Effect of Risk on the FDA Subsidy
    In recent years, the FDA subsidy has been justified          as   a mechanism for compensating
firms for the riskiness of mining, and for providing incentives for investment in mining.24
Although there are many different sources and types of risk associated with mining in-
vestments, one of the most important is price risk.25 We will consider here how increases
in price risk affect the value of the FDA subsidy; in Section 4 we investigate the effect of
increasing risk on optimal investment decisions.
    Whether losses are fully refunded or not, we obtain the following result:
Result    3.   if project value is non-increasingin price risk without the FDA, then for suffi-
ciently profitableprojects (i.e., P0 — c large enough), the FDA subsidy decreases                as   price
risk increases.

By the FDA subsidy, we mean the equilibrium value of the difference between future taxes
paid with and without a FDA. We will discuss "sufficiently profitable" below.
 24 See footnote 1.
 25 Bodie and
               Rosaneky [1980] report annual standard deviations in futures prices for several minerals of
    25—50%.


                                                    17
Proof. (For full tax loss refunds.) Differentiating the function giving a mine's value, (13),
by the instantaneous variance of the price process yields2°

                 3M"(p,t) = 3M"° +
                                                                                 (d2)] dt
                                                                            —                          (18)
                                                 .flrcfTe_, {(d2)
where:

                                         1—   r + .5r1'(T)
                                               1—r

                             (T) =
                                         f'trfl,       {s(d1)
                                                                —
                                                                    fl(21)] dt
                                                   gtcutprdt
and M"0 indicates the value         of   the mine without a PDA. (The derivation is straightfor-
ward, but tedious; see MacKie.-Mason j1984J.)
   Since d1 > d, < 1 and             is bounded above by unity, we have 0 C IT(T) <
                                     (.)
Thus, -y > 1, and the first term of (18) is a multiplier on the aversion to risk without a
PDA. Since     1)is the gaussian pdf, for Po > c sufficiently, the second expression in (18) is

also negative, and the decline in value of the mine is greater with a PDA than without. I

     With full loss refunds, the firm pays the ordinaryincome tax, but receives in return the
 difference between two contingentclaims (see equation (13) and Figure 1). By assumption,
 the value of the ordinary tax claim is not decreasing in risk (the firm is not price-risk
 loving). The convexity of the claims causes their value (to the firm and the government,
 respectively) to increase in risk.
     If the initial margin, (P0 — c), is low, then increased risk increases the probabilityof a
 project obtaining the FDA at all, since there is no subsidy if net income is negative. In
 this case, the increase in the value of the firm's contingent claim dominates, and the PDA
 subsidy may be increasing in risk (i.e., if the second term in (18) is big enough to dominate
 the multiplier, -y).

     Although Rothschild and Stiglits (1970j show that in general variance is not a sufficient proxy      for
     riskiness, Merton [1973a] has shown that when the stochastic process is Ito, the instantaneous variaoce
     is consistent with the Rothschild-Stiglitz definition.
  27 We have been assuming that investment opportunities are constant through time, so that & aod r
      (hence s) are constants over time. If the signs on j.&3r could change over time, then r < 0 is possible.
      However, the requirement that 4° C 0 imposes restrictions on             that make this unlikely.

                                                      18
   However, if the margin is higher, then an increase in risk primarilyincreases the proba-
bilitiy of government "cream-skimming"; i.e., the increase in the value of the government's
contingent claim dominates. Then, the PDA subsidy decreases with price risk, because
-y > 1 and the second term is negative.

   So far, we have only considered mines which are already open and operating, and have
assumed that the mine will continue operatinguntil exhausted,regardless of profitability.
Supposemineoperators have an option to temporarilyshut down, or permanentlyabandon
a mine if prices fall too far. Then, we can expect a selection process which results in the
portfolio of prnductive mines being weighted towards those with higher margins, ceteris
paribus. In fact, in numericalsimulations in which project value is nonincreasing in risk, we
find that when a mine has sufficiently high expected profits to remain open and operating,
the value of the PDA subsidy declines in price risk. This gives some content to the phrase,
"sufficiently profitable": in our calculations, the value of the PDA was decreasing in price
risk for any mines sufficiently profitable to be open.

RISKY INVESTMENT IEC1SIONS
  In this section, we show how the methods described can be extended to the analysis               of
optimal risky investment decisions. We then investigate, both analytically and numerically,
the effect of a corporate income tax and a percentagedepletionallowance on risky mining
investment decisions.     In the numerical examples, we also generalize the description of the
operating options available to a mining firm, to increase the realism of the model.
   Discussion of the Investment Decision
   Consider a firm which owns the right to exploit the mineral resources in a particular
property, and that it costs I to put this property into production. We call the value of
this (lease) right L(p,I,t,T), where T is the date on which the right expires. That is, at
a price I the firm can buy a producing mine, worth M(p,R,t;t4), with R total reserves,
and operating policy options •28 We continue to assume that reserves are known and
fixed, so we suppress the argument, R; we also assume for simplicity that the right never
expires, so   T is infinite.
 28 Thie
         approach to modeling the inveetrnent in a mine haa alao been adopted by Brennan and SchwartE
    [1986].

                                                 19
   For our problem, it is easy to show     that there must be some critical initial resource
price, p, above which it is optimal for the firm to invest immediately, and below which it
is preferable to wait in anticipation of higher prices. Market equilibriumwill require that


                                   L(p*,t) = Jt4(p*             —   I                      (19)

Since the firm is free to optimally choose the price at which it will invest, we also know
that the following marginal condition is necessary (see Merton 11973a1):


                                    L(p,t) = Mp(p,t;t,b)                                    (20)

The fundamentalvaluation result from Section 2 requires that L also satisfy the following
ordinary differential equation (for a lease right that never expires):


                                  a2p2Lpp+                —   rL = 0

The solution to the valuationproblem (21) is



                            L =ap5

                                 _(&_c)+[(a_ç)+2ra2]l                                       (L2)

where a and pt are determinedby the necessary conditions                (19)   and (20).
    Before we present the results of some numerical simulations, we again consider our
simple analyticalexample of a minewhich, once open, continues producing until all reserves
are exhausted. We substitute (Li) into (19) and (20), solve (20) for a, and substitute into
 (19), arriving at (for the full loss offsets case)



   0   =A=   —fl
             b 1
              b   /
                 Jo
                          {(i — r) + .5r[4'(di) _fl4(d1)]}etdt
                                        —
                                            q Jo/rT {(1   —
                                                              r) + .5r{(d2) — (d2)]}e'1dt ((22))

                                                  20
   To find the effect    of various   tax parameters on the optimal investment decision, we
apply the Implicit Function Theoremto differentiate (22). The resulting expressions are
complicatedso we discuss some of the results without presenting the calculations.
   The optimal investment price is determined on the basis of two values. First, paying
the investment price buys the firm a producing mine, which has an asset value. If the
value of a producing mine, M, is greater than the investment cost, I, the investment is
potentially desirable.
   At the same time, the output price of the project is stochasticaliy changing; typically
we assume an upward drift in price, consistent with a stochastic Hotelling equilibrium,
such as    that derived in Pindyck
                               [19801. There is some probability that a producing mine
will be worth more if production commences tomorrow instead of today; thus there is a
value to waiting, or speculating against an abnormally high increase in the production
value. The optimal investment price balances the returns to waiting against the profit
available from commencing production immediately. For example, if the current price is
Pt < p,  then the value of the lease right is maximized by waiting for price to increase to
at least   p before investing in productionfacilities.2
   The effects of tax policy on the optimal investment decision are most easily inter-
preted by describing their impact on the value of waiting and the current profitability
of production. By implicitly differentiating (22), the following surprising results can be
demonstrated:

Result 4. Increasing the rate of corporate income taxation, r, can encourage investment,
by lowering the optimal critical investment price,     p.
Result 5. Increasing the rate of the percentage depletion deduction,           5, can   discourage
investment.

   To describe the first result — that increasing the corporate tax rate may encourage in-
vestment — consider a mineral for which the expected rate of (risk-adju d) price growth,

20 Waiting can be
                  optimal, for example, in an industry equilibrium with low-cost and high-cost imnes.
   The low coot mines will be developed first, and the high-cost projects later.

                                                21
Er is relatively high compared to the risk-free return, r.30 When the rate of price growth
is high, the return to waiting is relatively high, and the optimal investment price will be
substantially above the minimal price required to break even on immediate production.
An increase in the corporate tax rate decreases the expected compensation for the risk
associated with waiting, and the firm is not willing to wait as long before investing in a
profitableproject.3' Thus, even though the value of both the lease right and a producing
mine fall as the corporate tax rate increases, investment may be encouraged because the
value of productionnow has risen relative to the value of waiting to produce in the future.
    The second result is illustrated by a different case. Suppose that the risk-adjusted rate
of price growth is relatively low, and the riskiness of price (a2) is also low. It is then
possible that an increase in the PDA will actually discourage investment, by raising the
critical investment price which leads firms to delay production.
     When   & is   low, there is not much gain from waiting to invest; discountingerodes most
of the return. In such a case, the optimal investment price will be quite close to the minimal
price required to yield an expected profit equal to the required return on the investment
cost.
   Consider Figure 3. When the FDA is increased, the kink in the tax function is moved
outward (the higher S means that the 50% of net income limitation becomes binding at
higher prices). In Figure 3, the old optimal investment price now falls below the kink.
With the higher PDA, if the firm waits to invest, its expected marginal tax rate on higher
 prices will be substantially lower than with the lower PDA, and the expected return to
 waiting is correspondingly higher. At the low optimal investment price, the firm will not
 make much profit from immediate production, so little is lost by waiting longer to invest
 to take advantage of the lower tax rate on higher expected future prices.
     The interactionbetween un...ertainty and the nonlinearity of the tax system is important
 in these cases. For instance, in the second example, if price risk is not low, then although
 ° That is, the    "convenience yield" on the mineral (p = r — a)—the equilibrium return to holding the
     mineral now, rather than a futures contract for the mineral — is relatively low, so that most of the
     equilibrium retum to owning the mineral asset is from market price growth.
     The immediate profitability of investment is of course also diminished, hut when the value to waiting
     is high, profits—quasi-rents—arerelatively high at the optimal investment price, and are still high
     enough to justify investment even after the tax increase and the lowering of the critical price.

                                                    22
                             TAX




                                                                      (p-c)q




Figure 3. An Increase in the PDA can Discourage Investment
it is more likely that the firm will get higher future PDA deductions, it also is more likely
that the project will end up earning losses. The result is that the increased value of waiting
from a higher PDA is discountedat a higher rate due to the uncertainty of obtaining the
benefits of the lower tax liabilities, and the increase in the value of immediateproduction
may now dominate, leading to greater investment, rather than lower investment.
   Nurner;ta! Stmulation.s
    Evaluating risky investmentdecisions is a complicatedproblem,especially when taxes
introduce nonlinearities into cash flows, and when the project is long-lived, with dynamic
uncertainty. It will generally be extremely difficult to analytically evaluate the effects of
        tax policies, or operating options. The analyses presented above were only feasible
different
because we made severe simplificationsin the specification of the mining project and the
investment decision.
    When more complex conditions are incorporated in the problem, the valuation method
described in this paper can be applied numerically. The general method requires the solu-
tion to the stochastic Bellmanpartial differential equation, as in (5), subject to appropriate
boundary conditions. The Bellman equation falls into the class of parabolic partial dif-
                                              23
ferential equations; numerical solution methods are well-developed for problems in two
and even three dimensions. Similarproblems are quite regularlysolved in finance applica-
tions; see, e.g., Geske and Shastri [1985], and Mason         [1979]   for presentations
                                                                                      of numerical
methods.
    There will be situations in which even the numerical solution of the Bellman equation
will be infeasible. For instance, if we were to correctly model corporate income tax loss
carryforwards, one of the stochastic state variables on which asset value depended would
be the carryforward. In general, it will not be possible to specify a terminal boundary for
this state variable; a known terminal boundary is necessary for the backwards recursion
solution methods usually applied. However, a Monte Carlo approach may be feasible in
some such problems. The Monte Carlo method uses a forward solution, simulating the
sample paths of the stochastic state variables, and valuing the asset over a large sample
of such simulations. This approach is possible because of the "expected value equivalent"

approach outlined in Section 2 above.32
    We present some results of numerical evaluations in order to demonstratethe feasibility
of the valuation method for certain types of problem. We consider an investment in an oil
field. Assumptions about production, costs, and rates of return are based on Lund's [1987]
 analysis of typical North Sea oil fields.33 The main assumptions are presented in Table 1.
    Althoughwe assume that field output is fixed if producing,we allow the firm to tem-
 porarily halt production if prices fall sufficiently, and to restart production if prices rise.
 Shutdown and reopening have a fixed cost; in addition, maintaining a field during the
dormant period also has a (flow) cost. The firm can abandon a field altogether at zero
cost, but abandoned fields are never worth reopening.
    We present some representativeresults in Tables 2, 3 and 4; Table 2 assumes that loss
offsets are immediate, and Table 3 that tax losses are never refunded. Table 4 presents

    Lund [1987] uses a Monte Carlo method to value different Norwegian tax policies on offshore oil
    development.
 33
    Although these assumptions may not be particularly representative of U.S. production fields, Lmd's
    numbers are carefully derived and calibrated. They suffice for the illustrative purposes of our simula-
    tions. The valuations can be determined when costs and output are known but changing over time, as
    in Lund [1987], but the qualitative results are unaffected by this additional complication. The invest-
    ment cost is only $500 million instead of $700 million in Lund's paper, because the optimal investment
    price was implausibly high for $700 MM. This is not surprising, since we assume that lease rights last
    forever, when in fact they typically expire after a few years, thus lowering the relum to waiting.

                                                    24
the value of the PDA subsidy for a few cases with full loss offsets. We consider several
different combinationsof the depletion allowance rate, the riskiness of the output price
path, and the convenience yield on oil.34
   The numerical calculations reinforce the earlier results. Consider Table 2 (symmetric
taxation). The prices p are the minimal prices required for initial investment in the field
to be optimal. For all three combinations of risk and convenience yield presented, the
minimal investment price decreases as the FDA rate increases; the FDA encourages large
investments.
    On the other hand, at lower prices, when current production is marginally profitable,
the FDA can discourage productiveinvestments. For example, in most cases an increase in
the FDA leads to a higher required price before it is optimal to make the fixed cost invest-
ment in reopening a closed field. Similarly, increases in the PDA increase the likelihood
that firms will "disinvest", by temporarily halting production of operating fields.
    Table 4 demonstratesthat the FDA provides substantial inframarginal rents, evenwhile
encouraging investment at the margin. The FDA subsidy (for 5 = 22%) when output price
is $30 per barrel is $538 million for a field with "low costs." The subsidy at a price of
$3.53 per barrel, essentially equal to marginal cost,       is   only $36 million for a low-cost mine.
Viewed another way,      the subsidy at $30/bbl for a "high-cost"          field (say, a "deep oil",   a
tertiary-recovery, or a "heavy     oil" field) is only $276 million;     about half the subsidy to a
low-cost, inframarginal project.

Conclusion
    We have shown how to use         a stochastic model of intertemporal asset valuation to
analyze the effects of tax policies on both asset values and risky investment decisions. In the
continuons time framework employed, it is relatively straightforward to model nonlinear
or asymmetric tax policies of a sort often encountered; viz., taxes involving kinks, or
contingent marginal tax rates.
    Analysis of the effects of a corporateincome tax with a percentagedepletionallowance
on the value of mines and decisions to invest in mines provided some interesting results.

    The convenienceyield is p in our earlier notation, which determines the risk-adjusted rate of expected
    price growth, & = r — p.

                                                   25
These taxes have   the expected effects on asset values, but the distortion to investment
decisions can be surprising. The risky investment decision involves a trade-offbetween the
current expected profitabilityof a mine, and the expected return from waiting until output
prices are higher. It is possible that an increase in the corporate tax rate will encourage
investment, by reducing the value of waiting to invest relatively more than the reduction
in immediate profitability. Similarly, an increase in the PDA subsidy may discourage
investment, by increasing the relative return to waiting.
    The importanceof interactionsbetween uncertaintyand nonlinear taxes was also illus-
trated by observing that a calculation of the FDA subsidy to a project which ignores these
interactions will overestimate the value of the subsidy.
    Numerical examples were calculated to illustrate the feasibility of the method for rela-
tively complicateddynamic investment and management problems. The numerical exam-
ples emphasized the comparative static results by presenting cases in which large, initial
production investments in a property would be encouraged by the FDA, but smaller,
"operating" investments would be discouraged (i.e, shutdown would be encouraged, and
re-opening   a closed mine would be discouraged).
   All of the analysis in this paper has been of partial equilibrium effects; in particular,
the exogenous stochastic price path was unaffected by tax changes. Such an analysis is
appropriate for the tax policies of a country in which production of the mineral is small
relativeto world output. In a Hotelling-type stochastic general equilibrium model,MacKie-
Mason [1984b] has found that a PDA offered to all firms in an industry tends to increase
exploration efforts, but also to lower output prices and increase consumption rates. The
effect on total ultimate recovery is ambiguous; in general, the PDA may or may not be a
 conservationistpolicy.35
    Two other recent papers ar. concerned with valuing mining assets and investment deci-
 sions. Brennan and Schwartz [1986] apply a valuation method derived from a no-arbitrage
 condition in securities markets. Their approach requires that futures contracts for the
 commodity be traded with maturities spanning the time horizon of the investment. Since

    This model involved somewhat different cost and geological assumptions so the results are not directly
    comparable to those in the present paper.

                                                   26
minerals futures are generally oniy traded with maturities of one year or less, applications
require restrictive assumptions quite similar to those of the asset pricing equilibrium ap-
proach employed in this paper. Brennan and Schwartz [1986] illustrate how to incorporate
some taxes in the analysis, but do not investigate the effect of any tax policies on asset
values or investment and operating decisions.
   Lund [1987] uses Monte Carlo techniques to solve a contingent valuation problem for
investments in North Sea oil fields. his analysis emphasizes the effects of the existing
Norwegian  tax system on the scale of development for an already discovered held. He does
not consider the effects of changing tax policies.
   Considerable interest has arisen in the application of models of intertemporal asset
pricing,as developed in finance literature, to problems of "real" investment. This paper has
taken such an approach to the analysis of tax policy effects on asset values and investment
and operating decisions, demonstratingboth the analytical and numerical tractability of
the method for at least some problems. The interesting new results on tax effects show
promise for the use of the methods to study other economic problems.




                                             27
   REFERENCES




Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973) "The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities," Jour-
   nal of Political Economy, 81, 637—654.
Bodie, Z. and Rosansky, V. I. (1980) "Risk and Return in Commodity Futures," Financial
   Anal ysts Journal, 36, 27—40.
Brennan, M. J. and E. S. Schwartz (1978) "Finite Difference Methodsand Jump Processes
   Arising in the Pricing of Contingent Claims: A Synthesis,' Journal of Financial and
    QuantitativeAnalysis, , 461—474.
Brennan, M. J. and E. S. Schwartz (1985) "Evaluating Natural Resource Investments,"
   Journal of Business, 58, 135—157.
Bulow, .1. and L. H. Summers (1984) "The Taxation of Risky Assets," Journal of Political
    Economy, 92, 20—39.
]3urness, S. H. (1976) "On the Taxation of Nonreplenishable Resources," Journal of Envi-
    ronrnental Economics and Management, 3,
Clark, T. B. (1985) "Retreatingto Tax Reform," National Journal, , 1267, 1298—1312.
Constantinides,G. M. (1978) "Market Risk Adjustment in Project Valuation," Journal of
   Finance, 33, 603—616.
Dasgupta, P. and G. M. Heal (1979) Economic Theory and Exhaustible Resources. Oxford:
   CambridgeUniversity Press.
Gamponia, V. and R. Mendelsohn (1985) "The Taxation of Exhaustible Resources," Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 100, 165—182.
Garnaut, R. and A. Clunies-Ross (1975) "Uncertainty, Risk Aversion and the Taxing of
  Natural Resource Projects," Economic Journal, 85, 272—287.
Geske, R. and K. Shastri (1985) "Valuation by Approximation: A Comparison of Alter-
  native Option Valuation Techniques," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
    20, 45—71.
Glen, M. (1985) "Heavy Lobbyg and Partisan Politicking May Save Oil Industry Tax
   Preferences," National Journal, , 1008—1012.
Gordon, R. (1985) "Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Revenues versus Tax
   Distortions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100, 1—27.
Gordon, R. and J. D. Wilson (1986) "Measuring the Efficiency Cost of Taxing Risky
   Capital Income," NBER Working Paper #1992.


                                           28
Hotelling, H. (1931) "The Economics of Exhaustible Resources," Journal of Political Econ-
   orny, 39, 137—175.
Lund, D (1987) "Investment, Taxes, and Uncertainty, with Applications to the Norwegian
   PetroleumSector," Memorandum No. 1, Departmentof Economics, University of Oslo,
   Norway.
MacKie-Mason, J. (1984) "Effects of Federal Tax Policy on Optimal Consumption and
   ExplorationPlans for Exhaustible Natural Resources," Working paper.
MacKie-Mason, J. K. (1984) "Nonlinear Tax Policies and the Risk-Taking Behavior of
   Firms," Chapter 1, Ph. D. dissertation, MIT.
Majd, S. and S. C. Myers (1984) "Valuing the Government's Tax Claim on Risky Assets,"
   Working Paper, Sloan School of Management, MIT.
Mason, S. P. (1979) "The Numerical Analysis of Risky Coupon Bond Contracts," Harvard
  Business School Working Paper, #79-35.
Mason, S. P. and R. C. Merton (1986) "The Role of Contingent Claims Analysis in Cor-
  porate Finance," in Recent Advances in Corporate Finance, ed. Altman, A. and M.
  Subrahmanyam. : , 8—61.
Merton, R. C. (1973) "An Intertemporal CAPM," Econorrietrica, 41, 867—887.
Merton, R. C. (1973) "Theory of Rational Option Pricing," Bell Journal of Economics, 4,
   141—183.
Merton, R. C. (1981) "On the Mathematics and Economic Assumptions of Continuous
   Time Models," in Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner, ed. Sharpe,
   W. F.. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Merton, R. C. (1976) "On the Pricing of Contingent Claims and the Modigliani-Miller
   Theorem," Journal of Financial Economics, 5, 241—250.
Pindyck, R. S. (1980) 'Uncertainty and Exhaustible Resource Markets," Journal of Polit-
   ical Economy, 88, 1203—1225.
Rothschild, M. and J. E. Stiglitz (1970) "Increasing Risk I: A Definition," Journal of
   Economic Theory, 2, 225—243.
Virmani, A. (1986) "Efficiency of Tax-Contract Policies for Natural ResourceRent Collec-
   tion," World Bank Working Paper, AVD/QJE-008/08.25.86.




                                            29
                                              TABLE     I
                  Assumptionsfor NumericalValuation!of Oil Field
              Costs
              Annual maintenance if closed:               $5 million
                         of
              Unit cost production:                       $3.51/bbl
              Coat of opening or closing existing field:  $1 million
              Initial investment cost:                   $500 million

               Taxes
               Corporate income tax rate:                                   50%
               Percentage depletionallowance rate:                      varies
               Tax treatment of losses:                                 varies

                 Prices and Production
                 Real interest rate:                                     3%
                 Convenience yield (,z = r — &):                        varies
                 Instantaneous price variance:                          varies
                 Maximum reserves:                                 226.1 million bbl
                 Maximum annualextraction rate:                     13.3 million bbl




                                                 TABLE 2
          Asset Values and Investment Decisions: Full Loss Offsets
______-_______________ (Field Valtiesin Million £)
       PDA Rate (6)          p    V0(p) p 'Vo(p)                   V0(p)      —
 Case 1:     2
          = .0685, e = .04
           0%               21.46 1460.6 3.83      70.2    2.62     13.4

                   15%                   18.92     1482.8   4.00    107.5     2.98     39.8
                   22%                   17.39     1435.6   4.17    130.5     3.11     52.5


Case     2   tr = .137, s = .04
                    0%                   30.02 2179.7       4.73    158.5     3.24      68.1
                   15%                   26.47 2210.9       4.54    186.4     3.24      91.1
                   22%                   24.34     2146.0   4.73    218.4     3.38     109.4

 Case 3:     y2   = .137, s = .08
                       0%                24.34     1225.2   3.68     42.3     2.22       2.5

                   15%               21.46 1241.5 3.83 64.4 2.63                       15.7
                   22%               20.57 1263.2 3.83 70.0 2.63                       17.6
 Notes: (p          p) p,
                        are prices  at which  it is optimal to make the initial investment in
 the field, re-open a dosed but developedfield, or dose an operating field, respectively. V0(.)

 is the value of a developed field if open (operating); V() is the value of a developed

 field   which    is   not producing (ahuidown).
                                    TABLE 3
             Asset Values and Investment Decisions: No Lou Offsets
                             (FIdd Values in Milhin £)
          PDA Rate (6)            p      V0(p)     p   V(p) p V0(p")
  Case .1: (72 = .0685, z = .04
                0%               21.46 1460.3 4.00      78.3 3.11  30.4
               15%               18.92 1482.8 4,17 119.1 3.38      62.4
               22%               17.39 1435.4 4.17 129.7 3.24      59.5

  Case   2        = .137, = .04
                  0%              30.02   2179.4   4.73   158.0   3.38   75.0
                  15%             26.47   2210.5   4.73   201.1   3.53   109.6
                  22%             24.34   2145.7   4.73   218.2   3.53   110.1

  Notes: See Table 2

                                 TABLE 4
                   Value of the PDA Subsidy (million $)
                                  PDA SubsidyValue (6 = 22% vs. 5 = 0%)
"Low Cost" Field (c = $3.51/bbl)
             P0= $30/bbl                                  538.3
               =
             P0 $3.53/bbl                                  36.6

"High Cost" Field (c = $25/bbl)
        P0 = $30/bbl                                      275.6
Notes: These valuaiions assume 2 = .1369 and z = .04.
