                           NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT AND INTERPRETATION
                               OF SAVING AND WEALTH




                               Michael J. Boskin




                            Working Paper No. 2633




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 1988




I would like to thank participants at the 50th Anniversary Conference on
Research on Income and Wealth, especially the discussants and panelists, for
many valuable suggestions and the National Bureau of Economic Research and
the Stanford Center for Economic Policy Research for financial support. This
research is part of NEER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed re those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
EconoEnic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2633
                                       June 1988


               ISSUES IN THE MEASUREMENT AND INTERPRETATION
                           OF SAVING AND WEALTH

    Alternative measures of saving are developed and compared to the

traditional NIPA estimates. Various data sources and estimation

methodologies all conclude that adJustments for net saving in durables,

government capital, capital gains and losses, and revaluations are

substantial. For example, government capital and durables adjustments raise

the NIPA estimate of net national saving in 1985 from 4.7% to 8.8%.

     New estimates of saving, developed and measured as the change in

real net worth based on data from the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds

National Balance Sheets, differ substantially from the NIPA estimates. For

example, in 1986 and 1987, the NIPA net national saving measure is 1.8% and

1.9%, respectively, whereas my corresponding estimates from FED data are

11.5% and 3.3%. My new estimates of net private saving from FED data

average 6.5% for the period 1981-87, versus 11.3% for the 1951-80 period.

Net national saving has fallen even further, from an average of 11.2% in

1951-80 to 3.2% in 1981-87. correspondingly, real private net worth reached

13.4 trillion (in constant 1982 dollars) by 1987, but its rate of growth

slowed in the period 1979-87 relative to the postwar average.

     Various conceptual and measurement issues are discussed. Most

important are 1) the appropriate level of aggregation across households of

different age and type, sectors of the economy, and types of assets, and 2)

improved measures of personal income to include as much currently unrecorded

income as possible.

                                        Michael J. Boskin
                                        NBER
                                        204 Junipero Serra Blvd.
                                        Stanford, CA 94305 USA
                                        (415) 326-5682
1.   Introduction

     The saving and wealth accumulation behavior of an economy reveal much

about it, as they reflect preferences, incentives, institutions, and

demographics. However, there are numerous measurement and interpretation

issues surrounding data on, adjusted measures of, and empirical analyses

about postwar U.S. saving and wealth. It is by now well known, and

considered conventional wisdom, that the U.S. postwar saving rate is low by

international standards, and has fallen since the 1950s and 1960s, This

"conventional wisdom" sterns primarily from the traditional National Income

and Product Account measures of gross and net private and national saving in

the United States.

     There are, however, other sources for measuring saving, and reasons to

believe the NIPA saving figures are the beginning, not the end, of the

story. Serious conceptual and measurement issues, ranging from the

comprehensiveness of the definition of saving to important details

concerning deflators, as well as a host of other matters, remain unresolved.

Since its inception, the Conference on Research on Income and Wealth has

devoted a nontrivial fraction of its efforts to dealing with these and

related issues, as have numerous other studies in the last decade, including

some of my own, conducted by and for the National Bureau of Economic

Research.

     In the first three Conference on Research in Income and Wealth volumes,

saving and wealth were prominent features. Issues I discuss below were

discussed even then: the treatment of capital gains and losses in the NIPA,

inflation and inventory valuation adjustments, real corporate profits. In

volume one, measuring national wealth, including valuation problems,

government product; in volume two, capital gains and alternative definitions

of saving; in volume three, alternative definitions and methods of measuring



                                      I
saving and its components. The talent mobilized to work on these issues in

the 1930s was impressive, and included Simon Kuznets, Raymond Goldsmith,

Milton Friedman, Gottfried Haberler and Solomon Fabricant, among many

others.

     Since a complete review of that literature would comprise a lengthy

paper itself, suffice it to say that the last Conference on Research in

Income and Wealth was devoted to issues in measuring saving and investment.

The forthcoming Conference voluxne1 contains a large number of important,

novel, and useful papers, many of which contain partial surveys of their

respective subfields within the general area of study.

     It is no coincidence that the most famous book ever written in

economics, Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations, bore its title. For 200 years,

issues concerning the measurement, positive analysis of, and normative

prescriptions for increasing, national wealth have been an important

component of the economics profession.

     These concerns about the economic Costs and benefits of saving also

have an interesting and checkered history (see L. Klein, 1986). Polonius'

advice was, "Neither a borrower nor a lender be." Benjamin Franklin's quip

that "a penny saved is a penny earned" is perhaps the most often-quoted

schoolboy maxim concerning the benefits of thrift, but in the middle third

of this century, it gave way to the Keynesian notion that spending might be

insufficient to support full employment. Keynes and the postwar

stagnationists were deeply concerned that insufficient spending would lead

to chronic and massive unemployment, so they argued for policies designed to




1. Lipsey and Tice (1988).




                                      2
soak up excess saving. While it is not my purpose here to present my own or

a summary of other views concerning this Keynesian proposition, suffice it

to say that the force of that argument has been mitigated considerably by

recent analytical and empirical research in economics, and that at best, it

is a weak and temporary proposition.

     It is obvious, however, that we could save too much. In order to save

more, we must forego current consumption. Therefore, individuals and

societies must somehow balance the benefits of increased consumption in the

future against the cost of foregone consumption opportunities today. To

show how full circle we have come, the current Chairman of the Federal

Reserve Board, Alan Greenspan, has been calling for the federal government

to run a budget surplus on average, primarily to compensate for what he

regards as a chronicly low saving rate.

     That we save too little as a nation appears to be a widespread view

among economists. Some refer to the apparent (usually measured by the NIPA

saving figures) historical decline in the saving rate, as well as the better

aggregate performance of the U.S. economy in the l950s and 1960s then

subsequently. Whether the low saving rate is a cause of the subsequent

deterioration of the economy's performance or an effect thereof, or both, is

generally left unspecified.

     Others bemoan the low U.S. saving rate relative to other countries. It

is clear that saving in the United States, as conventionally measured, is

below that of other advanced economies. While we will discuss below

extended measures of saving that suggest that the traditional measures

probably overstate this difference, it is still substantial. When I was a

graduate student, it was common to argue that it was reasonable for the

United States to have a much lower saving rate than other economies because

we were so much richer than they, they were saving rapidly to try to catch



                                       3
up and to finance the rebuilding of their infrastructure after the

devastation from World War II (although why this was still going on in the

l970s suggests convenient arguments die slowly). The rate of growth of GNP

in many of these other economies exceeded that of the United States and our

lower saving and investment rates were often singled out for a non-trivial

share of the blame.

     Recently, a new argument has claimed that the major problem with our

low private and even lower national saving rate is that it falls

substantially below our rate of net investment. The low investment rate is

assumed to be one cause of slow productivity growth, and is itself

substantially below the investment rates of most other advanced economies.

We appear to be unwilling to see the investment rate fall to the still lower

rate of net national saving. This leads us to rely on historically large

imports of foreign capital to finance a substantial fraction of our net

investment and a modest fraction of our gross investment. If this continues

for very long, it would imply an explosive growth of external debt and

concomitant adjustment problems later on.

     My own view of the relationship of domestic saving and investment is

that they are indeed eventually linked. In the short and medium run, there

is no necessary tie between domestic investment and saving, as capital is

internationally quite mobile, at least over a modest fraction of the saving

of any society. Eventually, however, an advanced economy such as the United

States will need to finance its own domestic investment. This implies that

in the long-run domestic investment will be constrained by the available

supply of private saving and gives some force to the concern about an

apparently low private saving rate.

     There is thus ample reason to be concerned about the measurement,




                                      4
interpretation, evolution, and analysis of saving and wealth in the postwar

United States. Saving behavior may well be linked to our long-term growth

as well as potentially to our short-run stability. As interesting as these

analytical and empirical issues are (see Boskin (1988) and Bernheim (1987)

for a discussion of sc .e of these issues), my goal here is much more modest.

Having raised these issues, I present a brief survey of some important

issues in the definition and measurement of saving. I also present some

selected recent results, identify some substantial progress made, and

present some sugesstions for future avenues of research.   I do not have the

time or space, nor is it my comparative advantage given the other

participants and papers in this conference and previous conferences on

income and wealth, to go into great technical detail concerning many of the

issues raised. For that, the interested reader is referred to some

references.

     Toward this end, Section 2 discusses definitions, measures, and sources

of information concerning saving and wealth, and their relationship to

theories of saving and consumption. It briefly mentions some of the

potential problems, such as sampling error, measurement error, and various

data sources. After a brief discussion of the NIPA saving figures, the

Federal Reserve Flow of Funds, household surveys, an1 the estate tax data,

it turns to the definition of saving for an individual, a sector, and a

nation.   It discusses the Keynesian emphasis on short-run flows, the

lifecycle permanent income view attempting to distinguish transitory and

permanent components on the one hand, or the need to develop household age

or cohort specific balance sheets combined with demographic information on

the other, the Ricardian equivalence intergenerational altruism view that

only aggregate resources matter for consumption and that the distribution of

resources (conditional on the level) does not affect aggregate consuniption



                                      5
and hence age-specific balance sheets would be beside the point.

     Various well-known conceptual problems with the NIPA and   the Flow of

Funds are discussed, such as the failure of the NIPA to measure capital

gains and losses, etc. Issues such as the measurement and valuation of

human wealth and changes therein, including the valuation of human and

nonhuman wealth in a world of incomplete markets, appropriate deflators,

inflation adjustment, cost-of-living indices, etc. are discussed. A

comparison of the traditional NIPA saving measures with those from the

Federal Reserve Flow of Funds is presented, as are new more comprehensive

extentions of the NIPA saving data to incorporate net saving in government

capital and consumer durables. These comparisons are interesting and

informative, although we make no pretense of delving deeply into reasons for

the differences (see Wilson, et al (1988) for a discussion thereof). They

reveal a somewhat more complete story concerning the evolution of private

and national saving and wealth than has heretofore been available. They

suggest that more comprehensive measures of saving reveal substantially

higher net saving rates in the U.S. than the traditional NIPA estimates,      but

they reinforce the view that the saving rate though higher,. has fallen, as

has the rate of wealth accumulation.

      Section 3 discusses aggregation and disaggregation. Various theories

of private behavior and the nature of credit markets suggest alternative

views of the propriety of aggregating and disaggregating saving and wealth

data by sector (household, business, goverment), by age or other

characteristics of households, by type of asset or liability, etc. For

example, what has become to be called Denison's Law has led many people to

suggest that gross private saving is the most appropriate variable to

analyze for the economy, as households see through the corporate veil.        I




                                       6
have elsewhere argued that both the gross and net numbers should be examined

and that there is little stability in the net private saving rate. An

asymmetric information model of the capital market which led to credit

rationing would require a distinction between household saving and business

saving, as the internal cost of funds to a firm would be less than external

financing (see Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)). Various assets and liabilities

have different liquidity, risk, expected duration, etc. These may also be

important for analyzing the performance of the economy.

     We also make a brief reference to my own work with Lawrence Lau which

suggests the potential importance of taking extreme care in analyzing

aggregation issues for U.S. saving.

     Section 4 turns to some specific issues. First, we turn to consumer

durables and present augmented NIPA figures including durable purchases as

saving and the rental flow from the stock of durables as consumption and

income. We also mention government capital, including government tangible

capital, government lending, government contingent and potential

liabilities, etc. Adjusted or augmented NIPA-type saving rates are also

presented, including consumer durables and various components of government

net capital formation. A comparison is made to Japan, to highlight the

potential importance such adjustments make in international comparisons of

saving rates.

     We also discuss education and human capital, pension and Social

Security wealth, estimates of income and its components, revaluations of

financial assets and liabilities due to interest rate changes, or other

factors, and inflation adjustment, as well as the saving by Americans

abroad.

     For each of these items, we simply raise the issues surrounding them

and including them in an augmented, more comprehensive measure of saving,



                                      7
discuss their rough orders of magnitude, and how they might affect the

evolution of the saving rate in the United States and its comparisons with

other countries.

     Finally, Section 5 presents a brief conclusion.    I conclude that we

have come some distance to a better understanding of saving and wealth.      I


conclude that no single theory --   Keynesian, permanent income, pure
lifecycle with no bequest motive or intergenerational altruism -   - is
sufficient by itself to explain aggregate saving in the United States.

While each of these models of saving behavior lend important insights and

contain some elements of truth, none are sufficient by themselves, and all

are strongly rejected in aggregate data.

     We have also come a substantial way toward refining some of the

adjustments to saving and wealth estimates which a more comprehensive

definition of saving would entail, and discovered that the interpretation of

these data depends heavily upon one's model of the economy. No one number

will be the answer to all questions. For example, while many of the

adjustments such as that for consumer durables, would raise the U.S. private

saving rate, there would also be a corresponding entry on the investment

side and would do nothing to redress the shortfall of saving relative to

domestic investment which necessitates capital imports. We may be somewhat

less anxious about the rate that Americans are acquiring claims to assets,

but other concerns remain. Capital gains and losses such as those in the

stock market, may partly explain swings in the traditional NIPA saving

measures, both because consumption and saving are affected by changes in

wealth and because of the institutional features of pension funds, the

majority of which are of the defined-benefit type in the United States.

This in turn implies that large swings in the stockmarket (and/or major




                                       8
changes in interest rates) will substantially change contributions to these

pension funds and hence personal saving.2

     My penultimate conclusion is that the United States still has a low

rate of saving (although not nearly so low as the traditional NIPA measure

would reveal), and rate of wealth creation. We start from a high level of

wealth, but on a per capita, or perhaps more importantly, on a per worker

basis, the rate of wealth accumulation has slowed substantially. While

saving in the United States takes on a somewhat different composition than

saving in other countries, we are only begirg to understand not just how

to measure it, but the implications thereof, and the policies and other

factors which affect that composition. For all the advances made and the

insights gained, there is still a substantial shortfall of national saving

relative to domestic investment.



2.   Definitions, Measures, Sources

     The potential data on saving and wealth come from several, potentially

complementary, sources. The three generic types of data used are the

aggregate data from the National Income and Product Accounts, the data    from

the Federal Reserve Flow of Funds, and household survey data. In addition,

some information on wealth and its distribution has been derived from estate

tax returns, usually federal but also state. The latter are particularly

useful in dealing with a truncated sample of the upper tail of the wealth

distribution. The relative advantages and disadvantages of household survey

data with respect to the NIPA and Flow of Funds data have been discussed in

detail in several other studies (see for example, Curtin, Juster and Morgan



2. As documented in Bernheim and Shaven (1988).




                                      9
(1988)). Annual surveys chronically underestimate wealth and property

income. While important advances have been made in attempting to aggregate

up from household data, the quality, measurement error, sampling error, and

other concerns are non-trivial. Further, to measure saving from household

surveys, one would not generally be able to get an accurate measure of both

income and total spending in order to get at saving by subtraction, and

while surveys of saving behavior are more common in some other countries

(e.g. ,   the   annual Family Saving Survey and Family Income and Expenditure

Survey in Japan) than in the United States, there are several surveys in

which it is possible to analyze data on the same households at two different

points in time and thereby attempt to create balance sheets at those two

points in time and to difference them to get a measure of saving or

dis saving.

      Another issue is the gray area between the business sector and the

household sector in which substantial saving occjrs --      nonprofits,   trusts,

pensions, and other vehicles which may be either excluded from household

surveys or where individual responses may be subject to considerable error

(e.g., accrued net saving in life insurance). Important recent data from

the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances, the 1984 Wealth Supplement to the

Panel Study of Income Dynamics, and the 1984 Wealth Supplement to the Survey

of Income and Program Participation are all fruitful data sources.

     Numerous other household surveys contain substantial information on

property income, and the question arises how to aggregate it to the

presumably more accurate national control totals such as those in the

National Income and Product Accounts, and then to capitalize them or to

translate them into asset values. This is most easily done for interest

bearing assets of a fixed duration, and much more difficult to do for other




                                          10
types of     assets and liabilities. Many of the recent studies of the

dissaving behavior of the elderly (e.g., Hurd (1987), Bernheim (1984),

Diamond and Hausman (1984), and others) attempt to make the best use

possible of such household survey data. I shall say no more about this

source of information ocher than that it is an important additional source

which can be integrated with aggregate data on the one hand, and

disaggregated to provide details on distributions and characteristics that

may be of great interest.

         Before turning to NIPA and Flow of Funds saving estimates and the

corresponding wealth estimates from the Flow of Funds, a few words

concerning theories of saving and consumption and what sorts of data are

consistent or inconsistent with them are in order.

         The three leading theories of saving/consumption behavior are Keynesian

(KN) ,    lifecycle/permanent   income hypotheses (LCH/PIH), and intergenerational

altruism (IGA). The Keynesian predilection to focus on short-run cash flows

generally ignored capital gains and losses as components of income and

focused on the flow of saving out of current disposable income. In

contrast, the permanent income hypothesis attempted to disentangle permenant

from transitory components and has vastly different predictions concerning

the response of saving to permanent and transitory components of income

(including transitory components due to fiscal policy changes).

Importantly, the lifecyle hypothesis suggests that the marginal propensity

to save depends upon age and that demographics are important. This leads

immediately to going beyond aggregate saving data to attempt to analyze the

effects of the age distribution of the population or resources on saving and

suggests the calculation of age or cohort specific balance sheets and saving

rates may be quite useful in the analysis of trends in saving behavior and

their responses to various policy experiments.



                                           11
     In sharp contrast to the LCH stands the strong implications of

intergenerational altruism that aggregate consumption depends only on

aggregate resources, not on their distribution across generations. Age

specific policies should have no impact on aggregate consumption and

national saving, as private saving will adjust to public saving or

dissaving. The potential usefulness of household balance sheets and age

specific saving rates for analyzing saving and its reaction to policy

experiments is useful only in the context of testing Ricardian

equivalence/intergenerational altruism. If one accepts the strong tenets     of

Ricardian equivalence, the usefulness of the data disaggregated by age

disappears. In Boskin and Kotlikoff (1985), we build a finite approximation

to an intergenerationally altruistic infinitely lived optimal consumption

program and test whether the age distribution of resources affects

consumption, given the aggregate level of resources. We reject this

implication of Ricardian equivalence based on postwar U.S. time series data.

In Boskin and Lau   (1988),   we develop age-cohort-specific balance sheets by

combining Current Population Survey data on the age distribution of income

with more usual aggregate variables. We estimate an economically important

and statistically significant effect of the age distribution of human and

nonhuman wealth on the share of aggregate wealth consumed. We also estimate

a large, statistically significant generation effect:      households headed by

persons born since 1939 consume a larger share of their wealth than those

born prior to 1939, at the same age. The strong implication of Ricardian

equivalence is rejected.

     Most aggregate time series studies reject the simple Keynesian

specification of consumption and suggest that there is tax discounting, on

the one hand, or at least a large fraction of the population is forward




                                         12
looking and maximizing over a longer time horizon than the typical Keynesian

short-run flows. For example, Hall and Mishkin (1982) conclude that about

four-fifths of consumers could be modeled as if they are maximizing over a

long time horizon, whereas one-fifth could not.

        Studies of the dissaving behavior of the elderly have generally

concluded that the strictest version of the lifecycle hypothesis, an

expected average propensity to consume over the lifetime of one, is

inconsistent with the observed behavior, although Hurd (1987) presents data

which are consistent with the LCH.

        My own conclusion is that no single model of saving and consumption

behavior is sufficient to explain aggregate saving fully. All of the

theories are rejected in studies based on aggregate time series data, and

others usually rejected in other studies. There appears to be substantial

heterogeneity among consumers. This heterogeneity may be a function of age,

income and desired consumption profiles leading to liquidity constraints, or

a host of social, psychological, environmental, historical and economic

variables. I believe that there is now strong evidence that the age

distribution of resources, given their aggregate level, affects aggregate

consumption, and therefore there is some potential gain in attempting to

integrate microeconomic (hopefully longitudinal) survey data on the

distribution of resources by characteristics of households with aggregate

data.

        Saving is usually defined as foregoing current consumption and

providing funds either directly or indirectly to capital markets to channel

into productive investment, whether in tangible, financial, or human

capital. it is a neat concept, but there are an inordinate number of

difficulties in measuring it.

        Let us start with the most basic definition that saving in period t,



                                        13
S, is equal to income minus consumption in that period,       minus C. Or,



(1)          S —   '' - C.

       Hence, saving will equal investment ex post. From the Haig-Simon's

definition of income,



(2)          Y —   C       +
                               (W
                                    -
                                        W1)

income is the sum of consumption plus the change in net worth, the

difference is the change in the value of assets and of liabilities.

Therefore,



(3)          S —       -




or    saving equals the change in net worth. The problems in measuring saving

(and when we integrate saving over a period of time, wealth) stem from

difficulties in measuring Y, C, and                and W1.
        It is worth mentioning that so prominent an economist as Lawry Klein

(1986) has argued that "the importance of saving tends to be understated if

we treat it as a mere residual." Klein emphasizes that households make

genuine decisions about most asset and liability changes, whereas the

residual concept was popularized from the Depression mentality as a typical

representation of personal saving.

        First, household saving in our national accounts is estimated as a

residual, after subtracting consumer expenditures, taxes, and interest

payments to business from estimated personal income. The measurement errors




                                              14
in these components (each of which is potentially quite large relative to

net saving), will show up dollar for dollar in net saving. Suppose,

heroically, that we have a good estimate of income. Then errors in the

measurement of consumption which may be quite small relative to consumption

translate into larger percentage errors in the measure of saving, which is

much smaller.   I consider this to be a problem, but much less of a problem

than measuring income. Suppose we measure consumption properly, but

mismeasure, say underestimate, income. Then in general, saving will be

underestimated dollar for dollar. Again, I consider this to be an extremely

important issue, perhaps the most important one. Numerous studies suggest

that income is substantially underestimated in the national income accounts.

The BEA makes an adjustment to personal income related, apparently, to IRS

estimates of under reported adjusted gross income. While the range of

estimates of this underestimation is substantial (see Feige (1985)), I

believe it is not trivial.

     One extreme set of estimates based on a transactions methodology (Feige

(1983)) estimates that while unrecorded income was trvial in the 1950s and

1960s, by the late 1970s and early l98Os, it amounted to 40% of GNP. An

unrecorded income which was primarily saved of even one-tenth this size

would raise the net private saving rate by 80%, from 5% to 9% of GNP! If

net private saving runs about 250 billion dollars per year, and gross

private saving about 600 or 700 billion dollars per year, a few percentage

point underestimate of income will lead to a serious underestimate of

saving. A related problem may be the understatement of the income earned

and saving done abroad.

     What are the likely reasons for underestimating income? A good

discussion of some of these issues is presented in Holloway (1988); it

includes where one draws the boundary in the GNP accounts (e.g. ,   placing


                                      15
emphasis on market transactions with only a few imputations, excluding

illegal activity, excluding capital gains, to which we will return below).

Much has been made recently of the underground economy, and estimates of the

size of the underground economy vary by two orders of magnitude.3 This

includes illegal activity and activity that is deliberately unreported,

usually for tax reasons, such as cash payments for services that go

unreported. To the extent that personal income is seriously understated, we

would expect the degree of underreporting to be positively correlated with

marginal effective tax rates. arro and Sahasakul (1983) estimate that the

fraction of U.S. households subject to high marginal tax rates quadrupled

between 1965 and 1980. While marginal tax rates have come down some since

then, this suggests that by the late 1970s and early 1980s the

underreporting of personal income had probably grown substantially.

     P,ut is personal income that underreported? Since comsuniption is two-

thirds of income, and is estimated from transactions, some of the incone

which is unreported for tax purposes does show up in transactions.

eventually working its way back into the income figures.

     Still, the net degree of underreporting of personal income is a source

of some concern, especially since there is reason to believe that it has

grown substantially over precisely the period in which there is great

concern about the fall in the saving rate. Finally, a word should be said

about international comparisons. Since U.S. marginal tax rates are now much

lower than those in most other advanced economies, we would expect the

degree of underreporting and the underground economy to be somewhat less in




3. See Feige (1983).




                                     16
the United States then in these countries. But this is only conjecture, for

this will reflect social attitudes, the nature and resources devoted to tax

enforcement, etc. and on this I believe we have little evidence. In any

event, I believe it is a fruitful area for future research. As already

noted, the NIPA measui of saving excludes net capital gains or losses in

its measure of saving, as in its measure of income.

     A third problem is the treatment of expenditures on consumer durables

as consumption rather than as saving. Finally, the treatment of government

saving or dissaving in the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts is a

rather mechanical reporting of the budgetary position, with no attempt to

develop a separate capital account on the expenditure side for government

units in reporting a surplus or deficit on current operating accounts. The

federal government's own budget suffers from this difficulty, but the

Department of Commerce does attempt to estimate government capital stocks,

investment, and depreciation. We will return to these two issues in Section

4 below.

     Let us turn to the NIPA saving figures for the United States. Table 1

presents estimates of gross and net national saving and its components in

the United States from 1951-1987, Net saving is decomposed into private

saving, the state and local government surplus and the federal government

surplus. Private saving in turn is decomposed into personal and corporate

saving. Numerous conjectures have been made concerning whether the

appropriate rate to study is net or gross, private or total, or

disaggregated personal and corporate saving. For example, David and

Scadding (1974) find that the gross private saving rate at full employment

is remarkably constant, reinforcing the finding of Denison (1958) .   They

infer from this that households see through the corporate veil and that

movements between personal and corporate saving reflect various factors such



                                      17
as changes in the relative tax advantages of the two forms   of saving.

However, they strongly reject the ultra-rationality argument that households

see through the government veil, an argument associated with Martin Baily

(1962) and Robert Barro (1974).

     Recent theoretical work on credit markets (e.g., Stiglitz and Weiss

(1981)) suggests that maintaining the distinction between household and

corporate saving may be quite important. Asymmetric information may lead to

a situation where the cost of internal funds is substantially below the cost

of external funds, and therefore corporate cash flow may be an important

separate determinant of business investment, a result consistent with

investment equations in many large macroeconometric models. If this is the

case, it may be important for some purposes not to aggregate private saving.

     Further. focusing on gross saving and its apparent stability -.

although   it has not been as stable through 1987 - - seems odd since virtually

all theories are in terms of how households, firms, and even governments

wish to form their net wealth position. In brief, any rationality

hypothesis seems somewhat out of balance if it ignores the fact that

depreciation is estimable. There is much less stability in the net private

saving rate and in the net national saving rate than the corresponding gross

figures.

        The most important items to note in Table 1 are the levels of gross and

net saving, which are low relative to that of other societies (see glades and

Sturm (1983)), and the substantial decline in the net private saving rate,

and especially the net national saving rate in the l980s relative to the

1950s, 1960s and 1970s. These data undoubtedly form the most important

basis    for concern over the level and trend in private and national saving in
the United States.


                                        18
     As noted above in equation (3), saving can also be defined as the

change in net worth. An alternative approach to measuring saving may be

obtained from estimates of sectoral and national net worth through time.

The Federal Reserve's year end balance sheets for the U.S. economy provide

just such a source of data. Recall that the National Income and Product

Account saving and income measures exclude capital gains and losses. These

are, in principle, captured by the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheets,        which

should also reflect some wealth accumulated in the underground economy. The

Flow of Funds data have their own problems, both internally and relative to

household surveys and the NIPAs (see, e.g. ,     Curtin,   Juster and Morgan (1988)

and Wilson, Freund, Yohn and Lederer (1988)). Among the more important are

that bonds are carried at par (in recent years, the changes in the value of

bonds will not necessarially net internally given the increase in foreign

holdings) ,   and the rudimentary treatment of the government sector in the

Flow of Funds -   - in   particular, as with the NIPA, there is no attempt to

estimate changes in the value and the imputed income from government

tangible capital.        (I ignore the even thornier problem of contingent and

potential liabilities and intangible capital discussed below.) The Flow of

Funds Balance Sheets, however, do attempt to record the current value of all.

assets and liabilities in the economy, such as owner-occupied housing,

consumer durables, inventories and depreciable plant and equipment. In

principle, the FOF not only includes traditional gains and losses,        but

revaluations of real assets caused by depreciation, obsolescence or other

sources. For business tangible capital, the estimates are of the

replacement cost, not the current market value. Hence, when Tobin's q

diverges systematically from one, the Flow of Funds data may over-or-

understate the value of tangible business capital.

      Saving can now be defined as the change in net worth. Because of



                                           19
inflation, with the net worth data as year end figures, we need to estimate

saving in current dollars as




(4)         S —       - 1't''t-l

where       is an index of prices. Because these are end of year data, I use

the December consumer price index. There are numerous reasons why other

indices might be more appropriate, but it is much more difficult to obtain

them on a year end basis rather than quarterly or an average over the year.

        The Flow of Funds also presents considerable disaggregation with

respect to the sector (e.g., households, nonfinancial corporations,

government units. etc.), and type of assets and liabilities. We present in

Table 2 the private, public and national saving rates as a percentage of GNP

from the period 1948-1987. These data reveal some interesting differences

relative to the data in Table 1. While they are usually substantially

higher, they vary quite a bit more, and as they reflect changes in asset

values, are even negative on occasion (for example, see national saving in

1982 and 1985). Table 3 presents estimates on a decade by decade average

basis for private public and national saving. The net private saving rate

in the l950s is more than 150% as large as that reported in the NIPA. In

the 1960s, it is somewhat larger, although it had fallen somewhat relative

to the 1950s. The net private saving rate from the Flow of Funds rebounds

in the 1970s and again, is more than one and one-half times that of the

corresponding data from NIPA. The data for the first half of the 1980s from

the Flow of Funds reveals the tremendous fall in both the private saving

rate, and the national saving rate. As Table 3 reveals, the public saving

rate was about zero in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, as traditionally




                                         20
measured budget deficits in the 1970s were offset by accumulation       of
financial   assets by the public sector. The net national saving rates,

therefore, are almost identical with the net private saving rates, and

again, are much larger than the NIPA numbers. Net national saving has

fallen tremendously in .he 1980s, as both net private saving has fallen and

the public sector has turned into a dissaver, even when one accounts for its

accumulation of financial assets (although not of tangible assets).

        Let us now turn our attention to measures of wealth and the rate of

growth of wealth. Table 4 presents estimates of private, public and

national net worth in billions of constant 1982 dollars, for the period

1948-1987, derived from the Flow of Funds. Recall that the public sector

data include only financial assets, not tangible assets. These data suggest

that private real net worth has more than tripled in the period 1948-1987,

and that national real net worth has almost quadrupled in the same period.

On a per capita basis, real net worth has about doubled.

        Table 5   presents estimates of the rate of growth of net worth (i.e.
the    rate of change of net worth, both private and national). This reflects

the rate of private and national saving in the numerator, including

revaluations, and the pre-existing level of net worth in the denominator.

While    there    is substantial year-to-year variation in both the private and

national growth rates of net worth, it is clear that the rate of growth of

real    net worth in the   U.S. economy has slowed substantially in   the period
1979-1987    relative to any other extended subperiod since World War II.

        Perhaps the most serious omission from these measures of net worth is

that    they reflect only nonhuman capital. The capitalized value of expected

future    earnings, human wealth,    is not included. There have been many

attempts    to estimate measures of human wealth, and/or to incorporate them in
analyses    of consumption and saving behavior (see, e.g. ,   Boskin and Lau



                                           21
(1988), Jorgenson and Fraumeni (1988)). There are many difficulties in

obtaining such estimates, including capitalization rates, the appropriate

expected earnings process for forecasts, questions of differential risk,

discounting, liquidity, bequeathability, etc. Roughly speaking,    about

three-quarters of national income is a return to labor; ignoring all these

differences would suggest that about three-quarters of total wealth would be

human wealth. Of course, mortality, disability and similar probabilities

must be added to discount rates on future earnings; there is differential

taxation of different sources and uses of income (although these have

declined with the new tax law), etc. Human wealth must be estimated in more

indirect ways than many components of nonhuman wealth whose asset values can

be determined via the market.

     Finally, in discussing definitions, measures, and data needs, it is

important to realize that the economy changes. The pace at which we want to

augment or update measures of saving and wealth, or reclassify    items, etc.,

depends heavily upon the purpose in generating the data in the first place.



3.   Aggregation and Disaggregation

     Discussed above was the issue of whether to combine the household and

corporate sectors following Denisons Law, as enunciated and reconfirmed (as

of that time) by David and Scadding (1974)), or at the other extreme,

whether to separate household and business saving because of credit

rationing. Additional distinctions might be drawn on the type of assets and

liabilities, for example, their liquidity properties, fixed costs in

shifting in and out of them, their duration, etc. We also mention that a

strong Ricardian might aggregate all resources, ignoring their age

distribution; and depending upon the view of the substitutability of public




                                      22
and private capital, might even aggregate private and public saving, and

focus only on national saving, as changes in public saving or dissaving

might be exactly offset according to the theory by private saving.

     The purpose of this section is to highlight two other issues of

aggregation. First, within the household sector there have been tremendous

changes in household formation, dissolution, the age structure of

households, average household size, life expectancy, and household

composition. Particularly when we begin to analyze consumer durables, the

value of housing, and lifecycle or age-specific balance sheet data, it is

important to keep these changes in mind. For example, Boskin and Lau (1988)

document that slightly more than half of the average annual percentage

increase in real consumption in the period 1950-1980 was due to the growth

in the number of households as opposed to the annual percentage increase in

real consumption per household.

     Thus, one might wish to decompose changes in the aggregate saving rate

into the sum of the rates of change per household and the rate of change in

the number of households. We know, for example, that in equation (1) that




     St —
            :.ii:   ii:


where we index households of type i, age j in year t. The households might

differ by size, asset values, net worth, or access to credit markets, family

composition, etc.; age may be important for lifecycle or other reasons.      We

know from survey data that some households are saving and others dissaving,

and that the aggregate saving rate is the sum of these household-specific

saving rates. Probing a little deeper, changes in saving caused,     for

example, by changes in an exogenous (to the household) variable z, we note




                                      23
that the elasticity of aggregate saving with respect to z is a weighted

average of the percentage changes of the saving of the different household

types with respect to the given percentage change of the variable for them,

with the weights being the share (possibly negative) of aggregate saving

accounted for by that type, or mathematically



                                dm5.
                                      jt
      d2nS           L N.jStt       dmnz
                 —   j
      dlnz
             t
                             Sijt
                     ij

where N.. refers to the number of households of type i and age j in year t

and          to the saving or dissaving of a household of type i, age j in year t.

      Thus, analyses of aggregate saving must come to grips with the problems

of aggregation to the extent that households are heterogeneous (see

Jorgenson, Lau and Stoker (1982) and Boskin and Lau (1988)). Quite apart

from Lucas-type critiques, analyses of the effects of various variables on

aggregate saving may be quite misleading if the shares of saving, or of

income and wealth, held by households of different types and ages change

through time. We know, for example, there have been tremendous changes in

the age distribution of income in the United States (see, e.g., Boskin,

Kotlikoff and Knetter (1985)). Perhaps the most important aspect of this

change has been the tremencous increase in the relative economic well-being

of the elderly, which some theories of saving suggest should be dissaving

during retirement.



4.    Some Specific Issues

      The National Income and Product Accounts treat expenditures on consumer



                                           24
durables as consumption rather than as saving. Many have argued (and I have

generally been sympathetic to the argument) that it would be preferable to

treat expenditures on consumer durables and the imputed rental flow of the

durables as consumption (see David and Scadding (1974), Roskin, Robinson and

Huber (1988), Holloway (1988), Hendershott and Peek (1988), among others).

Recall that estimates of the value of consumer durables are included

conceptually in the Flow of Funds estimates. Various issues arise in

valuing the services of consumer durables (Katz (1983)). We present in

Table 6 NIPA saving rates augmented to include consumer durables for a few

years. Note that this adds about 5 percentage points to the NIPA estimate

of gross saving. Of course, as mentioned in the introduction, it would also

be included on the investment side, and does nothing for the shortfall of

our domestic saving relative to our investment. U.S. citizens invest much

more in consumer durables than persons in other societies. This undoubtedly

reflects a number of factors, including the size of homes, etc. The

difference is particularly important relative to Japan, where the durables

adjustment closes the saving rate differential substantially (see Table 6

for some comparisons with Japan including durables adjustments and also

government capital).   It might well be useful for the REA to supplement (not

replace) the current saving data with such estimates for durables.

     Government tangible capital, as well as contingent and potential

liabilities, are also of potential importance. Governments in all countries

own, use, and provide services from, capital. Differences in the rates of

growth of public capital, and differences in levels across societies, can

lead to misconceptions about aggregate national well-being and aggregate

saving rates. Of course, government saving and investment does not pass the

same kind of market tests as private saving and investment. In Boskin,




                                      25
Robinson and Huber (1988), new estimates of government saving, capital

formation, and wealth for the United States in the period   1947-1985 are

estimated. Table 6 includes estimates of NIPA saving figures augmented to

include net government saving in the form of nonmilitary capital and total

capital. Again, the saving rate rises several percentage points,     but recall

that government capital depreciates and that our ability to estimate       that

depreciation is subject to even more difficulties than our ability    to


estimate the depreciation of private tangible assets. The comparison with
                                                          formation in the
Japan is instructive, since government military capital

United States is substantially larger, but total government capital

formation is substantially smaller, than in Japan as a percentage of GNP.

     Revaluations of assets and liabilities are presumably captured

approximately by market values and represented in the Flow of Funds.

Obviously, they do not do so precisely. Estimated revaluations of tangible

capital for the NIPA estimates would be adjusted upward, reflecting

generally positive real revaluations. These are caused by a variety of

factors, but especially the decline in investment goods prices relative to

the overall price level. Revaluations of financial assets and liabilities

other than general real interest rate changes should net internally as one

household's capital gain is another's capital loss, or conversely, between

 the public and private sectors. Of course, a general mood of pessimism or

 optimism tending to change the rate at which future incomes are discounted

 could cause a substantial overall revaluation. Further, to the extent that

 there are foreign holdings by Americans and holdings of U.S. assets by

 foreigners the real revaluations will not necessarily cancel for the US. as

 a whole. Indeed, the saving abroad by U.S. citizens is quite difficult to

 measure.

      We noted in the introduction and Section 2 that the measurement of



                                      26
income was undoubtedly a major issue in the measurement of saving. Under

reporting, as well as measurement errors, play a role and are likely to

change systematically over time. The measurement of real income is even

more difficult. Distortions caused by inflation create difficulties in

computing changes in real corporate balance sheets, as well as other

components of income. It is beyond the scope of the paper to go into detail

here, but not only is the measurement of real income tremendously difficult

and important (especially for corporate profits) but an appropriate real

cost-of-living index would include the price of future consumption in it,

and this obviously varies with the ex ante expected real net (of taxes) rate

of return, which has varied over time.

     Human capital, whether in education, health, nutrition, etc. ,   has been

discussed very briefly above. Clearly, the United States spends a much

larger fraction of its CNP on education than most other societies. This is

especially true for higher education. Difficulties of comparability,

however, abound. It is alleged, for example, that students in the U.K. or

Japan are much further along when they finish high school than our students.

A distinction between investment and consumption in educational expenditures

is not easy to draw empirically. Estimates of the rate of return must rely

on some estimate of the amount of such investment, and thus a certain amount

of indirection is necessary in obtaining estimates. Despite improvements in

correcting for sample selection bias, etc., we are still some distance from

estimating gross investment and saving in human capital. Some estimates,

e.g., Kendrick (1976), place the amount of human capital investment at

approximately the same level as nonhuman investment in the economy.

Estimating net saving and investment in human capital is even more

difficult. At what rate does knowledge and skill acquired in education, or




                                         27
on the job, depreciate or become obsolete? Clearly, unlike financial

assets, or tangible nonhuman capital, they cannot be bequeathed, although

they may be an input into human investment in ones children. Again,    I


refer the interested reader to Jorgenson and Fraumenti (1988), and perhaps

just as importantly, its discussion by Rosen (1988) to gain a feel for some

of the issues involved.

     The appropriate treatment of private pensions in saving statistics is a

subject of much dispute. Currently, for example, employer contributions     of

defined-benefit pension plans show up in the private saving statistics.

Some have argued for a concept of pension wealth, i.e., the expected present

value of future pension payments. An analogous argument has been made for

Social Security. It Is not our purpose here to review the voluminous

literature of the potential impact of Social Security wealth on real

economic activity such as saving choices, or the analogous literature on

private or state and local and other government non-fully funded

liabilities. At various points in history, currently unfunded liabilities

have been large, subject to substantial variation depending upon assumed

patterns of economic and demographic trends and subject to enormous change

through minors changes in the rules relating to benefit calculations or

taxes. Further, social security has begun a systematic move away from pay

as you go finance toward building an historically large surplus.

     How to define the expected obligations of the Social Security system,

for example, is also open to much controversy. Under a closed group

approach, the expected future taxes and benefits paid by particular cohorts.

for example, all those alive or all those currently above a certain age,

such as 18, would be calculated, discounted to the present, and compared.

The difference between the expected present value of benefits and taxes

would be the surplus or deficit. This concept, using current participants



                                     28
as a group, is adopted by Arthur Anderson & Co (1986). Such an estimate

would add $100 billion or more per year to the federal government deficit.

Likewise, to the   extent   there were accruing unfunded liabilities in state

and local government or private pension funds, these would need to be netted

out (to the extent that they were not netted explicitly or via market

valuation of corporate equities in Flow of Funds or other data). Recall

that the state and local surplus in recent years has been over one percent

of CNP, but that much of it is in their pension funds, whose simultaneously

accruing liabilities are not included in the national saving statistics.

     Under an open group concept, the expected present value of benefits and

taxes paid over some time period, often taken to be 75-year actuarial

projection period of the Social Security Administration, would be compared

with the difference being the surplus or deficit. Thus, taxes paid in the

early working years of the currently unborn and benefits paid to persons

during retirement who are not yet in the labor force would be counted,

While the Social Security system in the United States, as well as most other

advanced economies, has become so large, and contains so many features,

including insurance features, it may well affect private saving behavior, I

believe the best we can do is provide some supplemental information to the

traditional NIPA treatment of Social Security in the budget, simply netting

the excess of taxes over outlays as positive government saving, currently

offsetting the larger deficit in the non-Social Security part of the budget.

The substantial unfunded liabilities I have dealt with elsewhere (see

Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1988)).

     I do not think it is sensible to include OASI contributions as part of

personal saving, as suggested by Hendershott and Peek (1988). This would

double the net private saving rate, but while it is true that some




                                         29
individuals believe that their contributions are a sort of saving, legally

and by nature of the formulae in use at any point in time,   there is no

necessary relationship between an individual's marginal contribution and

their own marginal returns. Of course, for the nation as whole,    the


aggregate saving is captured by the difference in the cash flow in the

system plus (by no means easy to estimate) the change in expected real net

accrued liabilities. For those interested in the relationship of marginal

Social Security taxes paid and expected marginal benefits for households    of

different income levels, family type and ages, see Boskin, Kotlikoff,

Puffert, and Shoven (1987).

     I do not have the space to go into contingent liabilities by sector,

such as those generated in the thrift industry or pension plans. The nature

of deposit and pension insurance is to provide a put option and create a

heads I win tails the taxpayer loses type situation, which may encourage

excessive risk.taking.   I have dealt with these issues in the context of a

more appropriate budgetary treatment elsewhere (Boskin, Rarham, Cone and

Ozler, (1987)).



5.   Conclusion

     My conclusion is quite simple: We have come some way toward

understanding, measuring, interpreting, and analyzing saving and wealth.

While there is a substantial need for continued research into analyzing

saving behavior and wealth accumulation, the following conclusions deserve

emphasis:

      1. While the United States has a saving rate which is low by

historical and international standards, that saving rate is substantially

higher when more comprehensive measures of saving are developed. While

there are substantial difficulties in developing such augmented measures of



                                      30
national saving, various data sources and estimation methodologies all

conclude that adjustments for net saving in durables, government capital,

capital gains and losses, revaluations, etc. are substantial.

     2. The adjustments for durables and government capital are likely to

narrow the saving rate gap between the United States and Japan, and to a

lesser extent between the United States and the European economies. This

reduction in the "saving rate gap" is much greater for gross saving than net

saving.

     3. No one saving rate measure is the answer to all questions one might

pose about saving and wealth accumulation. Often there will be offsetting

tendencies by sector, asset type, etc. A decrease in the traditional NIPA

saving figures may reflo-t a rise in the stock market which may decrease

saving either because of direct adjustment on the part of households or

mechanical adjustments due to the actuarial formulae for pension plans.

     4. The reasonable, even permissable, level of aggregation, across

types of households, ages of households, sectors of the economy, and types

of assets and liabilities, depends heavily upon one's prior beliefs

concerning an apropriate model of the economy (for example, of credit

markets in deciding whether to combine household and corporate saving, and

of household behavior in deciding whether to analyze private saving and

government saving separately from national saving).

     5.   Innumerable technical issues remain, ranging from appropriate

deflators to valuation in nonmarket situations. 1''hile these often revolve

around technical issues, they also involve components of saving and of

wealth which can be large relative to the more traditional components, e.g.

social security, the contingent liabilities of the banking system, etc. The

remarkable change in the U.S. net international lending position in recent




                                      31
years suggest that the traditional argument that most capital gains and

losses, and revaluations, will net internally is no longer accurate.

     6. Perhaps the most important measurement issue for traditional saving

estimates is improving the measures of personal income to include as much

unrecorded income as plausible.

     7.   supplementing the aggregate data with age cohort specific data may

be of great value.

     At the last Conference on Research in Income and Wealth many of these

issues were addressed for the economy as a whole or for important subsectors

of the economy, and important subsets of these issues.   I have no doubt

whatsoever that when future generations of economists celebrate subsequent

major anniversaries of the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, they

will bear witness to considerable additional value added in measuring,

interpreting, and analyzing saving and wealth.




                                      32
                                                          Table 1

                                           U.S. Gross and Net SavIng      1951—1987


                                         1951—60 1961—70 1971—80    1981      1982     1983    1984    1985    1986    1987



   Total Nit SavIng                        7.1     7.8     7.0      5.7       2.0      2.0     4.1     2.3     J.8     1.9
    Nit Private S.ving                     7.5     8.2     8.0       6.6      5.5      5.7     6.8     5.7     5.3     4.3
      Personal Saving                      4.7     4.8     5.5       5.2      4.9      3.8     4.4     3.2     3.1     2.7
                                           2.8     3.4     2.4       1.4      0.6      3.9     2.5     2.5     2.2     1.7
      Corporat. Saving
    St.t. I Local Oovsrn*.nt Surplus      —0.2     0.1     0.9       3.1       1.1     1.4     1.7     1.6     1.3     1.0
    F.d.ral Go,.rnnent Surplus            —0.2    —0.5    —1.8      —1.1     —4.6     —5.2    —4.5    -4.9    —4.8    —3.4
    JI..ora.da: Capital Consuaption        8.7     8.4     9.8      11.4     12.1     11.6    .11.0   10.9    10.8    10.7
     Gross Privats Saving                 16.2    16.6    17.8      18.0     17.6     17.4    17.9    16.6    16.1    35.0




Sour..  US. D.pirt.ent of Coirc.. National Income and Product Accounts.
Not..: Data an, averages (.zospt for 1981—1987) of annual flow, as percentage, of gross national product.
D.t.Il mey not add to totals b.cause of rounding.
1987 figuns. are preli.inary.
                                     Table 2

                              Sectoral Savings Rates
                                    (% of GNP)


      Year              Private                Public          National
                J

      1948               15.5                    5.0             20.5
      1949               23.9                   -3.8             20.1
      1950                 6.6                   6.7             13.3
      1951                 9.8                  4.8              14.6
      1952               15.2                   -1.2             13.9
      1953               12.1                   -1.9             10.2
      1954               15.8                   -2.8             13.0
      1955               20.0                    0.0             20.0
      1956               15.6                    1.7             17.3
      1957                 6.4                   0.9              7.3
      1958                 9.3                  -2.6              6.7
      1959               10.3                   -0.6              9.7
      1960                 7.3                   0.5              7.7
      1961                 9.1                  -1.5              7.5
      1962                 8.5                  -0.9              7.6
      1963                 5.5                   0.2              5.7
      1964               13.2                   -0.6             12.6
      1965               10.8                    0.3             11.1
      1966               14.2                    0.6             14.8
      1967                 9.6                  -1.2              8.4
      1968               12.0                    0.0             12.0
      1969                 5.1                   1.6               6.7
      1970                 2.5                   0.1               2.7
      1971                14.0                  -2.0             12.1
      1972                16.4                  -0.4             16.0
      1973                11.2                   2.3             13.5
      1974                12.5                   2.1             14.6
       1975                9.3                  -3.3               6.0
       1976               20.1                  -1.8             18.3
       1977               19.6                  -0.1             19.4
       1978               20.3                   0.7             21.0
       1979                2.5                   2.1               4.7
       1980                 2.5                  0.3               2.8
       1981                9.6                   Ø4                9.2
       1982               -5.3                  -3.9              -9.2
       1983               11.1                  -4.4               6.6
       1984                .2                   -3.3               3.9
       1985                1.6                  -3.6              .2.0
       1986               16.2                  -4.7             11.5
       1987                5.9                  -2.6               3.3




Source: Author's calculations froze National Balance Sheets,
        Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
                                    Table 3

                         Sectoral Average Saving Rates
                                  (% of CNP)


     Years             Private                Public     National
                J




    1951-60             12.2                   -0.1        12.0

    1961-70              9.0                   -0.1         8.9

    1971-80             12.8                    0.0        12.8

    1981-87              6.5                   -3.3         3.2




Source: Author's calculations.
                          table 4

           Net Worth in Billions of 1982 Dollars


Year           Private          Public        National

1948         $3906.1         $-831.2          $3074.9
1949          4167.0          -873.0           3294.1
1950          4241.8          -797.2           3444.7
1951          4362.9          -738.2           3624.7
1952          4558.3          -754.2           3804.1
1953          4721.8           -779.7          3942.1
1954          4936.4           -817.9          4118.5
1955           5231.2          -817.3          4413.9
1956           5467.1          -791.1          4676.0
1957           5566.3          -777.2          4789.1
1958           5709.8          -817.8          4892.0
1959           5879.9          -828.4          5052.0
1960           6002.4          -820.3          5182.1
1961           6160.1          -846.9          5313.3
1962           6316.7          -862.8          5454.0
1963           6422.6          -859.8          5562.8
1964           6691.4          -872.0          5819.4
1965           6925.6          -865.7          6059.9
1966           7251.1          -851.5          6399.6
1967           7475.8          -878.8          6596.9
1968           7770.4          -879.6          6890.8
1969           7896.7          -838.6          7058.1
1970           7959.8          -835.4          7124.4
1971           8327.2          -886.8          7440.4
1972           8784.4          -897.5          7886.9
1973           9106.8          -832.7          8274.1
1974           9452.8          -774.0          8678.8
1975           9714.2          -867.8          8846.4
1976          10315.9          -922.6          9393.3
1977          10927.8          -926.4         10001.4
1978          11586.4          -902.6         10683.8
1979          11667.1          -834.9         10832.3
1980          11745.9           -827.1        10918.7
1981          12050.6           -839.5        11211.1
1982          11883.4           -962.9        10920.5
1983          12246.2         -1108.5         11137.6
1984          12496.9         -1223.9         11273.1
1985          12553.9         -1352.9         11201.1
1986          13158.9         -1528.0         11630.9
1987          13382.8         -1626.1         11756.7




Source: Authors calculations from National Balance Sheets,
         Board of Governors of Federal Reserve.
                                 Table 5

                   Pate of Growth of Net Worth
                        (Percentage Points)


      Year               Private                 National
                                           I


      1948                 4.2                     7.1
      1949                 6.3                     6.7
      1950                 1.8                     4.4
      1951                 2.8                     5.0
      1952                 4.3                     4.7
      1953                 3.5                     3.5
      1954                 4.3                     4.3
      1955                 5.6                     6.7
      1956                 4.3                     5.6
      1957                 1.8                     2.4
      1958                 2.5                     2.1
      1959                 2.9                     3.2
      1960                 2.0                     2.5
      1961                 2.6                     2.5
      1962                 2.5                     2.6
      1963                 1.6                     2.0
      1964                 4.0                     4.4
      1965                 3.4                     4.0
      1966                 4.5                     5.3
      1967                 3.0                     3.0
      1968                 3.8                     4.3
      1969                 1.6                     2.4
      1970                 0.8                     0.9
      1971                 4.4                     4.2
      1972                 5.2                     5.7
      1973                 3.5                     4.7
      1974                 3.7                     4.7
      1975                 2.7                     1.9
      1976                 5.8                     5.8
      1977                 5.6                     6.1
      1978                 5.7                     6.4
      1979                 0.7                     1.4
      1980                 0.7                     0.8
      1981                 2.5                     2.6
      1982                -1.4                    -2.7
      1983                 3.0                     1.9
      1984                 2.0                     1.2
      1985                 0.5                    -0.6
      1986                 4.6                     3.7
      1987                 1.7                     1.1




Source: Author's calculations.
                                             Table 6
                                                                                1
              Augmented Saving Rates, U.S.         and Japan, Selected Years,
                 U.S.    Gross   Saving   Rates (Gross National Saving/GNP)

            Exclude Govt           Include Govt           Include Govt      All      Govt.   Invstmt
                                                           Nonmilitary              & Consumer
             Nonmilitary            Nonmilitary
             Investment           Invstnt in Fixed      Invstmt in Fixed             Durables
            (NIPA Basis)           Reproducible           Reproducible
                                      Capital               Capital &
                                    (OECD Basis)        Consumer Durables

                17 . 8                    20.3                24.7                     23.9
1950                                                                                   22.9
                15.0                      18.3                21.9
1960                                                                                   21.8
                13.8                      16.8                21.3
1970                                                                                   24.0
                16.4                      18.1                23.2
1980
                13.8                      15.5                22.2                     24.3
1985


                    U.S.         Saving


                                          13.2                14.6                     11.8
1950            11.7
                                          10.6                10.9                     11.1
1960              8.2
                                           8.2                  8.8                      8.7
1970              6.2
                                           8.5                  8.7                      9.2
1980              7.7
                                           5.5                  7.0                      8.8
1985              4.7




                                           30.9                31.6                     31.7
1970             22.8
                                           22.6                23.1                     23.2
1975             14.7
                                           21.1                21.6                     21.7
1980             13.2
                 14.4                      19.8                20.2                     20.4
1984


1GNP and NNP augmented to include corresponding rental flows.
Sources: U.S.: Boskin, Robinson and Huber (1988); Japan: Boskin and Roberts (1986).
                                    REFERENCES

Arthur Anderson & Co. 1986, Sound Financial Reporting in the U.S.
Government: A Prerequisite to Fiscal Responsibility.

Auerbach, A., 1982, "Saving in the U.S.: Some Conceptual Issues," in P.
Hendershott ed., The Level and Composition of Household Saving, Cambridge:
Ballinger Publishing.

Bailey, M.J. 1962, National Income and the Price Level, New York: McGraw-
Hill.

Barro, R.J. ,    1974, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
Economy, November/December, 82:1095-1117.

Barro, R.J. and C. Sahasakul, 1983, "Measuring the Average Marginal Tax
Rate from the Individual Income Tax," Journal of Business, October, 56:419-
452.

Bernheim, 8.D. ,    1984, "Dissaving After Retirement," NBER Working Paper No.
1409.

Bernheim, B.D. ,1987, "Ricardian Equivalence: An Evaluation of Theory and
Evidence," Macroeconomics Annual 2. 1987, Cambridge: NBER.

Bernheim, ED. and J.B. Shoven (1988), "Pension Funding and Saving," in Z.
Bodie, J.B. Shoven, and D.A. Wise, eds., Pensions in the U.S. Economy,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Blades, D.W. and P. Sturrn, 1982, "The Concept and Measurement of Savings:
The United States and Other Industrialized Countries," in Saving and
Government Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series, No.
25.

Boskin, M.J., 1982, "Federal Government Deficits: Myths and Realities,"
American Economic Review, May, 72:296-303.

Boskin, M.J. ,1986, "Theoeretical and Empirical Issues in the Measurement,
Evaluation, and Interpretation of Postwar U.S. Saving," in G.F. Adams and
S.M. Wachter, eds., SavinEs and Camital Formation: The Policy Options,
Lexington, Massachusetts: Lexington Books.

Boskin, M.J., 1988, "Concepts and Measures of Federal Deficits and Debt
and Their Impact on Economic Activity," in K.J. Arrow and M.J. Boskin,
eds., Economics of Public Debt, Macmillan, forthcoming.

Boskin, M.J., 1988, "Consumption, Saving, and Fiscal Policy," American
Economic Review, May, 78:401-407.

Boskin, M.J., B. Barham, K. Cone and S. Ozier, 1987, "The Federal Budget an.
Federal Insurance Programs," in M. Boskin, ed., Modern Develovments In
Public Finance, Oxford and New York: Basil Blackwell.
Boskirt, M.J. and L.J. Kotljkoff, 1985, "Public Debt and U.S. Savings: A New
Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis," in K. Brunner and A.H. Metzler, eds.
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Po],icy:  The "New Monetary
Economics." Fiscal Issues and Unemployment, 23:55-86.

Boskin, M.J., L.J. Kotlikoff, and M. Knetter, 1985. "Changes in the Age
Distribution of Income in the United States. 1968-1984," NBER Working Paper
No. 1766.

Boskin, M.J., L.J. Kotlikoff, D.J. Puffert, and J.B. Shoven, 1987, "Social
Security: A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations," National
Tax Journal, March, 40:19-34.

Boskin, M.J. and L.J. Lau, 1988, "An Analysis of Postwar U.S. Consumption
and Savings Behavior," mimeo, Stanford University.

E,oskin, M.J., M.S. Robinson, and A.M. Huber, 1988, "Government Saving,
Capital Formation and Wealth in the United States, 1947-1985," in R. E.
Lipsey and Helen Tice, eds. , The Measurement of Saving. Investment and
Wealth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.

Boskin, M.J., M.S. Robinson, and J.M. Roberts, 1986, "New Estimates of
Federal Government Tangible Capital and Net Investment," in D.W.
Jorgenson, ed. ,       Technology and CalDital Formation, forthcoming.

Boskin, M.J. and J.M. Roberts, 1986, "A Closer Look at Saving
Rates in the United States and Japan," Washington: American Enterprise
Institute Working Paper No. 9.

Curtin, R.T., FT. Juster, and J.N. Morgan, 1988, "Survey Estimates of
Wealth: An Assessment of Quality," in R.E. Lipsey and H.S. Tice, eds., The
Measurement of Saving. Investment and Wealth, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming.

David, P.A. and J. Scadding, 1974, "Private Saving: Ultrarationality,
Aggregation, and 'Denison's Law,'" Journal of Political Econorriy.
March/April, 82:2252L+9.

Denison, E.F.   1958, "A Note on Private Saving," Review of Economics and
                   ,


Statistics, August, 40:261-267.

Diamond, P.A. and J.A. Hausman, 1984, "Individual Retirement and Savings
Behavior," Journal of Public Economics, February/March, 23:81-114.

Feige, E.L. , 1983, "The Meaning of the "Underground Economy" and the Full
Compliance Deficit," in W. Gaertner and A. Wenig, eds. , Studies in
Contemporary Economics: The Economics of the Shadow Economy, Berlin:
 Springer-Verlag.

Hall, R.E. and F.S. Mishkin, 1982, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households," Econometrica,
March, 50:461-481.
Hendershott P. and J. Peek, 1988, "Private Saving in the United
States: 1950-85," in RE. Lipsey and H.S. Tice, eds. , The Measurement of
Savtn. Investment and Wealth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
forthcoming.

Holloway, T.M. ,1988, "Present NIPA Saving Measures: Their
Characteristics and Limitations," in RE. Lipsey and H.S. Tice, eds. ,   The
Measurement of Saving. Investment and Wealth, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Hurd, M., 1987, "Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests," American
Economic Review, June, 77:298-312.

Jorgenson, D,W. and B.M. Fraumeni, 1988, "The Accumulation of Human
and Nonhuman Capital, 1948-1984," in R.E. Lipsey and H.S. Tice, eds., The
Measurement of Savinz. Investment and Wealth, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Jorgenson, D.W. ,L.J. Lau, and TM. Stoker, 1982, "The Transcendental
Logarithmic Model of Aggregate Consumer Behavior," Advances in
Econometrics, 1:97-238.

Katz, A. J. ,1983, "Valuing the Services of Consumer Durables,"
Review of Income and Wealth, December, 29:405-427.

Kendrick, J.W., 1976, The Formation and Stocks of Total Capital, New
York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Klein, L., 1986, "International Aspects of Saving," in C.F. Adams and S.M.
Wachter, eds., Savings and Capital Formation: The Policy Options,
Lexington, Massachusetts: Lexington Books.

Lipsey, R.E. and H.S. Tice, eds.., 1988, The Measurement of Saving.
Investment and Wealth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Rosen, S., 1988, "Discussion," in R.E. Lipsey and H.S. Tice, eds,, Ih.
Measurement of Savinz. Investment and Wealth, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Stiglitz, J.E. and A. Weiss, 1981, "Credit Rationing in Markets with
Imperfect Imformation," American Economic Review, June, 71:393-410.

Wilson, J.F., J.L. Freund, F.O. Yohn and W. Lederer, 1988, "Household
Saving Measurement: Recent Experience from the Flow of Funds Perspective,"
in R.E. Lipsey and H.S. Tice, eds., The Measurement of Savinz. Investment
and Wealth, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
