                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 HEDONIC PRICE INDEXES AND THE MEASUREMENT
                       OF CAPITAL AND PRODUCTIVITY:
                        SOME HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS




                               Zvi Griliches




                           Working Paper No. 2634




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  June 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #2634
                                          June 1988


                    HEDONIC PRICE INDEXES AND THE MEASUREMENT
                          OF CAPITAL AND PRODUCTIVITY:
                           SOME HISTORICAL REFLECTIONS


                                     ABSTRACT




       The paper describes the background for my original "hedonics" paper

(Griliches 1961) and discusses some of the issues raised by the subsequent

literature on this range of topics. It goes on to consider some of the

implications of this work for the measurement of capital services and connects

it to the Jorgenson-Griliches (1967) paper on the "explanation of productivity

change." It reviews the criticisms made against that paper, especially the

use of a utilization adjustment, and finds itself, perhaps unsurprisingly,

still in sympathy with its major thrust. It also cautions against

interpreting the recent slowdown in the growth of total factor productivity as

implying, necessarily, a parallel slowdown in the technological potential of

the   economy.




                                          Zvi Griliches
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Harvard University
                                          125 Littauer Center
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                                       I




             Hedonic Price Indexes and the Measurement of Capital

                and Productivity: Some Historical Reflections.



                                   Zvi Griliches*



     More than thirty years have passed since I stumbled onto the topic of

"hedonic" price indexes. More than twenty years have passed since Dale

Jorgenson and I pointed to "quality change" problems as a major potential

"explanation" of productivity growth as it was then being measured. It may be

opportune, therefore, on this festive occassion to reminisce a bit about where

from and how far we have come and also how much still remains to be done in

this, as in many other, areas of empirical research.

     before I get very far with this however, I should first enter a

disclaimer. There was nothing particularily original about my first "Hedonic

Price Indexes" paper (Griliches, 1961). The notion that one might use

regression techniques to relate the prices of different "models" or versions

of a commodity to differences in their characteristics, "qualities", and

discover thereby the relative valuation of such qualities is reasonably

obvious and has been rediscovered a number of times by many people. The

earliest references I know of today come primarily from agricultural

economics: Fred Waugh's Columbia thesis on vegetabiL prices (Waugh 1928 and

1929) and Vail's (1932) work on mixed fertiLizer prices. At the time, in the

late 1950's, when I went looking for references to buttress my own regressions.

I was pointed first to Stone's (1956) analysis of liquor prices and Court's

(1938) explicit use of the "hedotic" label for his automobile price



                               I
                                                                        2



regressions. At the theoretical level the issues had been discussed by Hofsten

(1952), Houthakker (1951-2), Adelman (1960), and others. It was clear to me

then and I think it is also clearly stated in the 1961 paper that the idea

itself was not particularily original, What was impressive about that paper

is that it took the idea seriously, did a lot of work with it and showed that

something interesting can indeed be accomplished this way. Showing that

something interesting is actually doable had a significant impact on the

subsequent literature, generating much new work in this style and also quite a

bit of theoretical controversy and elaboration. But I am running ahead of my

story.

     There were two influences, two   lines   of research that led me to work on

this problem. In my thesis on hybrid corn (Griliches 1956 and l957b) I had

studied the diffusion of an innovation as it was affected by various economic

forces. Central to that work was the concept of a diffusion curve or path, I

had used the logistic for this purpose, in which "time" is essentially

exogenous (as it was also to be in the concurrent and subsequent theories of

technological change). The model specified an adjustment path to the new

equilibrium, but the equilibrium level itself, the "ceiling" level for the new

technology, was fixed and unchanging over time (though I allowed it to differ

cross-sectionally). I was not entirely happy with such a formulation and had

already explored in an appendix to my thesis an alternative model which made

the rate of adoption a direct function of profitability with improvements in

the "quality" of the technology (rising relative yields of hybrid versus open

pollinated corn) and the fall in its price as its major driving forces. The

arrival of partial-adjustment distributed-lag models at Chicago via Cagan

(1956) and Theil (who had brought Koyck's 1954 model to Nerlove's and my



                               2
                                                                     3



attention] led me to try them as an alternative framework for the analysis of

technical change in my work on the demand for fertilizer in agriculture

(Criliches 1958a). That work interpreted the growth in fertilizer use as a

lagged response to the continued decline in its real price. For that I

needed, however, a reasonable price series and I was not satisfied with the

official USDA price index on this topic. The "quality" of the fertilizers

used was changing rapidly, the use of nitrogen was increasing relative to the

other components, and the official price series were not capturing it

adequately. Ac alternative was available to me in the form of a series of

"total plant nutrients used" and an estimate of the average price per plant

nutrient unit could be derived from it and the total fertilizer expenditure

series. But that series gave equal weight to each of the three major plant

nutrients [nitrogen N, phosphoric acid P, and potash K] which looked wrong to

me. It was then that I ran my first "hedonic" regression, though I did not

know its name at that point [in 1957], relating the prices of different mixed

fertilizers to their "formula", the mix of their ingredients, to derive better

weights for the construction of a total "constant quality" fertilizer quantity

and price series. This regression, which yielded 3.5, 2, and 1 as the

approximate "correct" weights for the three major plant nutrients [N, P, and

K] instead of the equal weights implicit in the total plant nutrients concept,

is buried in a footnote in the final published version (Griliches 1958a,

p. 599).   I had not realized yet what was going to sprout from it in the

future.

     The other line of work that merged with it was the direct measurement of

"technological change" using output over input indexes. This 1ir was based

on earlier work in agriculture by Barton and Cooper (1948), was summarized for



                                3
                                                                        14




me   by Schultz (1953), and had been pursued at Chicago by Ruttan (1954      and

1957), before the topic was transformed by Solow's (1957) elegant

reformulation and its subsequent elaboration by Jorgenson and Griliches

(1967).     Similar work had been done in industry by Schmookler (1952) and

Abrajnovitz (1956), among   others.   The stylized facts that had emerged were

quite clear. The lion's share of the observed growth in output was

attributable to "technical change," or more correctly, to the "residual."

       Having come to this problem with a background in econometrics, I had used

Schultz's numbers to estimate the social returns to public investments in

agricultural research (Griliches l958b), I found the spectacle of economic

models yielding large residuals rather uncomfortable, even when we fudged the

issue by renaming them as "technical change" and then claiming credit for their

"measurement." My interest in specification analysis (Griliches 1957a) led me

to a series of questions about the model used to compute such "residuals" and

also, especially, about the ingredients, the data, used in its implementation.

This led me to a research program which focused on the various components of

such computations and alternatives to them: the measurement of the services of

capital equipment items and the issues of deflation, quality change, and the

measurement of a relevant depreciation concept; the measurement of labor input

and the contribution of education to its changing quality; the role of "left-

out" variables linputs] such as public and private investments in R&D; and

formula misspecification issues, especially economies of scale and other

sources of disequilibria, which led me to a continued involvement with

production function estimation. This program of research, which was anounced,

implicitely, in my "Measuring Inputs in Agriculture" (Griliches 1960) paper

and found its most full expression in my two     papers   on agricultural



                                  4
                                                                     5




productivity (Griliches 1963 and l964a), served me rather well in subsequent

years and to this date. It was in certain aspects rather similar to the task

pursued by Denison (1962) at about the same time, except that I put more

emphasis on its econometric aspects, on the explicit testing of the various

proposed adjustments and "sources of growth" attributions.

     It was in this context, when I turned to the examination how the various

capital measures were being constructed and especially deflated, that I

escalated my incipient efforts in agriculture into a more general Staff Report

for the Stigler Committee (NBER 1961), resurecting thereby the "hedonic

regression" approach to the measurement of quality change problem. This paper

appeared at a rather opportune moment, just as data, computer resources,

econometric training and sophistication, and general interest in this range of

topics were all expanding, and a whole literature developed in its wake,

influencing the measurement of real estate prices, wage equations,

enviromental amenities, and other aspects of "qualitative differences". This

literature has become to vast for one person to survey it.   I tried to do so

earlier on in its development in the introduction to the volume of essays on

this topic edited by me (Griliches 1971). More recent surveys can be found in

Triplett (1975 and 1987), Berndt (1983), and Bartik and Smith (1987). Here I

can only indicate what I consider to be a few of the highlights of this

literature.


                                       II




     There are three major issues which tend to be addressed, in different

proportions, in the "hedonic" literature. There is a range of theoretical

questions: how should different "qualities," characteristics, of commodities


                                5
                                                                    6




(outputs or inputs) be modelled, entered into utility or cost functions and

translated into demand and supply functions and the resulting market outcomes?

Can one give a theoretically consistent interpretation to "quality adjusted"

price indexes and can one derive valid restrictions from the theory which the

empirical price-characteristics regressions should satisfy? There is also a

wide range of empirical problems: What are the salient characteristics of a

particular commodity? Under what conditions should one expect their market

valuation to remain constant? How should the regression framework be

expanded, what variables should be added to it, so as to keep the resulting

estimates "stable" in face of changing circumstances? And there is also a

whole host of econometric methodology issues associated with the attempt to

estimate a relationship that can be thought of as being the result of an

interaction of both demand and supply forces, and with the use of detailed

micro data, often in the form of an unbalanced panel of data for a fixed

number of manufacturers, but a different and changing number of "models"

(commodity versions).

     The theoretical literature tends to focus either on the demand side,

Lancaster (1966, 1971), Muellbauer (1974), and Berndt (1983), among others, or

the supply side (see Ohta, 1975 for an example), with very few, Rosen (1974)

being a notable exemption, attempting a full general equilibrium discussion.

(See also Epple 1987 for a recent discussion.) There is much finger-pointing

at the restrictive assumptions required to establish the "existence" and

meaning of hedonic "guality or price indexes.    (See, e.g., Muellbauer, 1974,

and Lucas 1975.) While useful, I feel that this literature has misunderstood

the original purpose of the hedonic suggestion. It is easy to show that

except for unique circumstances and under very stringent assumptions it is not


                                6
                                                                      7




possible to devise a perfect price index for      commodity classification.

With finite amounts of data, different procedures will yield (hopefully not

very) different answers, and even "good" formulae, such as Divisia-type

indexes, cannot be given a satisfactory theoretical interpretation except in

very limiting and unrealistic circumstances. Most of the objections to

attempts to constri.ict a price index of automobiles from the consideration of

their various attributes apply with the same force to the construction of a

motor-vehicles price index out of the prices of cars, trucks, and motorcycles.

     My own point of view is that what the hedonic approach tries to do is

estimate aspects of the budget constraint facing consumers, allowing thereby

the estimation of "missing" prices when quality changes. It is not in the

business of estimating utility or cost functions per Se, though it can also be

very useful for these purposes. (See Cardell 1977, McFadden 1978, and

Trajtenberg 1983 for examples.) What is being estimated is actually the locus

of intersections of the demand curves of different consumers with varying

tastes and the supply functions of different producers with possibly varying

technologies of production. One is unlikely, therefore, to be able to recover

the underlying utility and cost functions from such data alone, except in very

special circumstances. Nor can theoretical derivations at the individual

level really provide substantive constraints on the estimation of such "market"

relations. (See the detailed discussion of many of these issues, in the context

of estimating the value of urban amenities, in Bartik and Smith, 1987.) Hence

my preference for the "estimation of missing prices" interpretation of this

approach. Accepting that, one still faces the usual index number problems and

ambiguities but at least one is back to the "previous case". In this my views

are close to those articulated by Triplett (1983 and 1986). The following


                                7
                                                                       8




passage from Ohta and Criliches (1976, p.326) represents them reasonably well:

     "Despite the theoretical proofs to the contrary, the Consumer Price Index

(CPI) "exists" and is even of some use. It is thus of some value to attempt to

improve it even if perfection is unattainable. What the hedonic approach

attempted was to provide a tool for estimating "missing" prices, prices of

particular bundles not observed in the original or later periods. It did not

pretend to dispose of the question of whether various observed differentials

are demand or supply determined, how the observed variety of models in the

market is generated, and whether the resulting indexes have an unambiguous

welfare interpretation. Its goals were modest. It offered the tool of

econometrics, with all of its attendant problems, as a help to the solution of

the first two issues, the detection of the relevant characteristics of a

commodity and the estimation of their marginal market valuation."

    "Because of its focus on price explanation and its purpose of "predicting"

the price of unobserved variants of a commodity in particular periods, the

hedonic hypothesis can be viewed as asserting the existence of a reduced-form

relationship between prices and the various characteristics of the commodity.

That relationship need not be "stable" over time, but changes that occur should

have some rhyme and reason to them, otherwise one would suspect that the

observed results are a fluke and cannot be used in the extrapolation necessary

for the derivation of missing prices..."

     "To accomplish even such limited goals, one requires much prior

information on the commodity in question (econometrics is not a very good tool

when wielded blindly), lots of good data, and a detailed analysis of the

robustness of one's conclusions relative to the many possible alternative

specifications of the modsi."


                                8
                                                                      9




     The theoretical developments have been useful, however, in elucidating

under what conditions one might expect the hedonic price functions to be

stable or shift and which variables might be important in explaining such

shifts across markets and time. My own work in this area has had more of a

methodological-empirical flavor to it though there were also non-negligible

attempts to formulate and clarify the theory underlying such measurement

techniques in Adelman and Griliches (1961), Griliches (1964b) and in Ohta and

Griliches (1976 and 1986). The last two papers represent also my efforts to

pursue additional empirical work in this area. In the 1976 paper with Ohta we

extended the earlier approach to the analysis of used automobile prices and

investigated differences between performance and specification characteristics

and pricing differences between manufacturers of different makes of

automobiles. The 1986 paper focuses on the role of gasoline price changes in

shifting the hedonic price relationships for cars, extends the theory to

incorporate operating costs components, and shows that allowing for such price

changes leaves the "extended" hedonic function effectively unchanged,

permitting one to maintain the stability of tastes hypothesis in this market.

See also Gordon (1983) and Kahn (1986) for related work.

     The major recent "success" of hedonic methods has been their acceptance

by the official statistical agencies after many years of resistance. Hedonic

methods had been used for a long time by the Bureau of the Census to compute

its index of single family houses and much experimental work was carried on at

the Bureau of Labor Statistics, but it was not until 'inuary 1986, when the

Survey of Current Business announced a revision of the U.S. National Income

Accounts which incorporated a new price index for computers based on the

hedonic methodology, that one could feel that they had received the official


                               9
                                                                       to


imprimatur.   This index is described and discussed in Cole et al (1986) and

Triplett (1986). (See also Gordon 1988 for alternative computations.) It

It would be interesting to speculate why it has taken so long for these
methods to penetrate into the "official" circles. This is not, of course, the

first use of such methods by the statistical agencies. The Bureau of the

Census has used hedonic methods for years in the construction of its

residential housing price indexes and there has been significant experimental

work with these methods at the BLS, by Gavett, Early and Sinclair, Triplett,

and others. But the recent computer price indexes revision is the first time

an agency has embraced these methods publicly in a significant way.

     It is easy to forget how vehement the oposition was. One needs to go

back to the 1962 and 1965 exchanges between Gilbert, Denison, Jaszi and myself

to recapture the flavor of some of these arguments. (See Griliches 1962 and

1964b and the associated comments.) The objections could be caricatured as

either saying that it couldn't be done, or it shouldn't be done, or it was

already being done by the standard conventional methods. The fact that it is

difficult to do, that an actual empirical implementation calls for much

judgemenc on the part of the analyst and hence exposes him to the charge of

subjectivity is still the most telling objection today. The fact that the

standard procedures also involve much judgment and "ad-hockery" is usually

wall hidden behind the official facade of the statistical establishment.

Hedonic methods are difficult. They require more data and more analysis and

judgement. Their virtue is that they use more data and that they expose some

of these judgements to the final user of the results, providing an implicit

warning of their tenousness. Here, as everywhere else in economics, there is

no free lunch.


                               10
                                                                     11



     The notion that one should stick only to "cost" based quality

differentials was preposterous at the time and has been largely given up by

its proponents. The difference between "resource" use and "utility" based

quality adjustments was clarified in the debates between Gordon (1983) and

Triplett (1983) and it is now well understood that both concepts make sense in

different circumstances and that both are interesting and useful, especially

when they do not coincide.

     The notion that the statistical agencies where already doing all this

under the guise of "linking" was largely wishful thinking though matters have

improved greatly over the years. The problem was not that a detailed "all

models" Divisia index would not come close to a hedonic regression result. It

might even be superior to it. It was just that it was not being done. In

part because the detailed data were not being collected and new products and

new varieties of older products were not showing up in the indexes until it

was much too late. The hedonic approach was one way of implementing what

they should have been doing in the first place. It was also more willing to

cary the "linking" idea further, across models that differed significantly in

more than one dimension. It could not solve the really new product problem, a

product whose uses and dimensions had no previous precedent or anticipation.

But it was willing to push comparisons much further than it had been done

before, not giving up as easily in the face of a changing world. Buried

within the hedonic idea was already the germ of Becker's (1965) "household

production function" and the notion that one should look at the relevant

activity as a whole, at its "ultimate" product in terms of utility or

productivity, and not just at the individual components. In this sense, there

remains still much to be done in this area. I don't think that we have


                              11
                                                                       12




actually been daring enough. We have not yet produced a decent price index of

Thealth" nor have we done the simpler task of tracing thru the relevant

history of the price of computation, from the days of the abacus, through the

electric desk calculators of my student days [who remembers still the

Marchants, Monroes, and Frieden's of yore?], the electronic main-frames of our

youth, and the PC revolution of recent years.     I think that it is doable and I

believe that it is worth doing, whether we use the results to revise the

national Income accounts or not.



                                        III




     The work on hedonic price indexes connected to my more general interest

in the measurement of capital for the analysis of productivity change. A

rather complete statement of my original position on this matter can be found

in the Yehuda Grunfeld Memorial volume paper (Griliches, 1963). This was to

be refined later in the joint work with Jorgenson (Griliches and Jorgenson,

1966, and Jorgenson and Griliches 1967). The difficulty with the available

capital measures then, and to a great extent still now, was, in my view, the

fact that they were being over-deflated and over-depreciated, that items with

different expected lives were being added together in a wrong way, and that no

allowance was being made for changes in the utilization of such capital. The

over-deflation issues was already alluded to in the discussion above; it was

fed by the strong suspicion that the various available machinery and durable

equipment price indexes did not take quality change into account adequately,

if at all. This issue connects also to the "embodied" technical change idea

(Solow, 1960) and the   literature   that flowed from it. My view on over-


                               12
                                                                      13




depreciation remains controversial (see Miller, 1983). I myself turned early

to the evidence of used machinery markets to point out that the official

depreciation numbers were too high, that they were leading to an underestimate

of actual capital accumulation, but I also argued that the observed

depreciation rates in second-hand markets contain a large obsolescence

component, induced by the rising quality of new machines. This depreciation

is a valid subtraction from the present value of a machine in current prices

but it is not the right concept to be used in the construction of a constant

quality notion of the flow of services from the existing capital stock in

"constant prices." The fact that new machines are better does not imply that

the "real" flow of services available from the old machines has declined,

either potentially or actually. The point is illustrated visually in Figure

1, taken from the original 1963 paper which plots the information on different

performance concepts for farm tractors as a function of their age. These data

and my subsequent attempts to explore some of these issues econometrically

(see especially Pakes and Griliches, 1984) all throw doubt on the current

practice of assuming that the services of physical capital deteriorate at a

rapid and fixed rate, independent of their age. But the available data on

types of machinery in place and their actual age structure have been rather

sparse, and there has been less progress in this direction than I think is

desirable and might even be possible.



                                        Iv


     Several strands of this work came together in the 1967 joint paper with

Jorgenson on "The Explanation of Productivity Change," in an attempt at a more



                              13
complete accounting of the sources of economic growth. Given its twentieth

anniversary last year it may be worthwhile to review some of the issues raised

there.

     In 1967 we argued that a "correct" index number framework and the "right'

measurement of inputs would reduce greatly the role of the "residual"

("advances in knowledge," total factor productivity, disembodied technical

change, and/or other such terms) in accounting for the observed growth in

output. It brought together Jorgenson's work on Divisia indexes, on the

correct measurement of cost of capital, and on the right aggregation

procedures for it, with my own earlier work on the measurement of capital

prices and quality change and the contribution of education to productivity

growth (Griliches 1965). It produced the startling conclusion, already

foreshadowed in my agricultural productivity papers, that an adjustment of

conventional inputs for measurement and aggregation error may eliminate much

of the mystery that was associated with the original findings of large

unexplained components in the growth of national and sectoral outputs. It did

this with a "Look Ma! No hands!" attitude, using neither additional outside

variables such as R&D, or allowing for economies of scale or other

disequlibria. This did indeed attract attention and also criticism. The most

penetrating criticism came from Denison (1969) which led to an exhange between

us in the May 1972 issue of the Survey of Current Business.

     Denison found a number of minor errors and one major one in our

computations. By trying to adjust for changing utilization rates we used data

on energy consumption of electric motors in manufacturing, a direct measure of

capital equipment utilization in manufacturing (borrowed to a large extent

from Foss 1963), but extrapolated it also to non-equipment components of



                              14
                                                                      15



capital in manufacturing and to all capital outside of manufacturing,

including residential structures. There was also the uneasy issue of

integrating a utilization adjustment within what was otherwise a pure

equilibrium story. Once we conceded most of the utilization adjustment, our

"explanation" of productivity growth shrank from 94 to 43 percent and with it

also our claim to "do it all" (without mirrors).

     I still believe, however, that we were right in our basic idea that

productivity growth should be "explained" rather than just measured and that

errors of measurement and concept have a major role in this. But we did not go

far enough in that direction. We offered improved index number formulae, a

better reweighting of capital input components, a major adjustment of the

employment data for improvements in the quality of labor, revisions in

investment price indexes, and estimates of changes in capital utilization.

The potential orders of magnitude of the adjustments based on the first two

contributions, index number formulae and the reweighting of capital

components, are not large enough to account for a major part of the observed

"residual". The labor quality adjustment was not really controversial, but

the capital price indexes and utilization adjustments deserve a bit more

discussion. We argued for the idea that technical change could be thought of,

in a sense, as being "embodied" in factor inputs, in new machines and human

capital, and that a better measurement of these inputs via the non-

tautological route of hedonic index numbers for both capital and labor, could

account for most of what was being interpreted as a "residual." It became

clear, however, that without extending our framework further to allow for R&D

and other externalities, increasing returns to scale and other disequilibria,

we were unlikely to approach a full "explanation" of productivity change (see



                               15
                                                                     16


the last paragraphs of our "Reply to Denison": Jorgenson and Griliches 1972).

     It may appear that adjusting a particular input for misxneasured quality

change would not have much of an effect on productivity growth measurement

since one would need also to adjust the output figures for the corresponding

industry. But as long as the share of this industry in final output is less

than the elasticity of output with respect to this input, the two adjustments

will not cancel themselves out. Since the share of investment in output is

significantly lower than reasonable estimates of the share of capital in total

factor costs, adjusting capital for mismeasurement of its prices does lead to

a net reduction in the computed residual. Empirically it is clear that even

without considering any of the potential externalities associated with new

capital, there are enough questions about the official price indexes in these

areas to make further work on this topic a high priority.

     The utilization adjustment fit uneasily within the rather strict

competitive equilibrium framework of the Jorgenson-Griliches paper. The

analogy was made to labor hours, calling for the parallel concept of machine

hours as the relevant notion of capital services. We had also in mind the

model of a continuous process plant where output is more or less proportional

to hours of operation. Since we were interested primarily in "productivity"

change as a measure of "technical" change, a change that is due to changes in

techniques of production, fluctuations in "utilization", whether a plant

worked one shift or two, 10 months or 12, were not really relevant for this

purpose.    But while labor unemployment was happening off-stage as far as
business productivity accounts were concerned, capital "underemployment" was
difficult   to reconcile with the maximizing behavior with perfect foresight

implicit in our framework.



                                16
                                                                     17



     There are two somewhat separate "utilization" issues. Productivity as

measured is stongly pro-cyclical. Measured inputs, especially capital and

labor services, fluctuate less than reported output. The resulting

fluctuations in "productivity" do not make sense if we want to interpret them

as a measure of the growth in the level of technology or the state of

economically valuable knowledge of an economy. The U.S. economy did not

"forget" four percent of its technology between 1974 and 1975. Nor was there

a similar deterioration in the skill of its labor force. (National welfare

did go down as the result of OPEC induced world-wide rise in energy prices,

but that is a separate story.)

     What is wrong with the productivity numbers in this case is that we do

not measure accurately the actual amounts of labor or machine hours used rather

than just paid for. Since both capital and labor are bought or hired in

anticipation of a certain level of activity and on long term contracts, actual

factor payments do not reflect their respective marginal products except in

the case of perfect foresight and only in the long run. Under-utilization of

factors of production is the result of unanticipated shifts in demand and

various rigidities built into the economic system due to longer term explicit

and implicit contracts (and other market imperfections) between worker and

employer and seller and buyer. If our interest is primarily on the

"technological" interpretation of productivity measures, we must either ignore

such shorter run fluctuations or somehow adjust for them. This was the

rationale behind our original use of energy consumed by electric motors (per

installed horsepower) as a utilization adjustment.

     We used energy consumption as a proxy for the unobserved variation in

machine hours and not on its own behalf as an important intermediate input.



                                 17
                                                                     18


Used in the latter fashion it is a produced input which would cancel out at the

aggregate level (as was pointed out by Denison in his comment on our paper).

Alternatively, one could adjust the weight (share) of capital services in

one's total input index, to reflect the fact that underutilization of the

existing stock of resources should' reduce significantly the shadow price of

using them. (This is the approach suggested in erndt and Fuss ,   1986).
Unfortunately, it is difficult to use the observed factor returns for these

purposes, both because prices do not fall rapidly enough in the face of

unanticipated demand shocks and because of a variety of longer run contractual

factor payments arrangement which break the link between factor rewards and

their current productivity.

     This reflects, in a sense, the failure of the assumption of perfect

competition which is the basis for much of the standard productivity accounts.

The actual world we live in is full of short-run rigidities, transaction costs,

immalleable capital, and immobile resources, resulting in the pervasive

presence of quasi-rents and short-term capital gains and losses. While I do

not believe that such discrepancies from uperfectu competition actually imply

the presence of a significant market power in most industries (as argued, for

example, by Hall 1986), they do make productivity accounting even more

difficult.

     The other aspect of utilization is the longer run trend in shift-work,

the length of the workweek, and changes in hours of operation per day by plants,

stores, and service establishments. Consider, for example, a decline in over-

time or night-shift premia due, say, to a decline in union power. This would

reduce the price of a certain type of capital service and expand its use. If

capital is not measured in machine hours, we would show a rise in productivity



                               18
                                                                    19



even though there has been no "technological" change in methods of production.

I would prefer not to include such changes in the definition of productivity,

since I interpret them as movements along (or towards) a stable production

possibilities frontier. But there did occur an organizational change which

allowed us to get more "flow," more hours per day or year, from a given stock

of equipment or other resources. One way to look at this is to think of two

types of activities: output production which rents machine and labor hours and

the supply of capital services (and also effective labor hours) from the

existing resource levels. A decline in over-time premia would be similar to a

decline in the tariff on a certain kind of imported input. It would lead to

an improvement in "efficiency" but not necessarily to a "technical" change.

     It is still my belief that we need to adjust our data for such capacity

utilization fluctuations for a better understanding of "technical" change, the

issue that brought us to the analysis of such data in the first place. A

consistent framework for such an adjustment will require, however, the

introduction of adjustment costs and ex-post errors into the productivity

measurement framework. (See Morrison, 1985, and the literature cited there

for recent developments in this area.) It is not clear, however, whether one

can separate longer-run developments in the utilization of capital from

changes in technology and the organization of society. Much of capital is

employed outside continuous process manufacturing and there the connection

between its utilization and productivity is much looser. The rising cost of

human time and the desire for variety and flexibility have led to much

investment in what might be called "standby" capacity with rather low

utilization rates. The hi-fi system in my home is operating only at a

fraction of its potential capacity. Much inventory is held in many businesses



                              19
                                                                     20


to economize on other aspects of labor activity. Nor is it clear that an

extension of store hours with a resulting decline in productivity per square-

foot-hour of store space is necessarily a bad thing. Thus it is difficult to

see how one could separate long run trends in utilization from changes in

production and consumption technologies. It is, however, a topic worth

studying and a potentially important contributor to "explanations" of apparent

swings in the statistics on measured productivity.

     Whether we include or exclude such changes from our "productivity"

concept will affect our ability to "account" for them. But that is not the

important issue. We do want to measure them, because we do want to understand

what happened, to "explain" productivity.   The rest is semantics.

     Many of these problems arise because we do not disaggregate adequately

and do not describe the production process in adequate detail. A model which

would distinguish between the use of capital and labor at different times of

the day and year and does not assume that their shadow prices are constant

between different "hours" or over time, would be capable of handling these

kind of shifts. We do not have the data to implement such a program but it

underscores the message of our original paper: much of what passes for

productivity change in conventional data is the result of aggregation errors,

the wrong measurement of input quantities, and the use of wrong weights to

combine them into "total factor input" indexes.

     Something more should be said about the rather vague notions of

"explanation" and "accounting". National Income accounts and associated index

numbers are economic constructs, based on an implicit model of the economy and

a variety of more or less persuasive logical and empirical arguments. It is

not well adapted to "hypothesis testing" or debates about causality. In



                               20
                                                                      21


proposing a better measure of, say, labor, we rely on the evidence of market

wage differentials. By bringing in more evidence on this topic we are not

just reducing the "residual" tautologically. But the fact that it goes down

as the result of such an adjustment does not make it right either. A

different kind of evidence is required to provide a more persuasive

justification for such adjustments. That is why I turned early on to the use

of production functions for econometric testing. Without moving in such a

direction one tends to run into various paradoxes. For example, capital

growth accelerated in the 1970's in many industries without a comparable

increase in the growth of output. In the index number sense of growth

accounting, capital "explained" a larger fraction of the growth of output and

we did, indeed, have a smaller residual. But in spite of this "accounting",

the mystery only deepened.

     The "econometric" approach to growth accounting involves one in the

estimation of production functions. This allows one to test or validate a

particular way of measuring an input or adjusting it for quality change; to

estimate and test the role of left-out public good inputs such as R&D and

other externality generating activities; to estimate economies of scale; and

to check on the possibility of disequilibria and estimate the deviation of

"true" output elasticities from their respective factor shares. Production

function estimation raises many problems of its own, including issues of

aggregation, errors of measurement and simultaneity, but it is one of the few

ways available to us for checking the validity of the suggested attributions

of productivity growth to its various "sources".

     My work on agricultural productivity (Griliches 1963 and 1964a) which

used production function estimation as its main organizing device, left me



                              21
                                                                       22



with the conviction that education, investment in research, and economies of

scale (both at the level of the firm and at the level of the market) were the

important sources of productivity growth in the long run. Since in the paper

with Jorgenson we had not allowed for the two latter sources of growth, I was

not too surprised or disheartened when it turned out that we could not really

explain all of aggregate productivity change by formula and labor and capital

quality adjustments alone. It was clear, however, that one would need more

and better data to make such additional adjustments more reliable and

convincing. I turned, therefore, to trying to aitass more data and more

evidence on these topics, especially the measurement of the contribution of

education (Criliches 1977) and the role of R&D   (Griliches   1984 and 1986).

     Even though we now have more data, more advanced econometric technology,

and better computer resources, the overall state of this field has not

advanced all that much in the last twenty years. We are really not much closer to

an "explanation" of the observed changes in the various productivity indexes.

A tremendous effort was launched by Jorgenson and his co-workers (Christensen,

Fraumeni, Gollop, Nishimizu, and others) to improve and systematize the

relevant data sources, to produce and analyze a consistent set of industry

level total factor productivity accounts, to extend and generalize our

original labor quality adjustments, and to extend all of this also to

international comparisons of productivity. In the process, however, rather

than pursuing the possibly hopeless quest for a complete "explanation" of

productivity growth, they chose to focus instead on developing more precise

and detailed productivity measures at various levels of aggregation and

devising statistical models for their analysis. Denison (1974 and 1979), in

parallel, was pursuing his quest for a more complete accounting of the sources



                               22
                                                                    23


of growth, putting together as many reasonable scraps of information as were

available, but not embedding them in a clear theoretical framework or an

econometrically testable setting. The incompleteness of both approaches and

the unsatisfactory state of this field as a whole was revealed by the sharp

and prolonged slowdown in the growth of measured productivity which began in

the mid-seventies. Despite the best attempts of these and other researchers,

it has not been possible to account for this slowdown within the standard

growth accounting framework without concluding that the "residual" had

changed, that the underlying total factor productivity growth rate fell

sometime in the late 1960's or early 1970's. (See Denison 1984, Griliches

1980 and 1988, Kendrick 1983, and many others).

     I do not believe, however, that this slowdown can be interpreted to imply

that the underlying rate of technical change has slowed down, that we have

exhausted our technological frontiers. In my opinion, it was caused by misguided

macro policies induced by the oil price shocks and the subsequent inflation

and the fears thereof. Without allowing for errors in capital accumulation

(which continued initially at a rather high rate, in spite of the sharp

declines in aggregate demand) and widespread underutilization of capacity, it

is not possible to interpret the conventional productivity statistics. Surely

"knowledge" did not retreat. Moreover, I do not believe that one can use

statistics from such periods to infer anything about longer term technological

trends. If we are not close to our production possibilities frontier, we

cannot tell what is happening to it and whether the underlying growth rate of

an economy's "potential" has slowed down or not. We need a better articulated

theoretical framework, one that would allow for long term factor substitution

and short term rigidities and errors, before we shall be able to understand



                               23
                                                                      24


better what has happened to us recently. We also need better data, especially

on output and input prices and various aspects of labor and capital

utilization.




                              24
                                                                      25




                                   Footnote




*Paul M. Warburg, Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and Director of

the Productivity Program at the National Bureau of Economic Research,

Cambridge, Massachusetts.   I am indebted to the National Science Foundation

for its support of this work over the last thirty years. A significant

portion of this paper has been adopted from the Introduction to the

forthcoming collection of my early papers (Griliches 1988b).
                                                                         26




                                      REFERENCES




AbramovitZ, Moses, 1956, Resource and Output Trends      in the U.S. Since 1870,

     NBER   Occasional   Paper 52, New York, New York.

Adelman, Irma, (1960), "On an Index of Quality Change." Paper given at the

     August meeting of the American Statistical Association,      Stanford, CA.

Adelman, Irma and Zvi Griliches (1961), "On an Index of Quality Change,       Journal

     of the American Statistical Association, 56, 535-548.

Bartik, Timothy J. and V. Kerry Smith, 1987, "Urban Amenities and Public Policy," in

     E.S. Mills, ed., Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. II,

     Chapter 31, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 505-552.

Barton, CT. and M,B. Cooper, 1948. "Relation of Agricultural Production to

     Inputs," Review of Economics and Statistics, 30, May, 117-126.

Becker, Gary   S.,   1965. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal,

     75(299), 493-517.

Berndt, Ernst R., 1983, "Quality Adjustment, Hedonics, and Modern Empirical Demand

     Analysis," in WE. Diewert and C. Montemarquette, eds., Price Level

     Measurement, Ottawa: Statistics Canada.

Berndt, Ernst and Melvin Fuss, 1986, "Productivity Measurement with Adjustments

     for Variations in Capacity Utilization and Other Forms of Temporary

     Equilibrium," Journal of Econometrics, 33(1/2) 7-29.

 Cagan, Phillip, 1956, "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation," in M. Friedman,

      ed., Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, Chicago: University of

      Chicago Press, 25-11.

 Cardell, Nicholas Scott, 1977, "Methodology for Predicting the Demand for New
                                                                               27



     Electricity Using       Goods," Charles River Associates Report 244,

     Cambridge. Massachusetts, unpublished.

Cole, R.     Y.C. Chen,   J.A.   Barquin-Stolleuian, E. Dulberger, N. Helvacian and

     J.H. Hodge, 1986, "Quality Adjusted Price Indexes for Computer Processors

     and Selected Peripheral Equipment," Survey of Current Business, 66(1>,

     41-50.

Court, Andrew T., 1939, "Hedonic Price Indexes with Automotive Examples," in

     The     Dynamics of Automotive    Demand, New York: General Motors Corporation,

     99-117.

Denison, Edward F., 1962, The Sources of Economic Growth in the U.S. and the

     Alternatives Before US, Supplementary Paper No. 13, Committee for

     Economic Development, New York, New York.

___________       1969, "Some Major Issues in Productivity Analysis: An

      Examination of Estimates by Jorgenson and Griliches," Survey of Current

     Business, 49 (5, Part II), 1-27.

_____________      1974, Accounting for United States Economic Growth 1929-1969,

     Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

____________       1979, Accounting for Slower Economic Growth, Washington,
     D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

____________       1984, "Accounting for Slower Economic Growth: An Update," in

     J.W. Kendrick, ed., International Comparisons of Productivity and Causes

      of the Slowdown, Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1.46.

Epple, Dennis. 1987, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Estimating Demand

      and Supply Functions for Differentiated Products, Journal 2. Political

      Economy, 95(1), 59-80.

Foss, Murray, 1963, "The Utilization of Capital Equipnment," Survey of Current
                                                                              28




     Business, 43(6), 8-16.

Cordon, Robert J. , 1983, "Energy Efficiency, User-Cost Charge, and the Measurement

     of Durable Goods Prices," in M.F. Foss (ed.), The U.S. National Income

     and Product Accounts, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 47, NBER,

     Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 205-268.

___________      1988, "The Postwar Evolution of Computer Prices," in D,W.

     Jorgenson and R. Landau eds., Technology and Capital Formation,

     forthcoming.

Griliches, Zvi, 1956, "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of

     Technological Change," Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago.

_______________    l957a,   "Specification Bias in Estimates of Production

     Functions," Journal of Farm Economics, February, Vol. 39(1), 8-20.

______________     1957b, "Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of
     Technological Change," Econometrica, October, Vol. 25(4), 501-522.

______________      l958a,   "The Demand For Fertilizer: An Econometric Interpretation

     of a Technical Change," Journal of Farm Economics, XL(3), 591-606.

_____________       1958b, "Research Cost and Social Returns: Hybrid Corn and

     Related Innovations," Journal of Political Economy, October, vol.

     LXVI(5), 419-431.

_______________      1960, "Measuring Inputs in Agriculture: A Critical Survey,"

     Journal of Farm Economics, Proceedings Issue, December, Vol.

     XVII(5), 1411-1433.

______________       1961, "Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric
     Analysis of Quality Change," in NBER The Price Statistics of the Federal

     Government, Staff Report No. 3, General Series No. 73, New York, New York,

     173-196.
                                                                              29




____________     1962, "Quality Change and Index Numbers: A Critique," Monthly

    Labor Review, May, 542-544.

______________    1963, "The Sources of Measured Productivity Growth: U.S.

    Agriculture. 1940-1960," Journal of Political Economy, August, Vol.

    UQI(4), 331-346.

_____________     1964a, "Research Expenditures, Education, and the Aggregate

    Agricultural Production Function," American Economic Review.

    December, Vol. LIV(6), 961-974.

____________     1964b, "Notes on the Measurement of Price and Quality Changes,'

    Models of Income, Determination. Studies in Income and Wealth,

    NBER,   Princeton:   Princeton University Press, 28, 381-418.

____________     1971, Price Indexes and Quality Change, ed. , Cambridge,

    Mass.: Harvard University Press.

_____________    1977, "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric

     Problems," Econometrica, 45(1), 1-22.

_____________   l980a, "R&D and   The Productivity Slowdown," American Economic

     Review, vol. 70(2), 343-348.

_____________    1980b, "Returns to Research and Development Expenditures in the

     Private Sector," in J.W. Kendrick and B. Vaccara, ads. New Developments

     in Productivity Measurement, NBER,     Studies   in Income and Wealth,

     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, Vol. 44, 419-454.

______________    1986, "Productivity, R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm

     Level in the 1970s," American Economic Review, 76(1), 141-154.

______________    1988a, "Productivity Puzzles and R&D:      Another   Non-

     Explanation," Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.

                  l988b, Technolocy, Education and     Productivityl    Early Papers
                                                                           30




     with Notes to Subsequent Literature, New York and Oxford: Basil

     B].aclcwell, in press.

Griliches, Zvi and Dale Jorgenson. 1966, "Sources of Measured Productivity

     Change: Capital Input," American Economic Review, May, vol. 56(2),

     50-61.

Hall, Robert E., 1986, "Market Structure and Macroeconomic Fluctuations,"

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:285-322.

Hofsten, Erland von, 1952, Price Indexes and Quality Changes, Stockholm,

     Bokiorlaget Forum AZ.

Houthakker, Hendrik H., 1951-1952, "Compensated Changes itt   Quantities   and

     Qualities Consumer," Review of Economic Studies, 19: 155-164.

Jorgenson, Dale and Zvi Criliches, 1967, "The Explanation of Productivity

     Change," Review of Economic Studies, July, vol. XXXIV(3) 249-283.

___________________________    1972. "Issues in Growth Accounting: A Reply to

     Denison" in The Measurement of Productivity, special issue of Survey of

     Current Business, vol. 52(5), Part II, May, 31-111.

Kahn, James A., 1986, "Gasoline Prices and the Used Automobile Market: A

     Rational Expectations Asset Price Approach," Quarterly Journal of

     Economics, 101(2), 323-340.

Kendrick, John W., 1983, "International Comparisons of Recent Productivity

     Trends," in S.H. Shurr, ed., Energy, Productivity, and Economic Growth,

     Cambridge, MA: Delgeschlager & Co.

Koyck, L. M., 1954, Distributed       and Investment Analysis, Amsterdam:

     North Holland Publishing Company.

Lancaster, Kelvin, 1966, "A New Approach to Consumer Theory," Journal of Political

     Economy, 74, 132-157.
                                                                                 31




__________________      1971, Consumer Demand: A New Approach, New York:

     Columbia University Press.

Lucas, Robert E.B., 1975, "Hedonic Price Functions," Economic Inquiry,

     13(2), 157-178.

McFadden, Daniel, 1978, "Modelling the Choice of Residential Location," in A.

     Karlquist et al.     eds. ,   Spatial   Interation Theory and Residential

     Location, Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company, 75-96.

Miller, Edward M. , 1983, "Capital Aggregation in the Presence of Obsolescence.

     Inducing Technical Change," Review of Income and Wealth, 29(23),

     283-296.

Morrison, Catherine J., 1985, "On the Economic Interpretation and Measurement of

     Optimal Capacity Utilization with Anticipatory Expectations," Review of

     Economic Studies, 52:295-310.

Muellbauer, John 1974, "Household Production Theory, Quality and the 'Hedonic

     Technique'," American Economic Review, 64(6), 977-994.

National Bureau of Economic Research, 1961, The Price Statistics of the

     Federal Government, General Series, No. 73, New York, New York.

Ohta, Makoto, 1975, "Production Technologies in the U.S. Boiler and Turbo

     Generator Industries and Hedonic Indexes For Their Products: A Cost

     Function Approach," Journal of Political Economy, 83(1) 1-26.

Ohta, Makoto and Zvi Criliches, 1976, "Automobile Prices Revisited: Extensions

     of the Hedonic Hypothesis," in N. Terleckyj, ed., Household Production

     and Consumption, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 40, New York:

     Columbia University Press for NEER,         325-390.

_________________________          1986, "Automobile Prices and Quality Change:
                                                                         32



    Did The Gasoline Price Increases Change Consumer Tastes in the US.?',

   Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 4(2), 187-198.

Pakes, Arid and Zvi Griliches, 1984 "Estimating Distributed Lags in Short

     Panels with an Application to the Specification of Depreciation Patterns and

    Capital Stock Constructs," Review of Economic Studies, LI(2): 243-262.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1974, "Hedonic Price and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation

      in Pure Competition," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 82(1)., 34-55.

Ruttan, Vernon W., 1954. Technological Progress in the Meatpacking Industry, 1919-

     47. USDA Marketing Research Report No. 59, Washington: Government

     Printing Office.

__________   1957, "Agricultural and Non-Agricultural Growth in Output per

     Unit of Input," Journal of Farm Economics, Dec., 39, 1566-1576.

Schmookler, Jacob, 1952, "The Changing Efficiency of the American Economy, 1869-

     1938," Review of Economics and Statistics, Aug., 34, 214-231.

Schultz, Theodore W., 1953, The Economic Organization of Agriculture, New

York: McGraw Hill.

Solow, Robert M., 1957, "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,"

     Review of Economics and Statistics, 39(3), 312-320.

__________   1960, "Investment and Technical Progress," in K. Arrow et al, eds.,
     Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences, Stanford: Stanford

     University Press.

Stone, Richard, 1956, "Quantity and Price Indexes in National Accounts." Paris:

     Organization for European Economic Co-operation.

Trajtenberg, Manuel, 1983, "Dynamics and Welfare Analysis of Product Innovations,"

     Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University.

Triplett, Jack 8., 1975. "The Measurement of Inflation: A Survey of Research on
                                                                             33


     the Accuracy of Price Indexes," in Paul H. Earl, editor, Analysis of

     Inflation, 19-82.

_____________      1983a, "Concept of Quality in Input and Output Price Measures:

     A Resolution of the User-Value Resources-Cost Debate," in M.F. Foss,

     (ed.), The U.S. National Income and Product Accounts, Studies in

     Income and Wealth, Vol. 47, NEER,      Chicago:   University of Chicago Press.

_____________      1983b, "Introduction: An Essay on Labor Cost," in J.E.

     Triplett (ad.), The Measurement of Labor      Cost,   Studies in Income and

     Wealth, NBER,    Vol.   48, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

_____________      1986, "The Economic Interpretation of Hedonic Methods,"

     Survey of Current Business, 86(1), 36-40.

_____________      1987, "Hedonic Functions and Hedonic Indexes," New Paigrave

     Dictionary of Economic Theory, forthcoming.

Vail, E. E. ,   1932, "Retail Prices of Fertilizer Materials and Mixed

     Fertilizers," N.Y. (Cornell) AES, Bull. 545, Ithaca, N.Y.

Waugh, F.V., 1928, "Quality Factors Influencing Vegetable Prices," Journal of

     Farm Economics, 10:185-196.

__________      1929, Quality as ! Determinant of Vegetable Prices, New York:

     Columbia University Press.
                                      Chftrt 1

                             The   Aging of   Tractore



Fraction of original value
1.0




                                   Age in yeari


  From:   Crlljches 1963.
