                         NUER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SAVINGS PROMOTION, INVESTMENT PROMOTION,
                     AND INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESS




                            Lawrence   H. Goulder
                             Barry   Eichengreen




                           Working Paper No. 2635




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  June 1988




Prepared for the NBER Universities Research Conference on Trade Policies
for International Competitiveness, April 29-30, 1988. We wish to thank our
discussants, David Roland-Hoist and Wing Woo, as well as Lans Bovenberg,
Jeffrey Frankel, Daniel Frisch, Jeffrey Sachs, Joel Slemrod, Philippe Weil,
Peter Wilcoxen and John Zysman for helpful comments. We also thank Erik
Beecroft and Fernando Ramos for capable research assistance, and gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of the Bureau of International Labor
Affairs of the U.S. Department of Labor. This research is part of NEER's
research programs in International Studies and Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2635
                                       June 1988


                  SAVINGS PROMOTION, INVESTMENT PROMOTION,
                     AND INTERNATIONAL COMPETITIVENESS


                                  ABSTRACT



     In an open economy, savings- and investment-promoting policies may
have very different effects on the capital account and on the viability of
export-oriented and import-competing industries. The nature of the effects
is often ambiguous in analytical models. This paper employs a simulation
model that combines a detailed treatment of industry interactions,
attention to adjustment dynamics, and an integrated treatment of current
and capital account transactions to investigate these effects in both the
short and long run. We focus on the different effects of savings- and
investment-promoting U.S. tax policies on the viability of U.S. export
industries. We compare results under the assumption of no international
capital mobility (and no international asset transactions) with those under
the assumption of full international mobility (which assumes no barriers to
or costs of such transactions). Within the case of capital mobility, we
consider the importance of the degree of international asset
substitutability - - the extent to which individuals respond to differences
in anticipated rates of return by altering their portfolios.

     Simulation results show that the impacts on export industries differ
fundamentally depending on the degree of international capital mobility.
In the absence of such mobility, savings- and investment- promoting
policies have similar effects on U.S. export industries, with insubstantial
effects in the short run and larger, beneficial long-run effects that
reflect increases in the productiveness of the U.S. economy. Once
international capital mobility is accounted for, however, the effects of
the two policies differ from one another in both the short and long run.
Subsidizing saving helps U.S. export industries initially but hurts them
over the longer term. The reverse is true for a policy that subsidizes
investment. These differences, which are robust across a range of model
specifications and parameter assumptions, stem from the very different
implications of the two types of policies for the capital account of the
balance of payments.




Lawrence H. Goulder                     Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics                 Department of Economics
Harvard University                      University of California
Cambridge, MA 02138                     Berkeley, CA 94720
                                       1


I.   Introduction


      In recent years, discussions of U.S. tax policy have been taking on an

increasingly international flavor. As participants in tax policy debates

have become more concerned with the international economic environment and

with the competitive difficulties of U.S. import-competing and

export-oriented industries, many have concluded that changes in capital

income taxation, at both the personal and corporate levels, are essential

to restoring the competitiveness of U.S. industry in the international

marketplace.

      This growing attention to international considerations is a natural

consequence of the increasing openness of the U.S. economy. Openness poses

a challenge to tax policy analysts, who traditionally have relied on

closed-economy frameworks for policy analysis. In an open economy, it is

critical to distinguish policies aimed at stimulating saving from those

targeted at promoting investment. The distinction gains importance to the

extent that there is international mobility of financial capital; in its

presence, as Summers (1986) and others have pointed out, the two types of

policies are likely to have opposite effects on the current account of the

balance of payments and on the growth of domestic export and import-

competing industries, particularly in the short runJ

      It is one thing to identify potential differences in the effects of

the two types of policies; it is another to determine their magnitude.

Here numerical simulation can play an important role. That role is

particularly significant in the context of a growing, open economy, where

often the sign (let alone the magnitude) of a policy's impact on an

endogenous variable may defy analytical solution. An example of such

indeterminacy appears in Summers's paper, where the long-run implications
                                      2

for the current account of savings and investment policies are ambiguous.

In other analytical studies, even the short-run effects are indeterminate.2

     Previous attempts to simulate the effects of growth-oriented tax

policies within a dynamic, open economy framework include the computable

general equilibrium (CCE) simulations of Coulder, Shoven, and Whalley

(1983), who found that the welfare effects of promoting savings through a

consumption tax can be reversed when closed-economy assumptions are

relaxed. Mutti and Grubert (1985) extended this analysis by introducing

foreign production explicitly and by treating foreign tax systems more

realistically. They confirmed that even a limited degree of international

capital mobility can significantly alter results from closed-economy

models. Bovenberg (1986) presented a two-country, two-good model that

integrates the short- and long-run responses to tax policy changes. An

attraction of Bovenberg's work is its more compelling treatment of time:

Mutti and Crubert only consider steady-state results; in Goulder, Shoven,

and Whalley, the behavior of firms is not grounded in intertemporal

optimization.

     The present study combines many of the attractive features of these

models. Like Bovenberg's, our model is intertemporal and characterizes not

only the long-run (steady-state) effects of policy initiatives but also

short-run responses and the transition to the new steady state. Decisions

of consumers and producers in the U.S. and abroad derive from intertemporal

optimization. In contrast to 8ovenbergs model but like the others above,

our model is applied to actual U.S. data and contains a great deal of

detail on production and taxes. We distinguish ten domestic industries,

each with a different technology. Industries differ in the extent of their
                                       3


dependence on the export market and in the degree to which they compete

with foreign producers. The model departs from previous work by treating

financial behavior in considerable detail.

     There is a natural complementarity between our disaggregated model of

the U.S. economy and ag,regated multi-country models like that of McKibbin

and Sachs (1986). While their model considers six countries (regions), it

does not disaggregate industries within countries. Our model distinguishes

only two countries (the U.S. and the rest of the world) but offers much

additional industry and tax detail. Both models are based on full

intertemporal optimization.

     Our model preserves many features of the model of Goulder and Summers

(1987), from which the present work developed, but pays far more attention

to open-economy aspects. In contrast to Goulder and Sunimers, we derive the

behavior of the foreign sector from optimizing behavior. We also introduce

an international market for financial capital: domestic and foreign

households each hold portfolios consisting of assets from both countries,

as in Kouri (1978). Portfolio decisions give rise to capital account

transactions which are integrated with transactions on current account.

     In this paper we employ the model to assess the short- and long-run

effects of savings- and investment-promoting changes in U.S. tax policy.

We contrast a savings subsidy (effected through reduced income taxes and

higher taxes on consumption) with investment tax credits (restored to their

effective rates prior to inplementation of Tax Reform Act of 1986). Our

focus is on the implications of these policies for "international

Competitiveness," measured here by the profitability and output of U.S.

export industries. We compare results under the assumption of no
                                       4

international capital mobility (and no international asset transactions)

with those under the assumption of full international mobility (which

assumes that there are no barriers to or costs of such transactions) .   In
the case of capital mobility, we consider the importance of the degree of

international asset substitutability. At one extreme is zero

substitutability, where households hold domestic and foreign assets in

fixed proportions. At the other is perfect substitutability, where

households are indifferent between the two assets and drive their returns

to equality. In general we concentrate on intermediate cases.

      Our simulation results show that the implications of these policies

for international competitiveness differ radically once international

capital mobility is introduced. In the absence of such mobility,

investment- and savings-promoting policies each have only minor effects on

U.S. export industries in the short run. In the long run, the effects of

both policies are favorable, since both raise the capital intensity of U.S.

production, increasing productivity and incomes, reducing U.S. goods

prices, and raising the overall volume of trade, all to the benefit of the

export sector. Once international capital mobility is introduced, however,

the effects of the two policies differ from one another in both the short

and the long run. Restoring investment tax credits hurts U.S. export

industries initially but helps them over the longer term. The reverse is

true for the policy of exempting saving from the income tax. These

differences reflect the very different implications of the two types of

policies for the capital account of the balance of payments.

      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II offers an

overview of our dynamic, open-economy CGE model. Section III lays Out the
                                        S


structure of the model in greater detail. Sections IV and V describe how

we solve and calibrate the model. In Section VI we present our simulation

results, and the final section offers conclusions.



II. Overview of the M1e1

       Large CCE models are complex and all too often inaccessible. To

render our model as transparent as possible, we describe here a simple

heuristic model with features similar to those of the larger model used for

simulations. We then describe how the larger model differs from the simple

one.


A.     An Illustrative Model

       1. Behavioral Syecjfjcatiorts

       Consider a two-country model3 in which each country's output is

produced according to linearly homogeneous production functions with labor

and capital inputs:


(Il-I)      X —    f(K,L)

(11-2)      X* —   f*(K*,L*)

L and K are inputs of labor and capital in home country production, L* and

K* the corresponding inputs into production in the foreign country.

(Asterisks are used throughout to denote foreign-country variables.) X and

X* are outputs of each country. Labor supply is exogenous at each point in

time. Neither labor nor physical (as distinct from financial) capital is

mobile internationally.
                                                    6

      Total domestic and foreign human wealth, TW}1 and TWH*, can be

expressed as:


(11-3)     TWH —    PV(wL,i)


(11-4)     TWH* —     PV(w*L*,i*)

where w (w*) is the wage, i (i*) is the market interest rate, and PV(. ,

is   the present value operator, defined on flows and interest rates over all

time. If investment is financed solely by retained earnings and firms must

offer a rate of return to equity owners equal to the market interest rate,

then total nonh'unan wealth generated in each country is equal to the

present value of the flow of dividends; that is:


(11-5)     TWK — PV(pX     -   wL   -
                                        pI,i)

(11-6)     TWK* — PV(p*X*       -   w*L*   -
                                                p*I*,i*)

where p (p*) is the price of domestic (foreign) output and I is the

quantity of new capital goods purchased.4 TWK and TWK* are denominated in

the respective currencies of the two countries. In this simple model, the

produced good can be used for consumption or investment, and investment in

each country is a function of the interest rate.

      Income, consumption, and saving of each household are expressed in

local currency. At each moment of time, total income Y (Y*) received by

the domestic (foreign) household consists of labor and capital income:


(11-7)     Y —   iL   + -yDIV + (l1*)DIV*/e


(11-8)     Y* — w*L* + .1*DIV* + (l--y)DIV.e
                                            7


where A is the share of TWK owned by domestic households, A* is the share

of TWK* owned by foreign households, and DIV — pX          -   wL   -
                                                                        p1 (similarly for

DIV*). e is the nominal exchange rate, defined as units of foreign

currency per dollar. The value of consumption of each household depends on

the household's total ealth and the average return on its investments:


(11-9)    C — C(TWH — 7TWK +        (l_*)TWK*/e,   r)



(11-10)   C* — C*(TWH* + -y*TWK* + (l—7)TWK.e, r*)


r (r*) is the average return on the domestic (foreign) household's

portfolio, a weighted average of the returns on domestic and foreign

assets.

     Let a (*) denote the share of the domestic (foreign) household's

wealth that it wishes to hold in assets located domestically (abroad).

Assets from the two countries are imperfect substitutes in portfolios, with

the desired portfolio shares a function of the relative rates of return

(inclusive of exchange rate changes, where the dot over a variable

represents its time derivative):


(11-lI)   a —   a(i,   i* -   /e)
(11-12)   a* —   *(i    +   /e,   j*)



     When policy shocks alter relative rates of return on domestic and

foreign assets, desired portfolio shares change. At each moment in time,

the capital account reflects changes in the composition of households'

portfolios as well as overall increases in the value of portfolios

associated with their saving. Let Si (—             — C)   represent the total
                                             8

saving by households resident in country i, and let     denote the net

incremental demand by household i for financial assets of country j

Households divide Si into purchases of assets from the two countries so as

to attain the desired portfolio shares.

      Let C. represent the expenditure by household i devoted to

consumption of goods from country j. Assuming that domestic and foreign

goods are imperfect substitutes in consumption, with the demands for each

type of good a function of relative prices:


(11-13>   C. — Cii (Ci,pe/p*).

     2. Equilibrium Conditions

     At each moment of time, equilibrium requires that the following

conditions hold:


(11-14)   w/p —


(11-15)   w*/p* —   f*(K*,L*)

(11-16)   CDD + CFD/e + p1
                           — pX


(11-17)   CFF + CDFe +          *I* — p*X*
(11-18)   p1 —          +
                  SDD       SFD/e


(11-19)   p*I* —            +
                    SFF         SDFe

Here D and F subscripts denote "domestic" and "foreign." Equations (11-14)

and (11-15) express the requirement that labor supply and demand balance in

each country. Equations (11-16) and (11-17) show the conditions for

equality of output demand and supply. The final two equations indicate the
                                            9

conditions for savings-investment equality in each country. Note that the

balance of payments requirement,


(11-20)   CFD/e +   (l_y*)DIV*/e —   CDF
                                           — (1—1)DIV —
                                                        SDF
                                                            —
                                                              SF.fl/e


is assured by equations (11-14) through (11-19) and Walras's Law; it does

not constitute an independent equilibrium condition.

B.   The Larzer Model

     1.   Behavioral Specifications

      The larger model extends the simpler one in several ways. One major

difference is in the degree of industry disaggregation. Our model

distinguishes ten U.S. industries: agriculture and mining, crude petroleum

and refining, construction, the textile and apparel complex, metals,

machinery, motor vehicles, miscellaneous manufacturing, services, and

housing.5 This disaggregation enables us to address a number of topical

issues relating to U.S. international competitiveness: the effects of

restrictions on agricultural exports, of import penetration in textiles,

steel and automobiles, and of increased trade in services. The model also

incorporates intermediate goods production and substitution by producers

between domestic and foreign intermediate goods.

      The larger model treats investment dynamics explicitly. In each

industry, managers choose levels of investment to maximize the value of the

firm. Because of adjustment costs associated with the installation or

removal of new physical capital, in response to a change in economic

conditions firms find it optimal to approach new long-run capital

intensities gradually over time.6
                                      10

      The larger model treats corporate financial decisions in some detail.

As in Coulder and Summers, we model firms as financing investments through

both debt and equity issues]

      Finally, the larger model incorporates taxes and spending by the U.S.

government. It distinguishes taxes that apply to existing capital (for

example, the corporate income tax) from taxes that apply only to new

capital (for example, investment tax credits) and accounts for the

different effects of these two types of taxes on investment incentives and

asset values. The spending and transfer roles of the government are

modeled explicitly.


     2. Equilibrium Conditions

     In each country, four types of equilibrium conditions must be

satisfied in each period. First, commodity market equilibrium requires

that the supply of each good equal the sum of home and foreign demands.

Second, labor market equilibrium requires that the aggregate supply and

aggregate demand for labor balance. Third, savings-investment equilibrium

requires that the aggregate demand for external funds by home firms equal

the sum of national saving and net capital inflows. All three conditions

were present in the simpler model above. Introduction of a government

sector adds a fourth requirement (for each country): that total tax

revenues must equal total government spending.

      These equilibrium requirements are met through the adjustment of

domestic and foreign wages, domestic and foreign commodity prices, domestic

and foreign interest rates, the nominal exchange rate and lump-sum

adjustments to personal income taxes.8 But since current-period decisions

depend on forward-looking expectations, the current-period prices that
                                      11

satisfy the market-clearing conditions in a given period depend on

expectations of future prices (when agents have foresight, as assumed here,

current equilibrium prices depend on future equilibrium prices). Given

this intertemporal interdependence, we solve the model by transforming the

general equilibrium proLem into one in which current and future prices are

effectively solved separately (as described in Section IV). This enables

us to solve for the set of prices for each period that yields the

intertemporal general equilibrium under perfect foresight expectations.


     3. Dynamics

     The path of the domestic and foreign economies over time depends on

the adjustments of capital stocks and asset portfolios to policy

initiatives and other exogenous shocks. The model has steady-state

properties: in the long run, asset prices and rates of return adjust so

that the rates of net accumulation of physical capital by industry and the

rates of accumulation of financial capital by households equal g, the

growth rate of effective labor services. This yields a steady state in

which relative prices do not change and all quantities increase at the

rate g.

      In the short run, policy shocks generate divergences in the marginal

product of capital across industries as well as in average portfolio

returns to domestic and foreign residents. In the long run, firms'

investment decisions ultimately equalize marginal products of capital

across industries (adjusted for taxes and risk) ,   while   household portfolio

decisions and savings behavior ultimately equalize overall portfolio

returns. The adjustment dynamics associated with firms' investment

decisions have been described by Goulder and Summers. The adjustment
                                      12


dynamics associated with household portfolio decisions, on the other hand,

are more complex in this model because of the introduction of international

asset transactions. Assuming that assets issued by firms in different

countries are imperfect substitutes in portfolios and that households

display home country preference, then a positive shock to domestic firms

that increases the rate of return on dollar-denominated assets will raise

the average rate of return on the portfolios of domestic residents relative

to the average portfolio return to foreign residents. If the difference in

portfolio returns were to be sustained and propensities to save were

similar across countries, domestic residents would accumulate an

ever-increasing share of global wealth -    -a   result inconsistent with the

existence of a steady state. What p         nts this process from persisting is

that the higher accumulation rate of U.S. residents, under the assumption

of home country preference, implies an increase in the share of global

saving invested in the U.S. economy. Over time, this lowers the domestic

rate of return until average returns on domestic and foreign portfolios are

brought to equality. The long-run equalization of returns on portfolios

brought about by households' savings behavior parallels the long-run

equalization of marginal products of capital brought about by firms'

investment decisions.



III. A Detailed Description of the Model.


A.   Production

     1.   U.S. Industries

a.   Production Techno1oies. Each of the ten domestic industries produces

a single output using inputs of labor, capital, and intermediate goods. A
                                      13

multi-level structure governs the production of each industry output (see

Table 111.1). Firms choose the quantity of labor that maximizes current

profits, given the current capital stock. Labor and capital combine to

produce a value-added composite, VA. This composite is then combined with

intermediate inputs (x1, x2     XN) in fixed proportions to generate

output, x.

     Intermediate inputs are themselves composites of foreign- and

domestic-supplied intermediate goods. Treating domestic and foreign

intermediates as imperfect substitutes in production endogenizes the

relative prices of domestic and foreign intermediate goods. For a given

intermediate good of type i, producers choose the combination of domestic

and foreign inputs that minimizes costs.9

      The producer good outputs of the ten industries have several end

uses. They too serve as inputs for each industry. In addition, they

satisfy the demand for final goods by government and the demand for U.S.

exports by foreigners. Finally, they combine in fixed proportions to

produce a representative capital good used in production and to create the
                                            10
17 consumer goods demanded by households.

     b.   Producer Behavior. Managers seek to maximize the value of the

firm. Their choice variables at each point in time are employment,

intermediate inputs and investment. Labor and intermediates are chosen to

maximize current profits (given the capital stock)   ,   while   investment is

chosen to approach optimally the long-run (profit-maximizing) capital

intensity. The time required to attain the optimal capital intensity

depends on adjustment costs.
                                                  14

      A starting point for specifying the firm's behavior is the asset

market equilibrium condition that risk-adjusted expected returns be

equalized across domestic assets. The expected return from holding (risky)

equities must be consistent with those from holding a "safe" asset such as

corporate debt. The return on equity is the sum of capital gains and

dividends net of tax. For every firm at each point in time:




            (1_,)V — VN + (1—9)             —    i(1—9) +
(Ill-I)



where V is the value of the firm, VN is new share issues, DIV is the

current dividend,        is the capital gains tax rate, 9 is the marginal income

tax rate, i is the nominal interest rate on domestic corporate debt, and ,

is   the equity risk premium. Imposing a transversality condition ruling out

eternal speculative bubbles and integrating yields an expression equating

the value of the firm with the discounted value of after-tax dividends net

of share issues:



                                       —
(111-2)     Vt —
                         [()DIv5           VN]    [exp      j— du]ds


where r is the risk-adjusted rate of return, equal to i(l-9) +

       Dividends and new share issues in each period are related through the
cash-flow identity equating sources and uses of funds:


 (111-3)     EARN + BN    +   VN   — DIV + IEXP


where EARN represents earnings after taxes and interest payments, BN is the
                                                        15

value of new debt issue, and IEXP is the value of investment expenditure.

Earnings are given by:


(111-4)            EARN —    [pF(K,L,M)   -   wL   -
                                                       pM
                                                            -
                                                                iDEBT] (1 -   r)   + rD


where

        K and L —          inputs   of capital and labor

        N —       vector of domestic and foreign
                  intermediate inputs

        p —       output   price (net of output taxes)

        F —       quantity of output (gross of
                  adjustment costs)

      w — wage rate (gross of indirect tax on labor)

              —   vector  of intermediate input prices (gross of
                   tariffs and intermediate input taxes facing
                   the industry)

        DEBT —      nominal debt
        r —   corporate       tax rate

and

      D — value of currently allowable depreciation
              allowances.


      To determine the value of the firm, it is necessary to specify the

firm's financial behavior and identify the elements BN, VN, and DIV in

equation (111-3). We assume that firms pay dividends equal to a constant

fraction, a, of after-tax profits net of economic depreciation and issue

new debt to maintain a constant debt-capital ratio, b. We also assume that

new equity issues represent the marginal source of finance: that is, they

make up the difference between EARN + BN and DIV + IEXF in (III-3)J2
                                               16

     Investment expenditure is the sum of the "direct" costs of the new

capital (net of the investment tax credit) plus adjustment costs associated

with its installation:


(111-5)    IEXP — (1   -
                           ITC)PKI
                                      ÷ (1 -   r)pfl

where ITC represents the investment tax credit rate,             is the purchase

price of new capital goods, I is the quantity of investment,           and *(I/K) is

adjustment costs per unit of investment. We model adjustment costs as

internal to the firm: to add capital, currently available resources (labor,

existing capital, and intermediate goods) must be devoted to

installation.13 Output is separable between inputs and adjustment costs:


(111-6)    X —   F(K,L,M)   -




Using   the expression for the change in the capital stock,


(111-7)    k   ——

one can derive an expression for the value of the firm in terms of I, L, K,

prices, and the technology. Firms maximize this value subject to (111-7).

As detailed in Coulder and Summers, optimal investment is given by



(111-8)        - h(Q) -
                           h[(—
                                  -   I   + ITC + b + wZ]


where h(.) —       + (I/K)#'],        B is the present value of depreciation

allowances on existing capital, 1 is the present value of depreciation

allowances on a dollar of new investment, and w —           a(l-9)/(1-ac)   -   a +   I.
The adjustment cost function is:
                                          17



(111-9)       (I/K) -   /2

implying that the relationship between the rate of investment and Q is

simply:



(111-10)        —   +


where        is the adjustment cost parameter. Since they are defined in terms

of discounted streams of dividends and depreciation allowances, V, B,and Z

in the investment equation (111-8) incorporate expectations about the

future. The calculation of perfect foresight expectations is discussed in

Section IV.

        2.    Foreizn Industry

        The treatment of foreign production is analogous. A representative

foreign producer generates output using capital and labor inputs. The

specification of investment is the same as for domestic firms, as are the

foreign producer's financing rules. Total nonhuman wealth located abroad,

TWK*, is the sum of foreign-located debt and equity. The value of the

latter is the discounted sum of foreign dividends net of foreign share

issues.


B.      Household Behavior

        Households are represented as forward-looking and having perfect

foresight. The treatment of domestic and foreign households is similar,

although more detail is provided on the domestic side.
                                         18


     1. ConsumntiOfl and Asset Choices

     In each country, a representative, infinitely-lived household solves a

multilevel decision problem (Table 111.2). Consider the domestic

household. Its problem is to choose a path of consumption and a path of

portfolio holdings. When domestic and foreign assets are imperfect

substitutes and offer different expected returns, portfolio and consumption

choices need to be coordinated, since the choice of portfolio affects the

overall rate of return to the household. One approach to this problem

would be to explicitly incorporate risk. But the integration of portfolio

choice and consumption demands in the face of risk and uncertainty presents

difficult, unresolved theoretical issues, particularly when there are many

time periods and many consumption goods.14 Resolving these issues is

beyond the scope of this paper. Moreover, risk may only partly explain the

main empirical fact of interest: that households hold diversified

portfolios despite sustained differences in rates of return.'5 In this

investigation we adopt an alternative approach. Our starting point is the

observation that households exhibit strong home-country preference: assets

from their own country often make up the bulk of their portfolios, even

when rates of return on other-country assets are comparable or higher. In

keeping with this observation, we posit a portfolio preference function

which is consistent with the observed home-country preference yet which can

be embedded within a utility-maximizing framework that allows households to

adjust asset shares in accordance with differences in rates of return.'6

(Below we also report results using an alternative specification in which

consumption and asset preferences are decoupled.) In each period t, the

household maximizes a utility function of the form:
                                                19



(111-11) U



where 6 is the rate of time preference, C is the inverse of the

intertemporal elasticity of substitution, C is an index of overall

consumption in a given period, and A is a function of the household's asset

holdings. We specialize A to a CES function of a and 1-a, the shares of

the household's portfolio devoted to domestic and foreign assets:17



(111-12) A —                   +
                k[a0

     The household maximizes utility subject to the wealth accumulation

condition:


(111-13) W1<1 —       WK   —   raWK     +
                                            r(l_a)WK       + YL    —


where WK is the total nonhuman wealth owned by the household, r and r* are

the annual after-tax returns offered to the household on its holdings of

domestic and foreign assets, YL is labor income net of all taxes and

transfers, and p is the price index for overall consumption.

     A(.) summarizes the household's portfolio preferences: if r —              r*.
households maximize utility by choosing the asset shares                  and         When

rates of return differ, however, maintaining the portfolio shares a0 shares

and 1-a0 has a cost in terms of a lower overall return than that which

could be obtained if the household held more of the asset with the higher

return. The household chooses the path of a that balances the rewards of

approaching preferred shares against the costs in terms of a lower overall

return on the portfolio.
                                         20

      The parameter p in the portfolio preference function is related to a,

the elasticity of substitution between asset shares (p —    1-1/a).   When a —

0, households maintain shares a0 and l-a of domestic and foreign assets
irrespective of differences in rates of return. As a -.    , household
behavior approaches the limiting case of perfect substitutability, where

the slightest difference in returns leads households to hold only the asset

offering the higher return)8

     The Hamiltonian for the household's intertemporal problem is given by:



(111-14) 8 —


                    + t(1+6)l_t1(_vtQt)W1(t +   —
                                                    C]
     where

     Vt — r*
           t
                —     rt

Differentiating with respect to the control variables a and C yields the

first-order conditions:




(111-15) fi(CA_) CA -

(111-16)     (1—fl)                  — AvWK


Once .,    the marginal utility of wealth, is known, a and C can be identified

from these two first-order conditions. Differentiating the Haniiltonian

with respect to the state variable WK yields the equation of motion for A:



(111-17) .±]:         —
                           1+6
              A
                                                21

where r[_ ar +           (la)rJ        is the average portfolio return. We identify A

in each period by first solving for its steady-state value and then

applying equation (111-17) for transition years.

        The domestic (foreign) household's total nonhuman wealth, WK (WK*),

is related to industry liabilities through the following relationships.


                    10
(111-18) TWK — E         (V.+ DE8T1)
                 i—I


(111-19) TWK* — V* + DEBT*


where TWK and TWK* denote total nonhuman wealth located at home and abroad,

denominated in the respective currencies of each resident, as in Section

II.A above. Total nonhuman wealth of domestic and foreign residents, WK

and WK*, can be expressed as:


(111-20) WK — T%K + (1-i*)TWK*/e


(111-21) WK* — .i*TWK* —        (l-)TWK.e

where     represents the proportion of the debt and equity of domestic firms

held by domestic residents, 7* expresses the proportion of the debt and

equity of foreign firms held by foreigners, as in Section hA. If

households wish to maintain current asset proportions, then a — -1TWK/WK and

   — -y*TWK*/WK*.    When rates of return change, however, households

immediately alter the composition of their portfolios. Thus, changes in

asset holdings from period to period reflect both changes in the

composition of portfolios and increases in portfolio size associated with

household saving.
                                                    22

      Each asset generally yields a different return to residents of

different countries; this reflects anticipated exchange rate movements and

features of tax systems that impose different rates according to the

residence of the taxpayer. Let r and r* represent average returns on the

portfolios of domestic and foreign residents:


(111-22)       —
                   arJ +   (l_.i)rDF

(111-23) •* — c*r          +
                               (l.a*)rFD

rDD and rDF again are the returns expected by domestic residents on assets

located domestically and in the foreign country, respectively; rFF and rFD

are defined analogously.

     2. The Composition of Current Consumption19

     For domestic households, overall consumption, C, in each period is a

Cobb-Douglas aggregate of the 17 consumption goods in the model, implying

that consumption spending is allocated across consumption goods in fixed

expenditure shares. Our model incorporates imported consumer goods by

treating each good c. as a CES composite of domestic and foreign goods of

type i. Suppressing subscripts, we express the CES composite as:

                                                1
                                                A
           —       r,_' A              1A A1p
(111-24)   c —
                   [a
                        Pc° +   (l—)    Pc*Pj


where c is the quantity of the domestic consumption good, c* is the

quantity of the foreign consumption good, and            and   are parameters.   is

related to the elasticity of the substitution, ,          according   to:
                                      23



(111-25)     —



     Since c(.) is homothetic, the ratio of domestic and foreign goods in

the composite is independent of its level. Households select the optimal

mix of domestic and foreign goods to minimize the cost per unit of

composite.


C.   Government Sectors

     The domestic economy government is the same as in Goulder and Summers,

to which the reader is referred for details. It has three functions:

collecting taxes, distributing transfers, and purchasing goods and

services.

     The model incorporates each of the major taxes in the United States,

as in Table 111.3. It includes features of the U.S. tax code which impose

different effective rates on new and old capital; the explicit treatment of

profits taxes, investment tax credits, and capital gains taxes allows us to

capture the effects of tax policy on investment and dividend payment

decisions. It also distinguishes economic from tax depreciation.

     The level of government spending (transfers plus purchases) is

exogenous. Transfers and purchases each represent a fixed share of overall

spending. Purchases fall on to specific producer goods in fixed expenditure

shares.

     Since the model exhibits steady.state growth in the base case, overall

real government spending must increase at that steady-state growth rate, g.

In the base case, the government budget balances in each period. In

revised-case simulations, real government spending is fixed at the same
                                                         24

levels as in the base case; budget balance is maintained through lump-sum
                                                         20
adjustments to personal tncome taxes.

       The foreign government performs the same functions and has the same

tax instruments as the domestic economy government, although individual

industries are not distinguished.


D.     Imnorts and Exnorts

       Import demands consist of the demands for imported intermediate goods

by U.S. producers and for imported consumer goods by U.S. consumers.

Foreign producers require the same price (after conversion to foreign

currency) for goods sold in the U.S. as for goods sold locally. These

prices adjust to clear the market for each foreign good.

       Foreign demands for U.S. exports depend on the value of overall

foreign output and on the price of exports relative to foreign goods:


                                              —.€
                           —       PEie             1.


(111-26)    E. —
                   Eoi.(Y*/p*).(    —     )
                                    p*

Here       is the quantity demanded of the ith U.S. export, E0 is the

original expenditure share (at prices of unity), Y is foreign GNP, p* is

the foreign GNP price index,              is the export price in dollars, and   is

the export price elasticity of demand.



IV. Solving the Model

       Equilibrium must satisfy two sets of conditions. Intratemporal

equilibrium requires that, given expectations of future variables, current

supplies and demands balance in each period. Intertemporal equilibrium

requires that expectations conform to the values realized in later periods.
                                                           25

         At each point in time, expectations are embedded within the current

period values of "forward" variables. For the domestic economy, the

forward variables are:


                      equity value of firm i                    (i —     I   N)


     Q :              tax-adjusted q for firm i                 (i — 1       N)


     Z.      :        present value of depreciation allow-      (i — 1       N)
                      ances on a dollar of new investment

                      present value of depreciation allow-      (j   —   1   N)
                      ances on existing capital

     A       :        shadow value of domestic household's
                      wealth


The Vi's and B.'s can be expressed in terms of the Q's Zr's and current

values.21 Hence, expectations for the domestic economy are fully

summarized by the values of Q and Z for each industry and the value of A.

     The forward variables for the foreign economy are:


     V*          :
                      equity value of the foreign firm

                       tax-adjusted q for the foreign firm

                      shadow value of foreign household's wealth


It is possible to derive explicit relationships of the form:22



(IV-l)                 —
                           Q(W,             V+i)                (i — 1       N)


           • Z.
                 it
                       —   Z.
                               It 2it' Z
                                    (4' .
                                             i,t-i-l
                                                       )        (i — 1       N)



            A
                 t
                       —   A
                               t 3t'
                                   (4'
                                            ti-i
                                                   )


                 *             *
                       —
                           t4'4'            t÷1
                                         26

           *          *
          At          A(Ws, A+i)
where the variables       (j — 1         5) refer to prices and quantities
                             E      E      E     *E        *E
observed in period t, and V÷i. Z1, Ati V1 and A                 refer to the

values, expected in period t, for V, Z, A, Q*, and Al* in the next period.

We refer to the variables with "E" superscripts as "lead" variables. We

also employ eE, a lead variable for the exchange rate.

     Solution proceeds in two steps. First, we posit values for the lead

variables for t — 2, 3           T+1, where T is the last period simulated.

The first-level, intratemporal equilibrium problem is to calculate a

general equilibrium solution in every period conditional on these guesses.

The second-level, intertemporal equi1ibriun problem is to solve for the

correct values for the lead variables.


A.   Intratemporal EQuilibrium

     Intratemporal equilibrium requires that in each country and at each

period of time: (I) the demand for labor equal its supply. (2) the demand

for output from each industry equal its supply, (3) total external

borrowing by firms equal total saving by residents of the given country

plus the net capital inflow to that country, and (4) government revenues

equal government spending. These requirements imply .a total of 17

equilibrium conditions (see Table IV.l): two for the domestic and foreign

labor markets, ten for the domestic product market, one for the foreign

product market, two for the domestic and foreign loanable funds markets,

and two for the domestic and foreign governments' budget balance. It

suffices to solve for 16 equilibrium conditions, as the remaining one will

then be satisfied by Walras's Law. To obtain the intratemporal
                                     27

equilibrium, we employ the Powell (1970) algorithm, which tries alternative

values for 16 "prices:" the ten domestic output prices, the foreign output

price, the domestic and foreign gross interest rates, the nominal exchange

rate, and the domestic and foreign tax scalars (that control the lump-sum

tax adjustments necessary to bring about budget balance in each country).

The nominal wage in each country (in the own currency) is exogenous and

assumed to grow at a rate of six percent. The nominal exchange rate serves

to bring nominal magnitudes at home and abroad into line (see footnote 8).

     In Appendix 1 we outline the method of deriving excess demands in each

period from the given set of prices tried by the intratemporal solution

algorithm.

     Once the intratemporal equilibrium is obtained for the first period,

we augment the capital stocks of each industry on the basis of net

investment, and increment the total supplies of domestic and foreign labor

by their growth rate, g. We then repeat the equilibrium calculations for

the next period. In this manner we solve for every period in the

simulation interval.


B.   Intertenrporal Equilibrium

     Perfect foresight requires that expectations conform to the values

that ultimately obtain. To meet this requirement, we repeatedly solve the

model forward, each time revising the expectations (embedded in the lead

variables) that affect each intratemporal equilibrium. Appendix 2

describes our procedure for obtaining the perfect foresight expectations.
                                      28

V.   Data and Parameters


A.   Stocks and Flows

     We combine information from different sources to form a 1983 benchmark

data set. Much of the benchmark data is drawn from the general equilibrium

data Set recently assembled by Scholz (1987). The Scholz data include the

following information:


     Production Data

     Final demand vectors of consumption, investment, government spending,
     imports, and exports by producer good

     Matrix of input-output transactions

     Vectors of labor inputs by industry

     Labor taxes and intermediate input taxes by industry

     Production function elasticities by industry


     Consunrntion Data

     Matrix of expenditures on consumer goods by household

     Vector of savings by household

     Transition matrix between producer (industry) and consumer goods

     Vectors of income taxes paid, sales taxes paid, marginal tax rates,and
     transfers received by household


     We have supplemented these data with information on capital taxes and

the financial behavior of firms, including capital gains tax rates, tax

depreciation rates, dividend-payout and debt-capital ratios; and equity

risk premia.23 We have also added information on capital stocks by

industry obtained from the Survey of Current Business. Base case values

for tax rates and behavioral parameters are displayed in Table V.1. Tax
                                     29

rates for the foreign sector are set equal to the weighted average of the

rates applying in the U.S.24

     Since domestic firms distinguish between domestic and foreign

intermediate goods in production, it is necessary to employ a domestic and

foreign input-output ratrix describing the use of domestic and foreign-made

inputs in each industry. The relationship among the domestic and foreign

input-output matrices, the compcnents of final demand, and value added are

indicated in Figure V.1.

     Since the U.S. government does not produce a foreign input-output

matrix, we constructed one. This involved categorizing imports according

to their end use (intermediate use, consumption, or investment).25

     In the benchmark data set, we impose an initial value for ,     the   share

of domestic nonhwnan wealth owned by domestic residents, obtained from

information on foreign ownership of U.S. assets and total domestically

located assets from the Survey of Current Business and Federal Reserve

Balance Sheets. We also impose a value for the U.S. share of global wealth

based on a comparison of GDP in the U.S. and other non-communist countries.

With this information we derive (as discussed below) the benchmark level of

foreign wealth and the benchmark portfolio shares.


B.   Parameters

     Parameterizing the model involves selecting certain parameters from

outside sources and deriving the remainder from restrictions posed by two

sorts of requirements:


     Replication Requirement. In the base case, the model must generate an
     equilibrium solution with values matching those of the benchmark data
     set.
                                         30

        Balanced Growth Requirement. In the base case, the model must
        generate a steady-state growth path.


        First, we specify the exogenously growth rate of effective labor, g,

and the exogenous growth rate of nominal wages, 1r0.    g determines the

steady-state real growth rate of the economy and r0 the steady-state

inflation rate. These variables take the values .03 and 06, respectively.

        In our central case simulation, we employ a value of 0.6 for time

preference (5) and a value of 0.5 for the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution in consumption (l/c).

        In the steady state, the rate of gross investment, I/K, in each

industry must satisfy:


(V-i)        I/K — g +


where subscripts have been suppressed for convenience. K, g, and           are

contained in the benchmark data set. We derive the initial level of

investment in each industry from equation (V-i). A similar procedure

determines initial values for the depreciable capital stock, KDEP.

        We derive the benchmark values of firm debt (DEBT) and equity (V) from

data on capital stocks, tax rates, and nominal interest rates.26 Summing

across domestic industries yields TWK, total domestically-generated

nonhuman wealth. TWK*, total nonhuman wealth generated abroad, is a given

multiple, ii,   of   rwic27 Using TWK* and the foreign interest rate i*, we

derive foreign capital incomes.

        The procedure is similar for human wealth. From data on labor

incomes, taxes, and transfers, we calculate domestic human wealth, TWH, as
                                         31

the present value of the stream of after-tax labor and transfer income.

Foreign human wealth, TWH*, is set at m.TWH.

      From     and the requirement of capital account balance in the base

case, we derive -1* and the initial values for the portfolio shares a and

2*.

       In    the benchmark equilibrium, before-tax nominal interest rates are

equal at home and abroad. Those nominal interest rates must be consistent

with the requirement that domestic investment equal national saving plus

the net capital inflow. This condition can only be evaluated after wealth

levels and portfolio shares have been determined, yet these levels and

shares themselves depend on the assumed value for the interest rate. Hence

is necessary to iterate to obtain the benchmark value for the nominal

interest rate.

      Table V.2 displays the base case (calibrated) values for the principal

variables of the model.



VI. Simulation Results

      The "base case" equilibrium path is the standard against which the

effects of policy changes are measured. As mentioned above, the U.S. and

foreign economies display steady-state growth in the base case at an annual

rate of three percent. We perform simulations spanning an interval of 75

years (T —     75), with the equilibria spaced one year apart. Following a
policy change, both economies approach quite closely the new steady state

well before the 75th year, and using larger values for T does not

significantly affect the simulation results.
                                     32


A.   Promoting Savings through a Consurntion Tax

     Our savings-promoting policy combines a four percentage point increase

in taxes on consumption (sales and excise taxes, most of which are in the

five to ten percent range initially) with a compensating reduction in

domestic households' marginal income tax rates from 0.285 to 0.256. The

policy change is treated as unanticipated and takes effect in the first

period. It is approximately revenue neutral over the long term: the

present value of the stream of changes in government revenue is

approximately zero.28 It encourages saving by raising the after-tax rate

of return.

     1.      No Mobility

     We first examine the effects of this policy change in the absence of

internationally mobile financial capital. In this scenario, the portfolios

of domestic and foreign households contain only the assets of the country

of residence, and thus households have no concern for rates of return

offered on assets located in the other country. The impact effect of the

policy change is to raise the after-tax return for domestic households and

generate additional saving, allowing a drop in the equilibrium domestic

gross interest rate. The lower interest rate implies an increase in fixed

investment of 1.0 percent relative to the base case in the first period, as

indicated in Table VI.l. Over time, the rise in the capital intensity of

the economy implies a lower marginal product of capital and a lower value

of Q for any given interest rate; thus, the rate of investment falls,

although the level of investment remains higher than in the base case

because of the higher capital stock. In the new steady state, the rate of

investment in each industry returns to its long-run value, while aggregate
                                         33

investment exceeds that of the base case (for corresponding years) by 1.4

percent.

      In this scenario, the effects on imports and exports are minor in

both the short and long run. Since capital is internationally immobile,

there is no capital acccunt -   -a   potentially important channel for

transmitting effects on merchandise trade through its impact on the

exchange rate. In the short run, real exports are not significantly

affected by the policy change. Over the longer term, the higher capital

intensity and productiveness of the U.S. economy imply higher real output

and incomes; this yields somewhat higher demands for foreign intermediate

and final goods and a slightly increased volume of international trade. In

the new steady state, real exports are approximatelyO.4 percent higher

than in the base case.

     2.    Mobility

     The same initiative produces quite different impacts once capital

mobility is introduced. The differences are most easily seen by comparing

across columns of Table VII, which vary the substitutability of domestic

and foreign assets.

     We focus on the results of our central mobility case, which employs a

value of 1.0 for a. As before, the impact effect of the policy change is

to raise the after-tax return to domestic households. We model the U.S.

and foreign individual income tax systems as residence-based: households

pay capital income to their own governments, regardless of where     the

capital income originated.29 This implies that for domestic households the

new policy raises after-tax returns on savings invested at home and abroad.

Thus, the policy change has no first-order effect on the international
                                     34

allocation of their (increased) saving. For foreign households, the change

in policy does not affect the wedge between before- and after-tax returns,

since their marginal tax rates do not change. The asymmetry in the changes

in marginal rates implies significant adjustments in the capital account.

     In the central mobility case, domestic households increase their

saving by 5.1 percent in the initial period. Since the largest share of

domestic portfolios consists of domestic assets and since the new policy

has relatively little effect on the desired portfolio compo' ion, the bulk

of the increase in domestic household saving is directed toward domestic

assets. This depresses the U.S. before-tax nominal interest rate, which

falls initially from 7.1 to 6.8 percent.

     ecause foreigners' marginal tax rates remain unchanged, the fall in

before-tax interest rates in the U.S. leads to similar reductions in the

after-tax returns they receive from U.S. assets. This implies a lower

average return on foreigners' portfolios and lower overall foreign saving,

which falls by approximately one percent on impact. Much of the reduction

takes the form of reduced accumulation of U.S. assets; in the first year,

inflows of foreign capital to the U.S. fall by 3.4 percent from $15.0

billion (1983 dollars) in the base case to $14.5 billion in the policy

change simulation. But the increase in saving by domestic households more

than offsets the decrease in capital inflows from abroad, and total

domestic saving (national saving plus the net capital inflow) increases, as

shown in Figure VI.l.

     Increased purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents combine

with reduced purchases of domestic assets by foreign residents to produce a

capital account deficit, since the capital account balance is zero in the
                                        35

base case. In the first year, the capital account balance is $-3.5

billion. The capital account deficit puts downward pressure on the dollar,

which depreciates by one percent initially. The cheaper dollar benefits

export industries, whose output increases by .75 percent initially, and

leads to a trade surplus.

      Thus the short-run impacts on foreign trade of this savings-promoting

initiative are different in the presence of international capital mobility.

The differences stem from changes in the capital account and from

subsequent effects on exchange rates.

     Figure VI.l illustrates that the long-term consequences of the savings

subsidy differ substantially from the short-term effects. In the short and

medium term, domestic households enjoy a higher average return on their

portfolios than do foreign households, reflecting the reduced marginal tax

rates on their incomes. Incomes and saving by U.S. households grow faster

than do those of foreigners. Much of the increase in saving by U.S.

households is directed abroad. As a result, net income from abroad rises

over time, putting upward pressure on the dollar and reducing export

demands. Real exports decline (relative to the base case) over time. In

the new steady state, real exports are 0.1 percent below the base case

levels.

     These results underscore the importance of accounting for inter-

national capital mobility in assessing the effects of savings-promoting

policy on the performance of export (and import-competing) industries.

Just as important, they indicate that such a policy's long-run consequences

may be dramatically different from its effects in the short term.
                                     36

     To test the robustness of these results, we perform the same policy

simulation for alternative values of a. The essential pattern of effects

is little different: whether a equals 02, 1 or 5, the savings-promoting

policy initially leads to increased accumulation of foreign assets by

domestic households and reduced accumulation of domestic assets by foreign

households. This implies a deficit on the capital account, a decline in

the value of the dollar, and a rise in real exports in the short run.3° In

all three simulations, the position of exports is reversed in the long run

as higher net income flows raise the value of the   dollar. The magnitude of

these effects increases as the value of a grows. When a is large, U.S.

households' portfolio responses are greater: since they enjoy higher

returns on assets located abroad than on those located at home, they

respond to the policy change by devoting a larger share of their saving to

purchases of new foreign assets.31 As a result, the capital account

deficit is larger the higher the value of a, and exchange rate depreciation

is more pronounced. Hence export industries receive a larger initial

boost.


B.   Resurrecting Investment Tax Credits

     We next investigate the effects of restoring investment tax credits

 (ITC's) to their effective rates prior to the Tax Reform Act of 1986.

Since the credits apply only to equipment and not structures, effective

 subsidy rates differ by industry according to the composition of each

 industry's physical capital in terms of structures and equipment. The ITC

 renewal is assumed to be unanticipated and to take effect in the first

period. Where the previous policy affected incentives to save, this one

 affects incentives to invest.
                                       37

     1. No Mobility

     The impact effect of implementing the ITC is to lower the effective

cost of new capital to domestic industry and stimulate investment demand,

as show-n in Table VI.2. Tax-adjusted q and investment rise except in the

housing services industry, which enjoys little benefit from the policy

change since its capital consists almost entirely of structures and its

effective ITC rate is still zero. Heightened investment demands exert

upward pressure on the domestic interest rate, which elicits an increase in

saving by U.S. households of approximately 2.7 percent in the first year

(see Table VI.2).

     The short-run impact on exports is very small. Eventually, however,

real exports increase significantly relative to the base case, reflecting

the fact that restoring ITC's raises the capital intensity of the economy

over time, leading to higher incomes and output and a higher volume of

trade. In the new steady state, real exports are approximately two percent

higher than in the base case.

     2.   Mobility

     Restoring the ITC produces quite different results in the presence of

capital mobility, particularly in the short run. Again we focus on the

central mobility case (   — l).32   As in the no-mobility scenario, the

initial impact of the new policy is to stimulate investment demands and

raise the domestic interest rate. Higher U.S. interest rates induce

additional saving not only by U.S. residents but also by foreigners.

Higher U.S. rates increase the relative attractiveness of U.S. -located

assets, leading to increased demands for these assets by U.S. and foreign

residents. Total U.S. domestic saving (saving by U.S. nationals plus the
                                        38

net capital inflow) rises, reflecting the increase in global saving and the

increase in the share of that saving devoted to the accumulation of U.S.

assets. These changes in asset accumulation patterns imply a surplus on

the U.S. capital account, which puts upward pressure on the dollar, making

U.S. exports more expensive and reducing demand for U.S. exports by

approximately 0.2 percent on impact.

     Thus, restoring ITC's has different (though not exceptionally large)

short-run implications for export industries once an allowance is made for

international capital mobility.

     In the presence of mobile capital, long-run effects differ

significantly from short-run impacts. The long-run effects reflect the

fact that this policy change is source-based, stimulating capital formation

in the LL.   rather   than globally (as in the savings-promotion policy). As

a result, U.S. residents, who own   most   U.S. -located capital, experience

faster income growth than do foreign residents. Their higher incomes bring

about a rise in their accumulation of foreign assets relative to

foreigners' accumulation of domestic assets, causing the capital account

balance to fall aid ultimately become negative. The rise in net interest

income from abroad also reflects the increased accumulation of foreign

assets by domestic residents. These considerable income flows help push up

demands for dollars and cause the exchange rate to rise over time. Finally,

the higher domestic incomes imply fast growth in the demands for imports by

domestic consumers and domestic industry, and the trade balance worsens

over time.

     The negative long-run trade balance is due to higher import volumes,

not lower exports: in the long run, real exports exceed base case levels.
                                      39

This is a consequence both of a higher volume of trade and lower real

prices for U.S. goods. The ITC raises the capital intensity of the

domestic economy, making labor more productive and lowering prices of U.S.

goods to foreigners. The real exchange rate falls by 0.6 percent after ten

years, despite the increase in the nominal exchange rate.33 Thus, both

income and relative price changes contribute to the revival of export

demands. Figure VI.2 suggests that very little time is required for the

initial adverse effects of the ITC's on exports to be reversed. In the

long run, the real value of U.S. exports rises by 1.6 percent over base

case levels.

     These results underscore the importance of distinguishing the short-

and long-run effects of growth-oriented tax policy. While confirming that

there may be a conflict between investment proriotion and the viability of

export industries, our results suggest that the conflict may materialize

only briefly.


C.   Differences Across Industries

     So far our discussion of simulation results has focused on aggregate

effects. The savings- and investment-promoting policies also yield very

different effects across industries, differences our model is ideally

suited to bring out.

     Table VI.3 displays some of these differences. The first two panels

of the table show the effects of the savings subsidy in the no-mobility

case and the mobility case with c — 1.     In general, the savings subsidy

boosts capital goods industries (construction, metlas, machinery) relative

to consumer goods industries in the short run. Over the longer term, the

relative advantage of capital goods industries declines as the capital
                                        40

intensity of the U.S. economy rises and after-tax rates of return and rates

of accumulation fall. Under the savings subsidy, the differences between

the no-mobility and mobility cases are relatively minor for industries

that have little dependence on the export market. In contrast, for export-

oriented industries the mobility assumptions are important, as they affect

the patter of exports over time. Thus, in the short run the export-

oriented agriculture and textiles industries fare better in the presence of

mobility than in its absence; the reverse is the case in the long run.

     The last two panels of Table VI.3 consider the effects of the ITC

renewal. Here the differences across industries mainly reflect differences

in the magnitude of investment credits across industries. The petroleum

refining and housing industries receive the smallest credits because the

ratio of equipment to structures is low in these industries. In the first

period, investment in housing declines slightly and investment in petroleum

refining increases by less then three percent, while investment in most

other industries rises by between five and seven percent. In the long run,

investment in every industry exceeds base case levels, a consequence of the

overall increase in productivity and incomes generated by the policy

change.



D. Sensitivity Analysis

     We test further the robustness of our results by considering the

savings- and investment-promoting policies under alternative values for the

parameter 0, whose inverse is the intertenporal elasticity of substitution

in consumption. The simulations previously considered adopt a value of 0.5

for this elasticity (0 —   2).   Table VI.4 displays results for these central
                                       41

case simulations as well, as for simulations with values of 0.25 and 1.0 for

this elasticity.

     With a higher intertemporal consumption elasticity, the

savings-promoting policy induces a larger increase in savings by U.S.

households, a sharper drop in gross-of-tax U.S. interest rates, and a

larger reduction in savings bdd foreign households. There is a larger

increase in domestic households' accumulation of foreign assets and a

larger decrease in foreign households' accumulation of domestic assets

implying larger capital account deficits initially and larger impacts on

exchange rates and real exports. Under all three values for the

intertemporal elasticity, the pattern of effects over time is very similar:

real exports rise in the short run, but fall in the long run.

     Restoring the ITC similarly has larger effects on domestic households'

saving the larger the value of the intertemporal substitution elasticity.

The pattern of effects on exports is similar across different values for

this elasticity: in all simulations, the policy shock hurts exports

initially but eventually leads to export volumes above base case levels.

     We also consider both policies under an alternative model

specification in which households' consumption and portfolio choices are

independent. This alternative specification may appeal to those who prefer

to leave asset preferences out of individuals' utility functions.

Households first choose portfolio shares according to


(Vl.1)    dln[o/(1—a)] — a
                             dln(rDD/rDF)


where a is the elasticity of substitution between portfolio shares. They

then choose consumption levels to iuaxiiuize the utility function.
                                                  42


                           t—s           —1 1—0
(VI.2)    U —      (1÷6)         (1—0)     Cs
             s—t


where s is the current time period. However, this independence of

consumption and portfolio choices is achieved at some cost: households'

portfolio decisions do not stem from utility maximization but rather are

based on the arbitrary rule of equation (VI.l). Table VI.4 reveals that

the pattern of results is very similar under the alternative specification

to that under the old one: the savings-promoting policy again creates

capital account deficits and stimulates exports in the short run, while

leading to capital account improvements and declines in real exports over

the longer term. Similarly, restoring investment tax credits implies

capital account surpluses and reduced export volumes in the short term, and

capital account deficits and higher export volumes in the long run.



VII. Conclusions and Directions for Further Research

     In this paper we have presented a new framework for analyzing the

effects of domestic and foreign policies on the U.S. economy. The model is

unique in combining a disaggregated treatment of industry interactions, a

detailed specification of personal and corporate taxes, a rigorous

attention to adjustment dynamics, and an integrated treatment of current

and capital account transactions. We apply the model to analyze the short-

and long-run effects of savings- and investment-promoting tax policies on

the viability of export industries, and find that in the presence of

internationally mobile financial capital the effects of the two types of

policies differ significantly from one another and change fundamentally

over time.
                                      43

     In the absence of international capital mobility, investment- and

savings-promoting policies each have insignificant short-run effects and

favorable long-run effects on U.S. export industries. The long-run

benefits reflect the fact that both policies raise the overall capital

intensity of U.S. production, leading to an increase in productivity and

incomes, to lower relative prices for U.S. goods, and to a higher overall

volume of trade. In the presence of international capital mobility, the

two types of policies differ from one another in their short- and long-term

consequences. Restoring investment tax credits tends to hurt U.S. export

industries in the short run, but help them subsequently. The reverse is

true of policies that subsidize saving. These differences reflect the very

different implications of the two types of policies for the capital account

of the balance of payments in the short and long runs.

     In future work we intend to consider closely the normative

implications of these policy alternatives; this study has concentrated on

positive issues. We also plan to apply the model to analyze the effects of

recent changes in U.S. fiscal policy, of trade policy alternatives, and of

a variety of industrial policies.
                                     44

Appendix 1: DerivatiOn of Excess Demands based on Current Prices


     Given a set of current prices, firms' optimal demands for labor and

intermediate inputs can be determined. Given the interest rate and lead

values for V and Z, one can derive the current values for Q and Z.     From

these one can derive investment, adjustment costs, demands for external

funds, and the level of output of each industry.

     On the consumer side, the current marginal utility of wealth, At(A*t)
                                          E
can be calculated from the lead value, A t+l       t+l' and from the current

interest rate, based on equation (111-17). Portfolio shares and overall

consumption levels for each household can then be determined from current

prices and the current value for A, using the first-order conditions

(111-15) and (111-16).

     Current prices then dictate the allocation of current consumption

expenditure into demands for specific consumption goods. Based on

households' shares of dollar and foreign-currency-denominated wealth and

firms' dividend and interest payments, we derive households' capital

incomes, Subtracting the value of consumption from households' total

after-tax incomes yields household savings. Households devote their

savings to the accumulation of domestic and foreign assets so as to attain

the desired asset shares.

     Demands by government depend only on current prices; lead variables

are not employed here.
                                              45

ppendjx 2:        Procedure for Obtaining Perfect Foresizht Exoectations


     To solve for perfect foresight expectations, we first obtain the

values for V, Z, A, V*, A*, and e which ultimately prevail in the new

steady state after a policy change. In the base case, the steady-state

values for these variables emerge from the calibration procedure discussed

in the next section; in revised case simulations, a more complex simulation
                          34
procedure is required.             We then assign the steady-state values as

terminal values for the lead variables:


(A2-l) V1 —               V


              E       —
          ZT+l            Zss

                      —   A
              T+l             ss

                              *
          V           —   V
              T+1.            ss

                              *
          A           —   A
              T+l             ss

              E
          e           —   e
              T+l             ss


where T is the last simulation period, and the subscript SS denotes the

value for a variable in the new steady state. Next, we conjecture an

initial path for the lead variables.

     We then solve the model for each within-period equilibrium given the

initial path of the lead variables.35 The within-period equilibrium

solution provides a sequence of derived values: V1. V2
                                                                       VT;...; e1,

e2      eT. We compare our conjectures with contemporaneous derived
                                     46

values, updating the guesses in a Causs-Seidel fashion. For example, we

adjust the    path according to:



(A2-2)             —
                       pV' + (l—p)V
where k represents the iteration and p is a parameter between 0 and 1.

This procedure generally brings lead and realized values within .01 percent

of one another within fifty iterations.

     In this manner we generate paths for the forward variables that have

the appropriate slope across any two consecutive periods, since agents have

perfect foresight and impose the appropriate relationship across periods in

determining a current value on the basis of the corresponding lead

variable. Each equilibrium path also has the appropriate level, as

determined by the terminal values for each variable.
                                      47

                                  Footnotes


1. Slemrod (1988) offers an excellent summary of the implications of

international capital mobility for the theory of capital income taxation.

2. See, for example, Bovenberg (1987). The direction of the effects

depends on the relative magnitudes of intratemporal elasticities of

substitution in investment and intertemporal elasticities of substitution

in consumption. Giovannini (1987) shows that the relative size of these

elasticities also determines the welfare consequences of savings- and

investment-oriented policies under "small country" assumptions.

3. The framework here is essentially a two-country portfolio balance

model, as analyzed for example by Henderson and Rogoff (1982).

4. The basis for equations (11-5) and (11-6) is the arbitrage condition

requiring that the return to owners of firms equal the rate offered on

alternative assets. This is discussed in Section III.

5.   Thus, the model offers considerably more industry detail than the

Goulder-Sumniers model, which distinguishes five domestic industries.

6. This is the asset price approach to investment as developed in Summers

(1981).

7. There is some debate as to what constitutes the best sp.ecification of

firms' financing decisions. We adopt the "traditional" approach, according

to which the marginal source of funds for investment is new share issues.

For a discussion of this and other approaches, see Poterba and Summers

(1985).

8. The nominal exchange rate brings nominal magnitudes at home and abroad

into line. If all prices (other than the numeraire) are endogenous, the

nominal exchange rate is superfluous. This is not the case if some prices
                                      48

(other than the numeraire) are fixed in nominal terms, however. In the

model, domestic and foreign nominal wages are specified exogenously (and

increase over time at a specified rate that determines the long-run

inflation rate), permitting a role for the exchange rate.

9. Thus the demands for foreign inputs derive from optimizing behavior,

with the demand elasticities directly related to the substitution

elasticities embedded in the production functions.

10. This transformation of producer goods into consumer goods is necessary

because the categories for outputs from production data differ from the

categories for goods from consumer expenditure data.

11. See Poterba and Summers (1985) for an explicit derivation of this

expression for V.

12. This specification conforms to the "traditional" view of dividend

behavior. Some empirical support for this view is presented in Poterba and

Summers (1985). Further evidence comes from the large volume of share

repurchases in recent years documented in Shoven (1986).

13. An alternative is external adjustment Costs, according to which the

costs of adjustment are borne through payments to an agent (for example, an

enterprise providing installation services) external to the firm. See Mussa

(1978) for a discussion of these different approaches.

14. The consumption-based capital asset pricing model (see, for example,

Duffie and Zarne, 1987) offers a potential approach to this problem,

although the difficulties of empirical implementation are formidable.

15. Mehra and Prescott (1982) and Adler and Dumas (1983), for example,

argue that exchange rate risk provides only part of the explanation as to

why households maintain internationally diversified portfolios.
16. The model is agnostic as regards the specific bases for households'

portfolio preferences. One explanation might invoke risk considerations.

Another might refer to different liquidity services offered by domestic and

foreign assets. Poterba and Rotemberg (1983) refer to such services to

justify including money in individual utility function.

17. An alternative formulation would define A in terms of asset levels

rather than shares. But since asset stocks are used to finance future

consumption, adding levels of asset holdings to the utility function would

introduce an element of double-counting.

18. The value of a thus critically influences the extent to which policy

shocks or other exogenous changes will generate international capital flows.

19. We do not consider the foreign household here, since different

consumer goods are not distinguished in the foreign country.

20. This facilitates welfare evaluations, since the household utility

functions do not incorporate welfare derived from government-provided goods

and services.

21. See Goulder and Summers (1987).

22. See equation (111-17) and the appendix to Goulder and Summers (1987).

23. Our 10-sector disaggregation is not fully compatible with the

disaggregation in the Scholz data. The Scholz data includes metals,

machinery, and miscellaneous manufacturing as one sector, while in our

model these are three different sectors. We have split out the Scholz data

based on the shares of value added represented by each of the three

components.

     We have also added information pertaining to the housing industry.

The Scholz data subsumes housing within the real estate sector. To use
                                       50

this data in our model, the real estate sector data had to be divided into

housing and other real estate. The weights used to disaggregate the real

estate sector data were calculated based on shares of value added in the

367 x 367 1977 input-output matrix published by the Department of Commerce

(1984).

24.   Ultimately we intend to employ tax rates that more closely reflect

effective rates abroad.

25. This information was obtained from the End-Use Import Tables of the

Bureau of the Census Highlights of U.S. Export and Import Trade (1983) for

merchandise trade and from MeCulloch (1987) for trade in services. We

applied it as follows:

      a.    From the end-use tables we obtained consumption and investment

imports by type of good. For each import, total imports for intermediate

use were then calculated by subtracting consumption and investment imports

from total imports (of a given type) as given by Scholz.

       b.    Domestic intermediates were calculated by subtracting foreign

intermediates from total intermediate goods.

       c.    The foreign (domestic) input-output matrix was then calculated

by multiplying each row of the total input-output matrix by the ratio of

foreign (domestic) intermediate goods to total intermediate goods. Thus we

assumed, for each type of intermediate good, that the ratio of domestic to

foreign inputs of that type was the same across sectors. This assumption

was necessary given the absence information on the uses of intermediate

imports by sectors.

26. The procedure is described in Goulder and Summers.

27. The value of m is set at the ratio of foreign to U.S. GDP.
                                      51


28. As described above, government budget balance is maintained in each

year through lump-sum adjustments to domestic households' individual income

tax obligations. The present value of these adjustments is approximately zer

29. The U.S. tax system in fact is primarily residence based; the

corporate income tax has source-based elements, however, including the

foreign tax credit.

30. The difference in returns offered to U.S. savers on domestic and

foreign assets is relatively small, considerably smaller than the

differences in gross interest rates across countries. This reflects the

appreciation of the exchange rate, which, ceteris paribus, lowers the

return to U.S. households on foreign assets.

31. The case of perfect substitutability is also of interest but poses

special difficulties. Under residence-based taxation, such a scenario

generally implies a corner solution: for one of the residents, the

after-tax return will not be the same for the two assets, and thus the

resident will only hold one of the two assets. If residents' tax rates

differ, then if one of the residents faces equal after-tax returns on both

assets, the other will not. See Slemrod (1988).

32. We also consider the effects of this policy change under alternative

values for the asset elasticity of substitution, a. As Table VI.2 shows,

the general pattern of results is quite consistent with those we discuss in

the text.

33.   In the short run, the rate of inflation in the U.S. falls below the

long-run rate of six percent. The growth of foreign prices, however, is

relatively unaffected by the policy change. In the long run, rates of

inflation in the U.S. and abroad again are equal (at six percent), but the
                                     52

ratio of price levels is different from the ratio in the old steady state.

34. The procedure involves the solution of the general equilibrium model

under steady-state constraints. In the constrained system we iterate over

capital stocks and ownership shares (y and y*) as well as prices. Steady-

State values for capital stocks and ownership shares have been attained

when (1) the derived industry Q's are equal to the steady-state values and

(2) the wealth accumulation patterns of households imply no changes in the

ownership shares.

35. This technique is similar to the approach of Fair and Taylor (1983).
                                         53




                                    Ref erenees

Adler, M. ,    and B. Dumas (1983), "International Portfolio Choice and

     Corporation Finance: A Synthesis' Journal of Finance 38, PP. 925-984.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1987) , "Balance Sheets

     for the U.S. Economy, 1947-86."

Bovenberg, A.L. (1986), "Capital. Income Taxation in Growing Open

     Economies," Journal of Public Economics 3]., pp. 347-376.

Bóvenberg, A.L. (1987), "The Effects of Investment Incentives on Real

     Exchange Rates and Trade Flows," mimeo.

Duffie, D., and W. Zame (1987), "The Consumption-Based Capital Asset

     Pricing Model," mimeo, Stanford University.

Fair, R.C. ,    and J.B. Taylor (1983), "Solution and Maximum Likelihood

     Estimation of Dynamic Nonlinear Rational Expectation Models,"

     Econometrica 51(4), 1169-1185.

Giovannini, A. (1987), "International Capital Mobility and Tax Evasion,"

     National Bureau of Economic Research working Paper No. 2460.

Goulder, L.H., and L.H. Summers (1987), "Tax Policy, Asset Prices, and

     Growth: A General Equilibrium Analysis," Working Paper No. 2128,

     National Bureau of Economic Research.

Goulder, L.H., J.B. Shoven, and J. Whalley (1983), "Domestic Tax Policy and

     the Foreign Sector" in Martin Feldstein, ed. ,    ehaviora1   Simulation

     Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, (Chicago: University of Chicago

     Press).

Henderson, D., and K. Rogoff (1982), "Negative Net Foreign Asset

     Positions and Stability in a World Portfolio Balance Model," Journal.

     of International Economics 13, pp. 85-104.
                                        54

Kouri, P.J.K. (1976), "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the

     Short Run and in the Long Run," Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78,

     pp. 280-304.

Kouri, P.J.K. (1978), "Balance of Payments and the Foreign Exchange Market:

     A Dynamic Partial Equilibrium Model," manuscript, Yale University.

McCulloch, R. (1988), "International Competition in Services," in Martin

     Feldstein, ed. , The United States in the World Economy (Chicago:

     University of Chicago Press)

McKibbin, Warwick and Jeffrey Sachs (1986), "Coordination of Monetary and

     Fiscal Policies in the OECD', NBER Working Paper No. 1800.

Mehra, R., and E. Prescott (1982), "A Test of the Intertemporal Asset

     Pricing Model," mimeo.

Mussa, M. (1978), "Dynamic Adjustment in a Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson

     Model." Journal of Political Economy 86(5). 775-91.

Mutti, J., and H. Grubert (1985), "The Taxation of Capital Income in an

     Open Economy: The Importance of Resident-Nonresident Tax Treatment,"

     Journal of Public Economics 31, pp. 347-376.

Poterba, J.M. ,   and J.J. Rotemberg (1.983), "Money in the Utility Function:

     An Empirical Implementation," mimeo.

Poterba, J.M., and L.H. Summers (1985), "The Economic Effects of Dividend

     Taxation," in Edward T. Altman and Martin G. Subramanyam, eds. , Recent

     Advances in Cortorate Finance (Homeward, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin).



Powell, M.J.D. (1970), "A Hybrid Method for Nonlinear Equations." in

     P. Rabinowitz, ed., Numerical Methods for Nonlinear Algebraic

     Equations (London: Gordon and Greach), ch. 6.
                                       55

Sachs,   J. (1981), 'The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the

     1970s," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity II, pp. 201-268.

Scholz, K. (1987), "Documentation for the 1983 General Equilibrium Data

     Set,' unpublished manuscript.

Shoven, J.B. (1986), "The Tax Consequences of Share Repurchases and Other

     Non-dividend Cash Payments to Equity Owners,"   mimeo, Stanford

     University.

Slemrod, J. (1988), "Effects of Taxation with International Capital

     Mobility," in Henry J. Aaron, Harvey Galper, and Joseph Pechman, eds.

     Uneasy Compromise: Problems of a Hybrid Income-Consumption Tax, The

     Brookings Institution, Washington, DC., pp. 115-148.

Summers, L.H. (1981), "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory

     Approach," Brookthzs Papers on Economic Activity (January), pp.

     67-127.

Summers, L.H. (1986), "Tax Policy and International Competitiveness,"

     Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 1256,

     Harvard University.

U.S. Department of Commerce (1984), Survey of Current Business, August.

U.S. Department of Commerce (1984), Survey of Current Business, February.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census (1983), "Highlights of

     U.S. Export and Import Trade," December.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1984), Detailed

     Structure of the U.S. Economy.
</ref_section>
                               Table 111.1

                  Industry Production Structure



           Production Relationship              Functional Form




     X         X(VA, x1, x2       ..'   X4)
                                                   Leontief



     VA    =   VA(L. K)                              CES



           =                     (i   = 1, N)        CES
     x1        x(x1, x*1)




Key: X     =   gross output (exclusive of adjustment costs)
     VA    =   value added
     L     =   labor   input

           =   capital    input (fixed in the current period of time)

           =   composite intermediate input                   (i =

           =   intermediate    domestically-produced input (i =

     x*,       intermediate foreign-produced input            (i =   1. ..,N)
                                 Table 111.2

                   Household Consumption Structure



             Consumption Relationship                 Functional Form



             =                                      constant
    U
                 u(Ct,Ct÷i.. .)                              intertemporal
                                                    elasticity of substitution


             =
                          A)                        Cobb-Douglas



             =                                      Cobb-Douglas
     Cs          C5(c1                    Crn,s)




             =                                       CES
     A5          A5(a5,1-a5)


             =                                       CES
                 c(c15,    c,     )




Key: U       =   intertemporal        utililty

     C5
             =   overall   consumption at time s


     As
             =   portfolio      preference index at time s

     c,5 =       consumptionof composite consumer good i at time s
             =   consumption of domestically-made consumer good i
     c,
                    at time s
         *
     c       =   consumption of foreign-made consumer good i
                    at time s
                                    Table 111.3

                              Model Treatment of Taxes


      l•ax                                             Treatment in Model

1. Corporate income tax                           Ad valorem tax on profits by
                                                  industry; bond interest payments
                                                  are expensed


2. Property tax and corporate                     Ad valorem tax on capital stocks
    franchise taxes                               by industry


3.   Investment tax credits                       Ad valorem subsidy to investment
                                                  by industry


4. Depreciation deductions                        Tax credit based on the value of
                                                  depreciable capital stock, tax
                                                  depreciation rate, and corporate
                                                  income tax rate


5. Contributions to Social Security,              Ad valorem tax on the use of labor
    Unemployment Insurance, and                   services by industry
    Workmen's Compensation


6. Motor vehicles tax                             Ad valorem tax on the use of motor
                                                  vehicles by industry


7. Excise taxes, other indirect                   Ad valorem taxes on output of
    business taxes, and nontax                    producer goods
    payments to government


8. Retail sales taxes                             Ad valorem tax on purchases of
                                                  consumer goods


9. Personal income taxes (including               Linear function of labor and
    state and local)                              capital income (net of capital
                                                  gains taxes)


10. Social Security benefits,                 Lump-sum income transfer
    unemployment compensation, and            constituting a fixed share of
    other transfers                           overall government spending
                                                       Table IV.

                                      Summary of Equilibrium Conditions




Intratemporal Equilibrium Conditions

     labor demand                labor supply                                (in each country)

    gross output demand                     gross output supply              (for each domestic industry
                                                                             and the foreign industry)

    government spending = government revenue                                 (in each country)

    total industry borrowing
        national saving + net capital inflow                                 (in each country)




Intertemporal Equilibrium Conditions

           =             t       2, 3,       .,                                V


       Z =     Z,        t =     2,    3,     ,   1;                     =
                                                                               Z5
       *E =      *                                                 *E              *
      Vt       V.        t =     2,    3,     ,   T            V11 =           V
           = A
                 t
                     ,   t   =   2,    3,     ,   1;           AE
                                                                   T+1             ss


      At
           =
               At
                 *
                         t =     2,    3,    .,
                                                               A11
                                                                   *     =     A
                                                                                   *



       e =     e.        t =     2,    3,                                =     e
                                     Table V.1

           Benchmark Values for Industry Tax and Behavioral Parameters



                                    Rate of             Rate of       Equity     Debt-
                                    Economic              Tax         Risk      Capital
                                  Depreciation         Depreciation   Premium    Ratio
Industry                              (oR)                (O)          (r)        (b)



 (1) Agriculture & Mining             .010                .203         .139       .179

 (2) Crude Petroleum & Refining       .051                .120         .087       .181

 (3) Construction                     .156                .220         .091       .080

 (4) Textiles, Apparel & Leather      .078                .131         .111       .435

 (5) Metals                           .082                .130         .084       .339

 (6) Machinery                        .094                .140         .084       .365

 (7) Motor Vehicles                   .109                .161         .089       .255

 (5) Miscellaneous Manufacturing      .087                .180         .083       .220

 (9) Services                         .067                .124         .092       .527


(10) Housing                          .010                .070         .100       .502


Scalars

Growth Rate of Effective Labor Services          (g) 0.03
     (steady-state real growth rate)

Growth Rate of Nominal Wages                     (n0) 0.06
     (Steady-state inflation rate)

Corporate Profits Tax Rate                       (i) 0.34

Capital Gains Tax Rate                           (K) 0.05

Marginal Income Tax Rate                         (€) 0.285

Nominal Interest rate                            (i)     0.071
                                         Figure V.1

               Relationships   among Final Demand, Intermediate Input Use,
                                      and Value Added



                                         C     I       G      X




       LI                  I

       K   I               I




Key

       C: Personal consumption expenditures on domestic and foreign goods.

        I: Expenditures on domestic and foreign capital goods.

       G: Government purchases of domestic goods, labor services, and capital
           services.

       X: Exports of domestic goods.

      100: Domestic input-Output matrix --         domestic intermediate goods used by
            domestic industry.

      tOE: Foreign input-output matrix --      foreign     intermediate goods used by
            domestic industry.

        L: Labor services inputs

        K: Capital services inputs


Note: In the benchmark data set, government purchases of imports are zero and
       foreign imports are not re-exported. Hence, the 0 and X vectors do not
       extend into the imports rows.
                                     Table V.2

                      Benchmark Values for Income and Wealth*


                                                   U.S. Firms   Foreign Firms



Wealth

Human and Transfer Wealth                             27,606       54,414

Nonhuman Wealth                                        8,139       18,992
- Owned by U.S. households                             7,407          733
- Owned                                                  733       18,259
        by foreign households


Income and Tax Payments

Labor Income Payments                                  1,842        4,297
- To U.S. households                                                    0
                                                       1,842
— To foreign households                                    0        4,297

Capital Income Payments                                  464        1,083
- To U.S. households                                     422           42
- To foreign households                                   42        1,041

Indirect Taxes Paid                                      298          696


Investment Expenditure and Financin

Investment Expenditure                                   620        1,446

Investment Financing
— Retained
           Earnings                                      453        1,057
- Domestic
           Household Saving                              152           15
- Foreign Household Saving                                15          374




*All values in bIllions of 1983 dollars.
                                                                         Table VI.l
                                              Effects of     Saviis Subsidy under Xlternative Asst    ility
                                                            and 1sset Substitutability Ass.mptions

                                        No   Mobility                      pbi1ity                     Mobility                   Tii1ity
                                                                           00.2                        _____                       0=5
Period:                             1          5     8.5.             1        5       s.s.      1        5       s.s.       1       5        s.s.
Nminel    Ea1we    Rate            .996       .998   1.002         0.990    0.997     1.006   0.990    0.995      1.007    .987     .988    1.014
 (foreign arrcy/$)
Savirq by U.S. Wistho1de          2.72        1.88      2.13        5.98     3.48      2.03    5.09     2.92      2.21     5.01    3.57      3.09
—U.S. AsSet     ?siilaticn        2.72        1.88      2.13        5.08     2.94      2.03    3.57     2.06      2.04     1.83    1.54      2.06
           ?mu1atiai
—Foreign Asset                    0.00       0.00       0.00       15.13     8.93      2.02   20.54    11.63      3.85    44.69   24.03     13.53
—4 ?iset ?ssilation                1.0         1.0       1.0        .902     .905      .910    .897     .902       .909    .878    .892      .901
   re
Savizq by Foreign   Ix,ldB        0.01       0.01       0.01       —1.02    —0.66     —0.09   —1.06    —0.81    —0.21     —1.46   —1.51     —0.83
—U.S. Asset ?sai1ation            0.00       0.00       0.00      10.57      5.31      0.29    3.37    —6.41      -0.52   10.13   11.33      4.61
—Foreign Asset ?sn.i1atict        0.01       0.01       0.01       —0.80    —0.47     —0.11   —0.97    —0.59      -0.20   —1.93   —1.12     —0.68
—* A?et )ru1atjon                  1.0         1.0       1.0        .965     .963      .961    .962     .964       .962    .957     .965     .963

Ralazy of Paynents (levels)3
—c'apita].                          0          0         0        —3,168    2,094      255    3,494    2,651      —670
   e ?rit
                                                                                                                          5,035 5,213 —2,854
—'rrade                             0          0         0         2,128      —14    —1,939   2,632      681   —2,689     4,295 2,739 -6,428
—Net
          alatFlow Balarx,e         0          0         0         1,040    2,108     2,194     862    1,970    3,359       740 2,474 9,282
                                   0.20       0.33      0.39        0.71     0.34     —0.01    0.75     0.47    -0.07      1.10    0.87     —0.93
n-=tic Investiit4                  1.00       1.16      1.43        1.04     1.30      1.32    0.75     0.91      1.29     0.42    0.49      1.13
tic          Qxisiption          —0.06        0.06      0.19       —0.26     0.02      0.33   —0.10     0.10      0.39    —0.04    0.10      0.65


1. All valuss ress percentage thanes frtn the base case, except in the rows rres tDrl1ir to t1e exthaxqe rate, a.su1ation shares, and
helare of payments  arç,onents.
2. Ratio of hcire asset aa.itulation to total asset a.mi1ation. In the ndility scenarice, the base case values for the aouiu1aticc shares
are .910 aed .961 for dceestic   ez foreign ridents,
                                                 respectively.
3. All bala, of paysents     In milliais of 1983 dollars. Figures are rxrmalized to abstract frcin the 1on-nin (steady-state) growth of
                              it
the ece.
4. Invsst,t perntages may differ      persa.al saving pertmntages because of retained earTiizvs and irivestnt tax credits used to fiiwce
                                          fr
thves.
                                       Figure VI.i
                         DYNAMIC EFFECTS OF A SUBSIDY TO SAVING


                          3.5
     TOTAL SAVIN
          (% CHANGE)      2.5

                          1.5


                          0.5


                         —0.5
                                               20              30    40     50
                                0    10
                                                     PE00


 CAPITAL ACCUT
     ($   U.S.xlO   )      0

                        -1000

                        —2000

                        -3000

                        -4000
                                0              20              30    40    50
                                                     PERIOD


      REAL EXPORTS
       (% CHANCE)

                          0.5


                            0



                         -0.5
                                0               20              30    40    50
                                                      PERIOD




1. Total saving is domestic saving plus net capital Inflows.
2.        Capital account levels are normalized in each year by the
          factor (l+g)t, where g is the steady-state growth rate of the
          economy.
                                                                  Table VL2
                                       Effects of IrrIesl]nt Tax O-edits uer Alternative ?sset Wiility
                                                     ard Asset Substitutability Assmptior
                                      No   ?ility                   Ycbiity                    Pi1ity                   iility
                                                                     oO.2                       a1                       0=5
Feric:                            1           5    s.s.        1        5       s.s.      1       5     s.s.       1       5       s.s.
Naninal Exthae Rate            1.001       1.003   1.011    1.003    1.004     1.013   1.002   1.004    1.014   1.002   1.003    1.016
 (foreign irrency/S)
Savirq by U.S. Hais1ds          1.29       0,41     4.56     1.11     0.98      3.95    1.50    1.06    4.00     1.43    1.34     4.29
—U. S. Asset Amilaticw          1.29       0.41     4.56     1.10     0.90      3.98    1.12    0.97    3.97     0.65    0.92     3.99
—Foreign Asset Axua2lation      0.00       0.00     0.00     1.22     1.82      3.70    5.29    1.98    4.29     9.28    5.66     7.31
—+4ai A.set Aomailation          1.0         1.0     1.0     .910     .909      .910    .907    .909     .910    .903    .906     .907
   Share
Savirq by Foreign }stholds     -0.02       -0.01    0.02     0.18    -0.11     -0.07    0.04    0.13    0.11     0.05   -0.32    -0.30
—U.S. Asset Acc,.nailation      0.00        0.00    0.00     5.24    —1.08      0.29    6.75   —1.21   —0.01     8.72   —2.83    —1.32
—Foreign Asset Amii1aticri     —0.02       -0.01    0.02    —0.03    —0.07     -0.08   -0.23   —0.09   —0.12    -0.40   -0.22    —0.26
—Hc*ie                           1.0         1.0     1.0     .959     .962      .961    .959    .962     .961    .958    .962     .962
       A?et .siilaticii
   Share
Ba1az of paynents (levels)3
—pital   Aoaint Balaire           0           0       0       585     —380      —290     214    —422    —427      —78   —1,199 —1,095
—'rrade BaJ.ane                   0           0       0    —1,196     —155    —1,266    —811    —178   —1,472    —472     409 —2,559
—Net     Incrs FkM                0           0       0       611      535     1,556     597     600    1,899     550     790    3,654
Realrts                        —0.07        0.35    2.00    —0.32     0.33      1.66   —0.24    0.33    1.61    —0.16    0.44     1.38
Datstic     Investment4         2.71        3.36    7.35     2.86     3.46      6.86    2.86    3.47    6.84     2.76    3.40     6.79
rrzrestic   cmption            —1.21       —0.98    0.76    —1.21    —0.99      0.83   —1.23   —0.99    0.84    —1.20   —1.02     0.92
Notes:
1. All values  epress pel:centage c*arqes frrn the base case, except in the    correspxdin to the exdare rate, axuiii1aticzshares, sal
                                                                               rs
ba1arx of payments cpnents.
2. Ratio of hone asset anmi1ation to total asset aauiulation. In the Ii1ity scenarios, the base case values for the ai1aticm shares
are .910 aal .961 for dartic anl foreign residents, respectively.
3. All    bala  of payments itns in millic of 1983 dollars. Figures are nornialized to abstract fran the lor-nin (steady-state) gith of
the eauny.
4. Irwesthent percentages may differ fran personal savia percentages because of retained earnmis aril investment tax credits used to finarx
irivesthent.
                         25
                                   Figur. VI.2

               DYNAMIC EF7ECTS OV RESTORING INVESTMENT TAX CREDITS



                         3.5

      TOTAL SAVIN
          (% CHANCE)




                                                 PROQ


 CAPITAL ACC9T
     ($    U.S.xlO   )




                                                                °
                                                 PERIOD


      REAL EXPORTS             2
       (% CHANCE)
                             15




                                             IO•
                                                 PERIcO




1.        Total saving is domestic saving plus net capital inflows.
2.        Capital accont levels are normalized in each year by the
          factor (l+g)   where g is the steady-state growth rate of the
                         ,


          economy.
                                                                                                Table VI.3
                                           EFFECTS ACROSS INDUSTRIES OP SAVING- AND INVESTXENT-PROMOTING TAX                                          CHANCES

                                                                          (Percentage changes from base case)



                                                                                                                       3                        4                           S
                                                     Agricultur.               Crud.   P.trol.u                                        T.xtil..,    Apparel
                                                     and Hining                    and Rofining                   Construction              end Leather                   Metal.

  P.riod:                                        1        5        SS          1           S      iS         1         S      Si        1       5       SS           1      5           ss


SAVINGS SUSSIDY

  (1) No    Capital   Nobility

       Investment                            1.60       1.31       1,31    1.47        1.54 1.34           1.34       1.68    2.11     1.28    1.48     1.74     1.72      2.00         2.48
       E.pioy..nr                            1.18       0.3.9     -1.03    0.74        0.58 -0.14          0.73       0.83    1.01     0.37    0.39     0.11     0.55      0.55         0.39
       Cr0.. Output                          0.20       0.42       0.57    0.74        0.45 0.77           0.67       0.81    1.07     0.31    0.39     0.33     0.41      0.54         0.74
       Export.                              .0.29       0,43       1.09    0,01        0.12 0.36           0.22       0.22    0.11     0.29    0.34     0.27     0.19      0.23         0.20


  (2) Capital     Nobility.   o   —    1

       Inv..t..nr                            1.41       1.34 1.16          1,03        1.08       0.92     0.98      1.37      3.89    1.02    1.20     1.50     1   39   1 62
                                             1.42       0.38 -1.07         123                                                                                                          3.91
       Eploy..nt                                                                       0.81      -0,36     0.55      0.65     0.91     0.62    0.55    0.04      0.78     0.56
                                                                          0.63                                                                                                      0.09
      Cross Output                           0.29       0.43       0.46                047        0.44     0.31      0.64     0.96     0.53    0.51    0.24      0.61     0.54      0.41
      Export.                                0.04       0.44       0.63   0.23         0.13       0.00     0.66      0.35    -0.31     0.91    0.51    -0.34     0.61     0.35     -0.22

ITC 811EWAL

  (1) No Capital Nobility
       Inv..t..nt                            3,45       3.64       5,50   2    11      3.30       6.38    6.26       7.80    14,35     5.08    6,25   31.75      6.20     7,55 13.78
       Zeployment                            0,61       -104 -2.58        -U   56    -0.51       -0.11    2.01       2.31     5.03    -1.28 -1.06      0.38      0.98     3.01  2.03
       Crc..   Output                       -0.17       0.45       2.81   '0.30        0.25      387       1.80      2.33     5.48    -1,17 -0,70      1.85      0.65
                                            -0.33                         0
                                                                                                                                                                          1.39  3.94
       Exports                                          1.09       3.81        32      0.27       1.62    -0.09      0 06    0.73      0,03 0,32       1.70     0 12      0.30      I    16


   (2) CapItal Mobility,         o—   3.



       Invest Sent                           3 50        3.66      5 24      95        3   41    5   8!   6.72       8.28    13.37     5.17    6.33   11.21     6.63      7.95     12 88
       Lop loyment                           0.52       -3.06     -2.53   .0.1)      .056        -0.15    2.14       2.39     4.66    -1.40   -1.09    0.38     0.94      1.08      3.15
      Cross Output                          -0.21       0.46       2.74   -0.36        0.26       3.52    1.91       2.43     5.11    -1.28   -0.72    1.80     0.61      I 22     3.57
       Export.                              .043        1.08       3.44   0.05         0.27      1.32     -0.22      0.04    0.48     -0.16    0.28    130      .0.25     0 08     0.89
                                                                                         Tabis VT.) (continued)

                                         EFFECTS ACROSS INDUSTRIES OF SAVING- AND INVESThENT—FROHOTINGTAX                                    CHANCES


                                                                        (Percentage           changes froi base caBe)




                                                                                                                8                        9                           10
                                                      6                              7
  Industry:                                                                                                   Htx.c
                                                                                   Motor
                                                                                  V.ht.,l..             ?4.nufacturing                 S.rvtc.s
                                                  N.chtn.ry

                                                                                     S        ES       I         S     55       1        5        SS         1       5      55
  P.r tod                                             S       55



SAVINGS SUBSIDY

   (1)   No C.pit.l Mobility
                                                                                    1.67      1.94    1.31     1.55    1.77    1.56      1.82     2.44      0.45    0,56    0.68
                                             1.38     1.61    1,91        1.42
         lnv.stnnt                                                                                                             0.29      0.27     .0.13     0.23    0.07    -0.11
                                             0.1.4    0.43    0.34        0.64      0.54      0.16    0.34     0.36    0.14
         Ep1oy.t                                                                              0,56    023      0,37    047     0,18      0.28     0.33      -0.26   -0,01   0.64
                                             0.31     0.43    0.62        044       0.33                                                                                     0.00
         Cross Output                                                     0.27      0.37      0.21    0.21     0.37    0.44    0.36      0.35     032        0.00    0.00
                                             0,28     0.33    0.27
         Exports


   (2> C.ptt.1 NobilIty.       0—   1.

                                                              1.49        1.11       1.40      1.74   0.99      1.26    1.57   1.30      1.57      2.25      0.23 0.34 0.64
         Invette.nt                          1.05     1.23                                                                                        -0.08      0.10 0.12 -0.47
                                                              0.10        0.72       0.60      0.14   0.41     0.42     0.12   0.31      0.33
                                             0.64     0.1.6
         E.ploy..r.t                                          0.35        0.51       0.36      0.50   0.30     0.39     0.41   0.21      0.31.     0.35     -0.13 -0.02 0.61
         Cross Output                        0.49     0.43                                                                                                              0,00
                                                                          0.85       0,4.9    -0.32   0.82     0,32    -0.17   1.03      0.34     .0.32      0.00 0.00
                                             0.89     0,50 .0.3)
         Export.

ITC EENEIJAL

   (1)   No C.ptt.t Mobility
                                                                                                       5.77     6.90 11.70      6.64 8.21         16.30     -0.60 -0.60 0.76
         Inv..t..nt                          S   69   6.87 11.73           5.13      6.35 11.64
                                                                                                      -0,18    -0 16 0.52      -0.42 -0.48        -0.81     -2,01 -1.91 -1.10
                                             0.76     0,76 1.58           -0.02     -0.19 0.41
         Ep1oy..nt                                                                   0.22     2.86    -0.31     0.22   2.67    -0,59    -0.17      2 . 16    0,29 -0.10 0.69
                                             0.41     0.92    3.33        -0.21
         Cross Output                                                                         1.16    .009      0,67   2.36    0.00      0,25      2 . 24    0.00    0.00    0 00
                                             -0.17    0.20    1.70        .0.08      0.28
         Exports


   (2) C.pit.1 NobIlity,       0
                                                                                                      6 01      2.09   11 11    6.94 8.46 15.59             -0.55   -0.60 0.39
               S
         IflY. t St nt                       3.99     7.14    11.00        5.39      6.59 11.08
                                                                          -0.04     -0.20 0.38        -020 -0.17       0.50    -0.43 -0.50 -0.72            -7.03   .1.95 -140
                                             0.12     0.76    1.36                                                                                           0.27   -0.08  034
         E.ploy.nt                                                                   0.29 2.73        -034      0.23    2.56   -0,61    -0.17      2.13
         Cross Output                        0,37     0,94    3.03        -0,23                                                                              000     0.00 0.00
                                                                          -0.27      0.25 137         '0.28     0.45    1.94   -0.20     0.22      1.81
                                             -0 36    0.17    I    30
         Exports
                                                                   Table VI.4
                                              Effects urder Alternative Model Specification
                                  aid urder Alternative Valuen for Intertenporal Substitution Elasticity1
A.   SAVDI   JIYt
Intertral Substithticn Elasticity:      .25                          .5                           1.0                .5, irdeperdent
                                                                  (tral case)                                   aDns%rnption   &portfolio dioioe
Period:                           1      5     s.s.                    5        s.s,              5     3.8.                   5      3.8.

Savirq by U.S. Hcistho1ds      4.25    2.72     2.61       5.09      2.92       2.21    5.24    2.83    2.10       6.86    4.35      1.97

Sav1n by Foreign Hcuso1th     —0.90    —0.78   —0.22      —1.06     —0.81    —0.21     —1.14   —0.84    —0.21     —1.39   —0.97     —0.22


M1are of Payments (levels)2
—pita1   .mt 8alai            —3,009 —2,640     —697     —3,494    —2,651       —670   —4,031 —2,991    —762     —4,695 —3.163       —704
—'Th    1a                    2,338      923 —2,603       2,632       681 —2,689       3,094     828 —2,658       3,554    673     —2,516
—Net   Ir F1i                    671   1,717 3,300          862     1,970 3,359          937   2,163 3,420        1,141   2,490     3,220

Real
   cp)rts                       0.71    0.51   —0.02       0.75      0.47    —0.07      0.94    0.49    —0.09      0.94    0.48     —0.06

Imetic Inventit3                0.66    0.88    1.59       0.75      0.91       1.29    0.66    0.82    1.18       1.12    1.41      1.13
crtic Oition                   —0.02    0.10    0.38      •-0.lO    •-0.10   —0.39     —0.10    0.11    0.37      —0.36   —0.06      0.34
                                                            Table '11.4     (x,ntinuj)
                                                 Effects unier Alternative Model Specification
                                    ani unzler Alternative Values for Intertenoral Substitution Elasticity1
B.     W'W'D( TAX C1D
1rItertar81      Stittion Elasticity:    .25                           .5                           1.0                   .5, indepenient
                                                                    (oentral case)                                   coasunption & portfolio dioioe
period:                            1       5    s.s.           1          5      s.s.               5       s.s.          1       5      s.s.
Saving by U.S. Honseholds        0.85   0.78      5.76       1.50      1.06      4.00     1.88    1.12       3.33         0.48     .037    4.64

Saving by Foreign Honseholds     0.14   —0.10   —0.19       0.04      —0.13    —0.11     —0.08   —0.17      —0.07         0.16    —0.11   —0.14


Belanne of
       Paynants (levels)2
—pital Ant Balar                  598   —298      —691        214      —422      —427     —278    —603       —345        646       —374   520
—'l't-ade   Ba1ar                  93   —170    —2,535       —811      —178   —1,472      —429    —162    —1,024      —1,088        -45 —1,955
—Net     Irse F1                  505    468     3,226        597       600    1,899       707     765      1,369           442     419   2,475


Real   EcpDrts                  —0.30   0.30      1.53     -'0.24      0.33      1.61    —0.16    0.34       1.65         —0.29    0.34    1.58

Eestjc      Invtment3            2.76    3.38    8.10        2.86      3.47      6.84     2.92    3.50       6.38         2.64     3.23    7.25

DZsSStiC    rIJIrption          —1.18   —1.02    0.86      —1.23      —0.99      0.84    —1.28   —0.99       0.80         —1.09   —0.93    091
Notes:
1.  All     valu
               exprs pe1xntage thanes fru the base case, excapt in          Q3rreSXWdifl
                                                                            rs                to ba1ai of Payments cxsponents.
2.  Balazxa of payments  it  are in millions of 1983 dollars. Figwea are norealized      abstract
                                                                                         to         frte the 1o,-z.in (steady-state)
grøth of the eonnmy.
3.  Investsnt percantaqes nay differ fron personal saving percentages because of retained earnings       and Uwesth,ent   tax credits
used to finance irwestment.
