NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SUBSIDY TARGETING WITH MARKET POWER
Maria Polyakova
Stephen P. Ryan
Working Paper 26367
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26367

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2019

We gratefully acknowledge support from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (R03HS024800). We are grateful to David Card, Pietro Tebaldi, Mark Shepard, and Keith Ericson for
their discussions of the paper, and seminar participants at Daniel McFadden 80th Birthday
Conference, Junior Health Economics Summit, Ohlstadt Workshop, Stanford University, London
School of Economics, American Society of Health Economists, Yale University, University of
Connecticut, Columbia University, Bates White Life Sciences Symposium, University of
Munich, 2018 REStud Reunion Conference, Rice University, University of Utah, University of
Leuven, Georgia State University, UNC Chapel Hill, SUNY Stony Brook, University of Toronto,
2019 Penn State-Cornell Econometrics \& IO Conference, NBER Health Care Meetings, and
NBER Public Economics Meetings for helpful comments. We thank Alan Jaske Lynn Hua, and
Vinni Bhatia for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Maria Polyakova and Stephen P. Ryan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Subsidy Targeting with Market Power
Maria Polyakova and Stephen P. Ryan
NBER Working Paper No. 26367
October 2019
JEL No. H0,H2,H20,H21,H22,H23,H31,H41,H5,H51,I1,I10,I11,I13,I18,I38,L0
ABSTRACT
In-kind public transfers are commonly targeted based on observable characteristics of potential
recipients. This paper argues that when the subsidized good is provided by imperfectlycompetitive firms, targeting can give rise to a “demographic externality,” creating unintended
redistribution of surplus and distorting efficiency. We illustrate this mechanism empirically in the
context of means-tested subsidies for privately-provided health insurance plans under the
Affordable Care Act (ACA). Using a structural model of supply and demand, we show that
market power increases the welfare loss from subsidy targeting, vis-a-vis income-invariant
subsidies, by 33 percent.

Maria Polyakova
Department of Health Research & Policy
Stanford University
Redwood Building T111
150 Governor's Lane
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
maria.polyakova@stanford.edu
Stephen P. Ryan
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1133
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
stephen.p.ryan@wustl.edu

1

Introduction

Public welfare programs have a long history of linking their transfers to observable characteristics of potential recipients, such as income, age, employment, family, or disability status.
Conceptually, targeting of transfers helps improve the allocation of public dollars to the most
needy recipients. Targeting on observable characteristics, however, may imperfectly identify
the most needy, or may induce recipients to distort their behavior in order to qualify for the
benefit. The theoretical and empirical literature studying the costs and benefits of targeted
transfers has almost exclusively focused on these demand-side distortions, assuming that
benefits are provided by a benevolent government.1
In practice, however, governments are increasingly turning to profit-maximizing firms
to provide public benefits.2 How the government should pay private firms to administer
public benefits is a central policy question. The amount of public funds distributed through
subsidies is staggering: just for privately-provided health insurance alone, the US government
expects to pay $560 billion in subsidies in 2019, with that number growing to $1.2 trillion
by 2029 (CBO, 2019a,b,c). Subsidy mechanisms directly influence the economic efficiency of
public programs and their ability to achieve underlying redistributional goals; yet, relatively
little is understood about the optimal design of these instruments when goods and services
are provided by profit-maximizing firms. The contribution of this paper to this debate is
twofold. First, we combine insights from the literature in public economics and industrial
organization to investigate how one common design choice—targeting of transfers—may
interact with market power, leading to changes in the efficiency of allocations and their
ability to redistribute surplus. Second, through our empirical application, we provide novel
estimates of efficiency and incidence of subsidies, in a new market for non-group health
insurance plans in the United States that insures about ten million individuals, making
these estimates important in their own right.
The interaction of market power on the supply side and targeted taxes or subsidies on
the demand side can generate distortions in equilibrium. There are two key, potentially
countervailing, forces at work here. First, subsidy targeting introduces heterogeneity in
1

See, for example, Currie and Gahvari (2008) and Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2015) for overviews of the
literature on targeted and universal in-kind and in-cash transfers in the United States. Some recent examples
of the literature documenting the demand-side distortions include Jacob and Ludwig (2012); Allcott et al.
(2015); Lieber and Lockwood (2019); Basurto et al. (2017).
2
Notably, paying private agents to provide public benefits is particularly common in health care and
health insurance. Poterba (1996) outlines the stark differences in the choice of public policy instruments
between education and health care, highlighting the much more common payment to private agents—rather
than direct provision—in the health domain.

consumer-facing prices across markets and across consumers within markets. All else equal,
firms have incentives to raise list prices in markets where consumers receive more generous
subsidies. In the presence of market power, these incentives are not dissipated by competition
and may lead to perverse equilibrium outcomes. For example, if consumer subsidies are
means-tested and price discrimination is forbidden, as is the case in many public programs,
the near-poor may end up paying more for identical products if they live in markets with
many poor consumers. Second, targeted subsidies change the relative importance of different
consumers in the firm’s profit-maximization problem. If subsidized consumers are inherently
more price-sensitive, bringing these consumers into the market through subsidies that retain
their elasticity of demand on the margin, can generate negative pressure on prices, benefiting
unsubsidized consumers. We call this link between the distribution of consumer types and
equilibrium prices under subsidy targeting with market power a demographic externality.3
We explore the equilibrium effects of subsidy targeting in the presence of market power
empirically in the context of publicly-subsidized, privately-provided health insurance Marketplaces created under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). These relatively new markets insure
about ten million Americans and present an important precedent for how a non-group health
insurance market could work in the US. The Marketplaces provide a fruitful empirical laboratory for understanding the effects of subsidy targeting in the presence of market power
for several reasons. First, public funds play a significant role in this setting—the majority
of enrollees receive a subsidy in the form of a tax credit for the payment of their insurance
premiums. Second, these tax credits are targeted based on consumers’ household income,
thus resembling traditional means-tested transfers. Third, the exercise of market power is
likely, as firms are both allowed to set uniform prices to maximize profits (subject to regulatory limitations) and most markets are highly concentrated with two or fewer insurers. For
these reasons, we anticipate the interaction between subsidy targeting and market power to
be quantitatively important.
To quantify this interaction, we formulate and estimate a structural model of supply
and demand for ACA Marketplace plans. We utilize the unique institutional setting of the
Marketplaces to implement a novel identification strategy that leverages price variation that
is induced by kinks in the subsidy formulas (the approach is similar in spirit to Tebaldi
3

This idea is closely related to the “preference externality” as proposed in George and Waldfogel (2003)
and Waldfogel (2003), in which the features of differentiated products available to a consumer depend on
the preferences of the majority of consumers’ neighbors. The mechanism that generates the externality in
our setting, however, is different—the externality is driven by a policy instrument that exogenously changes
(slope and/or levels, depending on subsidy design) of demand functions for some, but not other consumers.

2

et al. 2019). The regulatory variation in prices also allows us to capture the underlying
heterogeneity in demand elasticity across different types of consumers, by letting the marginal
utility of income parameter vary across age and income brackets. Using this strategy, we
estimate reasonable levels of marginal utility of income and intuitive substitution patterns
for all groups of consumers. We then proceed to derive a profit function for insurers on
this market, trying to balance the institutional and especially regulatory detail with the
computational tractability of the model. We arrive at first-order conditions that allow us
to recover marginal costs for each product-market combination. Our estimates from the
inversion of the first-order condition at the product-market level are consistent—both in
terms of levels and relative ranking of products—with accounting data that we observe at
the product level.
With these estimates of demand and supply in hand, we compute a series of counterfactuals that help us investigate the interaction between market power and targeting. We
begin with a set of stylized model simulations that illustrate the demographic externality
in our setting. We then move to our main analysis, by first quantifying the allocative efficiency of the observed subsidy regime. This exercise serves two purposes—it first delivers
novel estimates of efficiency and incidence of public spending in this important market, and
second, it establishes a quantitative baseline against which we interpret our counterfactual
results. We next turn to a series of counterfactuals that modify the subsidy regime and impose either perfect competition, non-targeted subsidies, or both. This allows us to assess the
efficiency and distributional effects of market power and subsidy targeting, both in isolation
and jointly.
To illustrate the demographic externality mechanism, we start with two stylized exercises
that show the complex interplay between targeted subsidies and the distribution of consumer
demographics within a market. In our first experiment we introduce generous subsidies for
the highest-income consumers (who were previously not eligible for subsidies), keeping everything else fixed. This leads to a shift out in the aggregate demand curve and induces insurers
to increase prices. The increase in prices implies that consumers not directly affected by the
subsidy change experience a negative demographic externality: their consumer surplus falls
because their (high-income) neighbors become subsidized. This simple case, however, does
not capture the idea that the demographic externality depends both on the amount of the
subsidy and also on who is eligible to receive it. To capture this nuance, in our second exercise
we endow those newly-subsidized highest-income consumers with the demand parameters of
the lowest-income consumers. Since in our empirical application lower-income consumers

3

have more elastic demand, prices now move down in response to a more elastic demand
even though subsidies have increased. In this second experiment, the change in aggregate
elasticity dominates the change in subsidies, leading these newly-subsidized consumers to
exert a positive demographic externality on their neighbors. How these two opposing forces
play out in any given market in equilibrium is an empirical question, which we turn to next.
We start by computing two model simulations that allow us to measure the efficiency
of the observed allocation in ACA Marketplaces and to also document the incidence of
means-tested subsidies between consumers and producers under this allocation. We find
that under the observed subsidy regime, the ACA Marketplaces generate $42 billion in consumer and producer surplus for $30 billion in nominal public spending. Net of $16 billion,
which we estimate the government saves on the same consumers (for example, by not paying
for uncompensated care), the extra government outlays for the ACA program amount to $14
billion. Accounting for the cost of public funds, we conclude that $1 of extra public spending
invested in this market generates $2.33 of surplus in return. In other words, the ACA Marketplaces generate a substantial positive return on government spending. Contrasting this
allocation to a simulated equilibrium that fully shuts down premium subsidies, we conclude
that consumers capture the majority of subsidy payments, with 84 percent of surplus generated by subsidies accruing to consumers and 16 percent going to firms. The distribution of
surplus is highly heterogeneous across different groups of consumers and different geographic
areas. While no consumers end up being worse off on average when means-tested subsidies
are introduced (relative to a situation with no subsidies), lower income consumers that are
targeted by means-tested subsidies experience up to a four-fold higher increase in consumer
surplus than higher-income consumers.
With this set of baseline estimates for the existing allocation, we next turn to computing a
series of counterfactuals to help understand the role that market power, targeting, and their
interaction play in determining equilibrium outcomes. To understand the role of market
power in the observed mechanism, we compute an equilibrium in the environment that
keeps means-tested subsidies fixed, but imposes perfect competition on the supply side.
When prices are set at marginal cost, average premiums paid by consumers drop by $263 (24
percent), enrollment increases by 24 percent, consumer surplus goes up by nearly $10 billion,
from $38 to $47 billion, while government expenditures on premium subsidies decrease by $3
billion in nominal spending (net government expenditures decrease by about $0.5 billion).
The return on a dollar of public spending increases from $2.33 to $2.75. Overall, market
power clearly manifests itself in increased prices and reduced consumer surplus in this market

4

and it is quantitatively important.4
One of the major policy goals of using targeted subsidies is to achieve distributional
objectives. To understand how subsidy design per se influences efficiency and equity of
the market, we next compute an equilibrium where both subsidy targeting and market
power are removed. We replace means-tested subsidies with an income-invariant voucher
that we allow to vary be age, following the regulatory age curve for premiums. We focus
on the voucher level that results in the same level of subsidy spending as under meanstested subsidies. Switching from means-tested to flat subsidies when firms are forced to
price at marginal cost has almost no effect on aggregate enrollment, but strongly affects
what type of consumers choose to enroll. Many more higher-income consumers enroll under
flat vouchers. As a result, consumer surplus increases from $47 billion to $54 billion. In
aggregate surplus terms, we estimate that moving from a flat subsidy to means-testing,
keeping nominal government expenditures fixed, leads to a 24 percent decline in welfare.5
The increase in surplus is not uniform among consumer types, however: consumers at the
bottom of the income distribution experience about a 50 percent decline in average consumer
surplus, while those with higher income experience a significant increase. These results are
intuitive and highlight the equity-efficiency trade-off that is inherent in subsidy targeting.
In our empirical setting, higher-income consumers have less elastic demand and a higher
revealed valuation of the good. Thus, spending the same amount of public funds through
non-targeted subsidies substantially increases the size of the pie, but it is not a Paretoimproving policy.
Finally, we contrast the efficiency implications of means-tested and income-invariant subsidies in the presence of market power. We again focus on the voucher level that holds
government spending on subsidies constant between the two subsidy regimes. We estimate
that moving from means-tested to universal subsidies increases enrollment, but, as in the
case with perfect competition, there is a significant regressive re-distributional effect. Far
fewer lower-income consumers purchase the good, as their effective subsidy has decreased,
while far more higher-income consumers do the reverse. There is also a shift in the age distribution towards more uniform enrollment across ages than the older-skewed majority we
4

A complementary comparison, in which we vary market power after dropping public subsidies altogether,
gives us another way of measuring the effect of imperfect competition in this market. In the absence of
subsidies, list prices for a 20-year old consumer are almost $500 higher in the presence of market power and
enrollment is 28 percent lower.
5
We note that in our setting, means-tested subsidies generate a welfare loss. If consumers that are targeted
by subsidies had higher utility from the good, then targeting would generate a gain in welfare relative to an
income-invariant subsidy at the same level of government spending.

5

observe under the means-tested subsidy regime. With vouchers, both consumer surplus and
insurer profit increase by nearly $9 billion to a combined $50 billion. The return on a dollar
of public funds increases from $2.33 to $3.37. In terms of aggregate surplus, we estimate
that moving from flat to means-tested subsidies in the presence of market power leads to a
32 percent loss in welfare.
Returning to our initial motivation to understand how market power and subsidy targeting interact, we can interpret our findings in several ways. One salient point of view
is to consider the policymaker’s perspective when considering the equity-efficiency tradeoff
involved with using targeted versus non-targeted subsidies. Without considering market
power on the supply side, the policymaker would conclude that the welfare loss generated
by targeted subsidies is $9.4 billion, or 24 percent of total welfare. In contrast, accounting
for how targeted subsidies interact with market power changes that estimate dramatically;
total welfare is $6.1 billion lower and the welfare loss is $11.3 billion, or 32 percent of total
welfare. This is the primary message of the paper: accounting for the presence of market
power can have a large effect on the estimates of the efficiency of standard subsidy mechanisms that have long been used by policy-makers in many settings. Ignoring that interaction
understates the welfare loss from targeted subsidies by 33 percent.6
Our analysis makes several contributions to the literature. First, starting with the specific context of the ACA markets that constitute our empirical application, our study relates
to the rapidly growing literature that is examining the economics of these markets and their
effects on a variety of socio-economic outcomes.7,8 Several papers in this literature are related to our work. First, Ericson and Starc (2016); Abraham et al. (2017); Drake (2019);
Saltzman (2019) among others, have estimated demand in state-based ACA Marketplaces,
focusing on a handful of states, such as California, Colorado, Massachusetts, and Washington. Second, several studies have directly considered the question of optimal subsidy design
in this market using stylized simulations9 Finally, a handful of previous studies have consid6

In general, a policy-maker that fails to account for the strategic responses of firms will have biased
expectations about the welfare of the subsidy mechanism. In principle, this bias could go the opposite way
than what we find in our specific empirical setting, leading the policy-market to overestimate welfare losses.
7
Gruber and Sommers (2019) provide an extensive literature review of studies that have examined the
impact of the ACA on the rate of insurance coverage, on healthcare utilization and health outcomes, on
healthcare providers, on employment, and on state and federal budgets.
8
A significant share of this literature has examined the role of adverse selection and policies designed to
counteract selection in ACA markets. The results are somewhat mixed depending on the specific context, but
several studies find that risk-equalization policies on these markets are effective at neutralizing a substantial
amount of screening incentives (Geruso et al., 2019; Sacks et al., 2018). Other studies in this vein include
Layton and McGuire (2017); Layton et al. (2017); Kowalski (2014); Panhans (2019); Diamond et al. (2018).
9
For example, Einav et al. (2019) consider the difference in market outcomes between policies that channel

6

ered the supply side and the role of market power on ACA markets. For example, Dafny et
al. (2015) show that premiums in ACA markets are lower when more insurers are competing
in the market, while Cicala et al. (forthcoming) show that minimum loss ratio regulation
constraints premiums. Further, using data from the California Exchange, Dickstein et al.
(2015); Orsini and Tebaldi (2017) argue that the interaction of price-discrimination restrictions on plans and differences in the demographics across geographic markets can affects
pricing incentives. A related idea is examined in Tebaldi (2017), which is the closest to our
paper, both methodologically and in terms of the empirical context. Tebaldi examines the
welfare implications of price-linked subsidies in California ACA Exchanges. He highlights a
different type of externality in this market—an externality that arises because insurers pool
risks across consumers of different ages, but are only allowed to partially price discriminate
across consumers of different ages. The demographic externality that we study is different
in spirit, as it is not specific to markets with selection. Risk-pooling is not needed—the
demographic externality can arise in any market with subsidy targeting when the firms providing the good posses market power and have to set the same list price for subsidized and
unsubsidized consumers.
By considering how subsidy targeting and market power interact in the context of a
health insurance market, we also contribute to the literature that has examined the role of
subsidy design in a broader health insurance context. This literature has investigated the
efficiency and incidence of tax exclusions for employer-sponsored health insurance in the US
(e.g., Gruber and Washington, 2005; Gruber, 2005; Gruber and Poterba, 1996); the design
of employer contributions to employer-sponsored plans (Cutler and Reber, 1998; Ho and
Lee, 2019); and the design of subsidies in several publicly-funded privately-provided health
insurance programs in the US and other countries. Conceptually and methodologically, our
paper is closely related to the latter group that includes Curto et al. (2015), Decarolis (2015),
Decarolis et al. (forthcoming), Jaffe and Shepard (2018), Miller et al. (2019). These papers
study the design of subsidies in health insurance markets such as Medicare Advantage,
Medicare Part D, and Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange, focusing on the idea that
subsidies linked to prices of insurers may distort allocations. In many of these applications,
subsidies are not universal and are frequently targeted on income; the contribution of our
public transfers through the demand-side (subsidies) or supply-side (through risk-adjustment) of the market;
they test the theoretical model of these two mechanisms in the Covered California context. In a different
vein, Saltzman et al. (2015); Taylor et al. (2015) used the RAND Corporations model of employer-sponsored
insurance to simulate an extensive set of alternative subsidy designs for ACA Marketplaces in a stylized
framework with no strategic firms.

7

work is to consider the efficiency and equity implications of this aspect of the subsidization
mechanism.
Last, but not least, our paper is related to the extensive theoretical and empirical literature on cash-based and in-kind subsidization policies in various public programs (Currie
and Gahvari, 2008 provide a comprehensive overview; Allcott et al., 2015 and Lieber and
Lockwood, 2019 are among recent empirical applications). Traditionally, the literature on
the optimal targeting of taxes and subsidies has assumed that benefits are provided directly
by the government, so only demand-side distortions can occur. We add to this literature
by introducing the idea that targeted subsidies may generate additional distortions in the
presence of market power on the supply side, and by quantifying the extend of this distortion
in an important empirical context. This idea is closely related to several recent papers that
have documented how private firms strategically interact with consumers who receive public
benefits in-kind or in-cash. For example, Cellini and Goldin (2014) and Fillmore (2019) have
examined the “Bennett hypothesis” on the relationship between federal grants and college
tuition; Rothstein (2010) empirically examined how firms set wages in the presence of the
Earned-Income Tax Credit, while Stantcheva (2014) considers the theory of optimal taxation
in an environment where government policies and employer decisions interact; Meckel (2019)
and Goldin et al. (2018) consider the effects of food assistance programs on prices in grocery
stores; and Collinson and Ganong (2018) examine how housing vouchers may change housing
prices.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the theoretical framework. Section 3
gives a brief primer on the institutional setting and describes our data sources for our empirical application. Sections 4.1 and 4.2 lay out the empirical models of demand and supply.
Section 4.4 reports estimation results. Section 5 proceeds to discuss the efficiency properties
of observed and counterfactual subsidization mechanisms. Section 6 briefly concludes.

2

Stylized Framework

In this section, we highlight the basic intuition that characterizes the relationship between
subsidy targeting and market power. To motivate a standard result for why governments
may target subsidies on the basis of observable information about consumers, such as income,
we first begin with a textbook model of a benevolent government that aims to allocate inkind subsidies in order to maximize social welfare subject to a fixed budget constraint. In
this simple framework, We show that the optimal subsidy is differentiated across consumer

8

types due to differences in the curvature of the utility function. Then, taking the idea that
subsidies may be differentiated by observable consumer type, we model the incentives of
a profit-maximizing firm that provisions the good to the consumers. We show that the
combination of subsidy targeting and market power interacts in a complex fashion and can
distort market outcomes.
Suppose that the economy consists of a benevolent government, a single good w, and a
unit mass of consumers. Consumers belong to one of two observable types, t ∈ {H, L}, and
are endowed with bounded, increasing, and concave utility functions, Ut (w): U (w) < ∞,
Ui0 (w) > 0 and Ui00 (w) < 0. Let η and 1 − η denote the fraction of consumers within each
type L and H, respectively. The government has a fixed amount of the good equal to G and
wants to allocate the good among the two consumer types to maximize social welfare.
Formally, the problem is:
max ηUL (wL ) + (1 − η)UH (wH ) s.t. wL + wH = G.

wL ,wH

(1)

Substituting in the budget constraint and taking derivatives, the optimal (interior) solution
is characterized by the following first-order condition:
ηUL0 (wL ) = (1 − η)UH0 (G − wL ).

(2)

Intuitively, the optimal allocation equates share-weighted marginal utilities across consumer
types. From this simple expression, one can immediately see that the optimal split will, in
general, be unequal at both the group- and individual-level. In this sense, the social planner
finds it desirable to target allocations (i.e. subsidies) as a function of consumer type, which
is a ubiquitous feature of public assistance programs.10
Next, we introduce a profit-maximizing firm to act as an intermediary to provide the
good.11 Following the design of many publicly-subsidized and privately-provided markets
around the world, we allow that firm to set a single price, b, after observing both the
subsidy structure and the distribution of consumer types. Our model has a similar flavor to
those used in the price discrimination literature, particularly with regard to the effects of
enforcing a single price across multiple consumer types. Our theory extends the standard
price discrimination model to allow for targeted subsidies that move the demand curves of
10

When an interior solution does not exist, it implies that one consumer type gets all of the subsidy, which
is the most extreme form of targeting.
11
One motivation for doing so is that the firm (or, in the case of regulated competition, many firms) can
provide the good at lower cost or higher quality than the government.

9

each type differentially. We are particularly interested in the interaction of the single-price
restriction, targeted subsidies, and the exercise of market power by the firm.
A consumer of type t purchases one unit of the good from the firm if this consumer’s
willingness to pay, vt , is greater than the effective post-subsidy price pt (b) = max{0, b − zt },
where each consumer type has a type-specific subsidy, zt . Without loss of generality, we will
assume that the subsidy is positive for L consumers, and is zero for H consumers. Denote
the share of consumers of each type purchasing the good as st (pt ). We assume that the good
can be provided at the same marginal cost c to both types of consumers.12 The firm chooses
a list price b to maximize the following profit function:
π(b; z) = (b − c)(sH (pH (b))(1 − η) + sL (pL (b))η).

(3)

Assuming an interior solution, the first-order condition for the firm’s choice of b takes
the following form:
sL (pL (b))η + sH (pH (b))(1 − η)


∂sH (pH (b)) ∂pH (b)
∂sL (pL (b)) ∂pL (b)
+ (1 − η)
= 0. (4)
+ (b − c) η
∂pL (b)
∂b
∂pH (b)
∂b
This is the standard first-order condition for a monopolist selling to both types at a uniform
t (b)
captures the role of the subsidy design by
price with one key difference: the term ∂p∂b
introducing the possibility of a gap between the firm’s price, b, and the price that the
consumer faces, p. With targeted subsidies, the response of the effective consumer price to
changes in b varies across consumer types:
1. For the unsubsidized consumers of type H,
translates one-to-one into the price they pay.

∂pH (b)
∂b

= 1, i.e. an increase in the bid

2. Consumers of type L, however, receive a subsidy zL > 0. If the firm’s current price is
above that subsidy, b > zL , then any additional increase is passed on to the consumers,
∂pL (b)
= 1. However, if b < zL , then consumers pay zero additional premiums for a
∂b
L (b)
small increase in b and hence ∂p∂b
= 0.
As a result, targeted subsidies may induce a distortion in the aggregate demand curve
12

This assumption can be relaxed to allow for differences in costs across types. Allowing for costs to
vary doesn’t change the intuition of the mechanism, but adds another degree of freedom into the first-order
condition, making algebraic expressions less transparent. We hence use the constant marginal cost case for
the stylized discussion in this section.

10

perceived by the firm relative to the true underlying demand curve. Critically, the distortion
is asymmetric, as the targeted subsidies only change the demand curve for type L. However,
since the firm is forced by regulation to charge a single price, the presence of the subsidized
type L generically influences the price paid by type H.
The heart of our theoretical and empirical analysis is the demographic externality, which
we define as ∂pH (b)/∂η. The sign of this effect is theoretically ambiguous, as it depends
on both the level of the subsidy and the relative demand curves of the two types. On one
hand, holding all else equal, when η increases there is a price-raising incentive due to the
presence of additional subsidies in the market. However, if the two groups have different
demand curves, it could be the case that when η increases the firm now faces a more elastic
aggregate demand curve overall, which incentivizes the firm to lower prices. In any given
context, it is an empirical question as to which of these two forces is stronger.
The demographic externality creates an additional economic force within the market
that the policymakers need to be cognizant of when designing the subsidy mechanism. The
combination of subsidy targeting and market power along with a prohibition on price discrimination can lead to unintended equilibrium outcomes, such as prices being higher in
markets with more poor, but heavily-subsidized, consumers. In such a scenario, replacing
subsidy targeting with a universal subsidy could lead to higher social welfare (albeit, importantly, not necessarily a Pareto improvement) at the same level of government spending. At
the same time, if targeted subsidies are used, their optimal level in the presence of market
power needs to take into account the demographic externality and may be different than
the optimal subsidy level under public provision. Intuitively, targeted subsidies change the
level of consumer surplus of consumers in group L directly, and of consumers in group H
indirectly through changes in equilibrium prices.
Finally, we note that the demographic externality we describe here is conceptually distinct from other settings where prices are linked to the distribution of consumer types in
a market. In an insurance context, for example, the cost of providing the service depends
on which consumer types buy coverage. Under community rating and perfect competition,
the equilibrium price is the average cost across all types. Hence, on the margin, low-cost
consumers end up paying more for the same good if they live in markets with more high-cost
types. However, this effect is driven by changes to the firm’s cost function. Here, the effect
we describe is driven by links across consumer types enforced on the firm’s revenue function
by a public policy that differentially changes consumer demand function by providing targeted subsidies. This effect does not depend on the cost linkage and can be present in any

11

type of market.

3

Economic Environment and Data

Institutions Our empirical application is the US market for non-group health insurance
plans that was created by the Affordable Care Act and started its operation in 2014. The
program (often refereed to as ACA “Marketplaces”) allows consumers to purchase health
insurance plans for themselves and their families. Enrollment is voluntary; however, individuals that do not have any health insurance face fines. Insurance plans offered on this market
are highly dimensional products. All plans are classified into one “metal” tier: Bronze,
Silver, Gold, Platinum, and Catastrophic. These metal tiers reflect the average generosity
of plans that is measured as a fraction of costs that a plan would cover for a standardized
population. In addition to differences in cost-sharing and the scope of coverage, plans also
vary in their provider networks and (possibly) customer service.
While several US states have created their own ACA Marketplace programs, most states
(37) use an online federal platform, www.healthcare.gov, to facilitate the purchase of insurance; we focus on these states in our analysis. These 37 so-called “federally-facilitated”
states encompass 2,566 counties with about 9 million enrollees. Within each state, sets of
counties are aggregated into “rating areas.” Insurers have to charge the same price in all
counties they serve within the same rating area. However, insurers do not have to serve all
counties in a rating area; it follows, as Fang and Ko (2018) argue, that it is reasonable to
think about a county as the relevant market boundary in this setting.
Insurers in this market are not allowed to price-discriminate based on individual health
risk, but they are allowed to charge different premiums based on age.13 Age adjustment of
prices is tightly regulated. Insurers have to follow a regulatory age curve that determines
how much prices can differ across consumers of different ages.
The key institutional feature of ACA Marketplaces that is relevant for our analysis is
the availability of subsidies for consumers with low incomes. The subsidy system consists of
several pieces. The first type of subsidies—which are the focus of this paper—reduce annual
premiums. The second type of subsidies, held constant in our analysis, are cost-sharing
subsidies that reduce the out-of-pocket liability, such as deductibles, co-pays, etc. Both
types of subsidies are means-tested: Families with lower household incomes receive higher
13

Insurers are also allowed to underwrite consumers’ smoking status; however, whether someone smokes
is hardly verifiable and very few consumers in the data are flagged as smokers. Consequently, we do not
consider prices for smokers in our analysis.

12

subsidies.
Premium subsidies are known as Advanced Premium Tax Credits (APTC). 14 . The
APTC is calculated in several steps. First, the Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI) for
a tax family is converted to the percent of Federal Poverty Level (FPL).15 The FPL varies
with family composition and allows comparing incomes of families of different sizes using
the same scale. The MAGI relative to FPL measure then determines the maximum dollar
amount that the (tax) household “should be” paying for insurance premiums. Let us call
this amount a “CAP.” The CAP is based on a non-linear sliding schedule. For example,
if a household’s income is 200 percent of FPL, then this household should be spending no
more than 6.34 percent of their income on health insurance premiums. At 400 percent FPL,
the CAP is equal to infinity: Households with income at or above 400 percent FPL are not
subsidized.
Next, to determine the level of subsidies that a household is eligible to receive, the
regulator considers the distribution of list premiums on ACA Marketplaces in the county of
residence for this household. The regulator identifies the list price of the second-cheapest
Silver plan (SLSP) and sets this as the reference premium. If the family’s CAP amount is
larger than the sum of SLSP premiums that the family would need to pay for all family
members that require coverage, then this household gets no subsidy. If CAP is less than
SLSP, the household gets a premium tax credit that is equal to the difference between the
SLSP and the CAP.
Data We combine several sources of data for our analysis. We focus our analysis on
the 2017 edition of ACA Marketplaces that used the federal healthcare.gov platform. We
use Marketplace Public Use Files that record detailed information on the choice sets that
consumers faced in each geographic market. We also use two sets of data provided by
The Center for Consumer Information & Insurance Oversight (CCIIO). The first, reports
enrollment at county-metal level, at plan level, and at county-insurer level. The second
set of a data are so-called rate review files that contain information on accounting costs as
14

The APTC can be claimed concurrently with enrollment based on projected household income and then
adjusted (if necessary) when consumers file taxes. Consumers can also choose to forgo receiving advanced
credit and instead claim the subsidy as a regular tax credit in their tax return
15
MAGI is reported on US tax form 1040. The AGI is the total income that includes wages, tips, selfemployment income, etc., as well as taxable interest, dividends, taxable parts of the social security income,
IRA, pension, and annuity distributions that is adjusted for a variety of deductions specific to the income
source, such as, for example, student loan interest deduction. MAGI modifies the AGI by adding back certain
deductions.

13

reported by insurance plans.16 Kaiser Family Foundation has generously provided us with a
dataset that records the potential size of the market at a fine geographic level. Finally, we
use 2017 American Community Survey (ACS) to create a representative sample of potential
consumers (individuals without employer-sponsored or public health insurance coverage) in
each county, for whom we observe income, age, race, and gender.17
Table 1 summarizes the key data points on the choice sets, enrollment, and demographics.
In 2017, on average consumers could choose among plans offered by 1 to 4 large national
insurers and a number of smaller firms. The annual list premium for a 40-year old in these
plans ranged from $3,978 (10th percentile) to $6,351 (90th percentile) with an unweighted
average of about $5,160. The average number of potential enrollees per market was close to
8,000 individuals, although markets differed dramatically in their size, ranging from fewer
than 479 potential enrollees at the 10th percentile of counties to more than 15,000 at the
90th percentile. On average across markets, 60 percent of potential enrollees chose not
to purchase a Marketplace plan; among those that did purchase, Silver plans were by far
the most popular, accounting for almost 75 percent of choices conditional on enrollment.
In an average market, the average plan had 3,156 enrollees, again with plan sizes varying
substantially. We observe plans with fewer than 50 and more than 6,000 enrollees. Potential
enrollees were on average 40 years old, 90 percent white, with an average income of 262
percent FPL. On average, these consumers qualified for $3,301 in premium subsidies.

4
4.1

Empirical Model
Demand

We formulate and estimate a random utility model of demand for health insurance plans
on ACA Marketplaces. Utility takes a semi-nonparametric form. Consumer i gets utility
of φij from buying plan j and pays a premium pij that lowers i’s utility by αi utils per
dollar. Consumers pick plans that give them the highest utility at the lowest price, or
choose not to participate in the market. In practice, demand operates at the family level.
The ACA institutional design imposes that all consumers within a tax household that need
health insurance coverage form a “coverage family” and enroll in the same health insurance
16

All CCIIO data is public and can be accessed at https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/DataResources/index.html.
17
In ACS, we exclude individuals from our set of potential consumers if they report having no health
insurance coverage, but would likely be eligible for Medicaid in expansion states. When applying for health
insurance coverage on the Marketplaces, these individuals would in general be diverted to Medicaid.

14

plan. To operationalize such family-level choices in our empirical model, we assume that
each consumer maximizes the average utility of her coverage family. We drop family-specific
notation for simplicity in what follows, but each term that enters the utility function denotes
an average within a coverage family.18
Formally, we posit that individual i in market t chooses plan j from a set of choices J.
The set of choices that each consumer faces depends on the consumer’s family geographic
location, household income, and age distribution of family members that require insurance
coverage.19 The indirect utility function takes the following form:
uijt = −αi pijt + φijt

(5)

Where pijt is individual-specific (average across members of the coverage family) price
that consumer i (in family f ), who lives in market t, faces for plan j. This price is indexed
by i: consumers may face different prices for the same plan j in market t depending on
their household income and age composition of their coverage families. φijt is the amount
of utility a consumer in market t gets from plan j. This utility can vary across consumers
for two reasons. First, consumer valuation of the same plan may differ due to heterogeneity
in preferences. Second, the same plan j may have different characteristics for different
consumers, as consumers with lower incomes may get more generous coverage.
We make several assumptions about αi and φijt to arrive at an empirically-tractable
version of this utility function. First, we replace individual-specific αi with a coarser set of
parameters that vary across nine demographic groups, d. The demographic groups are all
combinations of three age categories: age under 25, age between 25 and 40, age above 40,
and three income categories: income under 200 percent FPL, income between 200 percent
and 400 percent FPL, income above 400 percent FPL. Second, we decompose the utility
that a consumer gets from plan j into several additively separable components. The first
component ψa captures the average level of utility that consumers get from purchasing any
insurance plan. We allow this intercept parameter to vary across three age groups a (same
as the age groups above), to capture the idea that older consumers may value insurance
18

For example, price pi(f ) is the average price that all consumers in coverage family f face. We account
for the coverage family structure of each potential consumer in estimation.
19
Recall that we define a county as the relevant geographic unit, following the evidence in Fang and Ko
(2018). In practice, counties are aggregated into service areas that are collections of counties (one or more)
where plan j is offered; and rating areas that are collections of counties where plan j has to offer the same
price in all counties if it chooses to operate in these counties. Service areas and rating areas need not overlap.
We account for the exact detail of rating and service areas in estimation.

15

more, all else equal.20 The second component captures the deviations in the generosity of
a plan j that consumers may see if they have low enough income. For these consumers,
cost-sharing reduction subsidies change the actuarial value (AV) of a plan. Finally, we
include a plan-specific constant δj for each plan j that captures the average utility that a
consumer gets from purchasing plan j. The remaining difference between φijt and these
three components is captured by the taste shock, ijt , that is observed by the consumer but
not the econometrician. We assume that this shock is distributed iid (at the family level)
with Extreme Value Type 1 distribution, which leads to a logit discrete choice model.21 To
summarize, the empirical version of the utility function becomes:
uijt = −αd(i) pijt + ψa(i) + γAVij + δj + ijt

(6)

To close the model we assume that individuals choose plan j that maximizes their family’s average utility across all possible choices, or they choose not to enroll, which gives a
P
P
normalized utility of zero. Formally, i chooses j if |f1| uijt > |f1| uikt for all k in J such
i∈f

i∈f

that k is not equal to j.
The variation in premiums pijt that we observe in the data does not stem from experimental assignment, implying that, in general, pijt could be correlated with ijt . However, the
regulatory design of this market generates variation in prices that is independent of demand
shocks and helps us identify the marginal utility of income parameters, αd . To see this, we
first note the well-known result from Berry et al. (1995) that there exists a unique vector δ
that perfectly rationalizes plan enrollments.22 However, that δ cannot, by itself, explain the
patterns of enrollments within a market across consumers of various ages and incomes. That
is where the α plays a critical role. Consider two consumers of the same age in a given market.
Under ACA regulations, two consumers will face different effective prices for the same plan j
if their incomes or ages are different. The variation in subsidies across income levels depends
on a pre-specified formula that generates a non-decreasing relationship between income and
20

We also allow for a separate intercept for the group of consumers with income under 100 percent FPL.
While this group of consumers should not be participating in ACA Marketplaces, as they are commonly
eligible for Medicaid and are not eligible for ACA subsidies, we observe some very few enrollees from this
group in the data; a separate intercept for this group allows the model to rationalize very low, but non-zero,
inside share for this group.
21
McFadden and Train (2000) show that the logit model can approximate any random utility function if
one is sufficiently flexible with the specification of how the utility parameters vary across individuals.
22
We make a substantive assumption that all consumers that see plan j across different markets have the
same δj . In the standard BLP setting, one estimates a separate δjt for each product in each market, which
we cannot implement due to data limitations.

16

effective premiums, as discussed in Section 3. The statutory age-adjustment curve does the
same for consumers of different ages. In conjunction with data on market-level enrollment
in any plan by age and income intervals, this policy-induced variation in prices for the same
plan j across income and age groups allow us to identify αd parameters: the δ explains the
average plan-level enrollments, while the α parameters explain the rate at which consumers
substitute to the outside option within and across age- and income-levels.
This identification approach is similar in spirit to that pursued in Tebaldi et al. 2019. In
sum, despite the fact that we do not observe product-market shares to pursue a more standard
demand estimation strategy (Berry et al., 1995), the institutional features of the market in
fact open a novel identification strategy that contrasts to the more common identification
approach of using instrumental variables constructed from product characteristics or prices
in other geographic markets (Hausman, 1996; Berry and Haile, 2016).

4.2
4.2.1

Supply
Profit function

Insurers on ACA Marketplaces decide which geographic markets to enter, how to design their
plans, and how to price them. In this paper we are interested in how the targeting of subsidies
to lower-income consumers may affect equilibrium prices, conditional on entry and contract
design decisions; hence, we keep insurers’ entry and product design fixed. Modeling pricesetting in this market poses a significant challenge, as pricing is constrained by numerous
regulatory provisions. To fix ideas, we first start with a brief accounting of payment flows
in the market. We then discuss the assumptions we make to get an empirically tractable
supply-side model.
For each consumer i of age a, plan j (im market t) collects revenue that consists of several
pieces. First, plan j collects premium pij from the consumer. For consumers that are not
eligible for premium subsidies, this premium is equal to the full list price for consumers of
age a, baj . For consumers that are eligible for subsidies, the insurer collects pij < baj from
the consumer and a subsidy from the federal government. Together, the consumer premium
and the subsidy add up to baj .23 Second, the insurer collects additional revenue, if any, from
three risk-equalization programs that we describe below.
23
If the subsidy is higher than the bid, the consumer pays zero and does not receive the cash value of
the “unused” subsidy. In practice, the subsidy operates as a tax credit; the estimated level of the credit is
reconciled during tax filing.

17

On the expenditure side, the insurer pays for consumers’ healthcare bills and any administrative costs. Let the total expected healthcare spending of consumer i in plan j be
hij . In general, this spending is a function of consumer’s underlying health risk, ri , and the
plan’s contract features, φj .24 Plan j’s expected cost for consumer i is usually not equal to
hij . Instead, the plan expects to pay a portion of hij , net of consumer cost-sharing in the
form of deductibles, co-pays, and co-insurance. Consumer cost-sharing, in turn, is either
paid directly by the enrollee or can be paid by the government in the form of cost-sharing
subsidies. The source of payment doesn’t affect insurer’s cost per se; however, insurers’ costs
may go up if cost-sharing subsidies induce additional demand for healthcare services. As
eligibility for cost-sharing subsidies depends on individual income, we can write that the
plan’s expected cost for enrollee i is cij (ri , φj , Di ) ≤ hij , where Di denotes consumer i’ s
income.
Prior to any risk-equalization transfers, plan j’s expected profit from enrolling consumer
i of age a is generally:
πij (baj ) = baj − cij (ri , φj , Di ),
(7)
Let caj denote the baseline plan-specific cost of covering an average enrollee of age a.
We can re-write cij as the sum of caj and the individual cost component: cij (ri , φj , Di ) =
caj + c̃ij (ri , φj , Di ). Using this notation, the expected profit of plan j from enrolling individual
i of age a becomes:
πij (baj ) = baj − caj − c̃ij (ri , φj , Di ),
(8)
where the individual-specific expected cost term c̃ allows for the presence of advantageous
or adverse selection into plan j that is a function of plan characteristics φj .
Three risk-equalization programs existed on ACA Marketplaces within the time horizon we study. The programs aimed to equalize expected insurers’ costs across all enrollees,
thereby reducing the incentives for active cream-skimming by insurers and ameliorating the
cost consequences of sicker consumers self-sorting into more generous plans. It is easier to
think about these programs as affecting insurers’ costs; however, in practice, the programs
constitute revenue streams. The first program, risk adjustment, generates lump-sum payments to or from a plan, depending on whether the plan has enrollees whose risk is above
or below the average in the market, respectively. Second, the reinsurance program transfers
additional revenue to insurers to cover expenditures on particularly high-cost consumers.
24

The features of plan j may affect hij either by changing consumer demand for healthcare, e.g. through
moral hazard, or plan j may simply have different negotiated prices, so that for the same underlying risk ri ,
total expenditures generated by the consumer in plan j are different from those in plan k.

18

Finally, insurers may receive funds from or be required to pay into a so-called risk corridor
program. This last program attempts to reduce the ex post volatility in realized profits
relative to the ex ante risk pool.
Intuitively, the idea of the risk-equalization programs was to create transfers that exactly
offset the idiosyncratic cost component c̃ij (ri , φj , Di ), so that every enrollee has the same
expected cost in the insurer’s profit function. For example, the reinsurance program effectively gave insurers additional individual-specific revenue for individuals with particularly
high c̃ij (ri , φj , Di ), reducing the importance of this term in the profit function. Denote the
difference between this additional revenue and the idiosyncratic cost-component with with
νij . Now let the (positive or negative) lump-sum risk-adjustment payment to the insurer
be Rj . This term is a function of risk types ri of all individuals that enroll in a plan and
is not individual-specific, but it aims to offset the sum of νij across all i’s in cases where
the expected (or in other words, predictable) individual-specific deviations in risk across conP
sumers add up to a positive or a negative quantity. Let Hj (φj ) = i∈j νij − Rj denote any
residual selection.25 If the risk-equalization programs fully offset the ex ante net idiosyncratic shocks, this term would be zero. Without data on the accuracy of the reinsurance
and risk-adjustment programs for the ACA Marketplaces, we can only estimate the profit
function up to the constant Hj (φj ).26 We simplify the notation by assuming that Hj (φj ) = 0
in subsequent discussion. Importantly, the normalization of Hj (φj ) to zero has no bearing
on the first-order condition in prices.27 Finally, we do not explicitly incorporate the ex post
risk-corridor transfers into the model; these payments can be interpreted as a reduction in
insurers’ fixed cost of purchasing private re-insurance policies and should not affect insurers’
25

Note that H is a function of plan characteristics, but not plan prices. The assumption that c̃ij (ri , φj , Di )
primarily depends on contract characteristics, while screening of consumers on premiums is second-order
follows from the following argument. Individuals with the lowest incomes, who are also likely to have the
highest expected costs (as has been shown by a voluminous literature on the health-income gradient), receive
subsidies that significantly compress the variation in the prices of plans that these consumers face, eliminating
the possibility of quantitatively meaningful risk-selection on premiums. Instead, the key differences across
plans that are likely to drive selection lie in non-pecuniary plan features of φj , such as physician networks,
formulary breadth, and chronic condition management.
26
Geruso et al. (2019) find empirical evidence in support of risk-equalization programs performing well in
this market. From other markets that employ risk-equalization policies, we know that while risk-equalization
leaves some scope for residual selection, it goes a long way to reducing the differences in costs in expectation.
27
In footnote 25 we argue that, conditional on φj , selection on prices is unlikely to be quantitatively
important. In other words, the derivative of Hj (φj ) with respect to prices is close to zero. We have
illustrated this point empirically in an earlier paper that studied subsidization mechanisms in the context of
Medicare Part D (Decarolis, Polyakova and Ryan, forthcoming). In the latter, we considered models that
that Hj was and wasn’t a function of prices and did not find that this assumption had first-order effects on
the simulation of insurers’ pricing decisions.

19

pricing incentives on the margin.
Under these assumptions about the structure of the risk-equalization programs, we can
re-write the profit function using the share notation, where saj denotes the share of plan j
among consumers of age a and M a denotes the number of potential consumers of age a on
the market, we get:
X
X
πj (bj ) =
saj M a baj −
saj M a caj
(9)
a

a

According to ACA statutes, insurers have to follow a statutory age schedule for their bids
that constraints age-specific underwriting. This restriction allows us to simplify the problem
further. Let there be a fixed set of age-specific multipliers that apply to bids. We assume
that the same multipliers apply to expected baseline costs, capturing how healthcare costs
increase with age.28 Let the multiplier vector be τ a . The profit equation for plan j then
becomes:
X
saj M a τja
(10)
πj (bj ) = (bj − cj )
a

At the insurer level, we aggregate across all plans j offered by insurer f :
#

"
πf (b) =

X

(bj − cj )

X

saj M a τja

(11)

a

j∈f

Finally, we model medical loss ratio (MLR) regulation that has been documented to be
binding for the majority of insurance contracts in this market (Cicala et al., forthcoming).
The MLR regulation stipulates that insurers in the ACA market spend at least 80 percent
of their revenue on healthcare claims and quality improvement, constraining the markups to
be at most 25 percent, and requiring insurers to rebate extra revenue consumers. We impose
this restriction when inverting the first-order condition to recover marginal costs. Under this
restriction, the insurer maximizes profits by choosing a bid bj for each plan j in its portfolio.
4.2.2

First-order conditions

Insurers choose bids that maximize their profits taking into account the actions of other
firms. The first-order condition for a single-plan firm is:
28

The assumption of the same multipliers on costs and bids simplifies the problem computationally, but
can conceptually be relaxed (Tebaldi, 2017), allowing costs to follow a different slope with respect to age than
the statutory age-specific multipliers. Examining age-cost gradients in commercially insured populations, we
found that the discrepancies are likely to be the largest in the oldest population that comprises the smallest
share of Marketplace enrollment, and are thus unlikely to qualitatively affect our results.

20

X ∂saj
X
∂πf
= (bj − cj )
M a τja +
saj M a τja = 0.
∂bj
∂b
j
a
a

(12)

For an insurer that offers more than one plan in a market, the set of j first-order conditions
accounts for own and cross-price elasticities of demand. In this case, the first-order condition
P
takes a vector form: S − Ω(B − C) = 0, where row j of vector S is given by Sj = a saj M a τ a
and row j of vector (B − C) is given by (B − C)j = (bj − cj ), while row k, column j of matrix
Ω is:
Ωkj = −

X ∂saj
a

∂bk

M aτ a

(13)

for plans k and j offered by firm f . This gives us j equations in j unknowns for each insurer.
We observe age-specific prices charged by each plan and we want to recover costs caj that are
unknown up to the scaling factor τ . To accomplish this, we invert Equation 12 and compute
the baseline marginal cost cj for each plan as a function of observed equilibrium prices and
the elasticity of demand that is given by the demand parameters from Section 4.1.
The key term of the first-order condition is the derivative of the (age-specific) share with
∂sa
respect to the (age-specific) bid: ∂baj . We drop the age superscripts to simplify notation
j
in what follows, as age scaling is given by regulation and age markets are additive in our
set up.29 The share derivative reflects how much the demand for plan j changes when this
plan increases its bid by a small amount. Unlike in a standard product-market setting,
this term captures the complex relationship between premiums and bids within the ACA
Marketplaces. Bids and premiums are linked via the premium subsidy mechanism:
∂sj ∂pj
dsj (pj , p−j )
=
∗
dbj
∂pj ∂bj

(14)

Recall that the subsidy is a function of the bid set by the second-cheapest silver plans
(SLSPs) and consumer’s family income. SLSPs face a different set of incentives in the
market. Under the observed subsidy regime, when these plans change their bids, it affects
not only their own prices, but also the subsidies, and hence consumer premiums, of all
plans.30 To account for the idea that the first-order conditions do not perfectly capture
these additional incentives, we do not use inverted marginal costs for these plans.31 Instead,
29

In practice, age markets interact through plan- or insurer-level risk-equalization policies and the MLR
constraint.
∂sj
∂p
30
Formally, the SLSPs have another term in 14 that is non-zero: ∂p−j
∗ ∂b−j
.
j
31
Note that since marginal costs of each plan are separable in the inverted first-order condition, the

21

following (Decarolis et al., forthcoming), we take a hedonic regression approach and use other
plans to impute the marginal costs of SLSPs. We project the estimated marginal costs (from
the first-order condition inversion) for the non-SLSPs on a rich vector of plan characteristics
and then use this projection to predict the marginal costs for the SLSPs.

4.3

Efficiency Metric

We define a welfare function (W ) that consists of three pieces: consumer surplus (CS),
insurer profits (Π), and government subsidy spending (G):
W = CS + Π − λG,

(15)

where λ is the social cost of raising public revenues, which we assume to be 30 cents on a
dollar. Following Williams (1977) and Small and Rosen (1981), surplus for consumer i with
a vector of marginal utilities θi takes the following form:
"
"
##
J
X
1
γ + ln 1 +
exp(vij (θi )) ,
CS(θi ) =
αi
j=1

(16)

where γ is Euler’s constant, and vij is the deterministic component of utility for person i
(recall that this, in return, is the average utility within a family) for plan j and is equal to
utility net of the idiosyncratic  term.32 We integrate out over the empirical distribution (as
observed in the ACS) of ages, income, and family composition to obtain average annual per
capita consumer surplus:
Z
CS =

CS(θ)dF (θ).

(17)

Producer surplus, Π, is computed following equation 11. We assume that any riskequalization payments, including risk corridors, contribute to cost equalization and are already captured in marginal cost estimates, implying that they do not separately enter the
profit function.
Government spending G captures three parts. Nominal spending includes subsidies for
insurance premiums and cost-sharing reduction subsidies. The former are computed either
from the data or are adjusted following the simulation scenarios of Section 5. Cost-sharing
inversion of marginal costs for non-SLSPs is not affected by the SLSP.
32
Euler’s constant is the mean value of the Type I Extreme Value idiosyncratic shock under the standard
normalizations in the logit model, and is approximately equal to 0.577.

22

reduction (CSR) spending is held at observed levels. Specifically, using CCIIO data reports
we compute the average per capita spending on CSR subsidies by consumer type, based on
income brackets.33 In all counterfactual simulations, we then assign this average spending
level to each consumer who falls into the respective income bracket and who enrolls in a
plan where cost-sharing reduction is available. In the final step, we account for the fact that
when a consumer enrolls into an ACA plan, the government likely saves some money on this
consumer; for example, if a consumer enrolls in a formal insurance plan, this consumer is then
unlikely to benefit from any public payments for uncompensated care. Following the Kaiser
Family Foundation and Urban Institute 2013 report on public spending on uncompensated
care for the uninsured (Coughlin et al., 2014), we assume that the government saves $1,827
per capita in public funds on each consumer who buys an ACA plan.

4.4

Estimation results

4.4.1

Demand Parameters

We use non-linear least squares to estimate utility function parameters. Panel A of Table
2 reports the results. We find intuitive patterns for the variation in the marginal utility of
income parameter across demographic groups. A one dollar increase in price has a larger
impact on the utility of poorer consumers and younger consumers. The relationship between
the overall value of insurance and age, as captured by age-specific intercepts, is non-linear.
While consumers above the age of 40 value any insurance more than consumers aged 25 to
40, the demand by consumers below age 25 exhibits an even higher valuation, all else equal.
Figure 4a plots compensating variation (CV) by income and age, allowing us to summarize
how much utility each demographic group gets from the observed plan offerings. When taking
into account age-rated premiums and other plan features, we find a monotone relationship
between consumer surplus and age - older consumers at any income point value insurance
more than younger consumers. We find that the relationship between CV and income is,
however, U-shaped. This follows intuitively from two countervailing forces: Subsidies are
declining in income, lowering CV, while our estimates suggest generally less elastic demand
as income rises, increasing CV.
As would also be expected, we find that consumers get significant utility from purchasing
plans with a higher level of coverage, as measured by the actuarial value, conditional on
other characteristics of plans held fixed. Other plan characteristics are captured here by
33

The data was accessed in June 2019 at Health Insurance Marketplace Cost-Sharing Reduction Subsidies
by Zip Code and County 2016.

23

the plan’s δ that measure the relative attractiveness of each plan to consumers, on average.
Together, the coefficients suggest that, for example, consumers over age 40 with income over
400 percent FPL value insurance coverage by a plan with the highest plan fixed effect that
on average pays 70 percent of expenditures (maximum δj for a silver plan equals 0.34) at
about $2,891, which lies within the support of the distribution of list premiums for a 40 year
old consumer for silver plans, ranging from $2,391 to $9,057 in the data.
In general, while the patterns are mostly intuitive, we are cautious about the interpretation, as the consumers in our model are assumed to be maximizing average family
utility, hence the marginal utility of income parameters capture family level preferences.
Family-level demand could, for example, exhibit a higher valuation of insurance by younger
consumers, stemming from the valuation of their parents rather than individuals themselves.
This would lead to a high estimated value of insurance at young age, as the younger group
includes children, whose parents may place a high value on having insurance for their child.
To assess fit, we compare how enrollment moments predicted by the model compare to
the moments observed in the data. Figure 1 illustrates one set of moments that was used for
estimation and a related measure of model fit. In Panel (a) we report the county-level market
share of Silver plans. In panel (b) we report the average in-sample difference between the
data and the model’s prediction of county-by-metal-level (across all metal levels) enrollment
shares for each of 2,566 counties that are used in the estimation. The differences between the
data and the model prediction are very close to zero, indicating that we closely match these
aggregated enrollment shares and that the model is able to capture a substantial amount of
variation in the data.
4.4.2

Cost

Panel B of Table 2 reports the results of a hedonic regression that projects marginal cost
estimates from the first-order condition inversion onto plan characteristics for non-SLSP
plans. The estimates are reassuringly intuitive: We find that more generous benefit design
is associated with higher marginal costs. The average (baseline, for a 20 year-old) non-SLSP
marginal cost from the inversion procedure is circa $1,940, with a standard deviation of $540.
Moving a plan’s actuarial value by 1 basis point, while keeping the metal level the same,
increases the marginal cost by $19. Moving from a gold to a silver plan decreases cost by
approximately $500 ($300 metal-label effect plus the actuarial value adjustment of $192).34
34

The regression also includes measures of out of network coverage, whether a plan is HSA-eligible, whether
a plan covers some common benefits, whether it offers management of common chronic conditions, and insurer

24

We use this regression equation to impute marginal costs for SLSPs. As in the marginal cost
inversion, we impose the MLR constraint on marginal cost predictions.
Figure 2a illustrates the resulting distribution of estimated marginal costs for the baseline
group of 20-year old consumers. We plot the distribution separately for Bronze and Gold
plans. We observe two pronounced patters. First, there is substantial heterogeneity in costs
within a metal level. This is not surprising: Plans on the ACA Marketplaces are extremely
heterogeneous, with some plans being offered by large national insurers and some by local cooperatives. Second, there are substantial differences in costs between more and less generous
plans, as we already saw in Panel B of Table 2. This is intuitive, as mechanically gold plans
cover 80 percent of consumers’ healthcare expenditures on average, while the Bronze plans
cover only 60 percent. We would expect that the ratio of costs between these plans is on
average at least 1.3, which is consistent with the shift in the distribution that we observe.
Figure 2b compares our estimates of marginal costs from the first-order condition inversion (and projection for the SLSPs) to plan-level accounting costs as reported by plans
to CMS. The accounting costs are measured with error, as insurers are allowed to report
their costs equally split across their plans rather than providing a true plan-level attribution
of costs. Moreover, accounting costs do not include some ex post cost reconciliation, such
as, for example, MLR payments. Nevertheless, the accounting cost data provide a valuable
informational signal. They are likely to provide an accurate ordinal ranking of plans from
the least to the most expensive, on average; they and also give a general sense of cost levels in the market. As we would expect given the existence of ex post cost reconciliation
transfers, our estimates of marginal cost are on average lower than reported accounting cost,
although they have the same general order of magnitude, as Figure 2b illustrates. In the
same Figure, we observe a very strong correlation between accounting costs and marginal
costs, which supports the idea that we are accurately able to differentiate more and less
expensive plans.35
fixed effects. The coefficients on these terms also have mostly intuitive signs.
35
Related work in this areas has pursued a different approach - directly using accounting costs as inputs
into the counterfactual exercises and avoiding the inversion of the first-order conditions (see for example,
Tebaldi, 2017). We do not pursue this strategy in our context, given that accounting costs are not observed
at the product-market level and may capture several levels of ex-post accounting of cash flows through riskequalization mechanisms, making it hard to know what exactly is being measured. In practice, the decision
on which approach to pursue appears to not be consequential for the subsequent analyses, given the strong
correlation between the two measures.

25

4.4.3

Demographic Externality

The combination of estimated demand and cost parameters allows us to empirically illustrate
the demographic externality mechanism that we described conceptually in Section 2.
We entertain two thought experiments to illustrate this idea. In the first experiment, we
increases the number of subsidized consumers without changing the distribution of marginal
utility of income in the population. For each market, we set subsidies for consumers with
income above 400 percent FPL as if these consumers had income of 151 percent FPL. This
means that in each market the share of consumers with subsidies increases, while the share
of unsubsidized consumers goes to zero. We then re-simulate the model and find the equilibrium. The results of this simulation are reported in Figure 3 and are marked as case “A.”
This figure shows how the average premiums and consumer surplus change for directly unaffected consumers—those with incomes between 150 percent and 400 percent FPL—when
their neighbors with income above 400 percent start getting subsidies. Insurers take advantage of the fact that in the 400+ percent FPL market segment, consumers now face lower
prices for any given list price, and raise list premiums. As a result, plans become more
expensive for “unaffected” consumers with incomes under 400 percent FPL. As the light
dashed line marked with “A” in the figure illustrates, the average annual effective premium
for consumers with income under 400 percent FPL increases by $10. Consumer surplus,
marked with grey circles, in turn declines by up to $20 for the poorest consumers. While
changes in prices and consumer surplus are relatively small on average, this masks a highly
unequal distribution of changes across geographic areas. Some counties are completely unaffected by the simulated change, while others experience more than ten times the average loss
in consumer surplus. This counterfactual simulation cleanly illustrates a simple mechanism:
subsidizing one group of consumers in a market with market power, all else equal, increases
prices and decreases welfare for other consumers. In this case, subsidized consumers exert a
negative demographic externality on other consumers. Importantly, this effect is not special
to insurance markets and does not depend on the fact that insurance contracts are pooling
risks, which is different from the age-based externality from risk pooling as documented in
Tebaldi (2017).
In the second exercise we simulate a scenario that is more likely to explain observed
cross-sectional variation in prices in ACA markets. In this scenario, we additionally endow
higher-income consumers with the marginal utility of income parameter of 151 percent FPL
consumers. In other words, we make 400+ percent FPL consumers look identical to 151
percent FPL consumers. This is equivalent to moving from a county that had some fraction
26

of unsubsidized consumers with 400+ percent FPL income to a county that had no 400+
percent FPL consumers. Relative to the previous scenario, the effects are more nuanced.
While the firms now face more subsidized consumers, which pushes prices up (“subsidy effect”), the firms also face much more elastic consumers, as we estimate a substantially higher
marginal utility of income parameter for the lower-income consumers, which pushes prices
down (“elasticity effect”). Case B in Figure 3 illustrates that the second effect dominates in
our empirical setting (although this is not a general result; in general, as we show in Section
2, the direction of price change is ambiguous). In our context, moving to an environment
with more subsidized, but highly elastic consumers, decreases list prices. As the dashed line
marked with “B” in 3 illustrates, the annual average consumer-facing prices for consumers
that are not directly affected by our simulation go down by $20–$30. This decline in premiums leads to an increase in consumer surplus among consumers with incomes between
150 percent and 400 percent FPL, whose subsidies or utility functions are not directly manipulated in the simulation. The effect is highly heterogeneous across geographic markets.
While some counties experience a high increase in consumer surplus, where the “elasticity”
effect dominates, other areas experience price increases and losses in consumer surplus, so
the “subsidy” effect dominates. On average, however, in this simulation the lowest-income
consumers exert a positive demographic externality on other consumers in the market.
We next examine how the economic forces of demographic externality can affect aggregate
efficiency and equity properties of market allocations.

5

Subsidy Design and Welfare

In this section we report a set of counterfactual model simulations that allow us to assess
the quantitative importance of the posited interaction effects between subsidy targeting and
market power. We start off by characterizing the observed market allocation under meanstested subsidies and market power. The efficiency properties of this allocation, as well as the
incidence of economic surplus under this allocation, form the baseline for our analysis. These
objects are also interesting in their own right, as they deliver novel estimates for the economic
efficiency and incidence of public spending in ACA Marketplaces—an extensively debated
new market that is setting an important policy precedent on providing publicly subsidized
non-group individual health insurance in the United States. Having established this baseline,
we then examine the economic consequences of subsidy means-testing and market power in
isolation. Finally, we put the two together, in a set of counterfactual comparisons that allow

27

us to estimate the extra welfare loss that is generated when a targeted subsidy is used as a
policy instrument in an environment with market power.
Efficiency of ACA Marketplaces We begin our analysis by examining the economic
costs and benefits of observed subsidy payments. To facilitate our analysis, we first solve
for an equilibrium under the observed subsidy mechanism with one change. We remove the
second-lowest silver plan incentives from the first-order conditions. This simulation serves
two purposes. First, it allows us to establish a baseline that differences out any model
simulation error. Second, it allows us to compute an allocation that keeps observed subsidy
levels, but shuts down the SLSP mechanism, creating a baseline that can be compared to
subsidy regimes in subsequent counterfactuals.36 In practice, our model has a tight insample fit, so that the resulting simulated allocation is very close to the data and allows us
to quantify the efficiency of the ACA market.
Column (1) of Table 3 reports the results. We estimate that consumer surplus in the ACA
Marketplaces amounts to $38 billion. Producer surplus amounts to $3.9 billion (Column 1,
row 2). In our simulation of the observed market equilibrium, the government is spending $30
billion in premium and cost-sharing subsidies, which is consistent with the subsidy spending
reported by the Congressional Budget Office.37
Consumer surplus of $38 billion in total corresponds to $1,881 in annual surplus per
capita, on average, among all potential consumers. Consumer surplus levels vary substantially across different socio-demographic groups and different areas of the country, as we
already saw in Section 4.4. Figure 4a plots consumer surplus by income and age. We estimate that older workers have higher surplus than younger workers for all income levels.
There is a U-shaped relationship between income and surplus, with workers in the 250-300
percent FPL range having the lowest valuations for insurance products in the ACA. This
variation in surplus levels dovetails with enrollment patterns across income groups; rows 14
to 26 of Column 1 show that more than half of the enrollees have incomes below 250 percent
FPL, while high-incomes consumers above 400 percent FPL constitute about a quarter of the
market. Enrollment is distributed modestly more evenly across age groups, but enrollment
36

We implement this simulation by assigning imputed marginal costs to SLSPs and letting all plans set
prices according to the first-order condition in 12, taking observed subsidy levels as given. This implies that
SLSPs end up being the only plans for which prices change relative to observed prices, and we find that the
price changes are minor.
37
CBO reports $39 billion in net premium and cost-sharing subsidy spending for 2016, which includes
spending in non-federally facilitated states (https://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-20152016/reports/51385-healthinsurancebaselineonecol.pdf)

28

rates still increase monotonically with age. Overall, the program attracts about 44 percent
of potential enrollees (row 17).38 Figure 4b illustrates the substantial geographic variation:
consumer surplus ranges from $621 in Brazos County, Texas to $6,260 in McHenry County,
Illinois.
Comparing consumer and producer surplus vis-a-vis government spending, we conclude
that public subsidy expenditures generate $1.39 of surplus for $1 of spending: the total
outlays on subsidies are $12 billion lower than the sum of consumer and producer surplus.
This partial equilibrium efficiency computation, however, is incomplete. As is the case in
many healthcare settings, the government is likely to incur costs for the same consumers even
if they do not enroll in the ACA. To account for this opportunity cost of public spending,
we report in row (5), the amount that the government would have spent on ACA enrollees
in uncompensated care payments. We estimate that the savings of public funds on the same
set of consumers amounts to $16 billion, which implies that the net additional government
outlays for premium and cost-sharing subsidies on the Marketplaces are approximately $14
rather than $30 billion. Taking into account this foregone spending, but also accounting for
the cost of raising public funds, we estimate a total return of $2.33 on a dollar of public
funds spent on the ACA Marketplaces (row 9).
Subsidy incidence in ACA Marketplaces Column 2 of Table 3 allows us to assess the
incidence of observed subsidies between consumers and producers. In this column, we simulate an equilibrium without premium subsidies, holding other features of the market (such
as market power and cost-sharing reduction subsidies) fixed. Without premium subsidies
consumer surplus drops from $38 billion to $26 billion, while producer surplus drops from
$3.9 billion to $1.7 billion. Overall, $29 billion in premium subsidies generate $13.7 billion
in additional surplus. The nominal within-ACA subsidy spending is partially mitigated by
$9 billion of additional public savings, leading to a net increase in government spending of
$20 billion. From this perspective, subsidizing premiums generates negative economic value,
as this extensive extra spending generates only $13.7 billion in additional surplus, resulting
in circa $6 billion of deadweight loss (or 68.5 cents in return to the extra dollar of public
spending).
These subsidies, however, do significantly benefit consumers. Enrollment jumps from
19 percent without subsidies to 44 percent with subsidies. This is particularly true of the
consumers below 400 percent FPL, who effectively exit the market without subsidy support.
38

Surplus monotonically increasing with age is consistent with the observation in Tebaldi (2017), who
argues that the structure of ACA subsidies does not encourage enrollment of the youngest consumers.

29

Out of $13.7 billion in additional surplus, 84 percent accrues to consumers and 16 percent
is captured by firms, which is a high pass-through for an imperfectly-competitive market.39
Two margins are at work here: one, the MLR constrains profit margins, and two, targeted
subsidies disproportionately attract lower-income consumers with substantially more elastic
demand into the market. Consumers with more elastic demand both have lower consumer
surplus and put pressure on insurer margins. Rows (29) and (30) of Columns (1) and (2)
summarize this effect. While the average premium subsidy payment between the two regimes
goes up from $0 to $3,377, the average consumer surplus increases from $1,310 to $1,881—a
substantially lower increase in surplus as compared to government expenditures.40
The incidence of subsidies on consumer surplus is highly heterogeneous across locations.
Panel (a) of Figure 5 illustrates the geographic distribution of the estimated gain in consumer
surplus under the observed mechanism relative to an equilibrium with no subsidies. Highest
changes in surplus accrue to southern parts of Texas, parts of Nebraska, and several states
in the Southeastern United States, including parts of Tennessee, North Carolina, Alabama,
Georgia, and Florida. In these states, average consumer surplus increases by more than 100
percent in many counties when means-tested subsidies are introduced.
Isolating the efficiency cost of market power Before turning to the discussion of how
market power interacts with subsidy design, we first estimate the efficiency cost of market
power in this market. Counterfactual simulations in columns (1) and (4) of Table 3 compare
the properties of allocations with and without market power, keeping everything else about
the environment fixed. In column (4), the allocation without market power is simulated by
setting prices equal to marginal costs. Removing market power increases total surplus by $6
billion from the baseline of $24 billion. In addition, $3.9 billion of surplus is re-allocated from
insurers to consumers, with consumer surplus increasing by nearly $10 billion (by ca. $460
on average) and consumer enrollment increasing from 44 to 55 percent. List premiums in
the absence of market power are $450 lower on average, which attracts slightly more lowerincome consumers into the market. On average, consumers lose 20 percent of per capita
39

These estimates suggest that the ACA market is on average more competitive—or, more likely, is effectively restricted by price caps imposed by the Minimum Loss Ratio—than Medicare Advantage, for which
Cabral et al. (2018) find 45 (in premiums only) to 54 (in premiums and benefits) percent pass-through rate
on average, and a range from 13 to 74 percent between least and most competitive markets.
40
The potentially puzzling phenomenon of low valuation (as measured from revealed preferences) of formal
insurance by low-income consumers has been documented in prior literature. See an overview in, for example,
Poterba (1996) and more recent empirical evidence in Lurie et al. (2019), and especially Finkelstein et al.
(2019), who speculate about the role of uncompensated care and behavioral biases in accounting for the low
revealed willingness to pay.

30

surplus due to the presence of market power in this market.
Isolating the efficiency cost of subsidy targeting To further understand how subsidy
targeting per se affects this market, we shut down market power and compare equilibria
under two different subsidy regimes. One with targeted subsidies as observed in the data,
and one with age-adjusted, but income-invariant (and hence universal) subsidies. In the
second regime, we pick a voucher level such that the total government spending remains the
same as under the regime with targeted subsidies. Columns (4) and (6) of Table 3 report the
characteristics of the respective allocations. We find that a voucher of $1,005 for a 20 year
old consumer that scales with age according to the statutory age curve leads to the same
amount of total government spending as under targeted subsidies.
Comparing these two allocations allows us to ask how much more (or less) consumer
surplus would be achieved if we kept the level of public spending the same, but made subsidies income-invariant (although still varying by age). We find that under income-invariant
subsidies, the same amount of total public spending delivers $6.6 billion more in total consumer surplus. This substantial gain in efficiency, however, comes at a large re-distributional
cost. While overall enrollment in the market increases, enrollment shifts from the poorest
to less poor consumers under universal subsidies. That is, means-tested subsidies work as
intended—they lower prices for the lowest-income consumers and thus attract them to the
market. When we keep government spending fixed, however, this means-testing is not efficient, since lowest-income consumers exhibit the lowest valuation of the good. In other words,
the marginal consumers attracted by increasingly generous subsidies have an increasinglydeclining willingness-to-pay for insurance, meaning that government spending grows faster
than consumer surplus.
More generally, this exercise highlights the central role that subsidies play in ensuring high
enrollment rates into the program. Without any subsidies and with marginal cost pricing,
we simulate (in Column 5) that only 27 percent of potential consumers would enroll in this
market (69 percent of these consumers coming from relatively higher-income households).
With either means-tested subsidies or universal subsidies, enrollment increases to 55 or 60
percent, respectively, but comes from different points in the income distribution. Under
means-tested subsidies more than half of the consumers are enrolling from households with
income under 250 percent FPL, while under universal subsidies this share is less than 40
percent.

31

Interaction between targeting and market power We next consider the central question of the paper, which is whether the presence of market power can introduce additional
distortions when subsidies to consumers are targeted. The thought experiment is the following. Consider a policy-maker who is deciding whether to allocate some amount of public
spending through universal subsidies or whether to set means-tested subsidies that disproportionately benefit low income consumers. Without considering the effects of market power,
the policy-maker will compare total welfare under the two subsidy regimes and conclude,
as we saw above, that means-tested subsidies generate a welfare loss, but possibly have desirable re-distributional properties. Weighing the equity gains vis-a-vis efficiency losses, the
policy-maker may be willing to accept efficiency losses. We argue that by not taking into
account the presence of market power, the policy-maker is likely to significantly underestimate the extent of efficiency losses from means-tested (versus universal) subsidies, leading to
a misguided policy choice. Our goal here is to measure whether the amount of “overlooked”
efficiency loss that results from the interaction between subsidy targeting and market power
can be quantitatively important.
We isolate this interaction effect through the lens of two comparative exercises. We first
simulate the decision problem of the “naive” policy-maker, comparing the efficiency of two
subsidy regimes (means-tested versus universal) under marginal cost pricing (Columns (4)
versus (6) of Table 3). We compute how much efficiency is lost from means-testing in that
scenario. We then simulate the decision problem of a “sophisticated” policy-maker, doing
the same comparison, but allowing for the market power to exist in both subsidy regimes,
and computing how much welfare loss is lost in that case (Columns (1) versus (3) of Table
3). Within each of the pairwise comparison, we focus on universal subsidies that keep the
amount of public spending fixed in equilibrium. As the level of public spending differs across
the two pairs, we focus on relative rather than absolute welfare loss as the key comparison
metric.
Figure 6 summarizes our findings. The light grey curve illustrates the “naive” comparison
case. Recall that we defined total welfare as the sum of consumer and producer surplus net of
extra government spending (sans the savings on uncompensated care) adjusted for the cost
of raising public funds. The light grey curve traces out the level of total welfare in the market
in the absence of market power, under different levels of age-adjusted, but income-invariant,
subsidies. The x-axis indexes subsidies using the voucher level for a 20-year old consumer
as the baseline. We note that total welfare is concave with respect to the voucher level.
Highest welfare is achieved at the baseline subsidy levels of $500, and starts falling at higher

32

subsidy levels. The level of welfare under means-tested subsidies (at the level observed in
the data), without market power, is marked with a light grey diamond. One the x-axis, the
grey diamond is located at the baseline subsidy level of $1,005. As we see in Column (3)
of Table 3, this is the level of universal subsidies that results in the same amount of public
spending as under means-tested subsidies. We estimate that in this “naive” decision-making
scenario—which ignores the presence of market power—the policy-maker would conclude
that means-tested subsidies lead to a 24 percent efficiency loss.
We repeat the same analysis for the “sophisticated” decision-making situation that takes
into account the presence of market power in this market and anticipates firms’ responses
to the subsidy regime. The black curve in Figure 6 now traces out the total welfare under
different levels of (baseline) universal subsidy, while the black diamond marks that amount
of welfare that is achieved under means-tested subsidies. The black diamond is located at
the baseline subsidy level of $1,105, at which point we observe the same amount of public
spending across the two subsidy regimes. we observe that in this case means-tested subsidies
generates a loss of 32 percent in total surplus. We conclude that market power significantly
exacerbates the efficiency losses from means-testing, leading to a 33 percent higher loss in
welfare.
It is important to emphasize, however, that the allocation with income-invariant subsidies is not Pareto improving over the targeted subsidy mechanism, in either the “naive” or
“sophisticated” worlds. In both cases, flat subsidies generate a re-allocation of surplus from
highly subsidized consumers to less subsidized consumers. This is true both under perfect
and imperfect competition, with the effects slightly amplified under imperfect competition.
Panel (b) of Figure 5 illustrates the geography of losers and winners in the presence of market
power. Counties in the Midwest are hurt by means-tested subsidies, while counties in the
Southeast and some areas of Texas benefit. Table 4 summarizes the magnitude of changes
in consumer surplus by consumer type in Panel B. Under perfect competition, we observe
that moving from means-tested to flat subsidies hurts the lowest income consumers of all
ages, as well as older consumers with incomes between 200 percent and 400 percent FPL
who are partially subsidized under the means-tested subsidy regime. For these, consumer
surplus declines by 26 to 53 percent. Young consumers with income between 200 percent
and 400 percent FPL benefit from flat subsidies, as do consumers of all ages with income
above 400 percent FPL, as they now also receive subsidies, their surplus increasing by 34 to
108 percent. The effects are amplified in the presence of market power. As insurers re-price
their plans, low income consumers experience slightly higher losses of surplus, while higher-

33

income consumers experience slightly higher gains. As price adjustments are constrained by
the minimum loss ratio requirements, these estimates capture only the lower bound of the
negative effects on the lowest income consumers, as insurers are restricted in the maximum
increase in prices that they can undertake.
The take-away from these two pairwise comparisons is that the “naive” policy analysis
that does not consider the potential for interaction between subsidy design and actions of
strategic firms with market power, may slightly underestimate the distributional gains, but
also significantly underestimate, by a third, the welfare losses from means-testing.

6

Conclusion

Traditionally, targeted benefits have been provided directly by the government. As a result, the vast majority of the literature has modelled the supply side in these settings as
a benevolent social planner. Increasingly, however, governments relegate the provision of
the benefits to private markets, subsidizing consumers that are served by the participating
private firms. In this paper we have argued that adding market power to the supply side of
public benefit provision in the presence of taxes or subsidies that are targeted on observables
has the potential to change the efficiency and equity properties of allocations in unintended
ways. The intuition is simple: if a firm knows the composition of observables in each market,
it will adjust prices so as to take advantage of subsidies received by consumers. As long as
the firm is required to set one price per market for its good, targeted subsidies lead to a
demographic externality that in an imperfectly-competitive environment is not dissipated by
competition.
We examine this theory in the empirical context of the ACA Marketplaces. We show
that market power has a substantial interaction effect with income-targeted subsidies, leading
to a 33 percent higher loss in welfare vis-a-vis universal subsidies. We conclude with the
observation that policymakers should account for this interaction when designing subsidy
mechanisms, as ignoring the effect can generate substantial biases in the evaluation of the
equity-efficiency tradeoff in publicly-funded, but privately-provided programs.

References
Abraham, Jean, Coleman Drake, Daniel W. Sacks, and Kosali Simon, “Demand
for health insurance marketplace plans was highly elastic in 2014 to 2015,” Economics
34

Letters, 2017, 159, 69 – 73.
Allcott, Hunt, Christopher Knittle, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Tagging and Targeting
of Energy Efficient Subsidies,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105(5), 187–191.
Basurto, Pia M, Pascaline Dupas, and Jonathan Robinson, “Decentralization and
Efficiency of Subsidy Targeting: Evidence from Chiefs in Rural Malawi,” Working Paper
23383, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2017.
Berry, Steven and Philip Haile, “Identification in Differentiated Products Markets,”
Annual Review of Economics, 2016, 8, 27–52.
, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 1995, 63(4), 841–889.
Cabral, Marika, Michael Geruso, and Neale Mahoney, “Do Larger Health Insurance
Subsidies Benefit Patients or Producers? Evidence from Medicare Advantage,” American
Economic Review, August 2018, 108 (8), 2048–87.
CBO, “Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age 65: 2019 to
2029,” Technical Report, Congressional Budget Office Report May 2019.
, “Medicaid—CBO’s May 2019 Baseline,” Technical Report, Congressional Budget Office
Report May 2019.
, “Medicare—CBO’s May 2019 Baseline,” Technical Report, Congressional Budget Office
Report May 2019.
Cellini, Stephanie and Claudia Goldin, “Does Federal Studen Aid Raise Tuition? New
Evidence on For-Profit Colleges,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2014,
6(4), 174–206.
Cicala, Steve, Ethan Lieber, and Victoria Marone, “Regulating Markups in U.S.
Health Insurance,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Collinson, Robert and Peter Ganong, “How Do Changes in Housing Voucher Design
Affect Rent and Neighborhood Quality?,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
May 2018, 10 (2), 62–89.

35

Coughlin, Teresa, John Holahan, Kyle Caswell, and Megan McGrath, “Uncompensated Care for Uninsured in 2013: A Detailed Examination,” Technical Report, Urban
Institute May 2014.
Currie, Janet and Firouz Gahvari, “Transfers in Cash and In-Kind: Theory Meets the
Data,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2008, 46(2), 333–383.
Curto, Vilsa, Liran Einav, Jonathan Levin, and Jay Bhattacharya, “Can Health Insurance Competition Work? Evidence from Medicare Advantage,” NBER Working Paper
No. 20818, 2015.
Cutler, David M. and Sarah J. Reber, “Paying For Health Insurance: The Trade-Off
Between Competition And Adverse Selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998,
113(2), 433–466.
Dafny, Leemore, Jonathan Gruber, and Christopher Ody, “More Insurers Lower
Premiums: Evidence from Initial Pricing in the Health Insurance Marketplaces,” American
Journal of Health Economics, 2015, 1 (1), 53–81.
Decarolis, Francesco, “Medicare Part D: Are Insurers Gaming the Low Income Subsidy
Design?,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105(4), 1547–1580.
, Maria Polyakova, and Stephen Ryan, “Subsidy Design in Privately-Provided Social
Insurance: Lessons from Medicare Part D,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Diamond, Rebecca, Michael J Dickstein, Timothy McQuade, and Petra Persson,
“Take-Up, Drop-Out, and Spending in ACA Marketplaces,” NBER Working Paper No.
24668, 2018.
Dickstein, Michael J., Mark Duggan, Joe Orsini, and Pietro Tebaldi, “The Impact
of Market Size and Composition on Health Insurance Premiums: Evidence from the First
Year of the Affordable Care Act,” American Economic Review, May 2015, 105 (5), 120–25.
Drake, Coleman, “What are consumers willing to pay for a broad network health plan?:
Evidence from covered California,” Journal of Health Economics, 2019, 65, 63 – 77.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Pietro Tebaldi, “Market Design in Regulated
Health Insurance Markets:Risk Adjustment vs. Subsidies,” Unpublished mimeo, Stanford
University, MIT, and University of Chicago, 2019.
36

Ericson, Keith M. Marzilli and Amanda Starc, “How product standardization affects
choice: Evidence from the Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange,” Journal of Health
Economics, 2016, 50, 71 – 85.
Fang, Hanming and Ami Ko, “Partial Rating Area Offering in the ACA Marketplaces:
Facts, Theory and Evidence,” Working Paper 25154, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2018.
Fillmore, Ian, “Price Discrimination and Public Policy in the U.S. College Market,” Unpublished mimeo, Washington University in St. Louis, 2019.
Finkelstein, Amy, Nathaniel Hendren, and Mark Shepard, “Subsidizing Health Insurance for Low-Income Adults: Evidence from Massachusetts,” American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (4).
George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel, “Who Affects Whom in Daily Newspaper Markets?,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (4), 765–784.
Geruso, Michael, Timothy Layton, and Daniel Prinz, “Screening in Contract Design:
Evidence from the ACA Health Insurance Exchanges,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, May 2019, 11 (2), 64–107.
Goldin, Jacob, Tatiana Homonoff, and Katherine Meckel, “SNAP Benefit Issuance
and Grocery Sales, Pricing, and Promotional Behavior,” Unpublished mimeo, Stanford
University, New York University, UCSD, 2018.
Gruber, Jonathan, Tax Policy for Health Insurance, in Tax Policy and the Economy,
Volume 19 by MIT Press, September 2005
and Benjamin D. Sommers, “The Affordable Care Act’s Effects On Patients,
Providers, And The Economy: What We’ve Learned So Far,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2019, 38 (4), 1028–1052.
and Ebonya Washington, “Subsidies to Employee Health Insurance Premiums and
the Health Insurance Market,” Journal of Health Economics, 2005, 24, 253–276.
and James M. Poterba, Tax Subsidies to Employer-Provided Health Insurance, in
Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation by University of Chicago Press, January
1996
37

Hausman, Jerry, “The Economics of New Goods” in “Valuation of New Goods under
Perfect and Imperfect Competition, eds. Bresnahan, T. and Gordon, R.,” University of
Chicago Press, 1996, pp. 207–248.
Ho, Kate and Robin Lee, “Health Insurance Menu Design: Managing the SpendingCoverage Tradeoff,” Princeton University and Harvard University, presentation slides,
2019.
Hoynes, Hilary and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, US Food and Nutrition Programs, in Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1
by University of Chicago Press, October, 2015
Jacob, Brian A. and Jens Ludwig, “The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply:
Evidence from a Voucher Lottery,” American Economic Review, February 2012, 102 (1),
272–304.
Jaffe, Sonia and Mark Shepard, “Price-Linked Subsidies and Imperfect Competition in
Health Insurance,” NBER Working Paper No. 23104, 2018.
Kowalski, Amanda E., “The Early Impact of the Affordable Care Act, State by State,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2014, pp. 277–333.
Layton, Timothy, Ellen J Montz, and Mark Shepard, “Health Plan Payment in U.S.
Marketplaces: Regulated Competition with a Weak Mandate,” Working Paper 23444,
National Bureau of Economic Research May 2017.
Layton, Timothy J. and Thomas G. McGuire, “Marketplace Plan Payment Options
for Dealing with High-Cost Enrollees,” American Journal of Health Economics, 2017, 3
(2), 165–191.
Lieber, Ethan M. J. and Lee M. Lockwood, “Targeting with In-Kind Transfers: Evidence from Medicaid Home Care,” American Economic Review, April 2019, 109 (4),
1461–85.
Lurie, Ithai, Daniel J Sacks, and Bradley Heim, “Does the individual mandate affect insurance coverage? Evidence from tax returns,” Unpublished mimeo, Office of Tax
Analysis and Indiana University, 2019.
McFadden, Daniel and Kenneth Train, “Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Response,”
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2000, 15, 447–470.
38

Meckel, Katherine, “Is the Cure Worse than the Disease? Unintended Effects of Payment
Reform in a Quantity-based Transfer Program,” Unpublished mimeo, 2019.
Miller, Keaton S, Amil Petrin, Robert Town, and Michael Chernew, “Optimal
Managed Competition Subsidies,” Working Paper 25616, National Bureau of Economic
Research February 2019.
Orsini, Joe and Pietro Tebaldi, “Regulated Age-Based Pricing in Subsidized Health
Insurance: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act,” Working Paper, Becker Friedman
Institute for Research in Economics November 2017.
Panhans, Matthew, “Adverse Selection in ACA Exchange Markets: Evidence from Colorado,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, April 2019, 11 (2), 1–36.
Poterba, James M., Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and Health
Care: How and Why?, in Individual and Social Responsibility: Child Care, Education,
Medical Care, and Long-Term Care in America by University of Chicago Press, January,
1996
Rothstein, Jesse, “Is the EITC as Goog as an NIT? Conditional Cash Transfers and Tax
Incidence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2(1), 177–208.
Sacks, Daniel W., Khoa Vu, Tsan-Yao Huang, and Pinar Karaca-Mandic, “The
Effect of the Risk Corridors Program on Marketplace Premiums and Participation,” Research Paper No. 18-57, Kelley School of Business April 2018.
Saltzman, Evan, “Demand for health insurance: Evidence from the California and Washington ACA exchanges,” Journal of Health Economics, 2019, 63, 197 – 222.
Saltzman, Evan A., Christine Eibner, and Alain C. Enthoven, “Improving The
Affordable Care Act: An Assessment Of Policy Options For Providing Subsidies,” Health
Affairs, 2015, 34 (12), 2095–2103.
Small, Kenneth A. and Harvey S. Rosen, “Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete
Choice Models,” Econometrica, 1981, 49(1), 105–130.
Stantcheva, Stefanie, “Optimal Income Taxation with Adverse Selection in the Labour
Market,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2014, 81 (3 (288)), 1296–1329.

39

Taylor, Erin A., Evan Saltzman, Sebastian Bauhoff, Rosalie L. Pacula, and Christine Eibner, “More Choice In Health Insurance Marketplaces May Reduce The Value Of
The Subsidies Available To Low-Income Enrollees,” Health Affairs, 2015, 34 (1), 104–110.
Tebaldi, Pietro, “Estimating Equilibrium in Health Insurance Exchanges: Price Competition and Subsidy Design under the ACA,” University of Chicago Working Paper, 2017.
, Alexander Torgovitsky, and Hanbin Yang, “Nonparametric Estimates of Demand
in the California Health Insurance Exchange,” Working Paper 25827, National Bureau of
Economic Research May 2019.
Waldfogel, Joel, “Preference externalities: An empirical study of who benefits whom in
differentiated-product markets.,” RAND Journal of Economics, 2003, 34, 557–568.
Williams, H.C.W.L, “On the formation of travel demand models and economic evaluation
measure of user benefit,” Environment and Planning, 1977, 9(3), 285–344.

40

Figure 1: Demand model: empirical moments and model fit
(a) Silver plan market share

(b) Model in-sample prediction error of Silver plan market share

Notes: Map in panel (a) plots the share of potential consumers in each county that enrolled in a Silver
plan on ACA Marketplaces. States that are marked with grey are not federally facilitated and do not enter
our analysis. The counts of the pool of potential consumers (denominator) was provided by the Kaiser
Family Foundation and is based on estimates from national surveys of how many people were uninsured or
underinsured in each geographic region. The number of people that purchased a Silver plan (numerator)
are administrative enrollee counts reported by CMS that do not account for disenrollments. Data is for
year 2017. Map in panel (b) plots the difference between the observed share of enrollees in Silver plans - as
pictured in Panel (a) - and the share of enrollment in Silver plans as predicted by demand model of Section
4.1.

41

Figure 2: Marginal cost estimates

0

.02

Fraction
.04
.06

.08

.1

(a) Distribution of marginal cost estimates

1

2

3
Marginal cost estimate, $'000
Bronze plans

4

5

Gold plans

0

Observed annual accounting cost, $'000
5
10
15

20

(b) Marginal cost estimates and observed accounting cost

2

4

6
Estimated annual MC, $'000

8

10

Notes: Panel (a) plots the distribution of plan-market level marginal costs as estimated in Section 4.2. The
costs are plotted for a baseline, age 20, consumer. The costs are plotted separately for Bronze plans that
provide the lowest amount of coverage and Gold plans that provide the highest amount of coverage for most
consumers (excluding rare Catastrophic and Platinum plans). Panel (b) plots the correspondence between
average estimated marginal cost (plan-market level costs were aggregated to plan-level) in each plan (x-axis)
and plan-level accounting costs reported by CMS (y-axis).

42

Figure 3: Demographic externality with targeted subsidies and market power
$60

Subsidize consumers above 400% FPL at rate
of 150% FPL consumers, adjust marginal
utility of income to level of 150% FPL
consumers (B)
Subsidize consumers above 400% FPL at rate
of 150% FPL consumers, keep marginal utility
of income parameter fixed (A)

$50
$40

Change in consumer surplus, $

$30
$20
Average change in consumer price, for (A)

$10
$0
-$10
-$20
-$30

Average change in consumer price, for (B)

-$40
-$50
120

170

220
270
320
Income, % of Federal Poverty Line

370

420

Notes: Figure reports estimated change in consumer surplus and consumer-facing prices (y-axis, in dollars)
by income level (x-axis) in two counterfactual cases that capture the “demographic externality”. The first
counterfactual simulation (case A) changes income of consumers with true income of above 400 percent FPL
to be 151 percent FPL. This change results in these consumers now receiving subsidies at the same rate
as 151 percent FPL consumers. The counterfactual simulation holds everything else constant, including
subsidies of other consumers and all utility function parameters, and allows firms to reprice their plans.
Consumers with (true) income between 150 percent and 400 percent FPL are affected by price changes. As
can be seen in the lighter dashed line, effective prices paid by consumers (that stay in the market) go up,
while consumer surplus (grey circles) goes down. In another simulation - Case B - we additionally change
the marginal utility of income parameter for consumers with true income above 400 percent FPL, assigning
them the utility parameter of consumers with 151 percent FPL. Reverse price and consumer surplus patterns
that are observed in this case are recorded in the darker dashed line (prices) and black circles (consumer
surplus).

43

Figure 4: Variation in consumer surplus under observed subsidies

0

Average consumer surplus, $
1000
2000
3000

4000

(a) Demographic variation in consumer surplus

100

200

300
Income in %FPL
Age <25
Age >40

400

500

Age 25-40

(b) Geographic variation in consumer surplus

Notes: Panel (a) plots the average consumer surplus by income and age groups, as estimated under the
observed subsidy regime. Map in Panel (b) plots average consumer surplus per county, also as estimated
under the observed subsidy regime.

44

Figure 5: Geographic incidence of subsidies under imperfect competition
(a) Means-tested subsidies relative to no subsidies

(b) Means-tested subsidies relative to flat subsidies

Notes: Panel (a) reports the percent change in average consumer surplus that results when we move consumers from an environment with no subsidies to means-tested subsidies at the level observed in the data.
Insurers are allowed to retain market power and can adjust prices. Panel (b) reports the percent change in
average consumer surplus from moving consumers from means-tested to flat (age-adjusted) subsidies, preserving total nominal government spending on subsidies. The baseline flat subsidy for a 20-year old that
results in the same government spending as under means-tested subsidies is $1,105.

45

Figure 6: Flat subsidies vs. means-tested subsidies: efficiency effects
$50,000
No subsidy targeting;
perfect competition
No subsidy targeting;
imperfect competition

Welfare, $M, with cost of public funds

$45,000

$40,000

$35,000

Welfare under
targeted subsidies with
perfect competition. Level of flat
subsidy for which total spending on
premium subsidies is the same
as under targeted subsidies.

-24%

Welfare under
targeted subsidies
with imperfect
competition. Level of flat
subsidy for which
government spending
is the same as under targeted
subsidies.

$30,000

$25,000

-32%

$20,000
$0

$500
$1,000
$1,500
$2,000
Level of flat (not targeted) subsidy for a 20 year old consumer

$2,500

Notes: Figure reports estimated total welfare (y-axis), including the opportunity cost of government spending
and the cost of raising public funds, under subsidies that do not vary with consumer income within an age
group. The x-axis marks the value of the flat voucher that is offered to a 20-year old consumer. Consumers
of all other ages receive vouchers that are scaled by the premium age curve as observed in the data. The
grey line marks welfare estimates in counterfactuals that shut down market power in the market, setting
baseline (for a 20 year olds) premiums to be equal to estimated marginal costs. The black line marks cases
that preserve market power. Two diamonds mark the two levels of baseline (for a 20 year old) flat subsidies
that lead to the same level of nominal government spending (premium and cost-sharing reduction subsidies
combined) as under means-tested subsidies, in the perfectly-competitive (grey diamond) and the imperfectlycompetitive (black diamond) environment. The y-axis value for both points record the level of total welfare
achieved under means-tested subsidies. The values correspond to row (7), Columns (1) and (4) in Table 3.
Curly brackets show the difference in welfare that is achieved - for the same level of government spending
- between means-tested and flat (age-adjusted) subsidies. We observe that the welfare loss from subsidy
means-testing is higher in the presence of market power.

46

Table 1: Summary statistics
‡

Mean
(1)

Std.Dev.
(2)

10th pctile
(3)

90th pctile
(4)

21
2.2
5,106

13
1.1
902

8
1
3,978

37
4
6,351

7,867
0.6
0.09
0.3
0.01
3,536
3,165

25,756
0.2
0.05
0.1
0.02
13,798
12,040

479
0.4
0.04
0.2
0
168
39

15,671
0.8
0.2
0.4
0.03
6,411
6,353

40
0.5
0.9
262
3,301

2.5
0.04
0.1
36
1,293

37
0.4
0.7
212
1,791

43
0.5
1.0
309
4,988

A. Choice set
(1) Number of plans
(2) Number of insurers
(3) Average annual premium (age 40), $
B. Enrollment
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Market size‡ ‡
Share outside option
Share bronze plans
Share silver plans
Share gold plans
Market-level enrollment
Plan-level enrollment^

C. ACS Sample of Potential Consumers
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
‡

Annual premium subsidy, $^^

Across counties

‡‡
^

Age
Share women
Share white
Income in % FPL

Based on Kaiser Family Foundation estimates

Mean, Std. Dev., 10th and 90th percentiles for plan enrollment are reported across plans, not across counties

^^

Reports average individual-level subsidy, which is computed as the average subsidy within a coverage family

Notes: Panels A and B report the distribution of choices and enrollment in federally-facilitated ACA Marketplaces in year 2017.
Choice set statistics (Panel A) are based on data from Health Insurance Marketplace Public Use Files, released by the Center for
Medicare and Medicaid Services as well as the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight. Enrollment statistics
(Panel B) are based on county and plan-level enrollment data released by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Demographic data in Panel C are based on the public use sample of the American Community Survey for year 2017. Potential
enrollees in the ACS sample were defined as individuals who did not have active employer-sponsored insurance, were not enrolled
in any type of public health insurance coverage, and were not eligible for insurance under Medicaid expansion in those states that
expanded Medicaid. Annual premium subsidies were imputed using the ACS records of income and tax family composition following
instructions for 2017 IRS Form 8962 (Premium Tax Credit).

47

Table 2: Model Estimates

Mean
(1)

Consumer type - age dimension
Age<25 Age 25-40 Age >40
(3)
(4)
(2)

Panel A: Parameters of utility function
Coefficient on premium, $000 ( α )
Income FPL <200

16.45
(1.07)

Income FPL > 200 and FPL < 400
Income FPL > 400
Age-specific intercepts
Actuarial Value

Average plan-level utility (plan fixed effects; 2,851 plans)
Std. Dev plan-level utility (plan fixed effects; 2,851 plans)

-4.75
(0.30)
-4.71
(0.33)
-1.68
(0.11)
1.39
(0.10)

-1.47
(0.10)
-0.98
(0.06)
-0.33
(0.03)
-2.40
(0.16)

-2.33
(0.20)
-2.94
(0.22)
-0.41
(0.19)
0.00
0.00

-11.25
3.00

Panel B: Marginal cost projection
Actuarial value

1.90
(0.10)
0.18
(0.01)
-0.0045
(0.09)
-0.80
(0.03)
-0.58
(0.02)
-0.28
(0.01)
reference

PPO
Catastrophic
Bronze
Silver
Gold
Platinum
New plan

-0.023
(0.00)

Mean dependent variable (inverted MC, $000)
Standard deviation dependent variable
R-squared
N

1.94
0.54
0.83
49222

Notes: Panel A reports non-linear least squares parameter estimates for the demand model described
in Section 4.1. The NLLS objective function minimizes the squared distance between estimated and real
age- and income-specific enrollments in each market. Bootstrapped standard errors are reported in
parantheses. The model includes, but does not report an intercept for consumers with income below
100% FPL. Panel B reports the results of a hedonic regression that projects marginal cost estimates obtained via the inversion of the first order condition - on plan characteristics, for plans other than the
second lowest silver plan. The model includes, but does not report: indicators for plan's HSA eligiblity,
out of network and out of country coverage, presence of a national network; measures of quantity
limits and coverage exclusions; indicators for the requirement of pregnancy notices, referrals to
specialits, presence of a wellness program, offers of chronic condition and pregnancy management;
indicators for coverage of most common services; insurer fixed effects.

48

49

Total surplus, including the cost of public funds, $M
Return on a dollar of nominal public spending, $
Return on a dollar of adjusted public spending $^^

(7)
(8)

2,425
2,315
186
1,310

12.2%
6.4%
14.4%
19.2%
25.5%
22.3%

0.0%
7.7%
4.5%
3.9%
2.1%
3.3%
78.5%

3,909
19.4

36,426
38.63
-

727
7,143
(6,416)

26,382
1,703
28,085

2,422
1,129
2,935
2,265

13.7%
11.6%
13.5%
17.1%
22.6%
21.6%

0.1%
13.7%
11.3%
9.7%
7.6%
12.1%
45.4%

10,275
51.0

35,126
1.66
3.37

30,156
18,772
11,384

45,634
4,291
49,925

(3)

Flat subsidies
with G ≈ G in
(1) ($1,105
subsidy for a
20 year-old)~

1,940
820
3,021
2,340

8.1%
11.4%
13.9%
16.2%
22.5%
27.9%

1.6%
20.1%
19.2%
14.1%
8.7%
9.9%
26.4%

11,056
54.9

29,965
1.41
2.75

33,406
20,200
13,206

47,133
47,133

(4)

Targeted
premium
subsidies

1,940
1,874
253
1,554

12.0%
7.3%
14.7%
19.3%
25.0%
21.7%

0.0%
10.7%
7.1%
5.3%
3.1%
4.8%
69.0%

5,437
27.0

42,427
22.78
-

1,374
9,933
(8,559)

31,300
31,300

(5)

No premium
subsidies

2,417
782
4,294
2,458

8.3%
10.5%
12.8%
15.4%
22.8%
30.2%

0.9%
20.7%
17.7%
11.0%
5.4%
5.2%
39.1%

10,326
51.3

16,414
1.12
1.50

44,334
18,865
25,469

49,524
49,524

2,332
507
4,782
1,532

8.8%
10.5%
13.5%
15.5%
22.2%
29.4%

0.9%
19.1%
16.5%
10.4%
5.1%
5.1%
42.8%

11,147
55.3

(7,536)
0.66
0.82

53,301
20,365
32,936

30,863
4,418
35,281

Subsidize
consumers
(7) and
above 400%
change α400 to
FPL at rate of
α150
150% FPL
consumers
(7)
(8)

Demographic externality

Notes: Table reports the levels of consumer surplus, producer surplus, government spending, and total welfare under the observed allocation (column 1) and under counterfactual allocations (columns 2 to
8). We compute these objects using estimates of demand and marginal costs, and simulated market equilibria that allocate consumers to Marketplace insurance plans or the outside option. All simulations
are performed within the ACS sample of consumers and are then scaled to the total market size (first by county, and then to total using county market size as weights). Consumer surplus is computed as
discussed in Section 5. Firm profits reported in row (2) account for risk-equalization programs indirectly, as marginal cost estimates are "pricing-relevant" marginal costs, i.e. net of firms' expectations about
positive or negative risk-equalization transfers. Cost-sharing reduction (CSR) subsidies in row (4) are computed by multiplying consumer-type specific average CSR values as reported by CMS for 2016 by
enrollment share of each consumer type ($1,440 per year for consumers with income under 150% FPL, $1,068 for those with income between 150% and 20)% FPL, and $144 for consumers with income
between 200% and 250% FPL. Uncompensated care spending is computed at the rate of $1,827 per capita, following the Kaiser Family Foundation 2013 report on public spending on uncompensated care
for the uninsured. Rows 11-27 describe consumer sorting for each allocation. Negative quantities are reported in parentheses.

Accounts for opportunity cost of public funds in the form of uncompensated care and the cost of raising public funds (λ, assumed to be 30 cents on a dollar)

Subsidies are flat within an age group. Baseline flat subsidy for a 20-year old consumer are adjusted for age using the age curve from the observed allocation

1,940
813
2,741
2,672

13.0%
12.1%
13.7%
16.6%
21.9%
22.8%

0.1%
14.7%
12.9%
10.9%
8.6%
13.7%
39.1%

12,173
60.4

39,351
1.61
3.72

33,372
22,241
11,131

53,822
53,822

Flat subsidies
with G ≈ G in
(4) ($1,005
subsidy for a
20 year-old
consumer)~
(6)

No market power

Simulation shuts down the second-lowest Silver plan part of the observed mechanism to allow comparability with counterfactual subsidization policies

^^

~

^

Average unweighted list premium for a 20 year old consumer, $
Average premium paid, $
Average subsidy paid, $
Average consumer surplus, $

2,410
1,083
3,377
1,881

6.6%
10.9%
14.1%
16.7%
23.4%
28.4%

(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)

(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)

1.1%
24.9%
21.3%
13.3%
6.5%
6.4%
26.4%

(13) Composition of inside share enrollment by consumer type
(14)
Income 0-100% FPL
(15)
Income 100-150% FPL
(16)
Income 150-200% FPL
(17)
Income 200-250% FPL
(18)
Income 250-300% FPL
(19)
Income 300-400% FPL
(20)
Income 400% FPL and above

Age 0-18
Age 19-26
Age 27-35
Age 36-45
Age 46-55
Age 55-64

8,896
44.2

(11) Inside option enrollment, '000
(12) Inside option enrollment, percent of total market

(10) Characteristics of the allocation

(9)

30,040
16,254
13,786

Public spending on premium and cost-sharing subsidies (G), $M
Public savings on uncompensated care for un(under-)insured, $M
Net government spending, $M

(4)
(5)
(6)
23,831
1.39
2.33

37,892
3,861
41,753

Consumer surplus, $M
Insurer profit, $M
Consumer and producer surplus, $M

(2)

(1)

(1)
(2)
(3)

No premium
subsidies

Simulated
baseline with
targeted
subsidies^

Preserve market power

Table 3: Surplus under counterfactual subsidy mechanisms

Table 4: Demographic incidence of subsidies
Change in consumer surplus, %

Age<25 Age 25-40
(2)
(1)

Age >40
(3)

Age<25 Age 25-40
(4)
(5)

Age >40
(6)

Panel A: Moving from no subsidies to means-tested subsidies
Under perfect competition

Under imperfect competition

Income FPL <200

422.4

200.0

380.2

317.3

179.2

351.1

Income FPL > 200 and FPL < 400

148.6

52.5

203.6

58.6

30.6

126.3

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.5

0.3

0.6

Income FPL > 400

Panel B: Moving from means-tested subsidies to flat subsidies ^
Under perfect competition

Under imperfect competition

Income FPL <200

-46.3

-37.6

-52.7

-48.4

-38.9

-57.7

Income FPL > 200 and FPL < 400

34.2

10.4

-26.4

59.2

16.2

-16.9

Income FPL > 400

108.1

33.9

52.1

127.0

35.9

58.4

^ Flat subsidies, adjusted for age, such that government spending is the same as under means-tested subsidies.
Notes: Table reports the percent change in average consumer surplus, by consumer type, for a set of allocations
under counterfactual subsidization policies. Panel A reports how consumer surplus changes when we compare
observed, means-tested subsidy regime with a regime where no consumers receive premium subsidies (the costsharing reduction subsidies are kept fixed). In the panels marked "under perfect competition," insurers are assumed
to price at their marginal costs. In the panels market "under imperfect competition," insurers choose prices taking
into account the subsidy structure and consumer demand. Panel B reports the change in consumer surplus that we
simulate when moving the market from means-tested to flat (but age-adjusted) subsidies. The baseline flat subsidy
for a 20-year old that results in the same nominal government spending (on premium and cost-sharing reduction
subsidies), as under means-tested subsidies is $1,005 under perfect competition and $1,105 under imperfect
competition. Consumer surplus is computed as discussed in Section 5. Surplus does not vary with consumer choices,
but only depends on the set of available products that is held fixed and consumer-facing product prices. Thus, any
changes in consumer surplus reported in this table result from price changes, either purely due to subsidy, under
perfect competition, or due to subsidy and firms' adjustment of list prices, under imperfect competition.

50

