                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SOVEREIGN DEBT RESTRUCTURINGS:
                            PANACEA OR PANGLOSS?




                                Jeremy Bulov

                               Kenneth Rogoff




                           Working Paper No. 2637




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  June 1988




The authors are grateful to the Bradley Foundation, the National Science
Foundation, and the Sloan Foundation for supporting this research. This
research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #2637
                                           June 1988


                         SOVEREIGN DEBT RESTRUCTURINGS:
                              PANACEA OR PANCLOSS?


                                     ABSTRACT




      The most widely proposed LDC debt plans are flawed by their failure to
recognize the fundamental differences between corporate and sovereign debt.
Consequently, many plans intended to help highly-indebted countries mainly
aid their foreign creditors. This paper emphasizes the crucial distinction
between marginal and average sovereign debt. This distinction provides the
cornerstone for an understanding of debt buybacks, debt-equity swaps, and
debt-for-debt swaps involving new classes of seniority. Highly indebted
countries would benefit more from direct transfers than from the same
resources spent on any of these financial engineering schemes.




  Jeremy Bulow                              Kenneth Rogoff
  Graduate School of Business               Department of Economics
                                            University of Wisconsin
  Stanford University                       1180 Observatory Drive
  Stanford, CA 94305
                                            Madison, WI 53706
                                           I


I. INTRODUCflON

       The less-developed-country debt problem is of enormous social,
political and economic significance. It is only natural that many leading
thinkers from academics, government and the world financial community
have tried to come 'p with imaginative solutions.1A number of these
schemes have actually been adopted, albeit on a small scale: Highly-indebted
countries (HICs) have tried trading equity in domestic firms for foreign
private bank debt, repurchasing some of their foreign debt (to take advantage
of secondary-market discounts), and creating new classes of senior debt.
Scores of other plans, including the creation of a new multilateral lending
agency to consolidate and partially forgive the debts, remain on the drawing
board.
      Unfortunately, all of the financial engineering gimmicks which have
been put into practice, and virtually all of those proposed, fail to adequately
recognize the fundamental differences between domestic corporate
refinancings and sovereign debt restructurings. These differences exist
because sovereign debt is supported by threats of trade and capital market
sanctions instead of collateral.2 Consequently, many pians that are intended to
benefit debtor countries mainly help their creditors. The most pervasive
problem with these schemes is that they ultimately amount to paying average
sovereign debt prices to retire marginal sovereign debt. As we will show, the
special limitations of sovereign debt contracts are such that the
average/marginal debt problem is not easily finessed.
       The difficulties endemic to financial engineering schemes can be seen
in the context of recent attempts by Bolivia and Mexico to restructure their
debts. Most of the paper is devoted to analyzing these examples, as well as

1See Bergsten, Cline and Williamson (1985), and Fischer (1987) for a general
discussion of the various classifications of debt schemes.
2In earlier papers, Bulow and Rogoff (1988a, b, c), we have developed a
framework for analyzing sovereign debt contracts. Though our discussion
here is less technical, we are in fact building very directly on that framework.
Our later discussion of the institutional features of sovereign debt contracts,
and in particular on the likely costs of default for a small country, also relies
on the earlier work; see section 2 and the appendix to Bulow and Rogoff
(1988a), and the references cited there.
                                       2


debt-equity swap programs. Our main points are summarized in the
conclusions.

II. DEBT REPURCHASES
      Table 1 presents recent secondary prices of government-guaranteed
foreign debt for a number of HICs.3 With discounts ranging from around fifty
percent for Mexico, Brazil and Venezuela, to ninety percent and above for
Bolivia and Peru, it is dear that investors consider these debts to be quite
risky. The basic rationale underlying debt repurchase plans is that problem
debtors (or their would-be benefactors) would do well to take advantage of
these fire-sale secondary-market prices.4
      In fact, sovereign debt repurchase plans (in their many guises) are
totally misconceived. The recent Bolivian experience provides a vivid
illustration of the general problem.

A. Bolivia's March 1988 Debt Repurchase
      Because of its small size, Bolivia had been considered by some to be an
ideal testing ground for an imaginative debt relief plan.     With
encouragement from many sources, including potential donors, Bolivia
negotiated with its bank creditors in early 1987 for the right to conduct a debt
repurchase.5 Later that year, funds were raised from an anonymous group of
richer countries, rumored to include the Netherlands, Spain, and some
wealthier Latin American countries. Using the benefactors' money, the



3The fifteen countries in Table 1 are the same as the World Bank and IMFs
group of "highly indebted countries," less Jamaica and Costa Rica.
4Actually, the standard contract between an LDC and its bank creditors
prohibits the debtor from repurchasing its own debt. It is not entirely dear
how watertight these provisions really are. For example, a country might try
to circumvent them via secret third-party transactions. However, as we will
later demonstrate, bank lenders should be happy to agree to waive their rights
to prohibit repurchases.
5Negotiations with the banks' rescheduling committee were completed in
February 1987: Creditor banks agreed to allow a one-time repurchase
provided that (a) all banks were offered the same deal, and (b) each bank was
given the right to reject the repurchase offer for all or part of its debt
                                 Table 1

                lllThEN HIGHLY INDEBTED COUNTRIESa


                                Percent of
                Total i)ebt    Which Privately   Secondary     Total Debt!
Country       ($US Billions)       Held1'          Prices           GNP

Argentina         49.4               86             29.0             .66
Bolivia            4.6               27             10.0            1.19
Brazil           114.5               76             53.0             .41
Chile             20.5               83             60.5            1.39
Columbia           15.1              49             67.0             .47
Ecuador             9.0              70             31.0             .84
Ivory Coast         9.1              60             30.0            1.23
Mexico            105.0              86             52.5             .84
Morocco            17.3              32             50.0            1.27
                   27.0              55             28.5             .46
Nigeria
Peru               16.7              53              7.0             .62
Phillipines        29.0              61             52.0             .94
                    3.8              80             59.5             .63
Uruguay
Venezuela          33.9              99             55.0             .71
                   21.8              70             45.5             .33
Yugoslavia




aSecondary market bid prices for government guaranteed debt are from
Salomon Brothers, May 2, 1988; all other data are from The World Bank Debt
Tables. Total debt is end-1987, except for Bolivia, Costa Rica, Ecuador and
Uruguay, which are end-1986.

bNon..private debt consists largely of borrowings from multilateral agendes
such as the IMF and World Bank, national export-import banks, and direct
government to government loans.
                                      3


Bolivians spent $34 million in March 1988 to buy back $308 million, or forty-
six percent of their $670 million in foreign commercial bank debt.6
       Was the buyback an efficient way for the donors to help Bolivia? We
shall argue that most of the benefits of the repurchase accrued to Bolivia's
creditors, and that Bolivia would have benefited much more from an
unconditional gift. The basic problem with FLIC debt repurchases is that it
does not make sense to pay "average sovereign debt" prices to retire
"marginal sovereign debt."7 The price of average sovereign debt is the total
market value of the debt divided by its face value; i.e., the secondary market
price.8 The price of marginal sovereign debt is the total value to creditors of
having the face value of a country's debt raised by one dollar. In the case of a
country like Bolivia, where average debt is worth very little, marginal debt is
generally worth almost nothing. Once a country owes more than it is ever
likely to repay, a small change in the face value of its obligations has little
effect on rescheduling negotiations. (We will give a formal definition of
average and marginal debt in Section III below.)
      Consider again the results of the Bolivian debt repurchase. In
September 1986, prior to any discussions of a repurchase, Bolivia's private
bank debt traded at six cents on the dollar. At this price, the total market
value of the $670 million it owed banks prior to the repurchase would be
$40.2 million9. After the March 1988 debt repurchase, its $362 million in
remaining debt was selling at eleven cents on the dollar. Total market value:
$39.8 million. This calculation, which is broken down in Table 2, suggests the
repurchase did very little to alleviate Bolivia's debt burden. It is possible, of
course, that factors other than the repurchase caused the price of Bolivia's
debt to rise. But it is worth noting that this rise took place over a period when

6Actually, of the $308 million in debt repurchased by the Bolivians, $268
million was sold for cash and $40 million was sold for local-currency bonds
that can be used to invest in Bolivia.
7See Bulow and Rogoff (1988a,c). Dooley (1987) has also developed this point.
8There institutional features of the market for sovereign debt which may
cause the secondary market price to deviate from the true average debt price,
but these are not central to our discussion here.
9To put the size of Bolivia's debt in perspective, consider that it recently cost
Donald Trump over $400 million to purchase the eight-hundred room Plaza
Hotel in New York City. In other words, the market value of Bolivia's debt
amounts to less than the cost of eighty normal-size rooms.
                                    Table 2

                  ANALYSIS OF BOLIVIAN DEBT BUYBACKa

                                                            $ Millions

(1) Value of Debt Repurcitased:

      $308 million repurchased
      x .06 per dollar pre-buyback price                           18.5

(2) Less Increase in Value of Remaining Debt:

       $362 million remaining debt
      x (.11 — .06) price increase due to buyback                  (18.1)

(3) Equals Decrease in Value of Creditors' Claims

      (1)—(2)                                                        0.4



(4) Cost of Buyback

       $308 million repurchased
       x .11 per dollar repurchase price                           34.0




   BENEFIT TO BOLIVIA AS PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL COST:

      (3) ÷ (4)                                                      1.2 percent




apbuyback price is the secondary market price which prevailed in
  September 1986, prior to any discussions of repurchase.
                                         4

the secondary market prices of ll the other fourteen HICs (listed in Table 1)
fell; see Table 3. Excluding Bolivia, the total market value of the HICs went
down by thirty percent between September 1986 and April 1988.
      if the total market value of Bolivia's debt was only $40 million prior to
the announcement of the repurchase plan, why did it cost Bolivia $34 million
to buy back less than half the face value of its debt? Creditor banks recognized
that the value of Bolivia's remaining claims would go up after the
repurchase; fewer creditors would remain to divide up more or less the same
stream of payments (in almost all states of nature). In order to induce any
creditor to tender her holdings, Bolivia had to offer the expected pos
repurchase price. Of course, even had Bolivia been able to secretly buy back its
debt at the old price of six cents, the repurchase would still have been
extremely inefficient. As one can see from the breakdown in Table 2, it would
still have cost Bolivia $18.5 million to achieve the same benefit of only
$400,000.10
       While the buyback was basically a giveaway from Bolivia and its
benefactors to the banks, these benefactors were not necessarily "duped". For
example, the transaction could have been part of a larger secret deal in which
the IMF and other international agencies agreed to give Bolivia increased
financial aid only if the Bolivians executed the buyback. However, even if
this is true, the repurchase itself still represents a $34 million gift to the banks.

B. Rescheduling Versus Repudiation, and the Distinction Between Average
   and Marginal Sovereign Debt
      In theory, there is one special case where marginal and average
sovereign debt have the same value. They are equal if debts are only paid in
full or not at all. It may be that this case, emphasized in the early theoretical
literature on sovereign debt contracts, has motivated advocates of debt
repurchase plans. However, both the recent theory of sovereign debt
contracts, and the extensive historical evidence'1suggest that "rescheduling"
(negotiated partial default) is much more likely to occur than outright
repudiation. The rationale for rescheduling is simple: the main cost to a
country of repudiation is that it will suffer reduced access to world goods and

10A secret debt repurchase might benefit a country which had extremely
favorable private information about its future economic prospects.
11See, for example, Borchard and Wynne (1951), and Winkler (1933).
                                 Table 3

   SECONDARY MARKET BID PRICES OF FIITEEN HIGHLY INDEBTED
                       COUNTRIES


 Country        8/18/86          2/20/87   7/13/87   4/4/88

Argentina         66.5            65.0      47.0      28.0

BOLIVIA            6.0             9.0      10.0      11.0

Brazil            74.0            69.0      57.0      49.5

Chile             66.0            68.0      68.0      58.0

Columbia          84.0            86.0      81.0      65.0

Ecuador           65.0            64.0      45.0      31.5

Ivory Coast       75.0            77.0      60.0      30.0

Mexico            57.0            57.0      54.0      51.0

Morocco           70.0            69.0      65.5      50.0

Nigeria           50.0            36.0      28.0      28.5

Peru              20.0            18.0      11.0       6.0

Phillipines       66.0            70.5      68.0      51.0

Uruguay           63.0            71.0      70.0      59.5

Venezuela         74.0            75.0      69.0      54.2

Yugoslavia        79.0            78.0      73.0      46.5



Source: Salomon Brothers, Inc.
                                        5


capital markets.12 However, creditors do not gain directly by such a cutoff and,
in some states of nature, this leaves the debtor scope to bargain for lower
repayments.13 This possibility is, of course, factored into the risk premium
the sovereign must offer.

III.     CONTRASTING THE CALCULUS OF CORPORATE VERSUS
       SOVEREIGN DEBT REPURCHASES
        The unprofitability of debt repurchases for sovereign governments
requires further explanation. After all, in corporate indentures, borrowers are
often prohibited from making debt repurchases at discount. Presumably these
indentures, which have been copied into international debt contracts, are
included to benefit lenders. This implies that repurchases are generally
advantageous to borrowers. As we will now demonstrate, this apparent
puzzle can be explained by examining the fundamental differences in the
bargaining factors underlying sovereign versus corporate debt rescheduling
negotiations.

A. The Corporate Case
       Corporate bondholders will typically require several covenants to
protect their claims. Such restrictions may include the familiar limitations
on dividends and share repurchases, clauses limiting the use of funds for
risky investments, and limitations of open market repurchase of debt at a
discount from face value.


'2Consider the recent example of Brazil, which in 1987 temporarily declared a
unilateral debt moratorium. Many banks responded by cutting back on short-
term credit lines for imports and exports, while others substantially increased
their charges. Brazil was afraid to hold reserves for fear that creditors would
be able to seize the money to offset loans. Also, the governments of creditor
nations, and agencies such as the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, came under political pressure to refuse Brazil financial help
during the moratorium. Consequently, Brazil was forced to make net
repayments on its loans from foreign governments and multilateral lending
agencies. (See the New York Times, February 1988).
13Willingness to pay and not ability to pay is clearly the binding constraint for
all the HICs in Table 1. Even counting debt from official sources, much of
which is implicitly highly concessional, few HICs owe even a year's GNP.
This is an amount which most countries could pay off eventually, were their
leaders and populace sufficiently determined to do so.
                                        6


      Why have discount repurchase restrictions? Because even in a full
information world such repurchases hurt bondholders. Consider a corporate
borrower with $C in cash and some physical assets. The physical assets will
return P tomorrow, where P is a random variable with a non-negative value.
Bondholders have a claim of B>C due as soon as P is realized. Then if debt
repurchases are prohibitcd, bondholders will receive payments of H where

                    l1=min(C+P,B)=C+min(P,B— C)                               (1)


       That is, bondholders essentially own the cash in the firm and the first
B — C dollars yielded by the physical assets. Of course, if there is a chance that

P will be less than B — C, then the bonds will sell in the market for less than
the face value.14
      Now assume that the firm is allowed to spend its cash to buy back a
portion of its bond issue. Because the bonds are selling discount, $C of cash
may be used to buy back $R face value of bonds, where B > R> C.
      After the repurchase, the company's balance sheet shows physical
assets that will return P. and a bond debt which will pay H' where

                               l1'=min(P,B—R)                                 (2)

Aggregating the bondholders whose debt was repurchased together with the
remaining bondholders, we see that bondholders must lose from the
repurchase. Prior to the repurchase, their claim was to all the corporate cash
plus the first B — C dollars of return from the risky asset. After the
repurchase, they have the cash plus a claim to only the first B — R dollars of
return.
       Essentially, the repurchase operation can be broken into two parts.
First the corporation announces to bondholders that it will issue K of new
bonds in exchange for $R of old bonds, with the new bonds having priority
over any remaining debt. Second, it redeems the new bonds for cash.

14ff the bonds are coming due in the future the analysis is identical, but all
the variables here must be interpreted as present values, discounted at the
riskless rate.
                                         7

Because all bonds were originally equal priority, it is clear that in the first step,
the corporation usurped part of the bondholders' claim. Essentially, the
company is claiming the right to make some of the bondholders senior, and
to auction off that right. Since creditors as a whole are always paid ahead of
stockholders, the company is simply forcing the bondholders to bid against
each other for seniority rights they already hold. So there is good reason for a
corporation's creditors to prohibit this kind of activity.

B. The Sovereign Case
      The sovereign debt is entirely different. The amount of money that a
Brazil, a Mexico, or a Bolivia pays each year is only ambiguously related to its
holdings of foreign reserves. On one hand, extra reserves may strengthen a
country's ability to pay cash in advance for many imports and thus lessens its
dependence on the banks. On the other, lower reserves may make the
country's insistence on lower repayments more credible under the "you can't
squeeze blood from a stone" theory. Because reserves have little impact on
debt repayments, creditors only gain when sovereign debtors engage in
voluntary debt repurchases.
       Thus consider a country with an outstanding debt of face value D and
market value v(D) = E{rnin(D, 0)) where 0 is a random variable. We assume
that the probability that all debt will be repaid is F(D), where 1 > F(D) so there
is some possibility of default. Note that an increase of one dollar in the face
value of total debt increases the market value by F(D), so v'(D) = F(D). We call
v'(D) the value of marginal debt. Because there is some possibility that debt
will only be partially repaid and the market assigns positive value to the
repayments made in that circumstance, the market price of a dollar of debt,
v(D)/D, exceeds the probability of full repayment. We call v(D)/D the
"average value" of debt. Therefore, the "average value" of debt exceeds the
"marginal value."
      Suppose that the country spends $C to repurchase part of its debt. As
we discussed in our post-mortem of the Bolivian deal, the country must offer
a high enough price so that creditors who sell will be at least as well off as
those who do not sell. Thus, in equilibrium $C in cash can be exchanged for
$X in bonds, where
                                         8

                                 C v(D-X)
                                 =   D-X                                    ()

Tendering bondholders are being repaid at a price of C/X per dollar of debt
exchanged. They must be indifferent between selling, and being one of the
remaining D — X bondholders, who are left splitting a daim of v(D — X).
       However, because marginal debt is worth less than average debt we
have
                              v(D - X)       v(D)
                                          > D
                               D-X

That is, repurchases push up the price of remaining debt. Because (a) the
repurchase is a purely financial transaction with no efficiency gains or losses
and (b) the repurchase makes the bondholders better off, then the country
must come out behind. This contrasts with the corporate case where the use
of cash for a repurchase diminishes the creditors' security and causes bond
prices to drop.
       .Ve have not taken into account the possible risk-sharing features of
sovereign debt contracts. but these would usually serve to make the
transaction less appealing. When the face value of the country's debt is
reduced, it benefits only in very good states of nature when its output and
gains from trade are high, and where creditors have enough bargaining
power to enforce full repayment. In bad states of nature, the country gains
nothing: it pays no less than it would if the face value of its debt were
higher.15
       Finally, we show in the Appendix that even if cash reserves do increase
creditors expected future repayments, it is implausible that the relationship is
strong enough to make repurchases profitable.
       It seems that for countries with tens of billions of dollars of debts more
than anyone expects them to repay, spending money on debt repurchases is
like throwing yen after pesos. Debt repurchases are inferior to the standard
vehicle of rescheduling negotiations, where the debtor is better able to
negotiate with creditors as group. When creditors bargain in concert, they can

 15We are implicitly assuming that country is more risk averse than its
 international lenders. Presumably, international investors can diversity
 against the country's productive uncertainty in world capital markets.
                                        9


internalize the fact that a decrease in one creditors holdings benefits the
country's remaining creditors.
      Of course, if Bolivia's benefactors could have found a way to wipe out
the country's entire debt for just $40 million (the total market value), there
would have been no leakage of benefits to creditors.16 In principle, the
country could negotiate such a comprehensive deal in the same manner that
rescheduling agreements are negotiated. One of the biggest obstacles is
probably the jockeying by creditors for a share of third-party sidepayments.17
Also, while third-parties may be willing to sponsor complete debt writeoffs
for the smallest, poorest debtors, there is probably no group willing to buy
back (and forgive) the entire debt of a large debtor such as Mexico or Brazil. 18

IV. DEBT-EQUITY SWAPS
      While debt repurchases have not been large, their close cousins, debt-
equity swaps, have been widely publicized and have received active support
from the banks. In a debt-equity swap, a country agrees to exchange local
currency for bank debt, with the stipulation that the currency be used for local
investment. The terms of the exchange are typically negotiated as part of a
rescheduling package. In most cases, the original creditor banks are not
required to make the swaps themselves; they are allowed to sell their debt in
the secondary market to a foreign company which actually swaps the debt and
makes the investment.
       Debt-equity programs have already been initiated in a number of HICs,
including Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, the Philippines and

l6it would be more accurate to say that if benefactors had retired Bolivia's
debt for $40 million, there would have been i leakage to creditors. The
secondary market price of Bolivian debt presumably incorporate expectations
about future third-party sidepayments.
17Debtors and creditors can exploit the threat of repudiation to try to extract a
flow of sidepayments from interested third parties, such as creditor-country
taxpayers who would be hurt by trade disruptions; see Bulow and Rogoff
(1988c).
180f course, in the cosmos of world capital markets, the debts of HICs are not
Jj  that large. Consider that as of May 1988, the total market value of the
private debts of the fifteen countries in Table I was just fifty-six percent of the
market value of the common stock of Nippon Telephone and Telegraph
Company.
                                       10


Venezuela.'9 Though growing, the scale of these programs has thus far been
limited. During the period 1984 through September 1987, the aforementioned
countries converted roughly six billion dollars in bank debt into equity, or
three percent of the groups total bank debt. (Chile has had the largest
program to date; it has used debt-equity swaps to retire over thirteen percent
of its foreign bank debts '
        Much of the controversy surrounding debt-equity stems from concern
that debtor countries appear to be paying well above secondary-market prices
to repurchase their debt. For example, in early 1988, Brazil was swapping 73
cents worth of cruzados for each dollar face amount of debt. Since the debt
has a market value of 50 cents, the country appears to be leaving 23 cents "on
the table." But this concern is misplaced: the debtor has a number of ways to
recapture at least part of the surplus. First of all, the deals do not seem so bad
when local currency prices paid for the bank debts are converted to dollars at
black market exchange rates instead of official exchange rates. Second and
equally important, the new equity investors have no guarantee that they will
ultimately be allowed to repatriate earnings. The new investment is subject
to some of the same political default risk as the original bank debt which sold
at discount.20
     The above considerations would seem to make it very difficult to
evaluate the welfare effects of debt-equity swaps. However, our earlier
analysis of debt repurchases suggests a very simple and powerful argument
that HICs will not benefit from undertaking debt-equity swaps, unless their
creditors compensate them for doing so. Table 4 shows how any debt-equity
swap can be broken into two components. First, a company buys some of a
country's bank debt on the secondary market. Second, it takes the debt and

195ee "Global Debt: The Equity Solution," supplement to Euromoney and
Corporate Finance (January 1988), and Regling (1988).
20Short of nationalization, the debtor can easily appropriate investors'
earnings through taxation, through laws which require firms to pay high
wages, by charging discriminatory fees for providing power or
telecommunications, or simply by prohibiting the firm from obtaining
foreign exchange. In addition to these implicit risks, there are often
important explicit restrictions on equity obtained via debt-equity swaps. For
example, the investor is usually explicitly prohibited from repatriating any
earnings for an extended period. Also, the investor is often required to invest
in certain industries or certain parts of the country; see Kling (1988).
                                    Table 4

                    ANALYSIS OF DEBT-EQUrn' SWAPS


      Debt-Equity Swaps                           Equivalent Transactions

(a) Company spends $E to purchase             (c) Company pays country $E
    bonds at "average debt" prices                cash for $E assets

+                                             +

(b) Bonds are swapped for $E of physical      (d) Country spends $E cash to
    assets in debtor country                      repurchase debt at "average
                                                  debt" prices




                     OUTCOME OF (a) + (b) OR (c) + (d)

Investors: Receive $E physical assets; pay $E cash.
Banks: Receive $E cash; value of claims reduced by
        $E x ( Marg. Value of Debt/Avg. Value of Debt)

Country: Trades $E of physical assets to reduce value of debt claims by
         $E x (Marg. Value of Debt/Avg. Value of Debt)



CONCLUSION: A debt/equity swap is simply the sum of a conventional
          direct foreign investment and a purchase of marginal debt at
          average debt prices. The second transaction is unprofitable
                 for the country. Therefore, conventional direct foreign
                 investment [transaction (C)] dominates debt/equity swaps.
                                       11


trades it for physical assets in the country. This combination of transactions is
exactly equivalent to the following two transactions: First, the country sells
assets to the company for cash through a conventional program of direct
foreign investment. Second, the country uses the money to retire marginal
debt at the average debt prices.2' The second transaction is definitely
unattractive for the debtor. And it does not need to undertake the second
transaction to undertake the first. 22
      Obviously, it is all right for countries to agree to undertake debt-equity
swaps if they get something equivalent in return; e.g., an increase in "new
money" loans.

V. FINANCIAL ENGINEERING GIMMICKS TO FINESSE THE MARGINAL-
    AVERAGE DEBT PROBLEM
       Are there any financial engineering tricks that a country can use to
retire marginal debt at marginal debt prices? Here we show that the answer
would be yes, were it only possible to enrich the seniority structure of the
debtor's obligations. The much publicized recent (February 1988) Mexican
debt plan provides a good example for illustrating the general issues.
       Mexico's plan was to issue $10 billion in new bonds, and then auction
off the bonds for bank debt. The bonds were to be partially collateralized by
U.S. Treasury bonds, which Mexico would purchase out of its own reserves.
Also, Mexico implied that the new bonds would be treated as senior to
existing bank debt. It might seem that the banks would have refused to
authorize such a deal, but this is not necessarily the case. Because the new
bonds were financed in part by Mexican reserves, the plan really constituted
an amalgam of a debt repurchase for cash, which helps bank creditors, and an
expropriation of seniority rights, which hurts them. Before evaluating the
outcome of the Mexican deal, we first consider the economics of this type of
exchange:


21Both the country and the company will pay the same secondary market
price, provided that when the company is the buyer, investors anticipate that
the debt will be retired via a debt-equity swap.
22Others have queried debt-equity swaps on macroeconomic and public
finance grounds; see for example, Watson i (1988). We think the finance-
theoretic argument presented here provides the most compelling objection to
swaps.
                                       12


A. Creating a New Class of Senior Debt: The Analytics
        Assume that a country has a debt with face value of D and market
value of v(D). It wishes to exchange some cash C and some new first priority
bonds with face value N for old bonds with a face value of X. On net, the
country's debt will be reduced by X — N. Assuming that the country is
unwilling to pay more than marginal debt prices to extinguish its obligations,
and that creditors will agree to any scheme so long as they "come out whole,"
what set of transactions is available to the country?
      First, if bondholders who exchange their debt are to break even, then:

                        C + v(N)         v(D)
                                   =
                           X                D
     That is, the bondholders who participate in the exchange will give up
X bonds for cash worth C and first priority bonds worth v(N). The value
they receive per bond must be equal to the pre-exchange bond price of
v(D)/D.
      Second, bondholders who do not exchange their debt must also break
even:
                   v(D+N—X)—v(N)= v(D)
                                                                           (6)
                         D-X                    D
The left hand side of (6) represents the total value of the junior bondholders'
claims after the exchange, divided by the number of junior (unexchanged)
bonds.
       If the value of marginal debt, v', is strictly decreasing, then choosing
any one of C, N, and X uniquely determines the other two. But even if not,
there is a unique relation between C and the amount of debt extinguished
X-N:
                         C=v(D)—v(D+N--X) .                                (7)


        Equation (7) confirms that because all bondholders are coming out
exactly even, the country is managing to pay exactly the marginal value of
debt in its repurchase.
       However, there is a limit to how large a repurchase can be executed in
this fashion. It is easy to show in solving (5) and (6) that d(X — N)/dX 0 for
X      D. That is, the greater the number of bondholders that are induced to
exchange their debt the larger the net retirement of debt. Thus, the largest
                                        13


possible net reduction will occur with an offer where X = D; that is, when all
bondholders will opt to exchange.
      Taking the limit of equation (6) as X — D yields

                                     v(D)
                             v(N)= D                                          (8)


That is, the largest feasible voluntary exchange offer will reduce debt by just
enough so that the post-exchange value of marginal debt equals the
exchange value of average debt. Larger such exchanges are possible only if the
country is willing to pay more than the reduction of the market value of its
debt.

B. The Mexican Experience
      So much for the theory. How did the Mexican debt exchange actually
work?
      The $10 billion in new bonds offered by Mexico were intended to be
preferable to existing bank debt in three respects: First, the principal on the
bonds, to be repaid in the year 2008, was fully collateralized by specially-issued
zero-coupon U.S. Treasury bonds. Since the present value of the principal
payment amounts to roughly twenty percent of the face value of the new
bonds, the bonds are effectively twenty percent guaranteed by the United
States and eighty percent guaranteed by Mexico. Second, the new bonds were
given implicit seniority over Mexico's other outstanding debt, with the
Mexicans promising to make the bonds exempt from future rescheduling
agreementsP Third, the bonds carried an interest rate of UBOR (London
Interbank Offer Rate) plus 13/8 percent, or twice the accounting spread on
Mexico's bank debt.
     To sell the new bonds, the Mexicans used a discriminatory auction (like
a treasury bill auction), in which bidders made offers specifying how much


23Technically, the bonds were to be exempted from "new money"
requirements in future reschedulings. In the jargon of rescheduling
agreements, "new money" are interest payments which the lenders agree to
roll over. Thus when one sees a newspaper headline stating "Mexico receives
$3 billion in new money," it may well mean that lenders succeeded in getting
Mexico to pay $1 billion dollars out of $4 billion it owed.
                                      14


new bond debt they wished to purchase, and how much of the old bank debt
they were willing to pay. Mexico had hoped to be able to trade the $10 billion
in new bonds for $20 billion in bank debt. if fully successful, the offering
would have eliminated roughly $11 billion in debt at a cost of $2 billion in
reserves, or eighteen cents on the dollar.24
       Investors greeted the new bonds skeptically. Less than twenty percent
of eligible creditors participated in the exchange, and those that did often
exchanged only a small fraction of their outstanding debt. As Table 5 shows,
the Mexicans managed to reduce their debt by only $1.44 billion at a cost in
reserves of $532 million, implying a repurchase price of 37 cents on the
dollar.5 Relative to the goal of retiring $11 billion in debt at eighteen cents
on the dollar, the Mexicans achieved just thirteen percent of their debt
reduction goal at twice the desired price.
       Why did the deal flop? A key reason is that investors seemed to doubt
the seniority provisions. Advocates of the plan argued that both law and
custom would give the new bondholders implicit seniority over remaining
bank claimants, and pointed to the fact that throughout the entire debt crisis
Latin American bonds have been punctually serviced.26 However, although
Mexico has indeed serviced its Eurobond issue of less than two billion dollars
outstanding throughout the debt crisis, the 17.5 percent yield to maturity on
those bonds indicates that the market does not regard Mexico's commitment
to payment without rescheduling as absolute. Moreover, whereas the small-
potato Eurobond issue holders have not yet been brought into rescheduling,
one suspects that this situation would change if the amount of bonds grew
substantially. As shown in Table 5, the component of the new bonds issued
and guaranteed by Mexico sold for approximately fifty-five percent as much as
riskiess bonds.


24The $2 billion is the cost to Mexico of collateralizing the principal payment.
The $11 billion figure represents the difference between the $8 billion of the
new bonds that would have been guaranteed by Mexico, adjusted upwards for
their higher interest rate, and the $20 billion of loans to be exchanged.
25While 37 cents is below the secondary market prices, claims that the
Mexican plan would be a major breakthrough in the debt crisis were clearly
overblown.
26See, for example, Cline (1987), or Sachs "Mexico Plan a Model for Other
Debtors," Wall Street Journal, January 12, 1988.
                                        Table 5

                            THE MEXICAN DEBT DEAL

                           (amounts in billions of dollars)


(1) Loans Retired Through Swap                                        3.67

      Less:

(2)      Newly Issued Bonds                                   2.56

(3) — Portion Guaranteed by United States Securities          (.53)

(4)     + Adjustment for Increased Interest Rate on Bonds      .20

                                                                      (2.23)

      Equals:
(5) Reduction in Mexican-Guaranteed Debt                              1.44



(6) Expenditure of Reserves for U.S. Securities                        .53

(7) EXPENDITURE PER DOLLAR OF DEBT REDUCTION
       =(6)+(5)                                                        .37



(8)    Market Value of Retired Debt
       .52 secondary price x 3.67 debt retired                        1.87

(9) Value of New Mexican-Guaranteed Component
      =(8)—(3)                                                        1.34

(10) Value of Mexican Component Discounted at
       Riskiess Rate (LIBOR)                                          2.43

(11) PRICE OF MEXICAN COMPONENT AS FRACTION
     OF RISKLESS PRICE = (9) + (10)                                    .55
                                       15


      The analysis in section V.A assumed that it is possible to issue new
bonds that have absolute priority over the old. If it is impossible to make
some creditors senior, no such deal can be done. Furthermore, we showed
that the maximum debt reduction (without the country overpaying) is
achieved in a swap where all bondholders exchange their debt and, on the
margin, any bondholder who did    exchange would become the lone junior
claimant with a credit worth v(D)/D. Essentially, the same result can be
derived when only limited seniority exists. However, without absolute
seniority a junior creditor will get a higher payoff for any given amount of
debt left outstanding. Therefore, if the value of a junior creditor's claim is to
be no more than v(D)/D, then less debt can be retired than with absolute
seniority.

C. Seniority Clauses in Private International Lending Contracts
       Many of the most widely-discussed debt plans explicitly or implicitly
rely on creating a new class of senior debt, as in the Mexican plan.27 Yet the
general issue of seniority in international debt contracts is not well
understood by economists. Unlike the case of corporate debt, where one
observes a rich variety of seniority structures, most sovereign debt obligations
receive nearly identical treatment. The standard sovereign debt contract
contains a pan pasu or "equal-sharing" provision which prohibits the country
from issuing new debt senior to existing debt.28 This is not only true today,
but historically as well.29 Although we do not fully understand the seniority
clause in international debt contracts, an exploration of the bargaining factors



27Sachs (1987) and Cline (1987) explicitly recognize the importance of senior
debt to their debt plans. As we discuss below, plans for creating an
international debt facility also seem to require the creation of a class of senior
debt.
28For a more complete discussion of pan pasu clauses, see Bulow and Rogoff
(1988a).
29See Borchard and Wynne (1951), and Winkler (1933). However, as
Eichengreen and Portes (1988) point out, in the 1930s countries were able to
discriminate in favor of national loans over state and local obligations. One
does observe very small classes of senior debt; foreign loans to national
airlines are often collateralized by aircraft. Most of the debt plans involve
creating senior debt on a much larger scale.
                                      16


underlying sovereign debt contracts may be able to give some important
insights.
       In the case of corporate debt, senior creditors ultimately have the threat
of liquidating the firm and claiming first rights to the proceeds. This protects
them from being asked to make concessions in rescheduling negotiations. In
the international context, senior creditors have no similar option. As we
have already emphasized, the most any foreign creditor can threaten to do in
the even of non-repayment is to interfere with the country's trade in
international goods markets and capital markets, and to lobby their home
governments for further assistance. Suppose first that junior creditors are
allowed to employ the same sanctions as senior creditors. Then, if "senior'
creditors are ever being paid more than "junior" creditors, the junior
creditors can threaten to invoke sanctions. Once the sanctions are invoked,
the debtor country might just as well stop payments on the senior debt.
Hence senior creditors would not really have any bargaining advantage over
junior creditors. At the opposite extreme, suppose junior creditors have no
legal or political rights to impose sanctions. Then the country will pay
nothing on junior loans and they will be worthless. While it may be
theoretically possible to create a sizable quantity of senior debt without
stripping junior loans of their rights entirely, such contracts have not yet
become prominent in international markets.
      Clearly, the market felt that Mexico's pledge to give its new bonds
implicit seniority made them worth a little more, but not much more, than
Mexican bank debt. Given that so few bonds were actually issued, the bonds
may well be ignored in future reschedulings and thus turn out to be a good
deal for their buyers. But if bonds ever become a significant fraction of
outstanding debts, then there will be great pressure from the country and the
banks to push the bondholders into renegotiations. During the last great
wave of reschedulings in the 1930's, virtually all sovereign debt was bond
debt and this certainly did not prevent countries from negotiating
rescheduling agreements.3°



30The negotiations between debtors and foreign bondholders' committees
were similar in many respects to today's rescheduling negotiations. See
Borchard and Wynne (1951), op cit.
                                      17


D. The Efficacy of the Mexican-Style Debt Plans
      If new bonds cannot be made senior, then a plan such as the Mexican
exchange simply reduces to a combination of two transactions: (a) a
meaningless swap of old Mexican-guaranteed paper for identical new
Mexican-guaranteed paper, and (b) an additional swap of some old Mexican
paper for cash. The effect for Mexico is exactly the same as if it used its
reserves to make a straight debt repurchase. That is, it is something they can
benefit from only if their creditors adequately compensate them for doing it.
      But what if there were some way to create a large class of senior bond
debt? Would a Mexican-style exchange benefit the debtor? Probably not. In
fact, the creation of a new class of lenders might easily lead to greater
inefficiencies in the rescheduling process, by adding to the number of
disparate parties involved. The bottom line is that swaps of bank loans for
securities do nothing if the securities cannot be made senior in some way.
And if there is a way to make the securities senior, then Mexican-style swaps
might be worse than doing nothing.

VI. DEBT FORGWENESS PLANS
       We have used the Bolivian debt repurchase, the Mexican debt plan,
and debt-equity swaps to illustrate the general problem of finding ways to
retire marginal sovereign debt without making large transfers to lenders.
This problem is not special to these plans, but is endemic to virtually all the
scores of (yet untested) debt relief plans proposed since 1982.
       Obviously, if creditor-country governments can coerce their banks into
participating in a debt relief plan, then the banks can be forced to accept
marginal debt prices (or less, for that matter). There are many reasons why
mandatory debt forgiveness plans are non-starters. For one thing, it is
unclear whether such plans would stand up in court. Also, LDCs are not the
most politically powerful of the banks' debtors, and it is hard to see how they
could succeed in obtaining mandatory debt relief ahead of problem debtors
residing in the creditor countries.
       A significant obstacle to all debt relief plans, but especially those that
involve coercion, is the need to coordinate the actions of the different
creditor-country governments. U.S. commercial banks hold less than forty
                                      18


percent of Latin America's private bank debt.31 if the U.S. were to unilaterally
force its banks to forgive half of their holdings of say, Mexico's debt, the
benefits to Mexico would be second order (because marginal debt doesn't
mean much). However, U.S. banks might suffer a significant drop in their
share of Mexico's repayments. Indeed, European and Japanese banks could
end up being the primary beneficiaries of any unilateral U.S. debt relief plan.
For mandatory forgiveness schemes to work to the benefit of the debtors, they
must involve coordinated action among the creditor-country governments.
Because banks can stall deals through the courts, the prospects for such
concerted action are remote.32
       Many plans involve the creation of a new multilateral lending
institution like the IMF or the World Bank; Kenen (1983) terms the
institution the International Debt Discount Corporation (IDDC). The JDDC
would buy up some of the HIC's bank debts and partially forgive them.33 The
institution would be financed, directly and through implicit insurance
guarantees, by creditor-country taxpayers. Unless banks are forced to sell their
debt to the new institutions, an IDDC would face exactly the same problem as
Bolivia's benefactors faced in their efforts to retire part of its debt. As
discussed in the analysis of Mexico's debt deal, this problem could be
ameliorated if IDDC debt could be made senior to bank loans. Whether this
can be achieved is questionable. Advocates of an IDDC argue that such an
agency's debt would effectively be senior, claiming that debtor countries
already give priority to repaying their International Monetary Fund and
World Bank loans. However, whereas international lenders nominally get
priority, they continually ante up a disproportionate share of "new money"
lending to debtors. Most JDDC plans assume that money owed to an official
creditor will be paid back like clockwork, whereas loans from a private bank

31See Watson et al (1988) and Feldstein et al (1987).
32Africa might be an exception, since there banks' legal and lobbying fees may
outweigh any repayments they can hope to get.
33Feiix G. Rohatyn, "A Plan for Stretching Out Global Debt," Business Week..
February 28, 198Z Peter B. Kenen, "Third World Debt: Sharing the Burden, A
Bailout Plan for the Banks," New York Times, March 6, 1983; Weinhert,
Richard S., "Swapping Third-World Debt," Foreign Policy., Winter 1987.
Recently, a variant of these plans has been advocated by U.S. Congressman
John LaFalce; this plan is being actively considered in House subcoinn'uttee
hearings (See Hobart Rowan, Washington Post, April 7, 1988).
                                       19


such as Citicorp are much less likely to be repaid. In fact, it seems much more
likely that once the debt is in official hands there will be strong political
pressures for further substantial writeoffs.
      As Table 6 illustrates, private creditors have driven much harder
bargains than have official creditors throughout the debt crisis. Official
creditors, including individual governments and multilateral institutions,
have provided the HICs with considerably more "new money" than they
have received in interest and principal repayments. Private creditors, on the
other hand, have succeeded in collecting roughly $12 billion per year more
than they have provided in "new money".
       By contrast, if the advocates of these plans are right and the official
loans would be religiously repaid, then the implementation of such a plan
may be costly to debtors. For example, if the Kenen plan had been adopted
when proposed it would have required Argentina to pay $8 billion more over
the last five years to the IDDC than it has paid to bank lenders.

VU. MORAL HAZARD AND INVESTMENT
       One popular argument in favor of debt reduction schemes is that the
debt overhang inhibits growth in the debtor countries. Basically, debtors
know that their creditors will be able to make them pay more if their output
grows. Thus the debt overhang works like a tax on investment. In theory,
the distortion can be so large that both creditors and debtors could be made
better off if part of the debt is forgiven.34 Proponents of the view that there is
a "Laffer Curve" in international debt point to the sharp drop in debtor-
country investment over the six years of the debt crisis.
      Our main points in this paper do not turn on whether or not there is
Lafferitis in international debt, but we wish to register our skepticism anyway.
First of all, there is already constant negotiating between the creditors'
committees and the debtor countries over economic policies, current
repayments, and the level of outstanding debt (determined through interest
rate negotiations). This system of constant recontracting gives the parties
involved considerable latitude to make agreements. It seems unlikely that


34This theoretical possibility was pointed out by Atkeson in 1986 (1988
Stanford Business School Ph.D. thesis), and has been argued as important by
Sachs and Huizinga (1987).
                                   Table 6

           CAPITAL FLOWS FROM HICS BY TYPE OF CREDITOR
                                   1983-86

                             (Billions of Dollars)


                                             Official
                                Multilateral            Bilateral   Private
  (1) Interest Payments             9,535                 6,495      78,059
+ (2) Principle Repayments          9,496                10,652      32,586
= (3) Total Payments               19,031                17,148     110,645

—
    (4) "New Money" Loans         (26,374)              (15,933)    (62,800)
= (5) Net Flows from HICs         (7,343)                 1,215     47,845

    (6) "NEW MONE'' AS
      PERCENTAGE OF
      REPAYMENTS = (4) ÷ (3)        139%                    93%        57%




Source: World Bank Debt Tables, 1987-88.
                                       20


after six years of negotiating, tens of billions of dollars in easily-achieved
efficiency gains have been left on the bargaining table. The argument that
efficient debt relief schemes will be blocked because they may involve small
losses to the banks is also wrong. If there are any efficiency gains to be had via
debt forgiveness, then it is possible to design a simple scheme which lets
banks capture all the rents.
       As for the low growth rates in the highly-indebted countries, these are
likely attributable to the same factors which set off the debt crisis: adverse
terms of trade shocks, high world interest rates, and low growth rates in the
industralized world.35 When real interest rates rise and copper prices fall,
investment in copper mines becomes less attractive. The political climate for
investment is no doubt also a major problem.36 All in all, it is not obvious
that rates of return on investment are higher in South America than in
Asia37 where countries are not generally experiencing severe problems with
debt service. We view the debt crisis principally as a byproduct and not a
cause of Latin America's growth problem.

Vifi. CONCLUSIONS
      We have shown that sovereign debt restructurings are fundamentally
different from corporate financings. They are different because a
corporation's bondholders have first claim to its cash reserves, whereas a
sovereign's creditors' bargaining power depends primarily on other factors,
such as the country's gains from trade and the value of having access to world
capital markets. Our analysis casts serious doubt on recent plans for highly-
indebted countries to repurchase their debts at secondary-market discounts,
and to engage in debt-equity swaps. Both schemes amount to the repurchase
of marginal sovereign debt at average sovereign debt prices. If it were possible
to design a mechanism for creating senior debt, then a carefully-crafted deal
could lead to a repurchase of a limited amount of marginal debt at marginal
debt prices. However, it is difficult both in theory and in practice to credibly
guarantee that any large class of debt will be treated as senior in international

35See Dornbusch (1987).
    was not easy for a country such as Argentina, with its enormous wealth
of physical and intellectual resources, to go from having one of the world's
highest per-capita GNPs before World War I to where it is today.
370r Wisconsin, for that matter.
                                      21


debt rescheduling negotiations. The less absolute the seniority of the newly-
issued bonds, the less scope there is for achieving debt reduction through
such deals. This issue was shown to have created problems for Mexico's
February 1988 swap.
      We argue further that these same basic problems are endemic to
virtually all of the dozens of (creditor-country taxpayer-sponsored) debt
forgiveness schemes which have been proposed.
       Does our analysis suggest a better debt plan? First of all, the current
regime of "constant recontracting" among debtors and creditors may not be so
inefficient, when one takes into account the special constraints on sovereign
debt contracts. Many of the perceived inefficiencies in the current
rescheduling process probably stem from the jockeying of debtors and banks
for creditor-country support. But our main condusions are as follows: First,
if outside parties wish to spend money to help the highly indebted countries,
and not their creditors, then no "financial engineering" scheme will be as
effective as a direct cash grant. Both the theory of sovereign debt contracts
and historical experience suggest that very little of the benefits of such cash
transfers would accrue to creditors. In contrast, virtually all the financial
engineering schemes which have been proposed are either infeasible, because
they rely on unenforceable seniority rights, or else lead to paying too much
for marginal debt. Second, countries which encourage direct foreign
investment will do better if they do so by conventional means, rather than
through debt-equity swaps. Debt-equity swaps are only worth employing in
return for rescheduling concessions from lenders.
        While financial engineering schemes will do little to solve the debt
crisis, substantive policy reforms on the part of debtor and creditor countries
alike would make an enormous difference. Debtors must be increasingly
integrated into the world economy if they are to have larger gains from trade
and the incentive to repay more of their debts.
                                         22


                                    APPENDIX

     Intermediate Case: When Higher Reserves Mean Higher Repayments

       In section ffl.B, we argued that an increase in a sovereign debtor's cash
reserves does not enable its creditors to bargain for higher repayments.
Suppose instead that every dollar of a country's reserves increases creditor's
ability to extract payments by q cents. This situation is intermediate to the
corporate and sovereign extremes as presented in the text.
       If a country has $C in reserves, the value of bondholders' claims when
repurchases are prohibited is

                          v(D)=min(D,qC÷O),                                    (Al)

where, as in the text, D is the face value of the country's total debt and v(D) is
it face value; 0 is the random component of creditors' bargaining power.
       A dollar spent on debt repurchase lowers the market value of the
country's debt by the ratio of the price of marginal debt to the price of average
debt, or Dv'(D)/v(D), which must be less than one. However, although the
benefit of a repurchase is less than a dollar, so too is its true cost. The true cost
is
                                 I - qEl - v'(D)] < 1.                          (Al)

Intuitively, there is a 1 - v'(D) chance that the country will j pay its bonds
in full. In this case, lenders would receive q cents out of an extra dollar held
in reserves. Therefore lenders effectively pay a portion of the repurchase cost.
       Comparing the cost and benefit, small buybacks hurt a sovereign debtor
II
                     1- qEl - v'(D)] >                                         (A3)
                                         V(D)/D

       In the corporate case, q = 1 and the inequality (A3) can never hold. In
the case of a country, (A3) always holds (possibly with equality) when q= 0 (as
in the text), or if v'(D) =  Finally, it is possible to show that if a small
                              0.
buyback helps the country, then the country will benefit by spending all its
cash on repurchases.
                                     23


      What is the appropriate choice of parameters in (A3) for a sovereign
debtor? Given that a sovereign's creditors are rarely able to extract payments
of more than a small fraction of exports over any extended period, and only a
very small fraction of GNP, it seems unlikely that q is more than a few
percent. But even if q = 1/3, inequality (A3) indicates none of the HICs in
Table 1 is likely to benefit from a repurchase. For a country such as Mexico
with v(D)/D = .5, v'(D) would have to equal .4 for a repurchase to pay off.
This would mean that only ten cents out of the fifty cent secondary market
price is attributable to states of nature in which there is partial default.
                                      24


                                REFERENCES



Alexander, Lewis S., "The Legal Consequences of Sovereign Default,"
      unpublished manuscript, The Federal Reserve Board, Washington D.C.
      (1987).

Atkeson, Andrew, "International Lending with Moral Hazard and Risk of
      Repudiation," Ph.D. Thesis, Stanford Business School, (May 1988).

Bergsten, Fred C.; Clime, William R., and John Williamson, Bank Lending to
      Developing Countries: The Policy Alternatives (Washington: Institute
      for International Economics, 1985).

Borchard, Edwin and W. H. Wynne, State Insolvency and Foreign
      Bondholders. Volume II (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1951).

Bulow, Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff, "A Constant Recontracting Model of
      Sovereign Debt," Journal of Political Economy (1988a), forthcoming.
                "Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?" National Bureau of
      Economic Research Working Paper (1988b).

___________ "Multilateral Sovereign Debt Reschedulings," mimeo,
     University of Wisconsin (1988c).

Cline, William R., Mobilizing Bank Lending to Debtor Countries
      (Washington: Institute for International Economics, 1987).
Dooley, Michael P., "Buy-backs and the Market Valuation of External Debt,"
     Unpublished working paper, International Monetary Fund (September
      1987).

Eichengreen, Barry and Richard Portes, "Settling Defaults in the Era of Bond
      Finance," mimeo. University of California at Berkeley (May 1988).

Feldstein, Martin; Decarmoy, Herve; Narusawa, Koei, and Paul R. Krugman,
      Restoring Growth in the Debt-Laden Third World (New York, The
      Trilateral Commission, 1987).

Fischer, Stanley, "Resolving the International Debt Crisis," National Bureau
      of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2373 (September 1987).

Kenen, Peter, 'Third World Debt: Sharing the Burden, A Bailout Plan for the
      Banks," New York Times (March 6, 1983).
                                      25


 Kling, Paul (ed.), Global Debt: The Equity Solution, supplement to
       Euromoney and Corporate Finance (January 1988).
 Regling, Klaus P., 'New Financing Approaches in the Debt Strategy," Finance
       and Development (March 1988).

Rohatyn, Felix G., "A Plan for Stretching Out Global Debt," Business Week
       (February 28, 1983).

Sachs, Jeffrey D., "Managing the LDC Debt Crisis," Brookings Papers on
      Economic Activity 2 (1986).

___________ "Mexico Plan a       Model for Other Debtors," Wall Street
     lournaL January 12, 1988.

Sachs, Jeffrey, and Harry Huizinga, "U.S. Commercial Banks and the
     Developing Country Debt Crisis," Brookings Papers on Economic
      Activity 2 (1987).

Watson, Maxwell; Mathieson, Donald; Kincaid, Russell; Folkerts-Landau,
     David; Regling, Klaus, and Caroline Atkinson, International Capital
     Markets: Developments and Prospects (Washington: International
      Monetary Fund, January 1988).

Weinhert, Richard S., "Swapping Third-World Debt," Foreign Policy (Winter
      1987).

Winkler, Max, Foreign Bonds: An Autopsy (Philadelphia, R. Swain Co.,
      1933).

World Bank, World Debt Tables: External Debt of Developing Countries,
     1987-1988 edition, Volumes I and II (Washington: The World Bank,
      1988).
