                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DO TOURNAMENTS HAVE INCENTIVE EFFECTS?




                            Ronald   C.   Ehrenberg

                            Michael L. Bognanno




                           Working Paper No. 2638




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 June 1988




Irving H. Ives Professor of Industrial and Labor Relations and Economics at
Cornell University and Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic
Research, and Ph.D. candidate in Labor Economics at Cornell University. We
have discussed our work in workshops at Cornell, Columbia, North Carolina
(Creensboro), MIT, Arizona and Minnesota and are grateful to numerous
colleagues at these institutions for their comments. This paper is based
upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. SES-
8719592.  This research is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the Nationsl
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #2638
                                      June 1988


                  DO TOURNAMENTS HAVE INCENTIVE EFFECTS?


                                 ABSTRACT



     Much attention has been devoted to studying models of tournaments or
situations in which an individual's payment depends only on his output or
                                                             than
rank, relative to other canpetitors. Such models are of more

academic Interest as they may well describe the canpensation structures
                                                        to sales people
applicable to many corporate executives and professors,
whose bonuses depend on their relative outputs, and to the more obvious
example of professional sports tournaments. Academic interest derives
fran the fact that under certain sets of assumptions tournaments have
desirable normative properties because of the incentive structures they
provide.
     Our paper uses nonexperlmental data to test if tournaments actually
elicit desired effort responses. We focus on golf tournaments because
information on the incentive structure (prize distribution) and measures
of individual output (players' scores) are both available. Under suitable
assumptions, players' scores can be related to players' effort and
implications for both players' overall tournament scores and their scores
on the last round of a tournament drawn. In addition, data are available
to control for factors other than the Incentive structure that should
affect output; these factors include player quality, quality of the rest
of the field, difficulty of the course, and weather conditions.
     The data used in our analyses cane fran the 1985 Golf Diqest Almanac,
the Official 1985PGA Tour Media Guide, and the 1984 PGA Tour Player

Record.  We find strong support for the proposition that the level and
structure of prizes in PGA tournaments influence players' performance.



 Ronald G. Ehrenberg                     Michael L. Bognanno
 NYSSILR                                 NYSSILR
 Cornell University                      Cornell University
 Ithaca, NY 14851-0952                   Ithaca, NY 14851-0952
I.   Introduction

     In recent years economists have devoted considerable attention to the

normative properties of alternative compensation arrangements. Among the

arrangements discussed have been deferred payment schemes, the payment of

efficiency wages, piece-rates and the use of tournaments or payment by

relative output.1 The optimality properties of the various arrangements

in certain states of the world (e.g., relating to monitoring costs,

recruitment costs, turnover costs, asymmetric information, or random

productivity shocks) derives from the postulated incentive effects that

each arrangement is thought to have.    Yet surprisingly there has been very

little effort made to test whether these incentive effects actually exist

jj   lead   to improved individual or firm performance.2

     Our work addresses models of tournaments, or situations in which an

individual's payment depends only on his output or rank relative to other

competitors.     Such models are of more than academic interest as they may

well describe the compensation structures applicable to many corporate

executives, to professors (who can been thought of as being involved in

promotion tournaments), to sales people (whose bonuses often depend on

their relative outputs), and to the more obvious example of professional

sports tournaments.    Academic interest derives from the fact that, under

certain sets of assumptions, tournaments have desirable normative

properties because of the incentive structures they provide.

      Very few attempts have been made to test if tournaments actually

elicit desired effort responses. One experimental study of rank-order

tournaments that used 225 paid undergraduate student volunteers as

subjects did find mixed support for the theory, although disadvantaged


                                         1
                                          2

 (high cost of effort)   subjects provided more effort than the theory

predicted.3     The lack of nonexperimental studies of tournaments is

probably due to the difficulty of measuring both individuals'     effort

levels and the incentive structures competitors face in many

circumstances.

     To test in a nonexperimental setting whether tournaments do have

incentive effects, we focus on golf tournaments because information on the

incentive structure (prize distribution) and measures of individual output

(players'   scores) are both available. Under suitable assumptions,

players' scores can be related to players' effort and implications for

scores drawn.    In addition,   data are available to control for factors

other than the incentive structure that should affect output; these

factors   include player quality, quality of the rest of the field,

difficulty of the course, and weather conditions.     Implications can be
drawn both for how well a player will perform during an entire tournament

and how well he will perform on the last (fourth) round
                                                        contingent,
ceteria paribus, on his rank in the tournament after the third round.

     The next section sketches some simple two-person tournament models

that provide the basis for our econometric work.     Our empirical analyses

make use of data from the 1984 Men's Professional Golf Association (PGA)

Tour and section III discusses key institutional characteristics of the

PGA Tour and specific hypotheses to be tested.     Section IV describes the

sources of the data used in our analyses and our econometric findings.

Finally, section V presents some concluding remarks and discusses the

implications of our findings for future research.
                                                      3

II.     Some Models of Tournaments and Their Implications

        The simple two-contestant tournament models that follow are

extensions of those found in Lazear and Rosen (1981).                         While others, for

example Green and Stokey (1983), have studied                      n    person tournaments and

derived normative implications about them, the simpler two-person

tournament captures the essence of the incentive problem.                         If one wishes,

one can interpret the two-person tournament as a competitor competing

against a representative of "the rest of the field".

        Consider first the case of homogeneous competitors. Individual j's

output in tournament                i,         is given by
                                         qjj



(1)
          qjj   —
                    Uji   +   Eji    + Si      j
                                                   — a,b       I   —   l,2...n.

       There are two          individuals      (a and b) and       n    tournaments. Here      Uji

is individual         j's      level of effort/concentration in tournament              i,    Ejj

is    a pure random or luck component which is drawn from a known symmetric

distribution that is further assumed to be normal with mean zero and

                                                                                             The
variance             and      &      Is a tournament specific effect on output.

latter is due to factors like the difficulty of the course and the

adversity of weather conditions and, for simplicity,                        is assumed to affect

all players in tournament equally.                   Increases in effort are translated

into higher outputs which, in the context of a golf tournament, means

lower scores.

        Of course, one may argue that our empirical focus is on professional

golfers and that professionals always play as hard as they can.4 What

this criticism ignores, however, is how difficult it is even for
                                                           4

professionals to maintain their concentration levels over tournaments that

typically last four days per week and that involve two to three hours of

physical effort per day.               Furthermore, playing on the tour involves weekly

travel and a "hotel lifestyle".                  At the very least, one might expect

fatigue to aet in on the latter days of a tournament and players' ability

to maintain their concentration to diminiah at these                                   times.   To capture

this, we assume that each individual faces a "cost of effort/

concentration" function (c(u)), with the marginal cost of effort being

positive and increasing (c'(u) >                    0, c"(u)       > 0).

       Suppose that the prize for winning tournament i is wli, while the

prize for the loser is w2j.                 Given these assumptions, an individual's

expected utility is given by,


(2)         p[w1-c(u)] + (l-p)[w2-c(u)]               —   pw +       (1-p)w2
                                                                                   -   c(u)

where       p    is an individual's probability of winning.

       Now individual a's probability of winning tournament i                                    is given by


(3)         Pa —   prob(q5         > qbi) —   prob     (uai-ubi >          biaP6i8i)
                         —    prob(ua-ub >     9)   — G(ua-ub).


Here    9   —         - €a,    9    is distributed as              g(9),   G(9)        is the cumulative

distribution function of                9     and --      if we assume         Eai       and 6bi        are


independent and identically distributed                        -   - E(9) —    0       and    E(9)2 —    22.
Under these assumptions, 9                    is also normally diatributed and hence                          g(9)

—   g(-9)       and   g'(9) —       -g'(-9)    for all 9 ' 0.

       Each player chooses his effort level to maximize expected utility,

which leads (assuming interior solutions) to first and second order
                                                             5

conditions respectively of the form


                                                 — 0             j —   a,b
(4)
        (wl-w2)(p/uj)
                                  -
                                      c'(uj)
                                                   < 0
        (w1-w2)(2p/u)                  cfl(uj)



      If one assumes a Nash-Cournot equilibrium, that is that each player

optimizes against his opponent assuming that the opponent has chosen his

optimal strategy, one obtains


(5)    Pa/t1a —          C(uaub)/ua            —   g(u-u)
                                               —
                    —    G(ubua)/ub                g(u-u5).

Substituting (5) into the first-order conditions in (4) yields reaction

functions for the two players.


                                  —
(6)       (w-w)g(u-u)                 c'(u5)
          (w-w)g(u-ug) —              c'(ub).

                         —                          must equal                     which in turn
      Since     g(e)         g(-9),      C'(Ua)                          c'(ub),

implies    ua   —   u.       Both players exert the same effort level and have an

ex ante probability of winning of one-half. Moreover, (6) reduces to


(7)       (w-w)g(O)
                             —   c'(u)

and it is straightforward to show that


(8)       u/(wl-w2) —            (g(0)/c"(u)) >          0


                                                                         to
      That is, increasing the prize differential for winning should lead

increased player effort and thus, ceteris paribus, to lower scores.

Indeed, returning to (1), we can rewrite it as
                                                              6

                 —                                +
(9)        qjj        uji(wli-w2i) +                   6j.

In    the homogeneous contestant model scores should depend only on the prize

differential for winning and on tournament specific factors (the weather

and course difficulty).

        Most tournaments, of course, do not have homogeneous contestants and

it is possible to introduce heterogeneity into the model in at least three

ways.     First, one can assume that the marginal return to effort is greater

for one contestant;             instead of (1) one would then have


(10)       qai —     uai + Eai+ 6i'            qbi —      nuj     +   Ebj   +


where if n           is greater than one,             b       is the better player.     Second, one

can assume that the players differ not in the return to effort but rather

in their cost of effort function;                     in this case the cost of effort

functions would become


(11)       ca(u)
                     —    c(u),   Cb(U)
                                           —   yc(u)              0 <   y<      1



where, since          y    is less than one,              b   can achieve any effort level at a

lower cost than a               and hence again b                 is a better player.   Finally, one

could assume that the marginal return to effort and marginal cost of

effort functions were identical, but that one player had an absolute

advantage over the other player.                    That is


(12)       qj    —   uaj    +   Eai   #   i'   bi         Ubj +         + Ebi       +



If        is greater than 0,              b    is the better player in the sense that,

ceteris paribus,            b     will have greater output (a lower score) than                a   if

both exert the same level of effort.
                                                 7

       It is straightforward to substitute these alternative assumptions

about heterogeneity into the model and to obtain comparative static

results.        For brevity, we omit the details here and simply summarize two


key implications.5 First, all three modifications still lead to the

result that a greater prize differential for winning should lead to more

effort and thus lower scores.         Second,        all three suggest that a player's


effort,    and hence output, will depend both on his own ability (A0) and

the ability of his competitor (Aj).              Hence,      the output of individual j


in tournament        i   can be written as


            —                                +         +   6j.
(13)   ji       Ujj((W1jW2i) Ajo,Ajc)            Ejj

That is, in the heterogeneous contestant model, a player's score should

depend upon the prize differential for winning, measures of his and his

opponent's ability, and tournament specific factors, such as the weather

and course difficulty.




III. The 1984 Men's Professional Golf Tour:                  Institutional Characteristics
       and Hypotheses to be Tested

       The typical golf tournament is a four round tournament. Half the

field is "cut" at the end of the second round, two additional rounds are

played,     and then prizes awarded on the basis of the players' ranks after

the final round.         Of the 45 tournaments on the 1984 Men's Professional

Golf Association Tour, 40 were of this type, and data from them are used

in our analyses.

       Across these tournaments the structure of prize money by rank was

virtually identical, although the        jj of prize money varies across
tournaments.6 Figure 1 summarizes this structure.                  A   key element of   the
                                           8

prize structure is that the marginal return from improving one's

performance by one rank (or by not seeing one's performance decline by one

rank)    was much higher for people who were close to the leaders after three

rounds than it was for people who were far from the leaders.         For example,

the marginal prize received from finishing second instead of third was 4.0

percent of the total tournament prize money, while the marginal prize

received from finishing twenty-second instead of twenty-third was 0.1

percent of the total tournament prize money.7

        This structure of prizes, coupled with variations in the level of

prizes across tournaments suggests two types of tests of the theories

sketched in the preceding section.     First, since the structure of prizes

is constant across tournaments, the prize differential for "winning"

depends only on the level of total prize money.       Thus,   one can focus on a

tournament as a whole and ask, other things equal, if higher total prize

money leads to lower scores.     Second,   one can focus only on the last round

of a tournament and ask, other things equal, if a player's performance on

the last round depends on the marginal return to effort he faces.         The

latter will depend in turn on the total prize money in the tournament, his

rank after the third round, and how many players are tightly bunched

around him after three rounds.     Both types of analyses are reported in the

next section.

        Before turning to the empirical results, however, one institutional

complication must be discussed. Not every pro golfer who wanted to enter

any given PCA tournament in 1984 could.        Rather, a system of exemptions

and priorities existed. At the risk of simplifying a very complex system,

the system worked as follows:8
                                         9

     (i)   Any golfer who had won a major tournament since 1975 or any PCA
           Tour tournament in 1983 could enter any tournament he wanted in
           both 1984     1985.

    (ii)   Any golfer who failed to qualify under (i) and had won a major
           tournament in 1975 or any PGA Tour tournament in 1982 could
           enter any tournament he wanted in 1984 but had no promise of
           entry for tournaments in 1985.

   (iii)   If all positions in a 1984 tournament were not filled by
           individuals from categories (i) and (ii), any golfer who
           finished among the top 125 money winners on the 1983 PGA Tour
           could enter the tournament.

    (iv)   Any remaining vacancies in a tournament were filled using other
           criteria (e.g., the sponsor got to choose a number of players,
           lower ranked players on the 1983 tour, leaders from the PGA Tour
           Qualifying Tournament).

     As we shall show, this system of exemptions and priorities helps to

explain which players entered which 1984 PCA Tour tournaments; this is

important because analyses that use data on the scores of entrants to

tournaments will be subject to potential selectivity biases.     In addition,

individuals in categories (ii), (iii), and (iv) had to be very concerned

about their total tour earnings in l984.      For unless they won a PGA Tour

tournament during the year, they had to finish in the top 125 money

winners during the year in order to be assured of virtual automatic entry

if they desired to PGA Tour tournaments in 1985 (i.e., to be in category

(iii) in 1985).   In contrast,   no matter what individuals in category (i)

accomplished during the 1984 tour, they were assured the option of entry

into any PGA Tour tournament that they wanted to enter in 1985.

     Suppose that the latter group, who we refer to henceforth as the

exempt players, exhibited effort levels that were sensitive to the level

and structure of prizes in a tournament.     Because the former group, who we

henceforth refer to as the nonexempt players, had to worry about

qualifying for the next year's tour, the level and structure of prize
                                      10

money in a tournament may not be an accurate indicator of their marginal

financial return to effort.   Rather, one would need to also know how an

increase in effort for one of them increased both the probability that he

would be classified as an exempt player in 1985 and his expected future

earnings if he was so classified. As such, even if the exempt and

nonexempt players' marginal responses to financial returns were equal, one

might intuitively "expect" nonexempt players' effort levels, and hence

scores, to be less sensitive to tournament specific prize variables.      The


appendix presents a simple omitted variables model that indicates the

precise (and restrictive) conditions under which this expectation is

theoretically correct and we test to see if responses differ between the

two groups in the next section.1°



IV.   Empirical Analyses

      Our empirical analyses proceeds in stages.   First we estimate final

score equations for players on the 1984 Men's PGA Tour.   Next,   we estimate

score after the second round equations. Third, we estimate final round

score equations.   Finally, we present some estimates for older men who

played on the 1984 PGA Men's Senior Tour.

      A)   Final Score EQuations

      Data are available in the 1985 Golf Digest Almanac (1984) and the

Official 1985 PGA Tour Media Guide (1985) for each 1984 Men's PGA

Tournament on the score by round, final rank, and prize money won for all

players who entered and made the cut in each tournament)'    Data on each

player's scoring average on all rounds during the year, a measure of his

"ability", are available only for the top 160 money winners during the
                                                  11

year; consequently the analyses reported below are restricted to these

iridividuals)2 Equations were estimated (pooling the data across

individuals and tournaments) of the form


                — a0 + ajTPRIZEj +            +          + a4zj +
(14)      sjj                           axj       a3yj            vjj


       Here    sjj        is the final score of individual j       in tournament       i.

TPRIZE    is the total prize money awarded in the tournament,               xj    is a

vector of variables to control for the difficulty of the tournament course

and weather conditions,           j   is a vector of proxies for player          j's

ability,      zj     is a vector of variables to control for the quality of other


players in the field and vjj            is a random error term.         If the theory of

tournaments is correct, higher prizes should lead to lower scores, hence

estimates of         a1    should be negative.

       The controls for other tournament specific factors are PAR, the par

for the tournament course; DIST. the total course yardage; RATING,                 the

PGA's evaluation of the playing difficulty of the course as it was Set                      U
for the tournament (expressed in strokes);               and WAVE, the average of three

raters'   perceptions of the number of days during the tournament that the

weather significantly influenced player performance. Player ability is

proxied by SCOREAVE,          his scoring average on all rounds played during the

1984 tour; and FCUT, the fraction of tournaments he entered in which he

made the cut during the 1984 tour.            Finally,    the quality of the other

players in the field is proxied by FRACT, the fraction of all players in

the tournament who made the cut that were ranked in the top 160 of total

prize winners during the 1984 tour and MPERAVE; a measure of the mean
                                       12

"performance average" on the 1984 tour of players in the tournament who

made the cut.13

     Estimates are reported in Table 1.     Separate analyses are presented

for the entire sample, for the exempt players, and for nonexempt

players.14   A dummy variable for whether a tournament is a "major"

tournament (i.e., the U.S. Open, the PGA or the Masters) is also

included.'5 Winning a major tournament typically provides substantial

opportunities for lucrative endorsements, hence the total price money

variable understates the return to winning these tournaments.

     Turning to the results, more difficult courses, as measured by PAR,

DIST, and RATING are seen to lead to higher scores.    Similarly, each day

of "bad" weather appear to raise players' scores by over 2 strokes. As

expected, poorer players, as measured by SCOREAVE, play worse.    where

significant, competing against a better field, as measured by FRACT and

MPERAVE, appears to lead to higher scores.

     Most striking, the coefficient of TPRIZE is negative as anticipated.

TPRIZE is measured in thousands of dollars, hence increasing the total

prize money by $100,000 is associated with each player, on average,

scoring 1.1 strokes lower during a tournament (col. 1).     The results of

estimating an equation in which TPRIZE is interacted with exempt status

(col. 2) and of estimating separate equations for exempt (col. 1E) and

nonexempt players (col. iN) suggest that the coefficient of TPRIZE is

slightly larger (in absolute value) for exempt players.     As noted in the

previous section and the appendix,   this may reflect either that exempt

players effort levels      more responsive to financial variables, or that

the nonexempt players TPRIZE coefficient is biased towards zero because
                                           13

their marginal return to effort is also based both on how doing well in a

tournament increases their probability of being classified as exempt in

the next year and on their expected increase in the present value of

future income if so classified.       Finally,   other things equal, scores are

lower in major tournaments but significantly so only for exempt players

(col. 1E),    Since these players are the ones with the greatest chance of

winning and thus gaining the endorsement value, this result seems

sensible.

     Of course the results in Table 1 may be subject to two types of

selection bias because the sample is restricted to the subset of players

who entered and made the cut in each tournament.        Because of this, we may

confound the effect of the total prize variable on players' final scores

with its effect on their entering and making the cut in a tournament.         To

control for this possible problem, requires one to have data on the

players who entered each tournament and failed to make the cut;

fortunately the PGA was able to provide us this information, as well as

data on these players' scores during the first two rounds of the

tournament.16

     To model separately the decision to enter a tournament and the

probability of making the cut and then to estimate a bivariate selection

model is a difficult task.       Instead, we approximated this process and

estimated a univariate probit probability of entering and making the Cut

equation.17    Following the approach initially suggested by James Heckwan

(1979) estimates from this equation were then used to compute an estimate

of the inverse   I'Iills   ratio for each individual and the latter entered as

an additional explanatory variable in (14) to control for selectivity
                                        14

bias.     However, when this augmented final score equation was reestimated,

the coefficient of the additional variable never proved significant nor

did the TPRIZE coefficients differ from those reported in Table   1.   Thus,

the estimates in Table 1 do not appear to be subject to selection bias.

     B)      Score After Second Round Equations

     Given the availability of data on the score after two rounds for all

individuals who enter each tournament, we can estimate how the level of

prize money influences players' performance in the early rounds of a

tournament. Table 2 presents estimates similar to those found in Table 1,

save that the sample is now all entrants in each tournament (among the top

160 money winners in the year) and the outcome variable is now the


player's score after the second round, prior to the cut's being made.     In

addition, the weather variable now refers to the weather on the first two

days of the tournament and the field quality variables to all entrants,

rather than to those who made the cut, in each tournament.

     The most striking finding is that the total tournament prize money

does not appear to influence players' performance during the first two

rounds.    Only for exempt players in the specification where exempt status

is interacted with the prize variable (col. 2), is there any evidence of

an effect and, even for this group, an increase in prize money of $100,000

would be associated with scores that were only 0.1 strokes lower per

player after the first two rounds.    This finding is consistent with the

hypothesis offered earlier that a player's difficulty of maintaining

concentration occurs primarily in the latter rounds of tournament when

fatigue is more likely to have set in.
                                       15

     Of course, the possibility still exists that the results in Table 2

are subject to selection bias because they are based on a sample of

tournament entrants; we may be confounding the effect of a tournament's

prize level on the probability players enter the tournament,   with its

effect on their scores.   To check for this, Heckman's (1979), two-step

procedure was once again employed.

     Table 3 presents the results of several probit probability of

entering a tournament equations that we estimated.   In these equations,

entry probabilities are specified to be a function of a player's exempt

status (EXMPT), his total career earnings prior to 1984 (PRCASH),   his age

(ACE), the chronological order of a tournament during the year (TCODE)    and

its square,   whether the tournament is a major tournament (MAJ), the

tournaments total prize money (TPRIZE), and the player's scoring average

on all rounds in which he played during the 1984 tour (SCOEAVE), or on all

first and second rounds in which he played during the tour (SCORE12).

Separate sets of coefficients are estimated for exempt and nonexempt

players; the former are denoted in the table by an "A" before a variable

name while the latter are denoted by a "B" in front of the variable name.

    The results one observes in this table are of interest in themselves.

Exempt players are more likely to enter major tournaments and tournaments

with higher prize money and, as a result, nonexempt players (with lower

priority) are less likely to enter major and high prize money tournaments

(although the latter result is not significant).18 An income effect on

labor supply is evident for exempt players as, ceteris paribus, the

greater an exempt player's lifetime earnings, the less likely he is to

enter a tournament.    The probability a nonexempt player will enter a
                                         16

tournament declines with age, although no such pattern exists for exempt

players.   The poorer a player is, as measured by higher average scores

during the year,    the more likely he is to enter a tournament.       Finally,

the probability of entering tournaments for both groups,      ceteris paribus,

follows a "un shaped pattern during the year and is lowest during the hot

summer months.     This implies that foreign golfers who don't play regularly

on the tour and individuals in our category (iv), both groups which are

    in our sample, are more likely to enter tournaments during this time.

     The estimates in Table 3 were then used to obtain estimates of the

inverse Mills ratio for each individual entered in each tournament and

augmented versions of the score after the second round equations then

estimated.   However, again the coefficients of the estimated inverse Mills

ratio never proved significant and the estimated coefficients of the total

prize variable were identical to those found in Table    2.    Thus,    the

conclusions that the level of prize money at best only marginally affects

the level of effort during the first two rounds for exempt players and

does not affect the level of effort during that time for nonexempt players

appears to be valid.

     C)    Final Round Score EQuation5

     Consider a golfer playing in two tournaments with the same total

prize money.     Suppose he scores a 72 on each of the first three days of

both tournaments but, because of random factors that influence his

opponents' performance, he finds himself in third place in the first

tournament but in twentieth place in the second tournament. Given the

structure of PGA tournament prizes (Figure 1), he faces, a greater marginal

return to effort/concentration in the first tournament, should exert more
                                        17

effort/concentration there and, on average, should have a lower final

round score in that tournament.   Put another way, we should expect to

observe, ceteris paribus, a positive correlation between a player's rank

after the third round of tournaments and his final round score.

     An initial test of this hypothesis is found in Table 4 in which we

present the result of estimating final round score equations, using data

pooled across individuals and tournaments.   A player's score on the final

round of a tournament is specified to be a function of his scores on the

first three days of the tournament (SCORE1, SCORE2,   SCORE3),   measures of

whether the weather adversely affected players' performance on the first

three days (WAVE123) and on the final day of the tournament (WAVE4),     the


player's rank after the third round (SCR3RANK),   and the total tournament

prize money (TPRIZE).   Given the weather, a player's scores on the first

three days, which are probably the best predictor of how well he is

currently playing, should be positively associated with his score on the

final day.    Given his scores on the first three days, the poorer the

weather was on them, the lower his score should be on the final day.

However, the poorer the weather on the final day, ceteris paribus, the

higher his final day score should be.

     A player's scores on the first three days of a tournament are not

exogenous, but rather depend (from equation (14)) on the prize

differential for winning, measures of his and his opponents ability, and

tournament specific factors such as course difficulty and the weather on

those days.    Similarly, a player's rank after the third round is also not

exogenous.    It depends upon his scores and his opponents' scores on the

first three days; both of which depend in turn on the factors described
                                          18

above.   As such, we traat SCORE1, SCORE2, SCORE3, and SCR3RANX as

endoganous and the estimates in Table 4 are obtained using an instrumental

variable method.19

     Quite striking, as expected, Table 4 indicates that tha higher the

rank of a player (the poorer his relative position)      after the third day of

a tournament, the higher his final round score will be (col. lA, 3A).

However, as in Table 1, this relationship is found only for exempt players

(col. lE, 1N).2°

     Of course, entering a player's rank after three rounds and total

tournament prize money separately only approximates the marginal return to

effort/concentration that he faces if he improves s given number of ranks.

Such a specification also does   flQS   take into account how closely his

competitors are "bunched"   around him.    To obtain more precise measures of

the relevant marginal returns, we defined six different variables, these

are all illustrated in Figure 2.

     Referring to the figure, suppose that the curve PP shows the

relationship between a player's final rank in a tournament and the prize

money he will be awarded. Consider an individual who after the third

round is at rank K.   If he remains at that rank, he will be awarded the

amount OA at the end of the tournament.

     The first three marginal return variables we compute ignore how

tightly bunched competitors are around the player and are based on the

return to improving performance, or of having it get worse, by one rank.

DPRIZE3 is the estimated marginal increase in prize money if the

individual's rank at the end of the tournament was one better than his

current rank.   It is based on the slope of PP at    K   and is given by AZ.
                                      19

UPRIZE3 is the actual increase in prize money the individual would gain if

he improved his rank by one; this is given by AC in the figure.      MIDPRIZ3

assumes the individual takes into account the cost of losing one rank, as

well as the benefit from improving one rank.   It is defined as the actual

average absolute change in prize money if the rank at the end of the

tournament is either one lower or one higher than    R   and it is given in the

figure by the average of the lengths of AC and AD.

     Presumably,   increased effort/concentrationdirectly affects a

player's score not his rank.   The effect of increased concentration on

rank then depends upon the number of competitors closely bunched around

the player.   The next three measures take this into account; they are the

actual increase in prize money the individual would receive if he improved

his scores relative to his competitors by one stroke (LES1PRIZ),      two

strokes (LES2PRIZ), or three strokes (LES3PRIZ).     Assuming that

improvements of one, two, and three strokes would cause the individual's

rank to improve respectively to S, T, and U in the figure, these

variables' magnitudes in turn would be given by AE, AF, and AC.

     Each of these six variables was computed for each individual in each

tournament.   Each variable in turn was substituted for SCR3RA}X and TPRIZE

and equations similar to those reported in Table 4 reestimated. Because

each of these marginal return to effort variables depends upon a player's

rank after the third round and the latter is endogenous, instruments were

also used for each of these variables.21

     Estimates of the coefficients of the marginal return to effort

variables from these equations are reported in Table 5.       The pattern of

results is remarkably consistent across specifications. The marginal
                                       20

prize variables do affect players' scores on the final round, but again

only for exempt players.

     Table 6 presents descriptive statistics for each of the marginal

prize variables. Focusing on the exempt sample, one can use these data

and the estimates in Table 5 to get estimates of the influence of these

variables on players' performance. For example, ceteris paribus, one can

compute, for each variable, how much better exempt players, whose marginal

prize is one standard deviation above the mean marginal prize in the

exempt sample, will play by multiplying the standard deviation in Table 6

by the corresponding regression coefficient in Table 5.   For five of the

six marginal prize variables, the calculations imply that such exempt

players will score 1.5 to 2.0 strokes lower on the final round of the

tournament.22

     D)   Averaae Score Per Round Equations for the 1984 Senior PG& Tour

     The evidence presented above is strongly supportive of the notion

that professional golfers' effort/concentrationlevel respond to the

financial incentives they face and that these response occur primarily in

the last rounds of tournaments when fatigue is more likely to have set in

and thus the difficulty of maintaining concentration is harder.

     The PGA operates a separate Senior Tour for golfers age 50 and older.

Given the players' ages, it seems reasonable to assume that fatigue will

be higher, as will be the difficulty of maintaining concentration, on the

senior tour.    Thus, one might expect to observe larger marginal responses

to the reward structure by these players.

     Table 7 presents some results that are consistent with this

hypothesis.    Estimates are presented of equations in which the averau
                                       21

round score of a senior player in a tournament is specified to be a

function of the prize money in the tournament (either total prize money

(TPRIZE) or winner's prize money (WINPRIZ)),   the difficulty of the course,

as measured by its par (PAR) and length (DIST), the player's ability as

measured by his scoring average in all rounds played during the year

(SCOREA),   and a measure of field quality, the number of competitors in the

tournament who finished among the top 10 money winners on the senior tour

in 1984 (TOP1O).23 Some tournaments on the senior tour only lasted three

rounds and hence the number of rounds in the tournament is added as an

additional explanatory variable (ROUNDS).   The sample is confined to the

top 25 money winners during the year on the tour and to 22 tournaments

that had similar prize structures.24

     The results in Table 7 suggest that fatigue plays an important role

on the senior tour.    Ceteris paribus, players' scores are about 2 strokes

per round higher on 4 day tournaments than they are on 3 day tournaments.

Furthermore, one observes that higher winners' prizes (col. (1)) or total

tournament prizes (col. (2)) both lead to lower scores per round.25

Indeed,   the results in column (2) suggest that an increase in the total


prize money of $100000 would lead to scores that averaged .8 strokes

lower per round.    Over a three and four day tournament, respectively, this

would correspond to lower total tournament scores of 2.4 and 3.2 strokes

per player.    These numbers should be contrasted to the 1.1 stroke

reduction in total tournament score per $100,000 increase in total prize

money that we observed for exempt players in Table 1.

     Of course, the individuals who play on the senior tour are, for the

most part, the individuals who in their younger years were very successful
                                         22

on the regular PGA Tour.     If better players are more responsive to

financial incentives, as some of the results above suggest, and the senior

tour is comprised disproportionately of players who previously were among

the better players on the regular tour, then one might expect to observe

larger responses to financial incentives on the senior tour.

        Some evidence supportive of this explanation is found in columns (3)

and (4) of Table 7 in which the coefficients of the winner's prize and

total prize money in a tournament are interacted with the total career

tournament earnings of each player (WPRINT, TPRINT). The negative

coefficients of these interaction terms suggest that better players'    ,   as
measured by higher career earnings,    effort/concentration levels are more

responsive to financial incentives.



V.      Conc1udin emarks

        This paper has provided nonexperimental evidence that tournaments

have incentive effects.     Our analysis of data from the 1984 Men's PGA Tour

and the 1984 Senior Men's PGA Tour suggest that the level and structure of

prize money does influence players' performance. Higher prize levels do

lead,    ceteris paribus, to lower scores but this effect occurs primarily in

the later rounds of a tournament when fatigue has set in and it is more

difficult for players to maintain concentration. Given a player's

performance on the first three rounds of a tournament, his performance on

the last round also appears, ceteris paribus, to depend on the marginal

returns to effort he faces, with players who face larger marginal returns

scoring lower.    The level of prize money in tournaments also influence who
                                                  23

enter the tournaments, with higher prize money attracting better (exempt)

players.

        The   influence of tournament prizes on performance was observed
primarily for            exempt players. As described in the text and      the appendix,
this    may   reflect either that         exempt players are more   responsive to the
reward    structure or that a tournament's prize level does not adequately

reflect the reward structure that rionexempt players face,               since these

players must be concerned with how their finish in a tournament will

influence their probability of qualifying for exempt status on next year's

tour.     Evidence from the senior tour provides some support for the former

hypotheses      -   -    that   better players are, in fact, more responsive to

financial incentives.

        Our work is only an initial empirical study of the incentive effects

of tournaments and there are a number of directions in which future

research might proceed.               First, replication using data from other sports

in which absolute measures of output are available (e.g., bowling) and for

other years in which the level and structure of prizes on the PCA tour

differed would obviously be desirable.

        Second,         all of our analyses are derived form simple two-person models

that yield implications for the output/scores of an individual player.

Generalization to n-person tournaments would yield implications about the

entire distribution of scores one might expect to observe and empirical

analyses of the distribution of final scores could then be undertaken.

         Third, our analyses assumed that the tournament prize structure

influences output/scores through its effect on effort/concentration

levels.       Players can also choose conservative (e.g.. hit down the center
                                     24

of a fairway) or risky (e.g., try to cut across a dogleg) strategies and

depending upon a player's ability relative to the rest of the field and/or

his rank after each round, different strategies may be pursued. Models

that also included the choice of strategies that differ in risk

undoubtedly would yield additional empirical implications.

     Fourth, there are normative issues relating to the level and

structure of prizes that we actually observe in tournaments. Can we infer

from this structure, what the objective functions of the PGA Tour and

tournament sponsors actually are? Can we estimate whether the marginal

cost to sponsors of higher prize tournaments is less than, equal to, or

greater than the marginal benefits they receive? To answer such questions

will require one to go far beyond the scores of players in tournaments and

to analyze more generally the operations of the PCA Tour and its sponsors.

     Finally, while analyses of sports tournaments are of interest in

themselves, there is the broader question of the extent to which

tournament theory can help to provide an explanation for the structure of

  mpensation we observe among corporate executives.   Devising ways to

address this question should rank high on the research agenda of

economists interested in compensation issues.
                                                 25

                                      References



George Ackerloff, "Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wages:            Four Views,"

     American Economic Review 74 (May 1984): 78-83.

Michael Bognanno,   Performance Incentives in Tournaments: An Emoirica)

            (unpublished M.S. thesis, Cornell University, January 1988).

dive   Bull, Andrew Schotter and Keith Weigett, "Tournaments and Piece

     Rates:   An Experimental Study," Journal of Political Economy 95

       (February 1987): 1-33.

Jeremy Bulow and Lawrence Summers,       "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets With

     Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynsian

     Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics 4 (July 1984): 376-414.

H. Lorne Carmichael, "The Agent-Agents Problem:            Payment by Relative

     Output," Journal of Labor Economics 1 (January 1983): 50-65.

Ronald Ehrenberg and George Milkovich, "Compensation and Firm Performance"

     in Morris Kleiner, cc al.    ,   eds.   ,   Human Resources and the Performance

     of Firms (Madison, WI:     Industrial Relations Research Association,

     1987).

Jerry Green and Nancy Stokey, "A Comparison of Tournaments and Contracts,"

     Journal of Political Economy 91 (June 1963): 349-65.

J.A. Hausman, "Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica 46

       (November 1978): 1251-1271.

James Heckman, "Sample Bias as a Specification Error," Econometrica 47

       (January 1979): 153-162.

Lawrence Katz, "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation," National

     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1906, AprIl 1986.
                                          26

Edward Lazear, "Why    is   There Mandatory Retirement?," Journal of     Polijç
     Economy 87 (December 1979): 1261-1284.

Edward Lazear, "Pensions as Severance Pay" in Zvi Bodie and John Shoven,

     eds., Financial    Asects of the United States Pension System

     (University of Chicago Press, 1983).

Edward Lazear,   "Salaries and Piece Rates," Journal of Business 59 (July

     1986): 405-431.

Edward Lazear and Sherwin Rosen, "Rank Order Tournaments as an Optimum

     Labor Contract," Journal of Political Economy 89 (October 1981): 841-

     864.

James M. Malcomson, "Work Incentives, Hierarchy, and Internal Labor

     Markets," Journal of Political Economy 92 (June 1984): 486-507.

Kenneth J. McLaughlin, "Aspects of Tournament Models:       A Survey" in Ronald

     G. Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 9 (Greenwich,

     CT:    JAI Press, 1988).

Barry J. Nalebuff and Joseph E. Stiglitz,      "Prizes and Incentives:     Towards

     a General Theory of Compensation and Competition," Bell Journal of

     Economics 2 (Spring 1984): 21-43.

1985 Golf Digest Almanac (New York:       Simon and Schuster,   1985).

1984 Player's Handbook (Ponte Vedra, FL:       PGA Tour, 1984).

1984 PCA Tour Player Record (Ponte Vedra, FL:       PGA Tour, 1985).

Official 1985 PGA Tour Media Guide (Ponte Vedra, FL:       PGA Tour, 1984).

Mary O'Keefe, V. Rip Viscusi and Richard Zeckhauser,       "Economic Contests:

     Comparative Reward Schemes," Journal of Labor Economics 2 (January

     1984):   27-56.
                                         27

John Pencavel, "Work-Effort and On-the-Job Screening and Remuneration" in

     Ronald C. Ehrenberg, ed., Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 1

     (Greenwich,   CT:   JAI Press, 1977).

Daniel M. C. Raff and Lawrence H. Summers, "Did Henry Ford Pay Efficiency

     Wages?," Journal of Labor Economics 5 (October 1987, Part 2): S57-

     S86.

Sherwin Rosen, "Prizes and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments,"

     American Economic Review 76 (September 1986): 701-716.

Eric Seiler,   "Piece Rate vs. Time Rate:     The Effect of Incentives on

     Earnings," Review of Economics and Statistics 66 (August 1984).

Joseph Stiglitz,   "The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality

     on Price," Journal of Economic Literature 25 (March 1987): 1-48.

Andrew Weiss, "Incentives and Worker Behavior:       Some Evidence," National

     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2194, May 1987.
                                         28

                                   Footnotes


     1.   See Edward Lazear (1979, 1983), for a discussion of deferred

payment schemes; Joseph Stiglitz (1987), Jeremy Bulow and Lawrence Summers

(1986), Lawrence Katz (1986) and George Akerloff (1984) for discussions of

efficiency wage theories;    Edward Lazear (1986) for a discussion of piece-

rates, and Edward Lazear and Sherwin Rosen (1981),      Lame   Carmichael

(1983), Jerry Green and Nancy Stokey (1983), James Malcomson (1984), Barry

Nalebuff and Joseph Stiglitz (1984), Mary O'Keefe, W. Kip Viscusi and

Richard Zeckhauser (1984), Sherwin Rosen (1986) and Kenneth McLaughlin

(1988) for discussions of tournament theory.

     2.   See Ronald Ehrenberg and George Milkovich (1987), for a summary

of what we know empirically about how compensation policy affects

performance. Daniel Raff and Lawrence Summers (1987) provide an

historical attempt at testing efficiency wage theory.       Attempts to test

whether piece-rate schemes lead to higher productivity, for example John

Pencavel (1977) and Eric Seiler (1984), that involve comparisons of the

 rnings of piece-rate and hourly workers run into well-known (including

by these authors) problems that workers       are not randomly assigned to


piece-rates in these studies and that piece-rate workers may receive

compensating wage differentials for the more variable earnings streams

they face.   Finally, Andrew Weiss (1987) finds that within a single firm,

the shift from individual to group incentives after workers were employed

for a specified period led to lower productivity for the best workers and

higher propensities to quit for workers in both tails of the productivity

distribution.

     3.   See   dive   Bull, Andrew Schotter and Keith Weigett (1987).
                                         29

     4.     In fact the PGA Tour's 1984 Player's Handbook (1984) states that

"In making a commitment to play in a PCA Tour cosponsored or approved

event, a player obligates himself to exercise his maximum golf skill and

to play in a professional manner" (p. 58).

     5.     Details are found in Michael Bognanno (1988), Chapter II and the

appendix.

     6.     See Official 1985 PGA Tour Media Guide (1984).   Of the 39

tournaments actually used in the study (the British Open was excluded for

reasons that will be made clear shortly),     9 offered total prize levels

between $200,000 and $350,000,    16 had a total prize level of $400,000,    8

had a total prize level of $500,000,    and 6 offered total prize money in

the $565,000 to $800,000 range.

     7.     Official 1985 PGA Tour Media Guide (1984), p. 288.

     8.     See 1984 Player's Handbook (1984).   In addition, among other

things, the system required members of the tour to play in a minimum

number    of tournaments, to declare their intent to participate in a

tournament at least a week in advance, to pay a minimal entry fee ($100)

per tournament, and limited the ability of players to withdraw from a

tournament once a commitment to enter had been made.

     9.     As we describe below, our sample includes only individuals in

categories (i), (ii), and (iii).

     10.     We are grateful to Robert Cibbons and Kevin Lang for stressing

the need for this appendix.

     11.     The restriction to players who entered and made the cut leads to

potential selectivity problems and we discuss this issue below.
                                         30

        12.   As a result, virtually no individuals from category iv are

included in the sample.

        13.   A player's "performance average" is a measure of how well he

placed in the tournaments he entered during the year, with high

performance averages indicating better players.      PAR, DIST,   SCOREAVE,

FCUT,    FRACT and MPERAVE were obtained from The 1985 Golf Dizest Almanac.

One paragraph descriptions of the weather conditions that players faced

each day of each tournament were obtained from the Official 1985 PGA Tour

Media Guide; an average of three raters' perceptions of whether the

weather each day adversely affected player performance was then

constructed. Finally RATING was obtained for a majority of the courses

from Mr. Jay Matolla of the Metropolitan Golf Association and for the

other courses through telephone calls to state golf associations.

Substitution of the number of players among the top 20 money winners in

the year as a measure of field quality led to estimates that are


marginally less significant than those that follow.

        14.   When a nonexempt player won a tournament, we changed his status

to exempt for subsequent tournaments in the year.

        15.   The British Open, the fourth major golf tournament,   was included

from the analyses both because RATING was not available for it and because

relatively few of the top U.S. players enter it.      As a result, our sample

actually includes 39 tournaments.

        16.   These data come from the 1984 PCA Tour Player Record (1985); a

complete record of the performance of each of the almost 300 players who

played in at least one PGA event during the year.
                                       31

     17.   For brevity these results are not reported here; they are

available from the authors upon request. The probits included as

explanatory variables, the individual's exempt status, his total career

earnings prior to 1984, his age, the chronological order of the tournament

during the year (1 to 40) and its square, whether the tournament was a

major tournament, the tournament's total prize money, and the player's

scoring average on all rounds during the 1984 tour (and/or in some

specifications his scoring average over the first two rounds of all

tournaments during the year).    Each variable was interacted with the

player's exempt status.    The explanatory variables all were collected from

the 1985 PCA Tour Media Guide and the 1985 Golf Digest Almanac.

     18.   We also estimated specifications that included a dummy variable

for tournaments the week before major tournaments. They suggested that

exempt players are less likely, and nonexempt players more likely, to

enter such tournaments.

     19.   The specific variables used to obtain the instruments are listed

in the notes to Table 4.    Formal specification tests conducted using the

sample of exempt players permit one to reject the hypothesis that this set

of variables should be treated as exogenous. See J.A. Hausman (1978) for

these tests.

     20.   The insignificance of TPRIZE (which does not vary across

individuals in the same tournament) may be due to its effects being

captured through the instruments for SCOREI, SCORE2, and SCORE3, or to the

functional form estimated (TPRIZE and SCR3R.ANK ware entered separately).

WAVE4 is highly positively correlated with VAVE123 and this may explain

its negative coefficient.
Percent of Total
   Prize Money




  180




  10.8   J....




   6.8   —1——t——
           I     I
           I     I

            I    I
           I     I
            I    I     I
            I          I
                   I   I

         ::÷::r_z:::__
            I
   -1      .1
                                                     —                      Player's   Rank
                                                                            in Tournanent
           1     2     3                        22       23




                                     Figure 1

          Share of Total Prize Money Going to Players of Different Ranks:
                      1984 Men's PGA Tournament in the Sample
Prize for Finishing
      at Rank


            P




     G




     F   -—*—-


     E
     C
     B
     A
     D



                                                         P
                                                                Player s Rank
     0                                                          in Tournament
            U    T    SR—i RR11



                                      Figure 2
                      Alternative Measures of Marginal Return
                      to Effort/Concentration in a Tournament
                                               Table 1

                   Final Score Equations for the 1984 Men's PGA Tour:
                       Data Pooled Acrosa Tournaments and Players
                             (absolute value t atatiatics)


                         (1)                    (2)                    (IE)                   (IN)

CONSTANT        —324.099       (13.1)     —312.030    (12.6)     —334.619   (   9.4)    —281.102   (   8.1)
TPRIZE             —.011       (   6.9)      —.010    (   6.1)      —.011   (   4.9)       —.010   (   3.9)
TPRIZE5EXMT                                  —.002    (   4.4)
PAR                1.495       (   8.5)      1.470    (   8.4)      1.637 (     6.5)       1.152   (   4.7)
DIST                .006       (   7.4)       .006 (      7.7)       .004 (     3.5)        .009   (   7.8)
RATING              .211 (20.5)               .210 (20.5)            .233 (15.0)            .185 (13.4)
WAVE               2.394 (13.3)              2.360    (13.1)        2.524   (   8.7)       2.155 (     9.3)
MAJ                —.698       (   1.3)      —.654    (   1.2)    —1.103    (   1.7)       —.811   (   0.9)
SCOREAVE           4.059 (14.0)              3.906    (13.5)        3.948   (   9.6)       3.831 (     9.4)
FCUT               4.346       (   3.0)      4.651    (   3.3)      4.026   (   1.9)       5.114 (     2.6)
FRACT              4.277       (   2.1)      3.515    (   1.7)      9.622   (   3.2)      —4.064   (   1.3)
MPERAVE             .042 (10.6)               .045 (11.1)            .039 (     7.5)        .055 (     8.5)

2                   .421                      .426                   .436                   .410
n                   2432                      2432                   1030                   1401


where:
TPRIZE        total tournament money (in 000's)

EXMT          1—automatically qualify to enter tournaments            on the 1985 men's PGA
              0—not automatically qualify
PAR           par for the tournament course
DIST          course yardage

RATING        course rating — PGA evaluationof the playing difficulty of the course
              as it was set up for the tournament (expressed in strokes)
WAVE          average of 3 raters' perceptions of the number of days the weather
              significantly influenced player performance during the tournament
MAJ           1U.S. Open, PGA, or Masters, Oother
SCOREAVE      player's   scoring average on all rounds played during              the 1984 tour
FCIJT         fraction of tournaments        entered in which the player made the cut on
              the 1984 tour
FRACT         fraction of players in the tournament who made the cut that were ranked
              in the top 160 in total prize money won during the 1984 tour
MPERAVE       mean "performance average" on the 1984 tour of players in the tournament
              who made the cut. A player's "performance average" is a measure of
              how high he placed in the tournaments he entered, with high performance
              averages indicatingbetter performance (see the text for details)
                                            Table 2

            Score After Second Round Equations for the 1984 Mens PGA Tour:
                      Data Pooled Across Tournamentsand Players
                            (absoluce value t statistics)a


                      (1)                     (2)                     (18)                 (IN)

CONSTANT       —128.429     (   7.0)   —121.571     (   6.6)   —148.561   (   5.6)   —93.279   (   3.6)
TPRIZE            —.001     (   0.8)      —.000     (   0.2)      —.001   (   0.6)     —.000 (     0.0)
TPRIZE*ET                                 —.001     (   3.4)
PAR                .558 (       4.4)       .556 (       4.4)       .759 (     4.0)      .359 (     2.1)
DIST               .000 (       0.2)       .000 (       0.3)      —.000   (   0.8)      .001 (     1.6)
RATING             .112     (16.2)         .111     (16.1)         .110   (10.3)        .110   (12.0)

WAVE2             2.148     (14.7)        2.129     (14.7)        2.106   C   9.2)     2.068 (10.5)

MAJ                .430     (   1.2)       .462 (       1.3)       .857 (     1.9)     —.673 (     1.0)
SCORE12           1.913     (   9.0)      1.820 C       8.5)      2.083   (   6.9)     1.561 (     5.1)
ECUT             —1.855     (   1.7)    —1.825      (   1.6)     —1.001   (   0.6)    —2.751   (   1.7)
FRACT2           11.683     C   6.3)     11.088 C       5.9)     10.383   C   3.8)     8.543 (     2.8)
MPERAVE2           .008     (   3.0)       .009 ( 3.5)             .008   C   2.5)      .017 C     3.2)

2                  .286                    .288                    .292                 .270

n                  3449                    3449                    1378                 2070



8A11 variables are defined as in Table 1.   save for WAVE2 which now refers to the
 weather during the first two rounds of the tournament, and FRACT2 and MPERAVE2 which
 now refer to all entrants in the tournament.
                                         Table 3

              1984 Men's PGA Tour Probit Probability of Entry   Equations
                            (absolute value t statistic.)


                                          (1)                                (2)


CONSTANT                             —9.119 (3.3)                     —8.946 (3.2)

EDT                                   3435      (0.9)                  3.549 (0.9)

APECASUd                              —. 159    (3.3)                  —.187 (3.5)

AAG?                                  —.471     (0.6)                  —.184 (0.3)

ATCODE5                               —.620 (6.3)                      —.619 (6.3)

ATCODE2b                               .108     (4.4)                   .107       (4.7)


A34AJ                                  .329     (2.6)                   .327       (2.6)


AIPRIZ?                                .230     (7.9)                   .231       (7.9)


BPRCASUd                               .077     (0.7)                   .081       (0.7)


BACEb                                 —.995 (1.9)                      —.978 (1.8)

ZTCODE5                               —.450 (5.30)                     —.451 (5.4)

BTCODE2b                               .101     (6.9)                       .102   (5.0)


8MAJ                                  —.680 (6.9)                      —.680 (6.9)

BTPRIZEC                              —.321 (1.4)                      —.321 (1.4)

ASCORE12                               .082     (2.0)                  —.142 (1.3)

BSCORE12                               .143     (3.7)                       .038   (0.3)

ASCORAVE                                                                    .218   (2.3)

BSCORAVE                                                                    .102   (1.0)



P—      0                              2178                                 2178
P   —   1                              3516                                 3516


x2(DOE)                             434.55     (15)                   440.91 (17)

where:
a—      coefficient   has   been multiplied    by   10
b—      coefficient   has   been multiplied    by   100
c—      coefficieot   has   been multiplied    by   1.000
d—      coefficient   has   been multiplied    by   1,000.000


        An "A" before a variable name indicates the variable'a coefficient for exempt
        players (those who automatically qualify to enter the next year's tournaments),
        while a "B" before a variable name indicates the variable's coafficient for
        nonexempt play.rs.
and
        PRCASB    total careerearnings prior to 1984
        AGE      ags
        TCODE    tournament code, in chronological order, equals 1 for the         first
                 tournament and 40 for the last
        TCODEZ   TCODE squared
        MAJ      1—U.S. Opso, PGA, or the Masters, Oothar
        TPRIZE   total tournament prime money (in 000's)
        SCOREAVE  player'.scoring average on all rounds played during tha 1984 tour
        SCORZ12 player's scoring average on all first and second rounds playsd
                 during the 1984 tour
                                                Table 4

                    Final Round Score Equations for the 1984 Men's PGA Tour:
                          Data Pooled Across Tournaments and Playersa
                                 (absolute value t statistics)



                      (1A)             (2A)               (3A)           (1E)                  (IN)

CONSTANT           —.996 (0.2)     —5.098 (1.1)      —.929 (0.2)       .409 (0.0)         .259 (0.0)
SCORE1              .198 (2.4)       .186 (2.2)       .197 (2.3)       .098 (0.6)         .210 (2.1)
SCORE2              .700 (6.6)       .658 (6.4)       .701 (6.5)       .699 (3.9)         .674 (5.2)
SCORE)              .122   (1.3)     .246   (3.0)     .121   (1.2)     .198   (1.2)       .126    (1.0)
WAVEI23           —2.292 (5.0)     —2.040 (4.7)     —2.295 (4.9)     —1.974 (2.7)     —2.304 (4.0)
WAVE4             —1.155 (1.9)     —1.232 (2.1)     —1.154 (1.9)     —1.692 (1.7)        —.941 (1.2)
SCR3RANK            .022 (2.5)                        .023   (2.5)     .029 (1.8)         .004 (0.3)
TPRIZE                             —.000 (0.7)        .000   (0.0)     .000 (0.2)         .000 (0.2)


                    .110             .117             .110             .112               .097
                    2390             2390             2390             1018               1371

where:
SCOREI        player's first round score in the tournament
SCOR.E2       player's second round score in the tournament
SCORE3        player's third round score in the tournament
WAVE123       average of 3 raters' perceptions of the number of days the weather
              significantly influenced players' performance during the first three
              days of the tournament
WAVE4         average of 3 raters' perceptions of whether the weather significantly
              influenced players' performance on the last day of the tournament
SCR3RANI(     player's rank after the third round of the tournament
TPRIZE        total tournament prize money (in 000's)
and
A   —   all
        players
E — exempt players (players who have already qualified for next year's PGA tour)
N — nonexempt players

alnstruments for SCORE1, SCORE2, SCORE3, SCR3RANX were obtained using:
 TPRIZE, MM, PAR, DIST, RATING, FRACT, MPERAVE, FCUT. SCOREAVE (which are all
 defined in Table 1) and
 SCORE12      —   player's
                         scoring average on all first and second rounds he played
                on the 1984 tour
SCORE3A       — player's scoring average on all third rounds he
                                                                played on the 1984 tour
WAVE1         ) average of 3 raters' perceptions of whether the weather significantly
WAVE2         ) influenced player performance during the first, second, third and
WAVE3         ) fourth rounds respectively of the tournament
WAVE4         )
 PERAVE       —
                  player's performance      average on the 1984 PGA tour (see    Table    1)
                                       Table 5

       Coefficients of Marginal Return to Effort Variables in Final Round
      Score Equations for the 1984 Men's PGA Tour: Various Specifications
                          (absolute value t statistics)


Specification                  All                Exempt              Nonexempt

(1) DPRIZE3                    —.042               —.042                 —.032
                              (2.7)                (1.8)                (0.9)

(2) IJPRIZE3                   —.236                —.310                —.070
                              (3.5)                (2.6)                (0.8)

(3) MIDPRIZ3                  —.212                 —.278               — .088
                              (3.)                 (2.5)                (0.8)

(4) LES3PRIZ                   —.049                —.052                 .009
                              (2.0)                (1.3)                (0.3)

(5) LES2PRIZ                   —.088                —.135                 .025
                              (2.6)                (2.4)                (0.5)

(6) LES1PRIZ                   —.181                —.306                 .105
                              (2.7)                (2.5)                (1.0)


where:

DPRIZE3          estimated marginal increase in prize money (in 000's) if rank
                 at the end of the tournament is one lower than individual's
                 third round rank
UPRIZE3         actual marginal increase in prize money (in 000's) if rank
                at the end of the tournament is one lower than the individual's
                third round rank
V"PRIZ3         actual average marginal absolute changes in prize money (in
                000's) if rank at the end of the tournament is one lower or
                one higher than individual's third round rank

LES3PRIZ         actual marginal increase in prize money (in 000's) if the
                 individual Improved his rank after the third round by reducing
                 his score by 3 strokes relative to the rest of the field
                 (LES2PRIZ — 2 strokes, LES1PRIZ — 1 stroke)

and

CAll specifications also include SCORE1, SCORE2, SCORE3, WAVE123 and WAVE4
 and use instruments used for SCORE1, SCORE2, SCORZ3 and the marginal return
 to effort variables.
                                                                       dollars. of thousands in measured are variables
        other All    87. and   1   between integer an is SCR3R.ANK      definitions. variable for 5 and 4 Tables bsee
                                                                                                          0.5. than     aL
  52.8              71.6               92.4           36.0             28.0        239.8         85.0           Val. Max.
  a                  a                  a              a                a           a            1.0            Val.   Mm.
  3.7               7.6               11.0            4.2              3.4         14.7          21.6           Dcv. Std.
  1.8               4.4                7.7            1.0              0.9         2.2           36.5                  Mean
                                                 (n—1405)    Sample Nonexempt
  52.8              78.4               92.4           57.6             44.8        339.0         87.0           Val. Max.
  a                  a                  a              a                a           a            1.0            Val.     Mi
  6.5               11.2               13.8           7.0              6.0         35.3          19.9           Dev. Std.
  3.1               6.9                10.6           2.4              2.4         8.9           27.3                  Mean
                                                  (n1053) Sample Exempt
  52.7              78.4               92.4           57.6             44.8        339.0         87.0           Val. Max.
   a                 a                  a              a                a           a            1.0            Val.   Mm.
  5.2               9.4                12.3           5.6              4.7         25.9          21.4           Dcv. Std.
  2.4               5.5                8.9            1.6              1.5         5.1           32.6                  Mean
                                                  (n2458) Sample Entire
LES1PRIZ       LES2PRIZ             LES3PRIZ       UPRIZE3        MIDPRIZ3        DPRIZE3      SCR3RANK
                                   Variablesb Prize   Marginal   — Statistics Descriptive
                                                             6 Table
                                       Table 7

             Average Score Per Round on the 1984 Men's Senior PGA Tour:
                     Data Pooled Across Tournaments and Players
                          (absolute value of t statistics)



                      (1)              (2)                       (3)               (4)


CONSTANT         10.395 (0.8)      2.961     (   0.2)     18.022 (1.3)         12.796    C   1.0)
SCOREA               .744 (7.7)      .786    C   8.4)       .630 (5.3)           .644    (   5.7)
ROUNDS            2.121 (9.8)      2.159 (11.6)            2.147 (9.9)         2.178     (11.7)

PAR               —.201 (1.3)      —.117     C   0.8)      —.202 (1.3)         —.120     (   0.8)
DIST                 .002 (5.1)      .002    (   4.8)       .003 (5.2)           .002    (   5.0)
TOP10                .035 (0.5)      .056    (   0.9)       .034 (0.5)           .057    (   0.9)
WINPRIZ           —.045 (2.7)                              —.039       (2.3)
TPRIZE                             —.008     (   6.0)                          —.007     (   4.9)
WPRINTa                                                    —.802       (1.7)
TPRINTa                                                                        —.150     (   2.2)

2                    .347            .396                   .350                 .403
n                    349             349                     349                  349


acoefficient has been multiplied by          i08.

where:
SCOREA          player's scoring   average on all rounds played during the
                1984 tour
    JTJNDS      number of rounds in the tournament
PAR            par   for the tournament course
DIST            course yardage
TOP1O           number of competitors in the tournament who were among the top
                10 money winners during 1984 on the seniors' tour
WINPRIZ        winner's prize (in 000's)
TPRIZE          total tournament prize money        (in 000's)
WPRINT         winner's prize interacted with the player's career earnings
                prior to 1984
TPRINT          total tournament prize money interacted with the player's
                career earnings prior to 1984
                                               Appendix


        Suppose    w1    is the prize for winning and                w2 — my1        is   the prize for

losing where             is less than one.             Suppose also for exempt players, that

the relationship between their output (y) and their marginal reward for

winning is given by


(Al) y   —     + B1(w1-w2) + E —             B0 + 81(l-m)w1 +       E
         —     +         +   E                           B1,B2 > 0


Here all other factors that influence a player's output are subsumed in B0

and the response of output to the prize spread is given by B2/(l-m).                               If

the error term      E     is uncorrelated with            w1,       least squares estimates of

(Al) will yield an unbiased estimate of                   B2    (ignoring any other

econometric problem).

     Now consider nonexempt players and let                     p    represent the probability

they qualify as exempt players on next year's tour and                          w3    their expected

increase in present value of earnings if they so qualify.                            Their marginal

reward for winning (R) is given by


(A2) R — w1 + p(w1)w3                w2 - p(w2)w3 — (w1-w2)         +   w3(p(w1) -    p(w2))
                                 -



         —   (l-o)wl +   w3(p(w1)        -
                                             p(mw1))


    Assuming that nonexempt players' effort and output response to the

marginal reward for winning is the same as that of exempt players


(A3) y — B0 + B1R        +   E   —   B0 + B11(l-m)wi + w3(p(w1)
                                                                          -
                                                                              p(mwi)fl     +

         — B0 + B2w1 +


where

                                                  A-i
                                                       A- 2

(A4)   *   —    E+ B1(w3(p(w1)         -
                                            p(i))]
       If the error term,              E*,       is positively     (negatively) correlated with

w1,    estimation of (A4) by least squares will yield estimates of                          B2

                                                                                                  The
(call these B2) that are biased in a positive (negative) direction.

correlation of             w1   and E*,          however, depends only on the sign of            p'(w1)

-
    ap'(w1). In            particular


(A5) p'(w1)       -
                         p'(w1)        0 —> E(B2)



       Now consider three possible scenarios for how                       p   varies with the

prize won.        First, suppose             p    increase linearly with the individual's

                                                                     is
winnings until the certainty of being classified as exempt next year

reached.        In this case,                 will be a positive constant, say         c,    and
                                       p'



(A6) p'(w1)
                     -
                         p'(w1)    —   (l-)c >0
Hence      B2    will be biased upwards.

       Second, suppose            p'       is increasing in the size of a prize won in a

tournament.              In this case,


(A?) p'(w1)          -
                          P'('l) > (l-)p'(w1) >                0



So again        B2        will be biased upwards.

        Finally, suppose p'                  is decreasing in the prize won in a tournament.


In this case


 (A8) p'(w1)         -
                          p'(v1)        0         as
                                                         '    p'(v1)
                                                         _______
                                                                       >
                                    A- 3

Hence, in this last case is it possible that B2 will be biased
towards zero.

     Of course, all of the above assumes that the actual responses of

exempt and nonexempt players to the marginal reward for winning are equal.

It is possible that exempt players are exempt because their effort levels

are more responsive to financial variables. Hence, if one observes

smaller (in absolute value) values of      B2   for nonexempt players (as we in

fact do in section III), it may reflect either differences in true

response functions or that p'(w1)   -
                                        p'(w1)    < 0.
