                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ThE GREAT CRASH AND ThE ONSET
                          OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION




                             Christina   D. Romer




                           Working Paper No. 2639




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  June 1988




I am grateful to Ben Bernanke, Michael Bernstein, Jeffrey Miron, David Romer,
and Peter Temin for helpful comments. Seminar participants at Harvard
University, Yale University, the University of California, Berkeley. and the
NBER Workshop on Macroeconomic History also made numerous useful suggestions.
The work was supported by National Science Foundation and the John M. Olin
Fellowship at the NBER. This research is part of NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2639
                                        June 1988


            THE GREAT CRASH AND ThE ONSET OF ThE GREAT DEPRESSION


                                   ABSTRACT




     This   paper argues that the collapse of stock prices in October 1929

generated temporary uncertainty about future income which caused consumers

to forego purchases of durable and semidurable goods in late 1929 and much

of 1930. Evidence that the stock market crash generated uncertainty is

provided by the decline in confidence expressed by contemporary

forecasters. Evidence that this uncertainty affected consumer behavior is

provided by the fact that spending on consumer durables and semidurables

declined immediately following the Great Crash and by the fact that there

is a negative historical relationship between stock market variability and

the production of consumer durables in the prewar era.




                                         Christina D. Romer
                                         Department of Economics
                                         University of California
                                         Berkeley, CA 94720
     "Uncertainty is worse than knowing the truth, no matter how bad."

         (The Mamazine of Wall Street, November 30, 1929, p. 177)




INTRODUCTION

     In the mind of the average person the Great Crash and the Great

Depression are often considered to be the same event. The decline in stock

prices in October 1929 and the tremendous decline in real output between

1929 and 1933 are often thought of as part of the same cataclysmic decline

of the American economy. In contrast, in the minds of many economists the

two events are not only not synonymous, they are in fact only tangentially

related. Dornbusch and Fischer (1984), for example, stress that real

output started down before stock prices collapsed and that the largest

falls in output did not occur until after the banking panics of 1931.

     Despite the dichotomy that economists often impose between the Great

Crash and the Great Depression, it is nevertheless true that the downturn

in real output that began in August 1929 accelerated dramatically after the

collapse of stock prices. For example, while seasonally adjusted

industrial production declined 1.8 percent between August 1929 and October

1929, it declined 9.8 percent between October 1929 and December 1929 and

another 23.9 percent between December 1929 and December 1930. Furthermore,

while economists have reasonably convincing stories about why output

started to decline in the summer of 1929 and why it took a dramatic fall in

1931, the existing explanations for why the decline accelerated so

decidedly in late 1929 and continued throughout 1930 are much less

satisfactory.
                                       2

     This paper argues that there may in fact be a very important link

between the stock market crash and the decline in real output in late 1929

and through much of 1930. That link is that the stock market crash caused

consumers and producers to become uncertain about the course of future

income. As a result, consumers and producers chose to delay current

spending on durable and semidurable goods as they waited for further

information about the likely course of economic activity. This decline itt

spending then drove down aggregate income through a standard Keynesian

mechanism (or, conceivably, through effects on the real interest rate and

the supply of labor).

     The fact that an increase in particular types of uncertainty can

theoretically cause an immediate drop in investment spending is discussed

in detail in Bernanke (l983a). In Section I of the paper I extend

Bernanke's analysis of the determinants of investment spending to the

effects of uncertainty on consumer spending. I present a simple infinite

horizon model of consumer behavior when there are durable and nondurable

goods and when future income is temporarily uncertain. This model of

consumer behavior shows that temporary uncertainty about future income can

cause a pause in the purchases of durable consumption goods. I also

discuss the predictions of the model when there are durable goods with

varying degrees of resalability.   I argue that goods for which purchases

can be more easily reversed will be less affected by temporary uncertainty

than those that are irreversible. I then provide reasons why one might

expect a stock crash to generate temporary uncertainty about future income.

     Section II of the paper examines the behavior of various disaggregate

spending and production series to see if it is consistent with the model

discussed in Section I. The model predicts that all types of spending on
                                      3

durables and semidurables should decline drastically following the Great

Crash, and that consumer spending on durables with difficult resale should

decline most of all. Using various types of monthly spending data I find

that sales of durables did indeed decline markedly relative to usual

following the collapse of stock prices. Using annual data on the

production of various types of consumption and investment goods. I also

find that consumer spending on durable goods with poor resale potential

(such as china, floor coverings, and household furniture) declined much

more than one would otherwise predict, even controlling for the behavior of

total output.

     In addition to making predictions about the behavior of various

spending series in 1929 and 1930, the uncertainty hypothesis also predicts

that there should be a negative historical relationship between stock

market variability and real consumer spending on durable goods. Using data

on the annual production of various types of consumer goods, I find that

there is indeed a negative relationship between consumer spending on

durables and stock market volatility in the late 19th and early 20th

centuries. Furthermore, I find that the negative effect of stock market

variability is strong enough to account for much of the decline in real

consumer spending that occurred in late 1929 and 1930.

     While the behavior of sales and production is consistent with the

uncertainty hypothesis, it is also important to find direct evidence on

whether uncertainty increased dramatically because of the stock market

crash in late 1929. In Section III I do this by examining the forecasts

and analyses of five contemporary forecasters for the periods surrounding

the recessions of 1921, 1924, and the stock market crash of 1929. This

previously unexploited source provides a wealth of information about the
                                      4

expectations and uncertainty of sophisticated financial analysts in these

crucial periods and about their perception of consumer expectations and

uncertainty.   I find that forecasters were themselves much more uncertain

following the stock market crash than was typical even for unsettled times,

and more importantly, that forecasters believed that consumers and

producers were unusually uncertain about the future of the economy

immediately following the drastic fall in stock prices and continuing well

into 1930.

     This explanation for the decline in consumption in late 1929 and early

1930 may provide an important missing link in the economic history of the

Great Depression, As mentioned earlier, economists have widely accepted

explanations for many of the pieces of the decline in output between 1929

and 1933. Hamilton (1987) argues convincingly that monetary stringency was

an important source of the initial decline in production in the late summer

of 1929. FrIedman and Schwartz (1963) have provided evidence that the

decline in the money supply caused by the banking panics of mid-1931

depressed the economy beginning in 1931. Furthermore, Bernanke (1983b)

suggests that the collapse of intermediation caused by the banking panics

of 1931 provides another source of decline for the later years of the

Depression.

     The primary mystery surrounding the Great Depression is why output

fell so drastically in late 1929 and all of 1930. Temin (1976) argues that

the behavior of interest rates suggests that monetary stringency could not

be the main explanation for the real decline in this period. Temin's

alternative explanation is that there was a decline in spending of all

sorts, and of consumption in particular. This view is fairly widely

accepted (see, for example, Hamilton (1987, p. 168) and Gordon and Wilcox
                                      S

(1982, pp. 70-74), though some authors such as Mayer (1978a, b) have

challenged Temin's evidence on the importance of consumption.

     Several studies have tried to explain the decline in spending noted by

Temin. Not surprisingly, many of these explanations are related to the

effects of the stock crash. Temin (1976), for example, asks whether

negative expectations caused by the crash could have decreased consumers

purchases. He concludes from the behavior of bond ratings that

expectations were too optimistic for this to be an explanation. Mishkin

(1978) asks whether the change in the household balance sheet caused by the

fall of security prices can explain the fall in consumption. While his

estimates suggest that the decline in wealth and the desire for liquidity

can explain some of the decline in spending, they cannot account for a

substantial fraction of the total fall. The failure of these explanations

to account for the large fall in real spending following the Great Crash

suggests that the uncertainty hypothesis could provide a useful step in

explaining the mysterious first year of the Great Depression.




I. MODEL OF THE EFFECT OF TEMPORARY UNCERTAINTY

Sasic Model

     To evaluate how temporary uncertainty about future income affects

current consumption spending, it is useful to consider a simple model of

consumer decision making. The model that I present assumes that there is a

representative consumer who is infinitely lived, has quadratic utility, and

allocates his consumption between perishable and durable goods. The prices

of both durable and perishable goods are assumed to be fixed. The model

shows that a temporary increase in uncertainty depresses consumer spending.
                                        6

In essence, the model shows that the aggregate demand curve for the economy

shifts back in response to a temporary rise in uncertainty about future

income.

      Definitions. The basic setup of the model is as follows. There is

one perishable good in the economy (food) and x is the quantity of the

perishable that the consumer purchases in period t.      The price of the

perishable is one. There is also one durable good in the economy (a car)

which lasts for N periods and then depreciates completely. The consumer

chooses      which is the quality of the single durable that he owns in

period t. The price of the durable in the period that the consumer buys it

is aq. Because there is no depreciation until the Nth period, a durable

of quality q provides q services in each of N periods. Purchases of

durables are assumed to be irreversible.

      Utility is assumed to be quadratic in the two types of goods. That


                      —        -    ax +      -
                                                    bq
The consumer is assumed to live forever, so lifetime utility, U, is



                  U —
(2)
                          tO   [)   U

where 5 is the discount rate. Lifetime wealth, W, is equal to the present

discounted value of future income, Y. Temporary uncertainty is introduced

into the model by assuming that in period 0 lifetime wealth is unknown,

with mean p and variance a2. In period 1 the certain value of lifetime

wealth is learned. Thus, the consumer is temporarily uncertain in period 0

and the degree of uncertainty is indicated by a2.

      The basic setup of the model should make clear that the mechanism by

which uncertainty affects consumer spending in this model is different from
                                            7

that in Zeldes (1986) and others, where the third derivative of the utility

function is key. Because the third derivative of a quadratic utility

function is obviously zero, the effects of uncertainty in this model will

have to come from the irreversibility of durable purchases and the

temporary nature of the uncertainty.

     To make the model fore tractable I make several simplifying

assumptions. First, I assume that the interest rate (r) is constant and

equal to the discount rate (6). Second, I assume that the coefficients a

and b of the utility function are equal. I also assume that the price (per

unit of quality) of the durable good is


                  a —    I   +    II  + i_i_i
                                  ll+rJ   1l+rJ
                                                +         .   .   +I
                                                                  11-fr

                     -       li11
                              r
                                  11-
                                  l+rJ
                                  L


These assumptions ensure that under certainty the quantity of the
nondurable   that the consumer buys (xe) and the service flow of the durable

that the consumer owns ()        will   be constant and equal to one another.

     Analysis. To analyze how an increase in uncertainty in period 0

affects a consumer's spending decision I calculate the expected lifetime

utility of the representative consumer both under the assumption that he

does not buy a durable in period 0 and under the assumption that he does

buy a durable in period 0. I then see how the difference between these two

expected utilities is affected by an increase in the variance of the

present discounted value of lifetime income,             Because utility is

quadratic, calculating the expected lifetime utilities under the two

scenarios is straightforward.

    One can show that if the consumer does not buy a durable good in

period 0, then
                                                        8


(4)                x0 —         and
                                                  (W-x0)(l÷r)r
(5)                x1 —     q           —
                                                        2(l+r)
where x1 and q1 are the level of consumption of nondurables and durable

services in each period starting in period 1. Expected lifetime utility if

the consumer does not buy a durable in period 0 (UD,t) is:


(6)            UD,t —               -        ar 2              -       a
                                                                           rr2      +
                                                                                          V0

where V0 is the utility that the consumer receives from a fully depreciated

durable or if he does not own any durable at all.1

        If the consumer 4 buy a durable in period 0, before the value of

lifetime wealth is learned, then


(7)                    —        —                           and
                           q0               2(l+r)      ,




                                                 (W -
                                                        x0- aq0)r
(8)
                    x1—
                                                 i +fi             Ni'
                                                                   -

                                                            1l+r
where      is the quality of the durable that the consumer buys in period N,

and every N periods in the future. The expressions for x0 given in

equations (4) and (7) show that spending on nondurables will be higher if

the consumer is foregoing the purchase of a durable than if he were

consuming both nondurables and a durable in period 0. Expected utility if

the consumer does buy a durable in period 0 (UD) is:


(9)                UD -             - {a +              faa) [J2
                                        1
                                            ar                         -   (li-a)       ru )2 +   2

                                                                                    2(l+r)J
                           1+ (1l+r
                               I—1 .N-l
                                         9

       Using the expressions for UDOfl,t and UDO and grouping terms in s and

     together, one can show that

                  AU —             -
(10)                      UD,
                                                     r.-
                                                           I1+rJ
                  —       -        Ls2r2     +a    2 L
                      0       4 (2+r)(1+r)                   1 N-i
                                                     [i+ ftp)        J
If   this difference is positive, the consumer delays purchasing a durable

until period 1 when the level of lifetime wealth is revealed. If it is

negative, the consumer does not delay the purchase.

       From (10) it is easy to see that the derivative of AU with respect to

     is positive: an increase in uncertainty about future income tends to

move AU in the direction of being positive. Thus, it makes it more likely

that the consumer will find it advantageous to delay purchasing the durable

until the uncertainty is resolved in period 1.

       As the model is written, it is equally costly for all consumers to

forego the purchase of a durable in any given period. As a result, if the

rise in uncertainty is large enough to cause anyone to not buy a durable in

period 0, it causes everyone to not buy a durable. Thus, the model

predicts that spending on durables, if anything, stops completely in

response to a rise in uncertainty. This implausible result can be

eliminated by assuming that the cost of foregoing purchasing a durable

varies across consumers. For example, foregoing purchasing a new car is

more costly for an individual whose fully depreciated car needs expensive

repairs in order to run another year than for an individual whose old car

is still running smoothly. In the context of the model above, this simple

heterogeneity can be incorporated by assuming that V0, the utility one

receives from a completely depreciated durable good or from no durable at

all, varies across consumers. When this heterogeneity is introduced,
                                      10

aggregate spending on durables falls but does not go to zero in response to

temporary uncertainty.



Extensions of the Basic Model

     While the simple model above is adequate to show that a temporary rise

in uncertainty leads to a drop in consumer spending on durables, there are

some extensions that make the model both more complete and more realistic.

One useful extension concerns the possibility of resale. The simple model

above assumes that once a consumer purchases a good, he is stuck with it

until it wears out. However, it is more realistic to suppose that there is

an active resale market for some goods. To make resale possible in the

model above, one needs to introduce some heterogeneity of income across

consumers. With this heterogeneity, there is a market for used goods

regardless of the realization of future income because consumers with

different income levels purchase goods that turn out to be inappropriate

for the original buyers.2 For example, if an individual buys a car of

moderate quality and then finds out that income is lower than predicted, he

can sell the car to a wealthier person who wishes to buy that level of

quality.

     If there were a perfect resale market for every durable good, then all

durables would be just like nondurables and a temporary uncertainty would

have no effect on spending on durables. However, we suspect that resale

markets for most durables are far from perfect, so temporary uncertainty

can cause a decline in aggregate spending on durables. Furthermore, the

resale markets for some durables are much better than for others.4 As a

result, the purchases of goods for which resale is easy will behave much

more like nondurables than will the purchases of goods for which resale is
                                      11

difficult. In this case, purchases of goods for which resale is easy would

decline less in response to a rise in uncertainty than purchases of goods

for which resale is very difficult.

     A second extension concerns the life span of the durable good. In the

model above, there is just one durable good and it lasts for N periods

before it depreciates completely. In fact, however, goods differ in

longevity. In particular, there exists a class of goods, traditionally

called semidurables, that last decidedly longer than perishables such as

food and fuel, but less long than durable goods such as stoves and cars.

Goods in this category include shoes, clothing, household linens, and

automobile tires. The effect of temporary uncertainty on purchases of

these goods depends on the relative importance of two competing factors.

     On the one hand, the resale potential of such semidurable goods is

particularly poor. There is very little market for used shoes and clothes.

The previous discussion suggests that this inability to resell will make

semidurable goods very susceptible to the negative effects of temporary

uncertainty. On the other hand, the purchase/do not purchase condition of

the basic model given in (10) shows that making N smaller (that is,

shortening the life span of the durable) makes the derivative of Liii with

respect to a2 smaller. The intuition behind this result is that the cost

of delaying the purchase of new semidurables is similar to that of delaying

the purchase of durables, but the period over which one reaps the benefit

of waiting (consuming the optimal amount of semidurable services given the

realization of income) is shorter. As a result, there is a tendency for

semidurable purchases to decline less in response to uncertainty than

durable purchases.

     While it is not obvious which of these two tendencies is stronger, it
                                      12

seems likely that the lack of resale might be severe enough for uncertainty

to have a strong depressing effect on sales of semidurables. This is

especially likely to be the case if the life span of semidurables is fairly

long and the temporary uncertainty is expected to be resolved quickly.



           ...orary Uncertainty on Investment

     The model and extensions discussed above examine the effects of

uncertainty about future income on consumption. It is useful to examine

how this uncertainty might also affect investment. As mentioned above,

Bernanke (1983a) provides a model of the effect of temporary uncertainty on

investment spending. He shows that when there are various projects with

different payoffs under different States of the world, increased

uncertainty about the future state of the world can lead to a pause in

investment as investors wait to gather more information.

     Bernanke applies his model to the effect of an oil cartel on

investment in technologies that can either be oil-intensive or oil-saving.

However it is possible that there are situations where the level of future

income could also be an important determinant of the relative payoff of

various projects. For example, suppose there are increasing returns to

scale in the technology for producing some good. In this case, if one

expects demand to be high in the future, one would invest in a large plant;

if one expects demand to be low in the future, one would invest in a

smaller, less efficient plant. If uncertainty regarding future aggregate

income rises temporarily, one might forego all investment spending for a

while and wait for the uncertainty to be resolved.

     This example shows that temporary uncertainty about future income

could have a depressing effect on investment spending. At the same time,
                                      13

however, the specificity of the example suggests that the conditions under

which income uncertainty affects investment may be limited. Whereas

temporary uncertainty about future income is likely to have a pervasive

effect on consumers, only some investors are likely to be have projects

whose relative payoff is dependent on the realization of future income. As

a result, it is likely that temporary uncertainty about the future state of

the economy has a substantially larger negative effect on consumers than on

producers.



ADolication of the Model to 1929-30

     While the model and extensions discussed above show that temporary

uncertainty can cause a drop in spending, there remains the question of how

and why the stock market crash of October 1929 might have generated

widespread temporary uncertainty about future income. The most

straightforward story about the rise in uncertainty in November 1929 starts

from the presumption that the stock market experienced a speculative bubble

that burst in October 1929. This presumption is supported by a wide

variety of contemporary and modern economic analysts.5 Under this

assumption, the drastic decline in stock prices is an exogenous event

because the bursting of a bubble is typically related to arbitrary events,

not to changes in fundamentals.

     This exogenous event may have caused uncertainty about future income

for a variety of reasons. One scenario that fits with many contemporary

accounts is that people realized that this exogenous crash could disrupt

credit markets and reduce investment. At the same time, they were hopeful

that the government would step in and stabilize or stimulate the economy.

These contradictory possibilities following the Great Crash made people
                                      14

much more uncertain about what future income would be than they were before

the crash.

     It is also possible to argue that the stock crash generated

uncertainty without assuming that the collapse of stock prices in 1929 was

necessarily the result of the bursting of a speculative bubble. It is

possible that stock market was thought to be an imperfect predictor of the

real economy by agents in the prewar economy. In this case, standard

linear prediction theory indicates that a larger than usual movement in

stock prices is likely to be associated with greater uncertainty about

one's prediction of future income. Thus, even if the decline in stock

prices was not an exogenous event, it could have caused a temporary rise in

uncertainty if individuals were using it to forecast the real economy.6

     Both of these stories explain why uncertainty may have risen

dramatically following the Great Crash. However, in order for the model

given above to predict that real consumption spending will actually

decrease in this situation, the assumption that prices are constant must

also hold. While this is not literally the case in 1929 and 1930, prices

of consumer goods move surprisingly little in the months immediately

following the Great Crash. For example, the aggregate consumer price index

(CPI-W, 1957-59 — 100) fell less than 1 percent between October and

December 1929 and less than 2 percent between January and June 1930. This

suggests that the basic preconditions necessary for the simple model given

above to apply to the first year of the Great Depression are indeed met.




II. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

     In this section I examine the behavior of several sales and production
                                      15

series to see if it is consistent with the view that the stock market crash

of October 1929 depressed the real economy by causing consumers and

investors to become temporarily uncertain.



Empirical Predictions of the Uncertainty Hypothesis

     The model and extensions of the uncertainty hypothesis presented in

Section I make several predictions about the behavior of various economic

variables around the time of the Great Crash. The simplest of these is

that spending on durable goods should have declined soon after the rise in

uncertainty in October l929. Furthermore, if the rise in uncertainty

following the Great Crash was very large, then the drop in spending should

also have been very large.

     This prediction need not be unique to the uncertainty hypothesis.

Models that assume that consumption is driven only by income and wealth

might also predict a large fall in spending in late 1929 and 1930, provided

that wealth declined a sufficient amount. Similarly, models that assume

that current spending is affected by expectations of future income might

predict that spending would drop in late 1929 if consumers became convinced

that a severe drop in income were imminent. However, as the survey of the

literature in the introduction suggests, the fall in wealth and the

forecasts of future income were such in 1929 that one would not have

predicted a large fall in spending following the Great Crash. Thus, the

prediction that spending should fall substantially in November 1929 is an

important identifying characteristic of the uncertainty hypothesis.

    More unique predictions of the uncertainty hypothesis concern the

composition of any decline in spending or output that occurred following

the Great Crash. First, the model of consumer behavior in Section I
                                      16

indicates that while sales of durable goods should fall in response to a

rise in uncertainty, sales of noridurables should in fact rise in the same

situation. This prediction differs from the predictions of models of

consumer behavior that stress the importance of wealth, income, or future

income. These models typically predict that spending on both durables and

nondurables will decline in response to a decline in actual or expected

income or wealth, though spending on durables will decline more (because a

larger movement in durables purchases is needed to yield a given change in

the flow of consumption services).

     A second important prediction of the uncertainty hypothesis about

composition concerns which type of durables purchases will be most

affected. The discussion of resale in Section I suggests that durable

goods for which resale is difficult should experience a larger drop in

sales relative to usual than goods for which resale is easy. This

prediction is different from that of models of consumer behavior that

stress the importance of income or wealth. These models typically do not

predict that durables with poor resale potential should fall more than

others.

     A third prediction involves the behavior of semidurable goods. As

discussed in Section I, semidurable goods typically have very poor resale

potential. Thus, provided that their shorter life span does not reverse

the effects of this inability to resell, one would expect sales of

semidurables to be particularly negatively affected by a rise in

uncertainty.

     A fourth prediction concerning the composition of spending is that

the rise in uncertainty following the Great Crash should have had a

relatively larger effect on consumers than producers. This suggests that
                                         17

sales of consumer durables should fall more relative to usual than sales of

producer durables. This prediction differs from that of traditional models

of economic fluctuations which postulate that investment spending is more

susceptible to exogenous shocks and hence may tend to have more extreme

fluctuations than consumption.

      In addition to these predictions about the decline and the changes in

the composition of spending immediately following the Great Crash, the

uncertainty hypothesis also makes a unique prediction about the historical

relationship between consumer spending and stock market variability.

Provided that uncertainty about future income is a stable, positive

function of stock market variability, it should be the case that consumer

spending on durable goods and stock market variability are inversely

related over long periods of time. This prediction is clearly one that is

different from more conventional models which predict that the level of the

stock market rather than the variability of stock prices should be

positively related to consumption.



Decline in Spending

      Data bearing on the simplest prediction of the uncertainty hypothesis

-   that   spending on durable goods should have declined in November 1929 -

are plentiful. A variety of sources provide monthly data on sales of
different types of products for the period around the Great Crash.

      The best known of the retail sales series is the Federal Reserve Board

(FRB) index of department store sales. (For the exact source of this and

all the other monthly spending series, see the notes to Table I.) This

series begins in 1919 and accounts for approximately ten percent of total

retail sales in the United States in the late 1920s.8 Department stores
                                         18

carry some consumer goods that last many years, such as furniture, floor

coverings, luggage, and china, and some consumer goods that last only a few

years, such as clothing, shoes, and linens. As a result, this sales series

clearly covers a mixture of consumer durable and semidurable goods.

Another sales series that is available and covers similar goods is one

showing the total value of sales from the two largest mail-order houses of

this period, Montgomery Ward and Sears.

     There are two other series that show monthly spending on durable

goods. One is a series on new automobile registrations that is available

for the period after 1925. This series appears to provide a good measure

of automobile sales. The second is a series on new construction contracts

awarded in a given month. This series shows the square footage of

buildings put under contract to be built within the next 60 days. Hence,

it provides a rough measure of spending on new construction. Because the

construction contract data are divided into residential and nonresidential

building, they can be used to analyze whether consumer spending on new

construction differed from commercial spending.

     There are also two retail sales series that show the behavior of sales

of nondurable goods. One is the value of sales of the four major five-and-

ten-cent store chains. The other is the FRB index of the sales of grocery

store chains. The FRB   grocery   store series only exists through December

1929. Since the FRE discontinued it because it felt that the index was no

longer representative of national grocery store sales, the quality of this

series in the late 1920s is clearly somewhat suspect. Despite this flaw,

it is useful to have these series on sales of nondurables to compare to the

series on spending on durable goods.

     I deflate the series for department Store sales, mail-order sales, and
                                          19

ten-cent store sales by the aggregate seasonally unadjusted consumer price

index (CPI). I deflate the series for grocery store sales by the

seasonally unadjusted CPI for food. Because the series on car

registrations and construction contracts awarded are already in real terms,

no deflation of these series is necessary.

     For each monthly ending series I then estimate an equation of form:

                              4                  12
                54
                     —    +   E 8.   s,        +E     7dK + Sit,
                              —l                k—2


where     is the monthly percentage change in series i, d, is a dummy

variable for the kth month, and t is a linear time trend. The monthly

dummy variables are included to account for seasonal movements, the own

lags to account for serial correlation (arising, for example, from sector-

specific shocks) and the linear trend to take into account the possibility

that the growth rate of spending may have an upward trend.

     This regression is run over the period 1919:1-1928:12 for all the

spending series except automobile registrations, for which data do not

become available until 1925:1. Thus, this regression summarizes the usual

behavior of spending in the l920s. I then do a static forecast of each

series for late 1929 and early 1930 using the coefficients estimated

through 1928. The difference between the forecasted monthly values and the

actual percentage changes in spending provides a measure of whether the

behavior of spending was aberrant following the Great Crash. The use of a

static forecast ensures that a given forecast error reflects the new

residual for each month, not the cumulative effect of previous forecast

errors.

     The estimated forecast errors for September 1929 through March 1930

for each monthly spending series are given in Table 1. The standard error
                                       20

 of each regression for 1919-1928 is also given so that one has a basis for

 gauging whether the forecast errorsare large relative to the predictive

 power of the regression.

      The main result is that for the series corresponding to consumer

 spending on durable and semidurable goods, namely department store sales,

 mail-order sales, new car registrations, and residential construction

 contracts, there does appear to be a large forecast error in November 1929.

 For department store sales the forecast error in November 1929 is almost

twice the size of the standard error of the regression; for automobile

registrations it is one-and-a-half times the standard error; and for mail-

order sales and residential construction contracts it is the same size as

the standard error. That the forecast error is large and negative in

November indicates that the actual percentage change in all of these

categories of spending between October and November 1929 was much smaller

than one would have predicted given the usual behavior of sales in the

l920s. This is exactly what the uncertainty hypothesis predicts should be

the result of dramatic rise in uncertainty following the stock market

crash.

     For these same four series there is also a substantial forecast error

in October 1929. This finding is consistent with the uncertainty

hypothesis because the uncertainty related to the decline in stock prices

may well have begun with the first large drop in stock prices on Black

Thursday, October 24, 1929. If spending dropped precipitously in the last

seven days of October, this would be enough to cause a moderate forecast

error in sales in this month. At the same time, because part of October

should have experienced normal sales, it still makes sense that there

should be another, larger error in November.9
                                      21

     After the large negative forecast errors in October and November 1929,

all four of these series on sales of durables show smaller errors, some

positive and some negative, in December. This behavior is also roughly

consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis. In its simplest form, the

uncertainty hypothesis predicts a one-time drop in spending following the

Great Crash; after tht drop, it predicts that spending would stay low

until the uncertainty is resolved. Thus, one would not expect to see

further important negative forecast errors in December.

     One potential problem with this analysis is that large forecast errors

return in January and several other months in 1930. However, as I describe

in the next section, it appears that the further stock price declines and

the confusion caused by the government's attempts to deal with the Crest

Crash generated additional surges in uncertainty during much of 1930. If

this argument is correct, then the large declines in spending on durables

in 1930 relative to what one would predict from their past behavior is

consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis.



Chanses in Comoosition

     There are three predictions concerning the composition of spending

after the Great Crash that apply to the uncertainty hypothesis but not to

more standard models of consumer and producer behavior. These unique

predictions are that spending on nondurables should have risen while

spending on durables should have fallen relative to usual, that spending on

durable goods with poor resale potential (including seinidurable goods)

should have fallen more relative to usual than spending on goods with easy

resale, and that spending on consumer durables should have fallen more

relative to usual than spending on producer durables.
                                      22

      gehavior of Spendina. The size and sign of the forecast errors from

 the prediction equations for the various monthly spending series given in

Table 1 can provide some evidence on the presence of the composition

effects predicted by the uncertainty hypothesis. First, in addition to

showing the forecast errors for the series on spending on durable goods,

Table 1 also shows the forecast errors for series covering the spending on

some nondurable goods. From Table 1 it is clear that while spending on

durables declines a great deal relative to usual following the Great Crash,

spending on nondurables does not show the same pattern. Tan-cent stores

show large negative forecast errors in September and October, but

essentially no error in November. Grocery store sales also show a large

negative error in September, but a positive forecast error in October and

only a very small negative error in November, The fact that there is not a

large negative forecast error in November 1929 in either of these series is

broadly consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis, which would predict

that the fall in sales should be limited to durable goods.1°

     Second, the behavior of construction contracts provides evidence that

spending on consumer durables was more affected by the Great Crash than

spending on producer durables. The prediction equation for residential

construction contracts has large negative forecast errors in October and

November of 1929. The prediction equation for commercial and industrial

construction contracts has a large negative forecast error in September

1929 and a small negative error in October 1929, but then actually has a

positive error in November 1929. This difference in the behavior of

residential and nonresidential construction contracts is consistent with

the uncertainty hypothesis which predicts that consumers will contract

their spending more than producers in response to a temporary rise in
                                       23

uncertainty about future income.

       While this analysis of the behavior of monthly spending data suggests

that the composition effects predicted by the uncertainty hypothesis may be

present, the available data are not completely adequate for testing these

predictions. Because we do not possess monthly data on total spending, it

is impossible to discuss the behavior of spending on different categories

of goods controlling for the overall movement in spending.

       Behavior of Commodity Output. This limitation can be overcome

somewhat by examining annual data on the real output of commodities

destined for domestic consumers and producers. The Shaw (1947) series on

commodity output for 1889-1933 provides good estimates of the output of

approximately 40 different classes of consumer and producer goods.11

Because Shaw provides a measure of the total production of commodities as

well as the many disaggregate output series, it is possible to see how the

production of particular kinds of producer and consumer goods typically

moves with total production in the late 1800s and early l900s. Then one

can examine whether the production of certain types of goods is aberrant in

1929 and 1930 in the ways predicted by the uncertainty hypothesis.

       To see if the production of certain goods behaved aberrantly, I

perform the following test. Over the period 1889-1928 I regress the

percentage change in a given category of commodity output on one own lag,

the current percentage change in total output, one lag of the percentage

change in total output, and a constant.'2 That is, I run


(12)                 y —        + fly1 +            +

where y denotes the percentage change in the production of a category of

goods and y denotes the percentage change in the total production of

commodities. This regression should both capture the usual relationship
                                       24

 between, say, the production of cars and total production, and allow for

 category specific shocks that may have some persistence.

      I then forecast the production of each category of commodity output in

 1929 and 1930, taking as exogenous the actual movement in total production

 in these years and the past movements in all types of production. The

 difference between the actual percentage change in production in 1929 and

 1930 and the predicted value is a measure of whether the production of a

 particular good is unusual in these two years. These resulting forecast

 errors for each category of goods as well as the standard error of the

 corresponding regression are given in Table 2.

      Before one can say whether the pattern of forecast errors is

consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis, one must deal with the question

of whether production data can be taken to represent consumption and

 investment spending in the years surrounding the Great Crash. Because the

Shaw production series is already adjusted to take into account net

exports, the only question is whether inventory behavior is aberrant in

1929 and 1930. In the regression above, if inventory investment has      some

typical cyclical pattern which continues into 1929 and 1930, then a

forecast error in a production equation also represents a forecast error in

spending. However, if inventory investment deviates from its usual

cyclical pattern in 1929 and 1930, then the forecast errors in production

could either over- or understate the true forecast errors in spending.

     Actual data on inventories for the period 1889-1930 which could

resolve this ambiguity are sparse. However, the classic study by

Abramovitz concludes that in the interwar era total inventory investment

tended to be procyclical as it is today (Abramovjtz, 1950, p. 345). At the

same time, Abramovitzs data on total real inventories as of December 31st
                                      25

show a definite rise in inventories in both 1929 and 1930. Since total

output declined substantially in 1930, this fact suggests that more

production than usual went into inventories in this year. This indicates

that a given forecast error in production will actually translate into a

larger forecast error in consumption or investment. Thus, the behavior of

the Shaw production se..ies can be taken to represent a lower bound on the

size of the negative forecast errors in the various categories of

consumption and investment.13

     An additional problem in interpreting the results stems from the fact

that the Shaw production data are annual. If the uncertainty hypothesis is

correct, then 1929 should have been a normal year until October, and then

spending on certain types of goods should have fallen greatly in the last

two months. As a result, this drop is likely to cause only a small

negative forecast error in 1929. On the other hand, provided that the

uncertainty is not resolved rapidly and that much of the drop in spending

actually is felt in 1930, the forecast error in 1930 should be large for

particular commodities.

     Having dealt with these complications, one can see that the sign and

significance of the various forecast errors given in Table 2 are remarkably

consistent with composition effects predicted by the uncertainty

hypothesis. First, the forecast errors for nearly all categories of

consumer durables and semidurables, as well as for the corresponding

aggregates, are negative in both 1929 and 1930. They are also often quite

large relative to the standard error of the corresponding regression in

1930. This indicates that consumer spending on durables and semidurables

was lower in both 1929 and especially 1930 than one would have predicted

given the size of the movement in total output. This behavior is certainty
                                      26

consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis and echoes that of the sales

data discussed above.14

     Second, the forecast errors for perishable consumer goods such as

food, drugs, and fuel are typically positive in both 1929 and 1930, though

the errors are never large relative to the standard error of the

corresponding prediction regression. The positive forecast errors indicate

that production (and as argued above, consumption) of these goods was

higher than one would have predicted given the total fall in output. This

finding is consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis.

     Third, the size of the negative forecast errors for different types of

consumer durables also confirms (though somewhat unevenly) the composition

predictions of the uncertainty hypothesis when there are differing degrees

of ease of resale. Among the consumer durables for which the forecast

error in 1930 is particularly large relative to the corresponding standard

error are floor coverings and luggage. Among the goods for which the error

is very small or even positive are musical instruments and pleasure craft

(boats). If one believes, as seems reasonable, that musical instruments

and boats are quite easy to resell, while floor coverings and luggage are

very hard to resell, this difference in behavior appears to be consistent

with the notion that the easier it is to resell a good, the less purchases

of that good are affected by uncertainty. This prediction is also

confirmed by the fact that household furniture and china, both goods with

poor resale potential, have forecast errors that are at least as large as

the standard error of the corresponding regression. It is, however,

contradicted somewhat by the behavior of jewelry and automobiles which also

show a moderately large negative error, despite the fact that resale of

these goods should be quite easy. Thus, while there is some evidence that
                                      27

the composition of the fall in consumption of durables is consistent with

the uncertainty hypothesis, the evidence is not unambiguous.

     The behavior of semidurable goods confirms the composition predictions

of the uncertainty hypothesis more strongly. Semidurables as a whole have

a negative forecast error in 1929 that is approximately equal to the

standard error of the forecasting equation and a negative forecast error in

1930 that is almost twice the standard error. This is exactly what one

would predict from the uncertainty hypothesis because goods such as shoes,

clothes and house furnishing tend to have a very limited resale market.

     Fourth, the forecast errors for the production of most producer

durable goods are positive in both 1929 and 1930. In some cases, such as

for aggregate producer durables, the positive forecast error is one to two

times the standard error of the corresponding forecasting regression. The

fact that the errors for producer durables are typically positive does not

mean that investment spending did not fall in 1930; in fact, aggregate

production of producer durables fell 22 percent between 1929 and 1930.

Rather, it indicates that investment spending fell less than one would have

expected given the large fall in total output. This change in the

composition of the fall in output is exactly what one would have expected

if uncertainty related to the stock market crash had a larger effect on

consumers than producers.



Historical Relationship

    The uncertainty hypothesis predicts that in general there should be an

inverse relationship between consumer spending on durable goods and

uncertainty about future income. If uncertainty is a continuous, positive

function of stock market volatility, this prediction means that stock
                                        28

market variability and consumer spending on durables and semidurables

 should be negatively related over long periods of time.

        To see if this is the case, I expand the simple forecasting equation

 for different classes of commodity output given in equation (12) to include

a measure of stock market variability.       I run


 (13)                        +          +            + 72i't-l +
where        and y are the percentage change in a class of commodity output

and total commodity output, respectively, and v is the annual average of

the squared monthly change in the value of the stock market. As before,

this equation is estimated only through 1928 so that the dramatic events of

1929 and 1930 cannot influence the results.

        The resulting parameter estimates for equation (13) for four major

classes of commodity output are given in Table 3. For the output of

consumer durables and semidurables, the estimated coefficient on V       is
large and negative. This indicates that both large positive and large

negative movements in stock prices tend to depress the consumption and

production of consumer durable goods just as the uncertainty hypothesis

predicts. For consumer perishables the coefficient is large and positive.

This is again consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis which predicts

that consumers will substitute perishable goods for durable goods in

periods of great uncertainty. Thus, for all three types of consumer goods

the coefficient has the sign predicted by the uncertainty hypothesis.

However, the large standard errors suggest that the relationships are not

measured precisely.

        For producer durables, the coefficient is relatively small and

positive, but not statistically significant. This positive coefficient is

consistent with the uncertainty hypothesis which predicts that producer
                                      29

durables will account for a smaller fraction of the decline in total output

when uncertainty is cause of the downturn than when more ordinary factors

are depressing the economy.

     Given these expanded prediction equations, it is useful to see if the

forecast errors present in 1929 and 1930 for consumer durables and

semidurables using the simple prediction equations are still present when

one explicitly takes into account the uncertainty effects of stock market

volatility. The estimated forecast errors for equations (12) and (13) for

four major classes of commodity output are given in Table 4. Table 4 shows

that including the stock variability measure in the prediction equation

eliminates the forecast errors for consumer durables in 1929 and 1930

entirely. For semidurables, including the stock variability measure

actually turns the forecast error in 1929 from negative to positive and

reduces the negative error in 1930 by 50 percent. These results show that

uncertainty effects due to stock market variability can explain most of the

unusual behavior of consumer spending on durable and semjdurable goods in

the first year and a half of the Great Depression.15 At the same time, the

figures in Table 4 show that the expanded prediction equations are much

less successful in eliminating the forecast errors for consumer perishables

and producer durables.




III. DIRECT EVIDENCE OF UNCERTAINTY

     In this section I investigate an entirely different type of evidence

concerning the links between the crash of the stock market uncertainty,

and the fall in output in late 1929 and much of 1930. Specifically, I

examine the forecasts and analyses of five contemporary business analysts
                                       30

 over the 1920s to determine whether uncertainty was uniquely high following

 the stock market crash, whether this uncertainty was caused by the crash,

 and whether uncertainty was believed to have an important negative effect

 on spending.

      The particular forecasts that I analyze are those furnished in

 Business Week, The Harvard Weekly Letters, The Masazine of Wall Street,

 Moody's Investors Service, and Standard Trade and Securities Service.     (See

 the appendix for a more information on these sources.) These five business

 reports are representative of the many such magazines and forecasting

 services that provided economic information in the interwar period. These

 reports typically included a prediction about the behavior of output over

 the coming months and an analysis of the perceived cause of the current

 situation.

      Because of their dual functions, these reports can provide two types

on information about the presence of temporary uncertainty around the time

of the Great Crash. First, since the forecasters typically provided some

indication of their certainty about their predictions, the reports can show

whether the forecasters themselves became dramatically more uncertain about

the course of economic activity following the collapse of stock prices in

1929 than they did during other periods of upheaval, such as 1920-21. This

kind of information is very helpful if one believes either that forecasters

mirror the expectations of ordinary consumers and producers or that

forecasters play an important role in forming expectations.16 Second, the

analyses of the forecasters may indicate their impression of consumer

expectations and uncertainty. If they do this consistently, then this can

provide direct evidence on whether uncertainty about the course of future

output increased around the time of the Great Crash.
                                          31




 Forecaster Uncertainty

      The information that the forecasts provide about forecaster

uncertainty due to the Great Crash is striking. An analysis of the

confidence expressed by the forecasters shows that forecasters became

uncertain immediately following the Great Crash to an extent that was

unprecedented in the l920s. Furthermore, this uncertainty, while perhaps

resolved somewhat in the spring of 1930, appears to resurface by mid-1930.

     j. Among the five forecasters, four become definitely more

uncertain about the future of business immediately following the collapse

of stock prices in late October 1929. This change is particularly

noticeable in The Harvard Weekly Letters (referred to as Harvard in the

following discussion), In early October 1929, Harvard is certain that a

mild downturn is in store for the economy. It states: "business is thus

facing another period of readjustment" (October 19, 1929, p. 252).

Following the crash, however, Harvard becomes very uncertain.                It says:

"the unprecedented declines in stock prices .             .   . make it difficult to

estimate at present the amount of injury which will be done to business"

(November 16, 1929, p.274). Furthermore, Harvard specifically mentions

that it feels that this uncertainty is temporary and that "a month hence it

may be possible to appraise the situation more satisfactorily and present a

definite forecast for the year 1930" (November 16, 1929, p. 276).

     This same pattern is also shown in Moody's Investors Service

(Moodv's). In mid-October Moody's states with confidence that "certain

signs of slightly diminished activity .        .   . do   not, in our opinion,

foreshadow a real business depression" (October 14, 1929, p. 1-225).

However, by November, Moody's is much more uncertain about the course of
                                        32

future activity. It states:     "the extent of net paper losses and their

effect can hardly be measured for the country as a whole" (November 18,

1929, p. 1-241) and in December it discusses "the extent of the current

decline, whatever it will ultimately prove" (December 16, 1929, p. 1-257).

       Standard Trade and Securities Service (Standard) is somewhat different

from Harvard and Moody's in that it is very optimistic before the crash. It

states in September that "American business .   .   . will   make another

excellent showing in the second half [of 1929]" (September 18, 1929, p. 1).

Following the stock market crash in October, Standard, like Harvard and

Moody's, becomes much less certain of its forecasts. In November it states

that the "full significance of the drastic drop in security values on

future business can in no wise be measured" (November 27, 1929, p. 1).

       business Week is also quite positive about the future course of

business and quite certain of its forecasts in the fall of 1929. In early

October it states that "business is not collapsing; it is merely settling

down to a normal pace" (October 5, 1929, p. 3). Following the crash it is

definitely more uncertain of its forecast. In early November business Week

tates that "early in 1930 business is likely to resume its normal stride,

if business men will keep their shirts on and roll up their sleeves"

(November 9, 1929, p. 3).    In January it is even more uncertain, stating

"the forecasters cannot yet read the riddle of 1930" (January 8, 1930, p.

48).

       In contrast to the other forecasters, The Magazine of Wall Street

(Wa].l Street) appears to be nearly as certain of its forecasts after the

crash as it was before the crash. Wall Street states in September 1929

that "it would require some extraordinary conditions to bring on one of the

old-time depressions" (September 21, 1929, p. 953). In November, it states
                                      33

with equal confidence that "the general outlook for trade and industry is

thus one in which moderate restraint may be evidenced for some months, but

      recovery to a fair measure of prosperous conditions may be

anticipated before the new year is far advanced" (November 16, 1929, p.

96). Despite the fact that Wall Street does not show a dramatic increase

in uncertainty following the Great Crash, this analysis of forecasts from

around the collapse of stock prices indicates that four of the five

forecasters were noticeably less confident of their forecasts immediately

following the crash than in the months before.

     It is important to note that, with the exception of Business Week, all

of the forecasters who become less confident indicate that it is due to the

stock crash. Several of the forecasters stress that the stock market crash

was an exogenous event. There are numerous references to the "gigantic

bubble of speculation in stocks," the fact that "the (stocki market is now

almost wholly 'psychological' ," and "the pricking of the speculative

bubble."17 Forecasters are uncertain about the effects of this exogenous

event because they see conflicting tendencies. The forecasters are very

aware that in the past drastic movements in stock prices or financial

panics sometimes preceded recessions. More importantly, as will be

discussed later, all of the forecasters believe that the crash will cause

consumer uncertainty which will tend to lower spending and thus depress

output. On the other hand, the forecasters see the fact that business

inventories are not excessive as a favorable sign and have great faith that

the Federal Reserve will lower interest rates and hence encourage

investment. The forecasters appear to be unsure about which of these

conflicting tendencies will predominate.

     While the confidence that forecasters expressed in their predictions
                                       34

 is obviously an important measure of uncertainty, the divergence of

 forecasts is another measure. Several authors have noted that most of the

 contemporaneous forecasts were fairly positive following the Great Crash,

 at least in light of what eventually happened to output over the course of

 the Great Depression (see for example, Temin (1976) and Dominguez, Fair,

 and Shapiro (1986)). However, it is clear from a reading of several

 forecasts that there was more divergence than usual in the point estimates

 of the forecasts shortly after the collapse of stock prices.

      Evidence that this was the case is provided by the fact that the

 forecasters themselves commented on this divergence frequently. Standard

 notes that "with the opening of the new year, there is a wide conflict of

 opinion as to what is in store for industry and commerce during the early

part of 1930" (January 3, 1930, p.1). Business Week also notes that

 "opinions may differ as to whether or not the stock market collapse     .




need necessarily be followed by a serious business recession!. (November 30,

1929, p. 44). Such divergence of opinion may be important if srie believes

that forecasters do not merely mirror public expectations,
                                                             butactually
affect them. In this case, consumers and     ducers might be made quite

uncertain because they are receiving conflicting predictions from the
economic experts.

     i22Q.. While this evidence suggests that forecaster uncertainty

increased following the Great Crash of October 1929, it does not indicate

whether this was a unique event.   It could be that forecasters always

become uncertain in downturns. To get a sense of whether the rise in

uncertainty in November 1929 was unique, I examine the forecasts and

analyses of the same forecasters examined above for the periods surrounding

the recessions of 1920-21 and l92324.l8 As with the previous analysis, I
                                      35

examine the forecasts from the several months before any signs of downturn

through the end of the following year.

     I find that the dramatic change in forecasters' expressions of

confidence that followed the Great Crash does not occur in either 1921 or

1924. In these earlier downturns there is never a time when several of the

forecasters simultaneously express greater uncertainty. Furthermore,

several of the forecasters are equally confident throughout both 1921 and

1924. For example, Harvard states with surety in February 1924 that

"conditior thus remain favorable to the maintenance of generally good

business conditions" (February 2, 1924, p. 28) and again in May with equal

confidence that "business is not now facing a period of general depression"

(May 17, 1924, p. 134).

     In the l920s some of the forecasters do periodically express

uncertainty about their forecasts, but these statements seem to be vague

disclaimers, the essence of which is that forecasting is difficult. For

example, Moody's ends nearly every forecast with a statement such as "the

above interpretation of 1921 developments is, of course, tentative insofar

as details are concerned. But I have full confidence that the general

trend which I have outlined will develop" (January 6, 1921, p. 7).

Similarly, Standard occasionally includes such statements as "the view

itself is to be interpreted as an estimate of the probabilities, rather

than as a cocksure forecast" (November 26, 1923, p. 375).

     There does not appear to be any systematic pattern to these

disclaimers, except perhaps that they appear slightly more frequently when

the analyst is forecasting a change in direction rather than the

continuation of current conditions. Furthermore, they occur at radically

different times for different forecasters and are never followed by
                                        36

statements about when the forecaster expects to be more certain as they

often are in 1929. Thus, they are at most statements of permanent

uncertainty among the forecasters, not the statements of extreme temporary

uncertainty that are so common following the Great Crash. These

characteristics indicate that the five forecasters did not become uncertain

in these earlier downturns as they did in 1929. This suggests that the

rise in uncertainty in 1929 was an unusual event that could have been an

important source of the unusually large and mysterious drop in spending and

output in the first year of the Great Depression.

     121Q.   While   it appears that the rise in uncertainty due to the stock

market crash in late 1929 and early 1930 can explain why output plummeted

immediately following the crash, there remains the question of why the

economy remained depressed and in fact continued to decline through all of

1930. Judging from the five business analyses that I have examined, the

answer may be that uncertainty continued or at least reappeared at various

points in 1930.

     In the spring of 1930 most of the forecasters appear to become both

very positive and very certain. For example, Moody's states in April that

"the inescapable conclusion is that we are not facing a business

depression" (April 24, 1930, p. 1-172). Similarly, Harvard, which had said

in November that it could not make a forecast, States in April that "what

this forecast means for second quarter business may now be indicated more

precisely" and forecasts that "by May or June,   .   .   . [there   should be]

definite evidence of a more substantial recovery in business" (April 19,

1930, p. 104).

     This apparent certainty may indicate that uncertainty related to the

Great Crash was resolved in the spring of 1930. However, it is possible
                                      37

 that this confidence should not be taken at face value. Beginning in late

November, Herbert Hoover called a series of conferences of businessmen, the

purpose of which was to "talk up" business. Indeed, Hoover's main response

to the stock market crash and the ensuing decline in real output was to

promulgate optimistic forecasts and to encourage others to do so as well.

It seems very likely that the professional analysts came under pressure to

participate in this "prosperity propaganda program" and hence introduced

into their forecasts a degree of manufactured optimism.

     Indirect evidence that this did happen is provided by the analysis of

Standard in the spring of 1930. Standard is openly skeptical of the Hoover

program. It states: "officialdom takes the attitude that its function is

to point out whatever is bright in the picture" and therefore "the business

community cannot look to its political government .   .   . to   analyze business

conditions fairly and impartially" (March 19, 1930, p.3). When Standard

announces in the same issue that "uncertainties in the situation are still

too numerous to permit the formation of an iron-bound opinion as regards

the longer term prospect for industrial production" it seems clear that it

is proud of not taking part in the Hoover boosterism (March 19, 1930, p.1).

     In addition to the fact that many of the forecasters may have been

artificially confident in the second quarter of 1930, they are also openly

uncertain and negative by the summer. For example, Moody's seems to be

quite unsure of its current forecast when it states in June that "within

the next two or three months it may be possible to say with more certainty

just how far this improvement will go and whether it will be sustained or

not" (June 27, 1930, p.1-280). Similarly, 8usiness Week, which seemed to

pride itself on positive prognostications in the spring of 1930, States in

June that "the prospects of early return to normal levels are less hopeful"
                                     38


(June 11, 1930, p. 1). This suggests that at the very least forecaster

uncertainty rose again in the summer of 1930.



Consumer Uncertainty

     As mentioned above, the forecasts of the five business analysts

provide evidence not only of their own expectations but also those of

average consumers. The descriptions that the business analysts provide of

consumer expectations suggest that consumers became uniquely uncertain

immediately following the Great Crash. The forecasters also provide

plausible reasons for believing that consumers remained uncertain

throughout 1930.

     1929. Before the crash in 1929, most of the analysts barely mentioned

consumers. Those that did merely stressed that consumption was at record

levels and that retail sales were expected to remain high. For example,

Moody's states in August 1929 that the large purchasing power in the hands

of the people will keep on transmuting itself into effective retail demand

for all kinds of consumption goods" (August 12, 1929, p. 1-174).

     After the crash the references to consumer uncertainty are many.

Moody's, for example, argues that the factors which 'may ultimately prove

more important than any calculated estimate of losses in purchasing power

      [are] the individual attitude and sentiment of people who have been

affected by the stock market." It States further that "the effect of the

general sentiment may be to slow down business activity" (both quotations

are from Moody's, November 18, 1929, p. 1-242). In December Moody's is

even more explicit about the rise in uncertainty. It discusses "the stock

market break, which undermined general confidence" and indicates that

"during the past few weeks almost everybody held his plans in abeyance and
                                        39

waited for the horizon to clear" (December 16, 1929, P. 1-257).

       Standard, like Moody's, not only mentions the rise in uncertainty, but

also differentiates its effect on consumer spending from the effect of the

decline in wealth. Several issues of its report in the fall of 1929

contain statements such as: "reflecting the loss of purchasing power, as

well as public confidence, resulting from the collapse of security values,

we anticipate a sizable decline in internal business during early future

months" (November 20, 1929, p. 1). The Harvard Weekly Letters, while not

discussing consumer uncertainty directly, notes that "coinciding with the

break in stock prices, department store trade showed a pronounced

shrinkage" (November 30, 1929, p. 284) and refers to "a spirit of caution

widely prevalent" (December 21, 1929, p. 308).

       Business Week and even The Mazazine of Wall Street, which does not

become obviously more uncertain of its own forecast, also believe that

consumers became very uncertain following the itock market crash. In early

November, Business Week refers to "the hysteria that accompanied the market

upheaval" and the resulting "suspicious and nervous public' (November 2,

1929, p. 3). Similarly, Wall Street states that "in itself, a severe

reaction in stock prices has an unfavorable influence on general trade both

by curtailing purchasing power and by impairing the confidence of consumers

and business men alike." It also notes that as a result of his

uncertainty, "there has been a tendency to reduce or postpone projected

commitments" (both quotations are from Wall Street, November 16, 1929, p.

94).

       All of the forecasters clearly feel that consumers, and to some degree

businessmen, became more uncertain about future income as a direct result

of the collapse of stock market prices. The forecasters are also quite
                                     40

explicit about the effect of this rise in uncertainty. They are all

certain that it will retard consumer spending on "furs, jewelry,

automobiles, radios, furniture, and anything else that may be classified

under the title of unessential" (Standard, November 20, 1929, p. 4).

     12Q. The emphasis on consumer uncertainty following the Great Crash

is particularly remarkable given that consumers are rarely mentioned during

other periods in the 1920s. In the downturn of 1923-24, most references to

consumers stress that consumption is doing well. For example, Standard

states in November 1923 that "still consumption holds its even pace"

(November 26, 1923, p. 376) and stresses in April 1924 that "high

consumption" is a favorable indicator (April 28, 1924, p. 136). Similarly,

Harvard states in the summer of 1924 that "retail trade, during the first

half of the year, compared favorably with the corresponding period of last

year" (July 19, 1924, p. 202).

     As the downturn deepens in the second quarter of 1924, there is some

mention of a drop in consumption. However, the source of this drop is

attributed to a drop in purchasing power due to rising unemployment. For

example, Moody's states in June 1924 that 'the growing unemployment,

although still moderate, naturally involves a diminution of the public

purchasing power, and this diminution is plainly reflected in the sales of

retail stores" (June 12, 1924, p. 241). This is very different from the

discussion in 1929 where the analysts specifically differentiate between

the effect on consumption of the decline in wealth and the rise in

unemployment and the effect on consumption of the rise in uncertainty.

     In 1920-21 there is some discussion of a drop in consumption but it

is much less widespread than in 1929. A few analysts feel that consumer

spending is being reduced because of expectations of deflation. For
                                         41

example, Standard states in the fall of 1920: "the public is displaying

caution in its purchases owing to the general expectation that prices will

go lower" (October 11, 1920, p. 59). However, the possibility that

consumers are feeling uncertain about future income is not mentioned at

all. Thus, the qualitative evidence on consumer expectations suggests that

the rise in uncertainty in November 1929 was uniquely large and therefore

could have had a uniquely strong negative effect on consumer spending.

        Q. The descriptions that the business analysts give of consumer

and business expectations also suggest that the unusual level of

uncertainty in late 1929 continued and perhaps increased through 1930. Th

Harvard Weekly Letters, for example, states in May that "the latest break

in stock prices, both because of the fresh losses entailed and the effect

on business sentiment, is an influence temporarily retarding business

improvement" (May 17, 1930, p. 128). In June Harvard again states that

"current business sentiment is apprehensive" and lists as the reasons for

this:

        (1) "belated realization that ... the Washington business
              conferences must be slow in yielding tangible effects"

        (2) "prolonged suspense concerning the tariff revision"

        (3) "alarm about the continuing weakness in prominent commodity
              markets"

        (4) "fear of further liquidation in the stock market"

        (5) "concern lest the current easy-money policy of the federal
              reserve system and of foreign central banks may prove short-
              lived" (June 21, 1930, p. 154).

        Moody's also discusses uncertainty in 1930 and stresses the causal

role of political factors.     In May it speaks of "the widening dissension

within the party in power . .    . [which)   will create even more uncertainty

and hesitation in the minds of business men" (May 22, 1930, p. 1-229). In
                                      42

the discussion of consumers, Moody's says that "the recent conservatism in

buying [is] caused by lower purchasing power and accentuated by

psychological uncertainties" (July 24, 1930, P. 1-303, 304).

     Standard and Business Week also both see a great deal of uncertainty

among producers and consumers during all of 1930. Standard speaks of "this

particular time of persistent uncertainty throughout the country" (April

23, 1930, p. 2) and Business Week states that "there is a widespread and

disquieting uncertainty as to how far this recovery will go and how long it

will be before normal level of activity will again be approached" (February

22, 1930, back cover). Business Week believes that this uncertainty is

partly due to "the drastic worldwide deflation of commodity prices"

(February 22, 1930, back cover) and partly due to "conflict and chaos in

Washington" which has led to "business hesitation in long-time commitments"

(May 14, 1930, p. 1).

     Both of these analysts also believe that businessmen and consumers are

particularly hesitant in 1930 because over-optimistic forecasts lad them to

expect recovery too soon. Standard, for example, states that

"readjuscments ... were postponed in the hope that they would not be

necessary" (October 22, 1930, p. 2). Business Week suggests that "business

is now suffering chiefly from a pain in the expectations, due mainly to

overproduction of official forecasts of early and easy return of the swell

times of yesteryear" (May 14, 1930, p. 1). In this way, it seems quite

possible that Hoover's prosperity propaganda program could have contributed

to the uncertainty of consumers and producers in 1930 because it led to

forecasts that were so at odds with actual economic conditions. As a

result, people may have decided to delay spending as they waited for

further information that would either effectively support or contradict the
                                       43

  official and professional forecasts about the course of income in the near

  future.

       Several of forecasters Stress the importance of deliberations over and

  the eventual passing of the Hawley-Smoot tariff in causing uncertainty both

 before the Great Crash, and especially in 1930. For example, in June 1930,

 Wall Street refers to the fact that "uncertainty   ... [hasj   been the new

 order of the day' (June 14, 1930, p. 254) and suggests that the "suspense

 and indecision created by the final outcome of the new rates included in

 the Hawley-Smoor tariff bill' has been an important cause of this

 uncertainty (June 14, 1930, p. 289). Business Week reports in June 1930

 that business is experiencing "anxiety over effects of the new tariff" and

 argues that the "flexibility [provisions of the tariffj mean chronic

 uncertainty" (June 25, 1930, p. 1 and p. 48, respectively).

      This evidence indicates that the five business analysts all view

 consumers and investors as remaining uncertain and perhaps becoming more

 uncertain throughout much of 1930. However, whereas the analysts all

 agreed that the stock market crash was the primary source of uncertainty in

 late 1929 and early 1930, they see more varied sources in the second,

third, and fourth quarters of 1930. Continued declines in securities

prices is certainly a major source, but commodity price falls, tariff

legislation, and excessive government optimism are also seen as   important

factors generating uncertainty among consumers and producers in mid and
late 1930.

     The continuation of uncertainty in 1930 may explain why consumption

did not rebound after its precipitous decline immediately
                                                            following the

Great Crash. Because consumers remained uncertain, they found it

advantageous to continue to postpone purchases of durable goods. The
                                     44

possible increase in uncertainty in 1930 may also explain why the downturn

became more severe. In the context of the simple model of Section I, if

uncertainty genuinely increased then this could have   caused the downturn to

                                                              that
accelerate. In this way, the qualitative evidence suggests

uncertainty can explain not only the initial collapse of output in late

1929, but also the continued drop in consumption throughout 1930.




CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS FOR 1987-8

     This analysis has investigated a possible link between the stock

market crash of October 1929 and the rapid acceleration of real      economic

decline in late 1929 and all of 1930. The paper has used theoretical

arguments, empirical results, and qualitative evidence on expectations to

 suggest that the stock market crash temporarily increased uncertainty about

 the course of future income and that the result of this temporary

 uncertainty was that consumers, and to a lesser degree investors, cut

                                                                                to
 spending on durable goods drastically as they waited for the uncertainty

 be resolved. This story can provide an explanation for some important

 puzzles that have previously prevented a complete explanation of     the Great

 Depression. Namely, it can explain why consumption spending dropped

 precipitously in late 1929 and early 1930 despite the fact that such

 spending is typically a stable function of income, and why investment

 spending also declined substantially despite the fact that monetary policy

 appears to have been quite loose.

      Given that this paper finds a link between the Great Crash and the

 onset of the Great Depression, it is natural to wonder whether these

 results provide insight into the behavior of the economy following the
                                        45

October 1987 collapse of stock prices. Before answering this question, it

is important to point out that there is no reason to presume that a stock

crash today will have the same effects that it did 50 years ago. In

general, the changes in the structure of the economy and the role of the

government that have occurred since the New Deal make it possible that any

given shock will have a different effect today than it did in 1929. This

is especially true in the case of a stock market crash. In 1929 the

collapse of stock prices had large real effects because it generated

tremendous uncertainty about future income. If the government today is

perceived as a ready stabilizer or if the level of economic understanding

has increase substantially over time, then it is possible that a modern

stock crash will not generate the uncertainty that it once did.

        Despite these caveats, it is possible to find some evidence that

forces similar to those present in 1929 were working in the months

immediately following the stock market crash of 1987. Between the third

and fourth quarters of 1987, real consumption spending declined nearly 1

percent. This is the largest one quarter drop in consumption since the

recession of 1980, and is large even in comparison to the drops related to

the oil price shocks of the mid-l970s. More importantly, this drop appears

to be unrelated to the movements in income that one would normally expect

to determine consumption spending. Thus, it is possible that consumers

responded to the recent stock market crash by cutting back on their

spending on durable and semidurable goods in the same way that they did in

1929.

        Following the dramatic one quarter decline, consumption recovered and

began to grow at a normal rate. This is obviously different from the first

year of the Great Depression when real consumer spending continued to fall
                                      46

throughout 1930, with only brief periods of respite. However, the

experience of 1930 may provide insight into why the economy appears to have

recovered so quickly in 1988. In 1930, the uncertainty generated by the

October stock crash was not resolved quickly. Rather, as the analysis of

the contemporary forecasts in Section III revealed, the uncertainty

continued and probably increased during 1930 because of further drastic

stock price declines, the collapse of commodity prices, and misguided

government policies. As a result of this continued and intensified

uncertainty, consumption remained depressed throughout 1930.

     In 1988, it is possible that the uncertainty generated by the October

1987 crash was resolved quickly. Since October, stock price movements have

been more moderate than they were in late 1929 and early 1930 and the

economic news has in general been much more positive. As a result,

consumers may have regained their confidence and started spending in 1988

in a way that they did not in 1930. If this true, then this analysis may

suggests that it is simple good fortune that has prevented the most recent

stock market crash from plunging the U.S. into an economic downturn.
                                     APPENDIX

                       Sources of Prewar Economic Forecasts



 Business Week

 1929-30: Business Week. The forecasts appear in the section entitled
              "Business Outlook."

 1920-24: The magazine did not begin until August 1929.


 Harvard

 1929-30: Harvard Economic Society. Weekly Letters. Most of the forecasts
           are found in the letter entitled "Business and Financial
           Conditions: The Business Outlook" which appeared once a month.

 1923-24: Harvard Economic Service. Weekly Letters. The forecasts are
           found in the letter entitled "General Business Conditions."

 1920-21: The material which later appears in the Weekly Letters is
           contained in these years in The Review of Economic Statistics.
           The relevant sections are entitled "General Business Conditions"
           and 'Review of the First (Second, etc.) Quarter of the Year."




All years: Moody's Investors Service. Moody's Investors Service. The
          forecasts typically appear in the issue entitled "Monthly
          Analysis of Business Conditions."


Standard

1929-30: Standard Statistics Company, Inc. Standard Trade and Securities
          Service. The forecasts appear in the monthly issue entitled "The
          Business Prospect."

1920-24: Standard Statistics Company, Inc. Standard Daily Trade Service.
          The forecasts usually appear in the supplement entitled "The
          Business Prospect."


Wall Street

All years: The Magazine of Wall Street. The forecasts appear periodically
          in articles with varying titles.
                                 ENDNOTES


1. In the case that the durable good is a car V0 can be thought of as the
utility value of a very old car or the utility that the consumer receives
from walking to work or being free of having to maintain a car.   I assume
that V0 is small enough that under certainty one will always choose to
replace the durable after it is fully depreciated (i.e. after N periods).

2. There is a market for durable goods even in a downturn because a
fraction of the stock of durables is depreciating completely in any period.

3. This argument assumes that there is no change in the relative price of
new and used durable goods over the cycle. It also does not apply to goods
at the extremes of the quality spectrum.

4. Among the factors that might affect whether or not a resale market
develops are ease of determining the quality of a used good and the
installation or transportation Costs associated with the good.

5. See, for example, Galbraith (1955), Chandler (1970), and the
contemporary forecasters whose views are discussed in Section III of this
paper.

6. Both of these stories provide a partial equilibrium explanation of why
a stock crash could generate temporary uncertainty. Neither of them takes
into account the fact that if people knew the model given above, they
should have known that if they became uncertain following the crash, they
would cut their consumption and hence cause a decline in output for sure.
As a result, if they were completely rational, they should have been
pessimistic following the crash, not merely uncertain. The neglect of this
possibility rests on the assumption that consumers and producers do not
know the true model of the economy. While this assumption is perhaps
unconventional, it appears quite realistic, particularly for the pre-Worid
War II period.

7. The exact timing of this fall in sales is actually somewhat uncertain.
Most likely, if uncertainty related to the stock crash were the crucial
determinant of the drop in sales, the drop should occur very soon after
late October 1929. However, Bernanke (l983a) argues that the drop in
spending may not occur immediately if an event must persist for a while
before it generates uncertainty.

8. See Federal Reserve Bulletin, June 1944, p. 543 for a discussion of the
relationship between department store sales and total retail sales.

9. For mail-order sales, but not for any other series on spending on
consumer durables, there is also a substantial residual in September 1929.
Because mail-order houses sell mainly to agricultural areas, this drop in
September may reflect conditions in the agricultural sector in the fall of
1929.

10. The fact that the forecast errors for both series are slightly
negative in November is somewhat at odds with the model given in Section I
which predicts that the spending on nondurables should actually have risen
in response to temporary uncertainty. This finding could be due to the
fact that the sales series may be driven by industry specific effects or by
the fact that income and wealth both fell somewhat in late 1929.

11. For an evaluation of the Shaw series, see Romer (forthcoming).

12. In this estimation the years corresponding to the direct U.S.
involvement in World War I, 1917 and 1918, are excluded.

13. This claim assumes that the behavior of inventories of particular
types of goods mimics that of total inventories. While postwar evidence
suggests that this is a reasonable assumption, it is possible that
inventories of particular goods could have fallen, despite the rise in
total inventories.

14. It is useful to emphasize that because current total commodity output
is included as an explanatory variable in these regressions, the fact that
durables always decline substantially in a depression is accounted for. As
a result, the forecast errors in other major downturns such as 1893, 1908,
and 1921 are typically not large or of a particular sign.

15. As the discussion of previous research in the introduction would
suggest, simple wealth effects due to the decline in stock values cannot
explain much of the unusual behavior of consumer durables and seinidurables
in 1929 and 1930. If one replaces v in equation (13) with the simple
percentage change in the level of the stock market over the year, the
forecast errors remain large. For consumer durables the forecast errors
are - .062 in 1929 and - .003 in 1930. For consumer semidurable the forecast
errors are -.024 in 1929 and - .042 in 1930.

16. Crainlich (1983) suggests that in some situations the forecasts of
professional forecasters provide a reasonably good proxy for consumer
expectations.


17. These quotations come from Moody's, January 6, 1930, p. W-5; Business
      September 7, 1929, p. 3; and The Maaazjne of Wall Street, June 14,
1930, p. 254, respectively.

18. Only these two recessions were analyzed because most of the forecasts
do not begin until shortly before World War I. No forecasts are analyzed
for Business Week for these earlier cycles because the magazine only came
into existence in August 1929.
                                REFERENCES


Abramovitz, Moses. Inventories and Business Cycles. New York: NBER,
      1950.
Automobile Trade Journal and Motor Aze. Various Issues.

Bernanke, Ben S. "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment."
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (February 1983): 85-106. (a)

___________  "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
      Propagation of the Great Depression." American Economic Review 73
      (June 1983): 257-276.   (b)

Chandler, Lester V. America's Greatest Depression: 1929-1941. New York:
      Harper & Row, 1970.

Cowles, Alfred, and Associates. Common-Stock Indexes. 2nd Edition.
      Bloomington, Indiana: Principia Press, 1939.

Dominguez, Kathryn M., Ray C. Fair, and Matthew D. Shapiro. "Forecasting
      the Depression: Harvard Versus Yale." NBER Working Paper 2095,
      1986.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer. Macroeconomics, 3rd Edition.
      New York: McGraw Hill, 1984.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United
      States. 1867-1.960. NBER. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
      1963.

Gaibraith, John K. The Great Crash. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1955.

Gordon, Robert J. and James A. Wilcox. "Monetarist Interpretations of the
      Great Depression: An Evaluation and Critique." In The Great
      Depression Revisited, Karl Brunner, ed. Boston: Martinus Nijhoff,
      1981, pp. 49-107.

Gramlich, Edward M. "Models of Inflation Expectations Formation." Journal
      of Money. Creditand Banking 15 (May 1983): 155-173.

Hamilton, James D. "Monetary Factors in the Great Depression." Journal of
      Monetary Economics 19 (March 1987): 145-170.

Lipsey, Robert E. and Doris Preston. Source Book of Statistics Relatina to
      Construction. New York: NBER, 1966.

Mayer, Thomas. "Consumption in the Great Depression." Journal of
      Political Economy 86 (February 1978): 139-145.

             "Money and the Great Depression: A Critique of Professor
      Temin's Thesis." Explorations in Economic History 15 (1978): 127-
      145.
Mishkin, Frederic S.  "The Household Balance Sheet and the Great
      Depression." Journal of Economic History 38 (December 1978):    918-
      937.

Romer, Christina D.  "The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered: New
      Estimates of Gross National Product, 1869-1908." Journal of
      Political Economy, forthcoming.

Shaw, William H. Value of Commodity QutDut since 1869. New York: NBER,
      1947.

Standard Statistics Co. ,   Standard Statistical Bulletin. 1930-31 and 1932
      Base Book.

Temin, Peter. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Deoression. New York:
      W. W. Norton, 1976.

U. S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Federal Reserve
      Bulletin, Various issues.

U. S. Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce. Survey of Current Business.
      Various issues.

U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Historical Summary from Detailed Monthly
      CPI Reoorts. Microfiche, 1987.

Zeldes, Stephen P.  "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income:
      Deviations from Certainty Equivalence." Rodney L. White Center for
      Financial Research (Wharton) Working Paper No. 20-86, 1986.
                                         TABLE 1

                       Behavior of Real Monthly Spending




                            Forecast Errors of the Prediction Equation for the
                                Percentage Change in Real Monthly Spending
                                              (Equation 11)

Series          SEE         Sept    Oct           Nov        Dec         Jan        Feb     Mar
                            1929    1929          1929       1929        1929       1929    1929




Department
Store Sales     .035        .093   -.026      -   .064       .027    -   .098   -   .034   -   .042



Mail-order
Sales           .087    -   .114   -   .098   -   .098       .084    •
                                                                         .252   -   .155   -   .179



Automobile
Registrations .092          .029   -   .149   -.137      -   .052    -
                                                                         .132       .096   -   .170


Residential
Construction
Contracts       .137    -   .059   -   .119   -   .139   -   .071    -
                                                                         .162       .169   -   .189

Commercial &
Industrial
Construct ion
Contracts       .155    -   .156   -   .038       .031       .028    -   .519       .137       .027




Ten- cent
Store Sales     .038    -.077      -.059      -.010      -.043       -.035          .010   -.060




Grocery
Store Sales     .035    -   .068       .017   -
                                                  .019       .02].         NA         NA         NA
                            Table 1, continued



Sources: The Department Store sales series is from the Federal Reserve
8ulletin, June 1944, p. 549. I use the version of the FRZ index that
covers the entire United States.

      The series on Mail-Order sales is from the Survey of Current
Business, 1932 Annual Supplement, pp. 50-51, and various earlier issues.

      The series on new car registrations for 1925-1929 is from Standard
Statistics Co. ,Standard Statistical Bulletin, 1930-31 Base Book, March
1930, p. 182. The data for 1930 are from various issues of the Automobile
Trade Journal and Motor Ace.

      The residential construction contracts series is series A8 from
Lipsey and Preston, 1966, p. 73. The commercial and industrial contracts
series is the sum of series A17 and Al9 from Lipsey and Preston, 1966, pp.
95-96 and 100-101.

      The series on Ten-Cent Store sales is from the Standard Statistical
Bulletin, 1932 Base Book, January 1932, p. 174.

      The series on Grocery Store sales is from the Federal Reserve
Bulletin, April 1928, pp. 234-235, and later monthly issues of the
Bulletin.


Notes: For all series I use the version that is not adjusted for seasonal
variation. The series for Department Store sales Mail-Order sales, and
Ten-Cent Store sales are deflated by the Consumer Price Index for all
goods, (CPI-W, 1957-59—100). The series for Grocery Store sales is
deflated by the Consumer Price Index for food (CPI-W 1969—100). Both
these price series are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Historical.
SummarY from Detailed Monthly CPI Reoorts, microfiche, 1987.
                                        TABLE 2

                        Behavior of Reel Commodity Output




                                                      Forecast Errors of the
                                                    Prediction Equation for the
                                                  Percentage Ch ange in Commodity
                                                       Output    (Equation 12)
 Commodity Output
by Minor Group                     SEE                       1929               1930



 Consumer Perishables

Manufactured Food                 .050                   -.018                  .051
Nonmanufactured Food              .068                   -.058              -
                                                                                .023
Tobacco Products                  .053                       .033           -
                                                                                .043
Drugs and Toiletries              .065                       .028               .037
Magazines and Newspapers          .109                   -   .032               .033
Manufactured Fuels               .094                        .065               .007
Nonmanufactured Fuels            .128                    -   .038           -   .146
Total                            .035                    .OO8                   .020


Consumer Semidurables

Dry Goods and Notions            .075                        .028       -       .044
Clothing                         .069                        .005       -       .053
Shoes and Boots                  .059                    - .003         -.075
House Furnishings                .069                    - .011         -       .001
Tires and Tubes                  .247                    - .291
                                                                                .101

Total                            .043                    -
                                                             .035       -       .070

Consumer Durables

Household Furniture              .077                -       .082       -       .102
Stoves and Furnaces              .158                        .037               .053
Floor Coverings                  .065                        .017       -       .238
China and Utensils               .122                -
                                                             .038       -       .110
Musical Instruments              .117                -
                                                             .281               .320
Jewelry and Silverware           .194                - .041             -       .208
Luggage                          .075                -
                                                       .008             -       .169
Motor Vehicles                   .240                - .268             -
                                                                            .327
Motor Vehicle Accessories        .247                - .227
                                                                            .094
Pleasure Craft                   .165                        .327           .420

Total                            .078                -
                                                             .082       -   .042
                              TABLE 2, Continued




                                                 Forecast Errors of the
                                               Prediction Equation for the
                                              Percentage Change in Commodity
                                                   Output   (Equation 12)
Commodity Output
by Minor Group                   SEE                1929             1930


Producer Durables
Industrial Machinery            .158                .140             .226
Tractors                        .761                .025            - .137
Electrical Equipment            .159                .008             .047
Farm Equipment                  .166                .025             .119
Office and Store Machinery      .164               - .103            .113
Office and Store Fixtures       .095                .121            -.177
Locomotives                     .243                .113             .707
Ships and Boats                 .261                .315             .505
Business Motor Vehicles         .323                .209            -.269
Carpenter's Tools               .136               - .081            .129
Miscellaneous Equipment         .133                .144             .041

Total                           .103                .175




Sources: The commodity output series is from Shaw, 1947, Table 1-3, pp.
70-77. The series represents commodity output destined for domestic
consumption, valued in 1913 dollars.

         Shaw's Table 1-3 groups some very minor commodities into a residual
category for each major group. These residual groups are not analyzed
separately here, but are included in the group totals. The sample period
used for estimation is 1889-1916 and 1921-1928. The series for tires and
tubes, stoves and furnaces, luggage, motor vehicles, motor vehicle
accessories, tractors, and business vehicles do not exist for the entire
period 1889-1930. As a result, the starting date for these regressions
must be later than 1889.
                                        TABLE 3

                    Coefficient Estimates for Equation 13


(13)             'i —            +           +
                                                 iiY +    12i't-1   +
                                                                        6it

Commodity Output             2
by Major Class           R             a                                12       6i




Total Consumer          .61           .02         - .50     .42          .14    17.00
Perishables                          (.01)        (.14)   (.10)         (.11)   (9.03)


Total Consumer          .62           .06         - .12     .55         - .37   -11.72
Semidurables                         (.02)        (.16)   (.14)         (.18)   (12.04)


Total Consumer          .78          - .02        - .13   2.01           .05     -8.99
Durables                             (.03)        (.21)    (.23)        (.51)   (22.67)


Total Producer          .76          - .13        -.42    2.41          1.96      3.69
Durables                             (.04)        (.15)    (.31)        (.45)   (28.58)




g.g: Standard errors are in parentheses. All real variables are
expressed as the first differences of logarithms (i.e. as decimals on the
order of .05). A typical value of v is .001; v is equal to .009 in 1929
and .005 in 1930. The sample period used for eshmation is 1889-1913 and
1921-1928. 1917 and 1918 are excluded because they are war years: 1914 and
1915 are excluded because it is impossible to calculate v for 1914 because
the stock market was closed for 4 months.
                                     TABLE 4

            Accounting    for the Behavior of Real Commodity Output




                                               Forecast Errors of the Prediction
                                               Equation for the Percentage Change
                                                       in Commodity Output

Commodity Output
by Major Group                                          1929              1930



Total Consumer Perishables

Simple Regression (Eqn. 12)                         -   .013              .013

With Stock Market Variability (Eqn. 13)             -   .154          -   .046


Total Consumer Semjdurables

Simple Regression (Eqn. 12)                         -   .038          -.082

With Stock Market Variability (Eqn. 13)                 .060          -   .041

Total Consumer Durables

Simple Regression (Eqn. 12)                             -   .068          -
                                                                              .022

With Stock Market Variability (Eqn. 13)                     .008              .008


Total Producer Durables

Simple Regression (Eqn. 12)                                 .186              .222

With Stock Market Variability (Eqn. 13)                     .156              .210




Sources: The commodity output series is from Shaw, 1947, Table 1-3, pp.
70-77. The stock market index is from Cowles, 1939, Table P-l, pp. 66-67.

        The stock market volatility measure is calculated as the average of
 re monthly squared stock price changes over the calendar year. The
results for the simple regression in Table 4 differ slightly from those in
Table 2 because the sample period of the regressions underlying Table 4
excludes the years 1914-1916.
