NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIQUIDITY AND MARKET STRUCTURE

Sanford J.

Grossman

Merton H. Miller

Working Paper No. 2641

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1988

A paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the American Finance Association.
December 29, 1987 in Chicago, Illinois. Helpful comments on an earlier draft
were received from Kenneth Cone, Kenneth French, T. Eric Kilcollin, Andrei
Shleifer, Lester Telser and Robert Vishny. This research is part of NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2641
July 1988

LIQUIDITY AND MARKET STRUCTURE

ABSTRACT

Market liquidity is modelled as being determined by the
demand and supply of immediacy. Exogenous liquidity events
coupled with the risk of delayed trade create a demand for

immediacy. Market makers supply immediacy by their continuous
presence, and willingness to bear risk during the time period

between the arrival of final buyers and sellers. In the long run
the number of market makers adjusts to equate the supply and

demand for immediacy. This determine the equilibrium level of
liquidity in the market. The lower is the autocorrelation in
rates of return, the higher is the equilibrium level of
liquidity.

Sanford J. Grossman
Department of Economics
Princeton University

Merton H. Miller
Department of Economics
University of Chicago

Princeton, NJ 08544

Chicago, IL 60637

LIQUXDITY AND MARKET STRUCTURE

by
Sanford J. Grossman and Merton H. Miller

I.

Introduction
Keynes once observed that while most of us could surely agree that Queen

Victoria was a happier woman, but a less successful monarch than Queen
Elizabeth I, we would be hard put to restate that notion in precise

mathematical terms. Keynes' observation could apply with equal force to the
notion of market liquidity. The T-bond Futures pit at the Chicago Board of
Trad, is surely more liquid than th. local market for residential housing.

But how much more? What

is

the decisive difference between them? Is the

colorful open-outcry format of the T-bond Futures market the source of its

great liquidity? Or does the causation run the other way?

purpose

Those are some of the issues we propose to consider here. Our

is to present a simple model of market structure that captures the essence

of

market liquidity. A key feature of the model is its finer partitioning of
time intervals and of roles for market participants than in standard

in

treatments of the determination of market prices. Much economic theory,

the Walrasian tradition, still proceeds as if prices were set in a gigantic
town meeting in which all potential buyers and sellers participate directly.

Researchers in the rapidly-growing specialty, sometimes dubbed
structur. theory, have expanded the cast to

include

market micro-

market makers in the

sense of intermediaries who can fill gaps arising from imperfect
synchronization between the arrivals of the buyers and the sellers. The
focus of this literature has been on the inventory management policies

market makers (see, e.g., Stoll (1978)) and on their responses to

2

the

of
threat

3

of adverse

information

(1985)). Our

trading against them (se. e.g., Glosten and Milgrom

intention

here, however, is not to expand this important and

interesting class of inventory models but to fit these intermediaries and
their temporary inventory holdings into a larger framework that also
encompasses the ultimate demanders and suppliers.

A riaf Overview of the Modal: The Supply and Demand for Immediacy
Our model of market structure has 2 participant groups and we shall

refer to them, for simplicity, as market makers, and outside customers. For
simplicity of exposition only, we shall take their basic tastes, including

risk tolerances, as the same. Their roles are defined at this stage
principally in terms of their initial endowments.

Within the group of outside customers are some who, for any of a variety
of reasons, experience what we call a liquidity event, which leads thea to
perceive a gap at current prices between their desired holdings of a

particular asset and their current holdings of that asset. Even if th. gaps
sum to zero across the whole group, as we assume, some customers might
propose to remedy their portfolio imbalance immediately by undertaking a
transaction in the asset; and for concreteness in exposition, suppose these

potential liquidity traders are net sellers. In our model the putative
sellers can choose to offer the goods immediately to the market makers who
happen to be in the market currently and who have no holdings of the asset,

or at least no imbalance that they too are seeking to eliminate. Or, a
seller can postpone the offer to sell for one stylized period until the
potential buyer customers on the other side of the trade have learned of the
offer and have had a chance to come to the market.

4

Clearly
buyers have

the seller faces a trade-off. By waiting until more potential

been

notified,

the

seller increases the chance of finding an

buyer. But this delay carries risks; while the buyers are assembling,

eager

the ultimate equilibrium price may shift. The best selling price for a sale

delayed

to the second period may be substantially lower (or higher) than the

price in a sale to a market maker in the first period. By selling
immediately, that interim price risk is transferred to the market maker who

then waits until the ultimate buyers have assembled. When we speak of
demand

for

the

immediacy by a seller, we mean the willingness to sell rather than

wait. This demand depends on the volatility of the underlying price and the
diversifiability of the risk of an adverse price move.
The market makers charge for bearing price risk by offering the
immediate sellers a price that is not uncertain, but that is lower, on

average, than the sellers could expect from delaying. The expected price
rise between periods 1 and 2 is. of course, only the market maker's gross

return before allowing for the costs of supplying the service. These include
any direct costs of effecting and monitoring trades, but also the important,
though often overlooked cost of being available and open for business when

th. outside customers arrive to trade. These opportunity costs of
maintaining a continuous presence in the market, which we mode], as fixed

costs, play a key role in determining the SUOD1Y of immediacy and market
making services.

The market makers, as emphasized earlier, must

also

assume the price

risk that the immediacy demanders shed. That the aggregate price risk is
merely shifted to the market makers does not, however, rule out efficiency
gains

from the arrangement. In our model, where all participants have the

5

same risk tolerance, the gains arise essentially from diversification.-ths
spreading of th. transferred risks over the entire group of market makers.
The larger chat group, the lower. ceteris oaribus the risk and expected
return per unit traded by each and hence also the lower the effective cost of
immediacy to the customers. The number of market makers will, adjust until,
in equilibrium, the returns to each from assuming the risk of waiting to
trade with the ultimate buyers just balance the Costs of maintaining a

continuous presence in the market. This adjustment determines the
equilibrium amount 'of immediacy provided, i.e., the amount by which price is
temporarily depressed by a typical sell order.

Our model thus suggests looking to differences in the cost to market
makers of maintaining a market presence and to differences in the demand by
customers for immediacy for the keys to market structure

and market

liquidity. The greater the demand for immediacy and the lower the cost to
market makers of maintaining a continuous presence, the larger the proportion
of the transactions between ultimate customers effected initially through
market makers, and hence the more liquid the market.

The Liquidity Soectrum in Real World Market Structures
Successful futures markets ar. the leading examples of markets where the

demand for immediacy is high. Futures markets are successful precisely for
those commodities and in those time periods when price volatility, and hence

the risks of delaying trading are high. The price risks of volatility ar.
further reinforced for potential hedger Customers in those markets by the
high leverage and extreme und.r.divsrsificatiofl of the underlying spot

inventory positions that constitute their main line of business. Immediacy
also becomes of particular concern where, as is frequently the case, the

6

futurse transaction is merely one leg of an inter-contract or inter.market

hedge. Little or no risk may be incurred once all the components of the
hedge have been put in place: but much risk is incurred when only some of the

legs have been set. When the transactor is naked," to use the colorful
language of the trade, the delay of avert a few seconds can become critical.

(See, e.g., Grossman and Miller (l9B6b).)

-

The demand for immediacy in successful futures markets is not only
urgent, but sustained. The regular seasonal build up and build down of
inventories as commodities move through the production chain creates a

continual desire to trade, not just to b2]. futures. In financial futures
markets, dealers' inventories of the underlying securities build up and down
in respons. to periodic auctions of U.S. Treasury issues, to the flotation of
stocks or bonds by corporations or to the restructuring of portfolios by
large institutional investors.

The sustained demand for hedging and hence for trading futures quickly
is often accommodated by designating a specific physical market place or
exchange in which many competing market makers can offer their services

simultaneously. Such arrangements help spread the fixed costs to market
makers of maintaining a presence, as does the practice at most present-day
futures exchanges of providing trading areas for many different contracts
between which individual market makers can drift as trading interest changes.
Many, but not all, futures exchanges also permit market makers to serve both
as brokers for customers and as

traders

on personal account, though not, of

course, on the same transaction. Moet floor traders tend to specialize in
one role or the other, but the freedom to switch roles can permit a quick

7

adjustment in the number of market makers when the flow of orders changes
1

abruptly.

At the opposite extreme from the highly liquid futures markets where
intermediary market makers participate as principals in virtually all
transactions, stand the highly illiquid markets, such as those for
residential housing, where virtually non. of the transactions passes through

a dealer's temporary inventory.2 Sellers of individual homes are typically
less concerned with short-term price volatility, and hence with immediacy,
than with making sure that the widest possible set of ultimate buyers can be

informed of the house's availability. Potential market makers, moreover,
face not only all the ordinary costs of maintaining a continuous presence in
a thin market, but the additional moral hazards that arise from the owner's

possibly adverse private information about the value of the property. The
result is a market in which intermediaries, to the extent that they are
involved at all, provide brokerage or search services, not immediacy.

The Structure of the Stock Mprke;
Most real-world markets lie somewhere between these liquidity extremes
and their structures will typically mix features from both the search markets

and the liquidity markets. U.S. stock market institutions, for example,

'For a discussion of the benefits and the supposed abuses of dual
trading on futures exchanges, see Grossman and Miller (l986b).
2Although the fraction of potential trades executed immediately by
market makers rather than d.lay.d for search is higher for futures exchanges
than in virtually any other market setting, search plays a role even there.
A cas, in point is so-called sunshin. trading in which pending large
and presumably informationless orders by portfolio insurers are publicized in
advanc, throughout the investment counLty with a view to attracting a large
inflow of counterpartias prepared to tak. th. other side. Whether such
sunshine trading violates long-standing regulatory prohibitions against
pr.arranged trading" is a policy issu. currently much in dispute.

8

currently involv, at least four distinct forms of market organization
operating simultaneously, but in different segments of th. market and with
somewhat different immediacy clienteles:
1..

For a few of the most widely held and heavily traded securities,

such as IBfl or AT&T. the market at the New York Stock Exchange often

approximates th. open-outcry pits at the commodity exchanges. These are
stocks in which the minute to minute order flow is highly variable relative
to the arrival of news about the underlying valu, of the shares, and for

which our model predicts a large number of market makers in equilibrium. The
"crowd for those stocks, though substantially smaller than in the T.bond
futures market, is large enough to offer a competitive discipline to the

Exchange's tranchised "specialist, who, in these particularly active
markets, typically plays more the rol. of an auctioneer (and a commission
collector) than a market maker on personal account.

2. The specialist's role as a market maker assumes greater prominence
for the hundreds of smaller, less active stocks, some of which may not even

trade as frequently as once a day. In such stocks, our model would not

predict an equilibrium with many market makers. The designation of a
specialist by the Exchange. however, does at least guarantee that someone

will indeed be maintaining a physical presence in the market, ready to effect

a transaction should an order happen to arrive. The potential for abuse of
the specialist's monopoly position is mitigated by the same standard cross-

subsidization approach long familiar in U.S. public utility regulation. As a
condition for keeping the franchise, specialists on the New York Stock
Exchange, for example, are encouraged by the Exchange to limit price changes
between successive transactions to no more than one tick (normally 12 1/2

9

cents per share), using personal inventory to absorb arty temporary imbalances

along the way. This restriction, which is in fact monitored by the Exchange,
serves both to limit specialists' profit and to create the appearance of

liquidity, though, in practice only for very small transactions. Should a
very large order arrive, however, and should it be larger than can be

absorbed by the specialist or by any previously entered limit orders then
resting in the specialist's "book, th. market can switch to search mode.
Th. specialist, with the permission of the Exchange, can suspend trading in
the stock and institute a search for courtterparties to the imbalance, either

elsewhere on the floor of the Exchange or, more likely these days, off the
floor at the block-trading desks of the investment bankers.

3. These desks are the third, and increasingly the dominant form of
market organization for trading common stocks in the U.S., thanks to the
concentration of so much corporate stock in a relatively small number of
extremely large pension funds, mutual funds and other institutional holders.
Because relatively small portfolio adjustments by these institutional holders
would be far too large to be absorbed by any specialist firm, the large
blocks of single stocks, or sometimes whol, portfolios are brought to the

upscairs sarket maintained by the investment banking firms. Until recently
at least, th. upstairs desks functioned primarily as

a search

market. The

upstairs traders essentially shopped the bl.ock among their customers, and

wh.n a

suitable

counterparty had been located, and a deal struck, reported

th. trade to the relevant sp.cialiats on th. floor of the Exchange. In the
process, they picked up on behalf of ths

initiating

side any limit orders on

the specialist's book that were transformed into market orders by the price
change occasioned by the block trade.

10

Although search was the initial, and still remains the major function of
the upstairs market, the amount

of

"positioning" and henc.

of

market-making

liquidity, provided by the upstairs firms has increased substantially in

recent years. The shift ::aces mainly to the highly liquid futures and
options index markets which permit the upstairs firms to hedge their
inventories while conducting the search for or waiting for the other side of
the transaction.

4. Finally, at th. other end of the spectrum from the upstairs,
wholesale broker-dealer market lies the retail, dealer market in Over-theCounter stocks, for which, with a few well-known exceptions, the normal

trading interest is typically too small to justify listing even on a regional

exchange) The market for such stocks is not a physical exchange floor but a
set of computer terminals. When introduced originally in the 1970's, the
computerized NASDAQ market system for OTC stocks offered essentially only a

bu1letin board in which those market makers with access to the system could
enter price quotes. The quotes, though deemed firm for some standard,
minimum size trade were essentially advertisements and the actual
transactions were not executed automatically, but negotiated between the

parties. The market makers in particular stocks, although they did position

1Soma corporations of substantial size, however, may nevertheless choose
to list in this market because there are fewer restrictions ott size and
capital structure (such as a one-share, one-vote rule) than on the NYSE or
A(!1.

U
small inventories, assumed no obligation to maintain a continuous presence or
to smooth price changes between successive transactions.'
All four forms of market organization for trading common stocks, along
with those of the index futures and options markets, were subjected in
October 1987 to what seemed to be liquidity events, in our sense, of

unprecedented magnitude. We shall return briefly to those events in Section
lit. First, however, we turn in Section II to set down the detailed
structure of our model of market liquidity and a characterization of its
equilibrium.

II. A Formal Model of Market Liquidity
In this section we present a formal model of the role of market makers

in providing immediacy. We focus most of our attention on the consequences

of a temporary order imbalance of size i in a simple world with only three

dates: 1, 2, and 3. At date I a liquidity event occurs which creates a
temporary order imbalance of size i. Market makers offset this temporary
imbalance by taking trading positions which they hold until date 2. We
denot. the nonmarket makers by the term "outside customer" although, in
practice, of course, individuals and firms can play either role at different

times. By a temporary order imbalance we mean an asynchronization of outside

tIn addition to the four markets so far listed, there may now be as many
as six distinct stock markets if one counts the "after-hours" market (which
now includes th. trading of big-name U.S. stocks on foreign exchanges) and
th. so-called "fourth marker" in which larg. pension funds, especially those
following "passive" or indexing serarsgiee, transfer baskets of stocks
directly to and from each other in essentially inforisationless trades. The
futures and options markets in stocks, of course, constitute still another
form of stock market at least for the trading if not the holding of stocks.
Many European stock markets, where the volumes of trading are still
quite small by U.S. standards, us. "batch" or "periodic caLl" systems rather
than any of the continuous trading systems we find hers. For a comprehensive
survey of trading practices overseas, sac Whitcomb (1985).

12

customer trading times; the net trading demand would be zero at the current
price if all traders were simultaneously present in the market.
At dat. 2, the market makers offset their positions as other outside

customers arrive to offset the imbalance. Thus, the length of time between
date 1. and date 2 is the period of time needed for enough orders of outside

customers to arrive at the market to offset the initial order imbalance.
Date 3 is introduced only as a terminal condition for valuing the securities

as of date

2.1

We assum, two

assets:

a risk-free asset called cash (with zero rate of

return), and a risky asset. Let P3

be the exogenously given terminal

price

(or liquidation value) of the risky asset. Assume that public information

about

2. Let

arrives before trade at period I and also before trade at period
be the number of units of the asset owned by an outside customer

after trade at time t,

and let

be that customer's holdings of cash (in

dollars). Two interpretations can be given to i.

In

the first, the

outside customer is a commercial hedger and the asset is a futures contract.

In this case, the hedger's net holding at period 3 is x3 —

+ i,

where

is the number of units of the spot commodity (which may. of course, be a

security) owned by the hedger. The hedger's terminal wealth is then

(1)

W3=32+P3i3—82+P3x2+iP3.

The hedger is using the futures market to offset the spot price P.

risk

of

the initial position. (Note that under this futures market interpretation.
the asset is in zero supply.)

'The reader is referred to Ho (1984) for a model of equilibrium market
making in a continuous-time, poisson-arrival-of-orders setting.

13

In the second interpretation, the market is a stock market, and the

outside

customer at time 1 has an endowment

of size i in the security,

which is inappropriate in the light of the customer's risk preferences and

the

information on the risk-return pattern associated with

security. In this

case, x3 is th. final holding of the security at the terminal date, and c3

—

x2.

In contrast to the futures market interpretation, the asset is not in

zero supply; and if i is correlated across customers, then the aggregate
endowment of the asset relevant for market clearing at each date t will,

affected

be

by i.

Under

either interpretation we assume that at times t —

customer chooses asset holdings ,
maximize the expected

and

a

1,

2 the

risk-free asset positiot B to

utility of terminal (i.e., date-3) wealth

E U (W3)

subject to

—

(2a)

p2x2

(2c)

P1i1 +

t1

XP
+

+ B2 — V2 —

(2b)

whir.

+

B,

—

V1

—

P1i1

+

V0

represents the initial endowment of the asset and V0 represents

oth.r wealth, Not. that:

— 0
—

If

i

i

and i3 — *2 +
and *3 —

*2
and 2 are eliminated from

W3—W0+(2 - Pi)(xi

-

in

the

futures market case;

in the stock market case.
(2a)-(2c) we

obtain

j1)÷(3 P2)(x2

-

i1)

+3i

14

whets

-

i1

represents the excess demand for the asset, whether it be a

futures contract or a stock. Therefore, it simplifies matters to define a
trader's excess demand to be

e—l,2.
In the above notation customers choose their positions to maximize

We

EU(W3)

will

+ (3

+

—

(3)

-

22 +

assume that P is normally distributed at each date,

U(W) —

(4)

and

that

-aW

By backward induction, and (4), if we let xr denote the optimal value of

cd

x2 (chosen at date 2) then

max E2U(W2

solves

P2i1 +

x2

(

-

P2)x2

+

3i)

Using the exponential utility function, the optimal value for x2 is

Cd

(5)

E2P3 -

x2 —

-i

a Var2 P3

wher. all means and variances are
Note that

the

conditioned

customers excess demand is

ed

on the information at time 2.

which is linear in i.

Hence, if all. customers are identical, except possibly with respect to i,

we can take xr to represent the aggregate demand of customers, and i to
be the aggregate potential imbalance.

We assume that there are M other traders in the market who do not hold
the spot commodity and thus face no spot price risk; these are the market

makers. (Under the stock market interpretation, assume that the

market

makers do not hold an endowment of the security prior to their date 1

15

trading with outside customers.) Market makers have the same utility

function, but for them i — 0.

Hence, if th. excess demand per market maker

is x the total excess demand by market makers in period 2

is

Mx —M _____
d

(6)

2

a Var2 P3

W. now state the assumption critical to understanding the benefits of

waiting from period I to period 2 to trade. In particular, it is that
asvnchronizatiofl of desired trades creates the demand for immediacy at time
1.

Thus,

the

positive immediacy demand felt by the customers at tias 1 is.

customers arriving at dat. 2 with th. opposite

by definition, offset by

imbalance from those who arrived at date 1. Their aggregate excess demand
is

3

-

E,P

a Var2 P3

Market clearing at date 2 requires that the excess demand of (a)
customers who arrived at date

1,

plus (b) market makers, plus (c) th. new

customers arriving at date 2 should sum to zero:

E23 -

(7)

P2

a Var2 3

-i+M

(E.P1 •

a

P2 )

Var2 P3

E2P3 -

______

+i—o.

a Var2 P3

Not. that in a futures interpretation, the right-hand side represents an
aggregat. endowment of zero, whil. in a
demands

(i.e..

stock

market (7) means that excess

trades net of endowments) must sum to zero. Note also that

under our convention that period 3 is merely a terminal condition. (7)
implies:

(8)

E2P3

-

16

The equilibrium excess demand at dat.

market at date

1.

2

of the customer arriving at the

is thus

x —

(9)

-i
I

Using (3), (4), (8), and (9) we can find the date

demand of the

customer from

Max E1U(J0 +

(10)

x1(E23

•

F1)

+

iE23)

xl

This problem has

the

same

form

the problem in period 2 except that the

as

risk from the point of view of period I is that

—

is

not known.

As before, the customer's excess demand function is

£ -P 1

cd_ 13

(11)

a Var1(E23)
where the law of iterated expectations is used to obtain E1E23 — E1P3.

Market Makers and the Provision of tediacv

At date 1. there are M market makers. They constantly watch the
floor of the exchange either directly or through their agents on the floor.

They solve the same maximization problem as the customers except that for

them i — 0.

(12)

Hence their excess demand function is

E1.3 -P

xa —
1.

1.

a Var1(E2P3)

Market clearing at date 1

thus

a

(13)

requires
cd

M.x1+x1 —o

Using (11) and (12), it is seen that (13) becomes:

17

E13-P1

(14)

___

—

a

Let

—

-

Var1(E2P3)

1,

be the excess return earned by the market makers.

Then
Ph

E1 — + a Var1()

(15)

Thus if H is finite, a positive value of P1i (which causes hedgers to
desire to "shorts) will induce a temporary fall in the market price. Note
that vs have defined the order imbalance to sum to zero across periods I

and 2. In particular, no aggregate risk is associated with holding the
asset across periods. Therefore, in the absence of an asynchronization of
order flows,

—

0.

It is the asynchronization of these flows and the

finite risk bearing capacity of market makers that leads

to deviate

from 0. Note that from (12) and (14) the value of the positions held by a
typical market maker (i.e., his inventory) is

a —_____

P1x1

1

+ H

The larger is this inventory the higher the expected return between period

I.

and 2 to compansat. the market maker for th. risk that new information may

arrive (causing E2P3 —

0 P1)

leading to capital losses on the inventory

positions.

Determination of the Number of Market Makers
A market maker choosing always to have a presence on the trading floor

is aasua.d to forego opportunities elsewhere worth Sc. The gain from being
on th. floor is the ability to trade at price P1. Then the expected utility
of a market maker who pays Sc out of initial wealth is

1.8

-

where

-

+

EU(W0

the profit between period 2 and period 3. ( -

P2)x,

does not

0.

appear because (6) and (8) imply that x —

Free entry of market makers will occur until

- P1)x)

EU(W0 - c +

(1.6)

Equation

—

EU(W0)

(12) and the exponential utility assumption can be used to evaluate

(16):

1

(17a)

e E exp{. (—J (Var12)

]2) —

(,

or

z)

eac £ exp( -

(17b)

t—a 2'r1P2

—

I

where

,

z2 —

Van

(1 + N)2

___
Var i

Using the moment generating function of the non-central Chi-squared
distribution (lib) becomes

1

—

(18)

-ac

(.(Ei)2 [tJ)

Ji+t

If we assume that the expectation of an order imbalance is zero, i.e..
EL — 0,

then (18) becomes
1

(19)
11. +

Equation

c

(19) implies that

t—a2

(Var12)Var
(1 + N)

2

I

19
is

determined solaly by ac and is an increasing function of ac. The lower

th. cost of maintaining a market presence, the greater the number of market

makers in equilibrium. That number would also be larger, of course, the

smaller th. risk-aversion parameter a for the market makers.
Var i is th. average size of hedging demand (since hedging demand in

its average size is Elil which is proportional to Var i when I

is

normally distributed). Var12 is the predictability of the price change.
Hence, as either of these two

variances

rises the number of market makers

rises.

Some Empirical Imolications of the Model

The contribution of market makers shows up in the correlation between

successive price changes. Since the model is only a 3-period model with a

single liquidity event at time 1, we define the correlation to be
Cov(P2 -

-

P1

EoP)

q— __________________
-

(20)

./Var(P2

P1) Var(P1

Using (16), the fact that P2 —

E23, E01 —

(21)

P2

(22)

P1 - E3P1 —

P1 —

E12

+

E0P)

E0P2

and E12 —

13

yields

H a Var1(P2)

- E02

-

1

H a Var1(2)

To impart a tiaal.ss quality to the uncertainty, assume that one-step-ahead
variances are the same at each date. i.e.,

—

Var1(P2

We can now restate q;

-

E12)

—

Var(E12

-

E02)

—

Var1(2)

-

20
C

(23)

Thus, from (19) the correlation between successive price changes is negative

and is determined solely by the cost of being a market maker c.
Note that the covariance between successive price changes is
2

a

-

(24)

Cov(P2

E0P1)

p1,

Var 1. 4_

(1+t()

Hence, for a given c, since r is fixed, assets with more variability of
expected price changes will have higher negative covariance.

of

Finally, consider the amount

immediacy provided in equilibrium. This

can be measured by the amount of customer trade that is completed in period

cd
1, x1 ,

cd
and the amount completed in period 2. x2

-

cd
x1

,

which can be

derived from (l1)-(14):

H
l+M

(25a)

x1 —.

(25b)

x2 •x1

cd

cd

i

1+H

Since the total size of the trade desired is -i, the fraction completed in

period 1 is determined by M. Jhen H is very large the transaction is
completed immediately and the market can be said to be liquid..

III. Extensions and Ammlications

Many readers will have been surprised to have come so far in a paper on

market liquidity with no referenc. to the term bid-ask apr.ad. That term

has

indeed dominated academic discussions of transaction costs and market

efficiency ever since the

pioneering

paper by Demsetz (1968); and, even

before that, the term was the stand.ard, short-hand among practitioners for

contrasting the cost of trading between markets and over time. For all its

21

familiarity, however, and its rough common sens, as a metric, we believ, it
does

not

fully capture th. notion of market liquidity.

Limitations of the bid-ask spread as a

measure of liquidity

First (as Stoll (1976), (l98) has emphasized), the bid-ask spread
measures exactly the market maker's return for providing immediacy only in

the special case in which the market maker simultaneously "crosses (i.e.,
executes both sides of) the trade, one at the bid and the other at the ask.
But in that case, of course, the spread could not also serve as a valid

measure of the Cost of supplying immediacy to each of the customers. It is
simply a charge by the market maker for executing their orders, rather than
for providing them liquidity services.

In th. more typical cas, that our model was designed to portray, the

orders do not arrive simultaneously but are randomly separated in time. If
so, the price may change between the time at which ch. market maker buys and
sells; and the market maker may earn much more or less than the spread quoted

t the time of the first leg of the transaction. And, for the same reason,
the currently quoted spread cannot serve any transactor as a precise measure
of the cost of trading imm.diately rather than delaying ch. order,

particularly when the order is a large one. Yet that cost, as we have
emphasized, is the •ssence of market liquidity. A customer desiring to sell
is likely to be more concerned with how th. bid will chang. over time than
with the size of the current bid-ask spread.

The benefit of iediacy to a customer is the shedding of the price risk
associated with waiting. In most real-world exchanges this waiting can also

be achieved by means of a limit order to sell, for example, at th. current
quoted bid price. Such a limit order will be executed if and when a buyer

22

willing to pay this price appears and no other seller is offering to sell at

a lower price. Sut that may never occur and the customer may have to revise
the order and sell at a a price lower than the bid price at the time the

first limit order was sent in. Thus, if lucky, the limit-order customer gets

a

price

higher than the bid, while if unlucky, a low-r price. The customer's

choice between limit orders and market orders is thus governed not by the
bid-ask spread, but precisely by those considerations which our model
suggests determine the supply and demand for immediacy, i.e., by the
likelihood that a buyer will arrive who is willing to pay more than the

current bid. (See Cohen, et al. (1981), for an equilibrium analysis of bidask spreads which emphasizes the importance of jumps in the price away from
the current quotes.)
Not. also that a substantial volum, of transactions occur within the
prevailing quoted bid-ask Spread because

the

traders who commit to a bid (or

ask) are giving the market an option. Some traders may decide not to commit
to buying or selling at particular prices and thus the quoted bid may be
lower than the actual bids which appear in response to a market sell order.
The more that market orders to buy and sell are separated in time the
greater the exposure of the maiket maker to the risks of adverse information

trading. The bid-ask spread, in addition to the pure timing option premium,
will then contain still another component, which compensates the market
makers on their information-less trades for their likely losses to the

informed

traders. This phenomenon, as

noted

earlier, has been much studied

in th. academic literature on market micro structure. (See, e.g., Clost.n

Milgro. (1985).) Much less attention, however, has been directed to the
inverse problem of what is likely to happen to conventional quoted bid-ask
and

23

spread.s in highly active markets, like futures markets, where many separate

buy and sell orders are entering the trading pit virtually simultaneously.
Because the adverse selection problem arises only when a market maker cannot
hope to offset a position immediately, and because the costs of maintaining a
market presence are mainly (and, in our model, entirely) fixed costs, it

might seem that quoted bid-ask spreads and market makers' profits from what
amounts to crossing trades would be driven towards zero by the competitive
entry of new market makers.1 Where th. fixed costs are large relative to the
entry-inhibiting trading risks, a competitive market may not be viable
because the market makers would have no way of recovering their fixed costs

of maintaining a presence on the floor.2 To keep markets viable, therefore,

exchanges may limit the number of "seats available to market makers (or
designate a regulated specialist).

Exchanges also typically define a minimum price change unit (called a

'tick) which, in highly active markets, serves also to set a minimum on both
th. quoted bid-ask spread and the profits a "scalper makes from a quick

naround. This somewhat subtle and frequently overlooked role of the
minimum tick helps explain, among other things, the seeming paradox of
finding many traders in an obviously highly competitive pit fighting

(sometimes literally) to execute an order. This behavior suggests chat the
quoted bid-ask spread of one tick, and hence the profit from a quick turn on

tReaember that in our model, market makers take risky positions as well
as match orders. Entry occu.s to the point where the market makers earn a
return on their risky positions plus any profits from simultaneous matching
which just balances the trading risks and the fixed costs of maintaining a
continuous presence.

terms of the notation in our model, the non-viability of a

competitive equilibrium would occur when c becomes large relative to a.

24

a standard siz. trade is actually higher in an active market than it would be

in the absence of the minimum tick rule. Part of the art of managing a
futures exchange is finding a minimum tick siz. for its contracts, high
enough to sustain a viably competitive supply of floor traders, but not so
high as to give rise to the problems of rationing and queue discipline so
often

encountered under price controls.1

L.i.itations of the "Liquidity Ratio"
pp a Measure of Market Liauiditv

Another widely used empirical measure

in inter-market

market liquidity is the "liquidity ratio." defined as

the

comparisons of

ratio of average

dollar volume of trading to the average price change during some interval.
(See, e.g., Dubofsky and Groth (1984). Cooper, Croth and Avers (1983), Reilly

and Wong (1982) and Martin (1975).) A high value for the ratio is taken to
indicate that many shares were traded with little price change; and a low
value to suggest that a trader bringing a

large block

to market will induce a

large adverse price change.

These measures, of course, tell us at best only about past average
associations between price changes and volume.
critical question of how the sudden arrival of a

They do not answer

the

larger-than-average

order

would affect price. Nor do they distinguish adequately among the sources of

price

volatility. A particular market may display

high price variability not

because it is illiquid but because new fundam.ntal information arrives

closely related but somewhat different problem is faced by the
designers of computerized, automatic execution systems like the muchpublicized (but little used) INTEX •xchang. in Bermuda. Because th. users
can hit directly any bids or offers shoving on the screen, no intermediary
can hope to earn a living by "scalping" the bid-ask spread on quick trades.
This keeps market makers, who might otherwis, provide immediacy when orders
do not match, from being able to recover their opportunity costs of
maintaining a continuous presence in the market.

25

frequently. High price volatility can occur without high volumes of trading;
in fact, when the import of the news is unambiguous, there may be no trading
at all.

The liquidity ratio, in sum, fails to capture what we have called the
immediacy that the market's structure offers. At best, and with all, due
regard for the pitfalls of estimating simultaneous equations, it might hope
to measure the average elasticity of the market's demand curve for

transactions. What we need, however, is a measure of how well the market
makers are providing customers with an effective substitute for the delays in

a search for a more inclusive set of counterparties. Whether so complex a
notion can ever be distilled down to a single scalar is still far from clear.
Our equations (24) and (25) (a) and (b) with their focus on reversals offer
some promising new leads (similar in spirit to those op.ned earlier by Roll
(1984)), which we hope to follow up in future empirical research.
The need for new ways of measuring and comparing the liquidity of
different market structures takes on added urgency in the light of the
dramatic stock-market events of last October and especially of the many
policy proposals for market reform that have surfaced in the wake of the

crash and are now being actively debated in the press and in Congress. But
even in the absenc. of numerical calibrations of liquidity we believe that
the model of market liquidity presented in the previous section can offer a
helpful perspective on th. main events of those hectic days.

Market Liauiditv and the Crash of October 1987
We hasten to add that our interpretation of the recent crash in terms of
our modal of market liquidity must not be taken as signifying our belief that

the event was entirely, or even primarily, a matter of liquidity rather than

of fundamentals. (See Miller, et p1.

(1987) for

a discussion of the events

26

preceding and surrounding the crash.) Whatever the precipitating cause, a
massive liquidity event, in our earlier sense of an imbalance in the demand
for immediacy clearly occurred at the opening of the markets on the 19th.

80th the futures market and the cash spot market were hit simultaneously with
a flood of sell orders of unprecedented size.
Each of the two markets responded immediately to the imbalances, but in
ways appropriate to their characteristic and, as we had noted earlier, quite
different structures. The rules of the NYSE permit. -

specialists

indeed,

encourage- -

to delay the opening of trading when the overnight accumulation

of orders for a particular stock is too far out of balance to allow market

clearing at a price near the previous close. The delayed opening gives the
specialist time to search the floor and the upstairs block-trading desks for

balancing orders on the other side. Under ordinary conditions, when most
other stocks have opened and are trading normally, that search is completed
successfully, and trading resumed (though, typically, with a somewhat larger

than usual price gap) in a matter of a few minutes. At the opening of the
19th, however, the order imbalances were so widespread and so large that no
immediate help from on or off the floor was available to the beleaguered

specialists of many of the most heavily traded shares. An hour after the
opening bell, more than a third of the stocks in the Dow-Jones Index
(including such widely-followed international companies as IRK, Sears and
Exxon) had yet to start trading.
By contrast, the S6IP 500 futures market at the Chicago Mercantile

Exchange, lik, other futures markets, seeks to provid, a setting in which

prices can best speedily reflect the best current information. If the
at the opening call on a futures exchange shows the ov.rnigtt
orders to be heavily unbalanced, then the price will jump

outcry

accumulation

directly

of

to a level

27

at which trading can imisediately take place.1 Th. previous closing price

plays no explicit role in setting that level or the path to reach it. This
contrast in opening procedures between the futures and the stock markets is

fully understandable in th. light of our model. The high risk associated
with futures trading (recall pages 4-6 above) causes those markets to be

organized precisely to provide maximal iediacy of order execution. The
costs of delayed execution being normally less for stock trading, the market
makers there seek to provide more search service relative to immediacy than
in the futures markets.

On Monday the 19th, opening prices in New York had to fall some 10
percent below the Friday close- -an enormous gap by past standards- -before

trading in all stocks could begin.2 By 11:00 A.M. or so, New York time,
however, all the major delayed-opening stocks had resumed trading, and the
two markets were now virtually back in step. Although the pric, fall had been
large, the two markets, from all outward appearances appeared to have handled
successfully the enormous imbalance of sell, orders that had accumulated at

e opening. But the capital resources of their regular market makers on or

around the floor had by then been heavily coitted. In Chicago, many of
the smaller market makers had left the floor, either voluntarily or under

The Chicago Board of Options Exchange opens with an auctioneer
establishing provisional opening pric.s for each traded option. But with so
many separate maturities and striking prices involved, the process of finding
simultaneous, viabl, trading ranges is far from easy when prices are moving
rapidly. On the morning of the 19th, and again on the 20th, by the tim. the
rotation, as the opening process is called, had worked its way around to
the last series, the earlier, tentatively-established trading ranges had
become hopelessly wide of the mark. The process had to be repeated and on
Tuesday trading did not in fact begin until far after the regular opening time.
2

This difference in opening procedures in the two markets undoubtedly
contributed to the widespread (but misleading) impression at the time that
the futures market in Chicago. if not actually dragging down stock prices in
New York, was at least signalling to an already panicky public that heavy new
s.lling pressure was on its way to th. market in New York.

28

pressure from their clearing firms. Those that remained were unwilling to
take on large positions in such a volatile market except at price concessions
far larger than normal. IThen a further wave of sell

orders

hit both markets

somewhat after noon, New York time, there was less resistance from the market
makers and the fabled

colorful

"meltdown was soon under way. Or, to use

the less

language of our model, both markets had by then become highly

illiquid and virtually incapable of supplying immediacy at the low cost their
users in the past had come to expect.
That illiquidity was evidenced in the spot market by (1) the virtual
impossibility of executing market sell orders at the bid quoted at the time
of order entry, and (2) the delays in executing and confirming trades on
Monday afternoon and again, after the opening on Tuesday. On the futures
exchange, order flows that might have moved the market by at most a tick or
two

or

in

the week

before,

were moving the market by 10 or 20 times that amount

more in the early afternoon of Tuesday, October 20. Despite the evident

rise in the cost of immediacy to sellers, the inflow of sell orders
continued, and perhaps even accelerated in what took on all the appearances

of a classic, self-reinforcing panic. By early afternoon on Tuesday, trading
had been suspended in many NYSE stocks and in the main options and futures

markets. With virtually no market-making capacity remaining, the burden of
equilibration had to be assumed by the search for buyers off the market,
culminating in th. cavalry-like ride to the rescue on Tuesday afternoon by
large U.S. corporations instituting buy-back programs of their own

shares.

11n the case of the NASDAQ bulletin board, market prices were sometimes
changing at a faster rate than the quotes were being updated. When the best
offer to sell is entered below the best bid to buy, a market is deemed
crossed and under the then standing NASDAQ rules only the bid showed on the
screen. No further transactions could be made until the obsolete bid was
updated which often involved substantial delay.

29

At the same time, the Fed.ral Reserve System was directly and indirectly
encouraging banks to support dealer inventory positions. By
day,

these

the end of the

infusions of buying power had pushed prices nearly back to their

l.v.ls before the Monday noon collapse and substantial market-making capacity
was back in place.

Effective market-making capacity in the period immediately after the
crash, however, as well as at several critical Junctures during the crash,

was reduced by restrictions iapo5ed on program

trading

which cut the normal

arbitrage linkage between the market makers in the spot and futures markets.
Arbitragers. by taking offsetting positions in both markets close to
simultaneously. can transmit some of the pressure of order imbalances from

the market first impacted to the market makers in the other. Market makers'
resources in both markets can thus be brought to bear on the initiating
imbalance more effectively, much as they would be if the number of active

market makers had been increased. Price concessions and hence the cost of
transacting can be kept smaller in both markets, thanks to arbitrage program
trading, than might otherwise be the case) How ironic then to find

arbitrage program trading still so often blamed for undermining investor
confidence in the market.

iFor a further discussion of arbitrage program trading and especially
its interaction with portfolio insurance, see Grossman (1988).

30
REFERENCES

Amihud, Y. ; Ho, I. ; and Schwartz, R. Market Makinz and the ChanLng

Structure

of the Securities Industry. Lexington Books, 1985.

Cohen, K.; Mair, S.; Schwartz, R.; and Whitcomb, D. "Transaction Costs,
Order Placement Strategy and the Existence of the Bid-Ask Spread.'
Journal of Political Economy 89 (April 1981).

Cooper, K.; Groth, J. C.; and Avers, W. E.

"Liquidity, Exchange Listing, and

Common Stock Performance." Texas A( University, August 1983.
Demsetz, H. "The Cost of Transacting." Ouarterlv Journal of Economics 82
(February 1968).

Dubofsky, F., and Groth, J.

"Exchange Listing and Liquidity." Department of

Finance, Texas MM University, mimeo, February 1984.
Closten, Lawrence R. •

and Milgrom, Paul 9. "Bid, Ask and Transaction Prices

in a Specialist Market with Heterogeneously Informed Traders." Journal

of Financial Economics 14; 1 (March 1985): 71-100.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Miller, Merton H. "Economic Costs and Benefits of
the Proposed One-Minute Time Bracketing Regulation." Journal of Futures
Markets Vol. 6, No. I (Spring 1986b), pp. 141-66.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Miller, Merton H.

"The Determinants of Market

Liquidity." University of Chicago. July 1986a (manuscript).
Grossman, Sanford J. "An Analysis of the Implications for Stock and Futures
Pric. Volatility of Program Trading and Dynamic

Hedging

Strategies."

Journal of Business (1988), forthcoming.

Ho, T. "Dealer Market Structure: A Dynamic
University working paper, March 1984.

Competitive Model." New York

31

Martin. P.

NYSE

Analysis of the Impact of Cop.titive Rates on the

Stocks.

Liquidity

Economic Staff Paper 75-3. Securities and Exchange

Commission (July 1975).

Miller, Merton H., Chairman; Hauke Jr., John D.; Malkiel, Burton; and

Scholes, Myron. PreliminarY Report of the Coittea of Inouirv

Aoointed

by the Chicago Mercantile Exehanfe to Examine the

Surroundin October 19. 1981 (December 22. 1987.) Mimeo.

Events

of

