                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          O YOUTH AND BEAUTY:
         CHILDREN’S LOOKS AND CHILDREN’S COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

                                    Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                     Rachel A. Gordon
                                      Robert Crosnoe

                                     Working Paper 26412
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26412


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 2019




This project was principally funded by the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development under Grant R01HD081022. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by Daniel S. Hamermesh, Rachel A. Gordon, and Robert Crosnoe. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
O Youth and Beauty: Children’s Looks and Children’s Cognitive Development
Daniel S. Hamermesh, Rachel A. Gordon, and Robert Crosnoe
NBER Working Paper No. 26412
October 2019
JEL No. I24,I26,J71

                                            ABSTRACT

We use data from the 11 waves of the U.S. Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development 1991-2005,
following children from ages 6 months through 15 years. Observers rated videos of them, obtaining
measures of looks at each age. Given their family income, parents’ education, race/ethnicity and gender,
being better-looking raised subsequent changes in measurements of objective learning outcomes. The
gains imply a long-run impact on cognitive achievement of about 0.04 standard deviations per standard
deviation of differences in looks. Similar estimates on changes in reading and arithmetic scores at
ages 7, 11 and 16 in the U.K. National Child Development Survey 1958 cohort show larger effects.
The extra gains persist when instrumenting children’s looks by their mother’s, and do not work through
teachers’ differential treatment of better-looking children, any relation between looks and a child’s
behavior, his/her victimization by bullies or self-confidence. Results from both data sets show that
a substantial part of the economic returns to beauty result indirectly from its effects on educational
attainment. A person whose looks are one standard deviation above average attains 0.4 years more
schooling than an otherwise identical average-looking individual.


Daniel S. Hamermesh                                Robert Crosnoe
Department of Economics                            University of Texas at Austin
Barnard College                                    305 E. 23rd Street
3009 Broadway                                      Austin, TX 78712-1086
New York, NY 10027                                 crosnoe@austin.utexas.edu
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

Rachel A. Gordon
University of Illinois
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
ragordon@uic.edu
We find a delight in the beauty and happiness of children. [Emerson, 1871]

I. Introduction

        An immense and still burgeoning literature has studied the productivity of different inputs into

educational production functions, evaluating their effectiveness by examining their valued-added, typically

measured in standard-deviation units of changes in scores on various achievement tests. The economic

literature goes back at least to Hanushek (1971), with Chetty et al. (2014a, b) being just two of the numerous

more recent examples, and with an excellent summary of results in Hanushek and Rivkin (2010). Whether

experimental (e.g., Fryer, 2011; Abeberese et al., 2014) or observational based on administrative data (e.g.,

Aaronson et al., 2007) the general conclusion is that program effectiveness and the differences made by

exceptional teachers are small, rarely more than 0.2 standard deviations and often nearly zero. The effects

created by the ways in which schools are organized may be even smaller (Dynarski et al., 2018).

        Another literature has focused not on classrooms but on mother’s and, to a lesser extent father’s

time spent with their children and its impact on their cognitive development. Some recent literature is

summarized by Francesconi and Heckman (2016); but this is a recent avatar of a very old and long literature

in economics (of which Leibowitz, 1974, is a fairly early example). The estimated effects vary widely, but

they are usually substantial.

        A much smaller but growing literature has examined the impact of personal beauty on economic

outcomes, including earnings (Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994; Harper, 2000; Gordon et al., 2013, and many

others), electoral outcomes (King and Leigh, 2009; Berggren et al., 2010) and even happiness (Abrevaya

and Hamermesh, 2013). The general view is of beauty as a productive characteristic that adds value to a

person’s performance in a variety of areas (Langlois et al., 2000; Hamermesh, 2011). Its effects are not

huge, on earnings being somewhere between the equivalent of one-third and one year of additional

education. Given the variances of the distributions of earnings in Western countries, in standard-deviation

terms these impacts are, however, as large as those found for the long-term effects of the interventions



                                                      1
examined in the education literature, although perhaps somewhat less than those in the home inputs

literature.

         A fourth literature has examined teachers’ expectations and student performance (see Hatfield and

Sprecher, 1986, Ch. 5, and Jackson et al., 1995, for surveys), although most of the work focuses on how

looks affect teachers’ perceptions of student ability rather than directly on achievement. A few studies,

however, have examined how children’s looks are related to their academic performance (e.g., Salvia et al.,

1977; Talamas et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2019), but these are quite limited, in that either: 1) They use small

samples and have few if any controls; or 2) More important, they relate cross-section differences in

students’ achievements on particular tests to ratings of their looks, thus putting them outside the value-

added framework of the literature in the economics of education. 1

         Here we examine the relationship between looks and value-added to cognitive achievement, using

two very different data sets. Our main focus is on the longitudinal data collected through the U.S. Study of

Early Child Care and Youth Development (SECCYD), a panel of over 1300 children who were assessed

11 times between ages 6 months and 15 years (between 1991 and 2005). As an attempt to examine the

value-added effect of looks on student achievement in a different environment with a different type of data,

we also use the 1958 cohort of the U.K. National Child Development Survey (NCDS), which assessed

children at ages 7, 11 and 16, and has followed them at various intervals through adulthood.

         We cannot identify whether the value-added, as measured by changes in achievement test results,

is attributable to the child’s teacher, his/her parent(s), including their inputs of time with the child, his/her

peers, in-class or outside, or his/her mutual interactions with any one or several pairs of these agents. All

that we examine is how value-added is mediated by the child’s looks over the time when the value is being

added. Despite this inability, however, we use some proxies describing interactions between the student




1
 While looking at cross-section effects, and thus outside the value-added literature, Gordon et al. (2013) related looks
to GPA and other outcomes in the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent Health.


                                                           2
and the teacher, parents and fellow students to examine the mechanism through which any beauty effects

that we observe operate.

        In Section II we first discuss how we measure the beauty of the children in the SECCYD, then

move on to analyze patterns of their beauty and how these varied over time. Section III discusses the

variables used in the autoregressions of achievement, focusing particularly on the changing variety of

achievement measures included in the survey as the children aged. In the next Section we estimate

autoregressions describing value-added by looks in the SECCYD. Section V considers the impact of looks

on value-added in achievement in the NCDS, while Section VI investigates the possible mechanisms

through which good looks raise measures of cognitive development. The next Section estimates the extent

to which the impact of education on earnings—one of the most widely-examined economic relationships—

arises from the impact of looks on educational attainment, first indirectly using the results from the

SECCYD and extraneous estimates of the impact of achievement on educational attainment, then directly

using the results from the NCDS and additional estimates based on those data.

II. Beauty in the SECCYD

        A. Assessing Beauty Through Videos

        The SECCYD is a longitudinal study of 1,364 children and their families (NICHD Early Child Care

Research Network, 2005). It was begun in 1991, when newborns were sampled from hospitals at 10 sites

in 9 states. After screening, 89 percent of scheduled one-month interviews were completed. In-person data

collections—the “major assessments,” which included videotaped interactions, occurred at eleven points:

At 6, 15, 24, 36, and 54 months, in grades 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6, and at 15 years. There were videos of from 63

to 93 percent of the initial sample at each assessment (see Table 1). A near majority had videos at all eleven

waves (N = 558), and a majority did at least at ten waves (N = 782).

        Undergraduate research assistants created thin slices of video (approximately 7-10 seconds in

duration) at each wave of the survey, focusing on the child’s face and body. The background setting and

other people were blacked out and the audio was muted, to focus the ratings on the child’s looks. This

approach is like that followed cross-sectionally by Benjamin and Shapiro (2009) for electoral candidates.

                                                      3
It is a subset of the many studies of the impacts of beauty based on photographs (e.g., Biddle and

Hamermesh, 1998), as opposed to those based on interviewers’ in-person assessments of the subjects’ looks

(as in Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994, and Gordon et al., 2013).

            Undergraduates from the same general birth cohort as members of the SECCYD sample (aged in

their early 20s in 2016-18) at two large public universities rated the video clips. Among other things each

student was asked to assign ratings from 5 (very cute/very attractive), to 4 (cute/attractive), 3 (about

average), 2 (not cute/unattractive) or 1 (not at all cute/very unattractive) in response to the question: How

cute/attractive is child/adolescent overall? Each rater had five seconds to rate the subject’s overall

appearance.2 In each wave the looks of each subject were assessed by at least ten raters. Appendix Table

A1 details the rating procedures.

            The distributions of the raw ratings of overall appearance are presented in Table 1 for the entire

sample over all eleven waves. Where a rater looked at fewer than 50 videos in a wave of the SECCYD, that

person’s ratings were deleted. 3 As is standard in studies of adult beauty (Hamermesh, 2011, Chapter 2),

many more people were rated attractive or very attractive than were rated unattractive or very unattractive.

Because raters differ in the generosity of their views of the children’s/adolescents’ looks, each rater’s scores

were unit-normalized using the rater’s own mean and standard deviation within each wave.

            B. Changing Patterns of Beauty in the SECCYD

            For each subject in each wave (12,045 data points in all) we calculated the mean and standard

deviation of their rater/wave normalized individual ratings, creating two variables: 1) The youth/wave mean

of normalized ratings and 2) The youth/wave standard deviation of normalized ratings. For brevity, we refer

to these as mean looks and SD looks. Mean looks averaged 0.0015 across all subjects/waves, with a standard

deviation of 0.53. SD looks averaged 0.84 across all subjects/waves, suggesting far from perfect agreement



2
    For more detail on how the videos were created and how the coders were instructed, see (Gordon et al., 2018).
3
 These were fewer than 1 percent of all ratings. Including them hardly changes the distributions of the means or SD
of measured looks.


                                                            4
among raters. Nonetheless, combining the moderate average inter-correlations with our relatively large

number of ratings produced high internal consistency (with Cronbach’s α ranging from 0.66 with ten raters

of the 15-month-olds to 0.91 with eleven raters of the 15-year-olds, and an average α=0.88). Because we

used many more raters of each subject’s looks than in most other studies (the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study,

Abrevaya and Hamermesh, 2013; Scholz and Sicinski, 2015, being an exception), the measured agreement

here is very high. There is both substantial wave-to-wave variation in average beauty and substantial

persistence: An analysis of variance of the average standardized beauty ratings shows that 33 percent of the

total variation is across children (and 67 percent across waves within each child).

         Table 2 shows the averages (across all individuals) of each child’s mean looks by gender and by

wave of the survey in the first two columns, and the averages of each child’s SD looks at each wave and

gender in the second two columns. 4 The table demonstrates several regularities in how the

children’s/adolescents’ looks are viewed by the raters. Girls’ looks are consistently rated higher on average

than boys’. This differs from the results of most research on adults, where there is little average difference

by gender. The differences here are quite small, however, with the average girl being in the 55th percentile

of looks in the overall sample, the average boy being in the 44th percentile.

         The gender difference in the average ratings of looks generally rises over the first 15 years of life,

although not monotonically, to the point where at age 15 the average teenage boy’s looks place him at the

39th percentile in the sample, while the average girl’s place her in the 61st percentile. These gender

differences do not arise because people find it more difficult to rate boys’ looks. On the contrary, in seven

of the eleven waves the average SD of looks is significantly less for boys than for girls, while only at age

15 is the opposite true.

         Our focus is on the impact of looks on cognitive development, as measured by value-added in

students’ achievement over time; and since we know that the latter is affected by income and demographic

differences, it is crucial to examine whether these are also correlated with the youth/wave aggregated


4
 Note that the standard deviations of the averages of the normalized ratings are less than one, because we are averaging
across the positively correlated normalized ratings.

                                                           5
normalized ratings of looks. The SECCYD contains information on the race/ethnicity of the child, income

of the parents at the child’s birth, and indicators of the mother’s educational attainment and that of the

better-educated parent. Appendix Table A2 lists statistics describing these variables.

        The SECCYD sample was randomly drawn from hospital births in each site and well matches

demographically the catchment areas of those hospitals (NICHD SECCYD Steering Committee. 1993).

The sample also tracks well the distribution of Americans with children ages 0-2 in 1990, with some

differences reflecting the geographically restricted sample. The racial/ethnic distribution matches perfectly

the fraction of African-Americans in the relevant population nationally; but Hispanics are twice as frequent

in this sample as in the population of parents with children ages 0-2 in 1990 (12 percent vs. 6 percent), and

there are commensurately fewer non-Hispanic Whites. The income brackets used by the SECCYD

approximate income quartiles in the 1990 Census, and the reported incomes in the sample of parents here

are somewhat higher than those in the population of similarly aged adults. The distribution of educational

attainment indicates, consistent with the distribution of income, that parents of the children in this sample

are more educated than the average parent with a newborn/toddler in 1990. 5

         The associations of the mean and SD of looks with demographics, shown in Appendix Table A3,

are quite small, with only 1 to 3 percent of the variance explained. Relative to Hispanics, children in all

three other racial/ethnic groups receive average ratings that are lower, although with significantly large

differences only among non-Hispanic blacks. There is, however, less agreement among raters about the

looks of blacks and other non-Hispanic children. Raters gave slightly higher ratings to children from higher-

income families, although not statistically significantly so; and there was (insignificantly) more agreement

among raters about the looks of those children.




5
 The distributions of race/ethnicity and educational attainment are from the 1990 CPS-MORG; the income
distributions are from the 1990 Census of Population.


                                                     6
III. Outcome Measures in the SECCYD

         The SECCYD included various tests of the child’s/adolescent’s cognitive achievement at each

wave. Because the measures were designed and selected to be age-appropriate, none was used for all ages.

Since we cannot examine value-added using the same assessment as the child ages, we use various

measures, concentrating on those which are present in as many waves as possible and which represent

objective evaluations. As checks on the validity of our estimates, we experiment by estimating the impacts

of looks and other measures on alternative assessments in each wave.

        Table 3 lists all the outcome variables used in the results presented in the text tables. For each we

list the variable name, a description and the waves in which it was used, and its mean, standard deviation

and range. The most frequently provided assessment, the Woodcock-Johnson Applied Problems Standard

Score (WJAPSC) Revised Version (Woodcock and Johnson, 1989), is a math subscale from a battery of

tests designed for standardized administration by trained staff to assess achievement from early childhood

through old age. It has been used very rarely by economists (Akresh and Akresh, 2011, and del Boca et al.,

2017, are exceptions), but is standard among educational psychologists (http://achievement-

test.com/testing-options/woodcock-johnson-iii-tests). 6 We use the standard score which the SECCYD

study staff looked up in tables created by the test developers using a norming sample. As frequent as the

WJAPSC and overlapping it in availability in three of the five waves for which it is available, is another set

of achievement scores, the Academic Skills Rating Scale (ASLL). The ASLL is the average of ten items that

teachers rate on a scale of 1 (Not yet) to 5 (Proficient) to reflect children’s language and literacy skills (e.g.,

conveying ideas clearly, understanding stories read aloud, composing multi-paragraph stories). Because it

seems less likely to be objective than the WJAPSC, we use it only when the latter is unavailable.

        These measures cover student achievement from Wave 5 (age 54 months) through Wave 11 (age

15) but are not administered to toddlers and pre-school students. For them (Waves 1-4) we use age-



6
 There are several other assessments in the Woodcock-Johnson battery with which we experimented but which we do
not report here. We do, however, present the results using one set in an Appendix Table.


                                                        7
appropriate standardized measures administered by SECCYD study staff, the Bayley Mental Development

Index (http://www.healthofchildren.com/B/Bayley-Scales-of-Infant-Development.html) in Waves 2 and 3

(ages    15   and     24   months      respectively),    and      the   Bracken     School    Readiness      Composite

(https://www.pearsonclinical.com/childhood/products/100000165/bracken-school-readiness-assessment-

third-edition-bsra-3.html) at age 36 months (the earliest for which this measure is age-appropriate). 7

IMPRSO, used at Wave 1 (age 6 months) is impressionistic, not based on any formal testing or assessment.

         As Table 3 demonstrates, the assessments all have different scoring systems and, although available

for all the subjects in the SECCYD who remained in the study at any wave, are not directly comparable. To

enable comparisons, we normalize each measure, separately at each wave of the SECCYD. The outcomes

that we examine at each wave are thus the normalized scores of the child’s/adolescent’s achievements on

each measure.

IV. Looks and Educational Value-Added During Childhood

         The general models to be estimated are:

(1)      Sit = αBit-1 +βS’it-1 + γXi0 + εit , t = 2,…, 11 ,

where S is the normalized score on some educational assessment, S’ is the normalized score on either the

same assessment mode or one closely related at t-1, the previous wave of the Study, Bit-1 is the mean looks

of child i at the previous wave, X is the set of controls describing family and parental circumstances at the

child’s birth, t-1 is the time of the previous assessment, and ε is the usual disturbance term. Because the

waves are not spaced evenly over the child’s 15 years, the lag in (1) can be anywhere from 9 months to 4

years (between Waves 10 and 11). 8




7
 While both sets of assessments are standard in educational psychology, they too have rarely been used by economists
(but see Duncan et al., 2007; Rubio-Codina et al., 2015).
8
 The equations were re-estimated with various ways of accounting for the differences in time between waves of the
survey. These re-specifications yielded the same conclusions as the equations discussed in the text. Similarly,
including a vector of fixed effects indicating the site where the infant was enrolled in the Study also left the estimates
essentially unchanged.

                                                              8
         A. Main Estimates

         Separate estimates for Waves 2-6 and Waves 7-11 are shown in Appendix Tables A4 and A5.

Where the same measure is available in two consecutive waves, as at 24 months and Grades 1, 3 and 6, we

use that measure. In each case we only show the estimates of the expanded versions of (1) that include the

entire vector of covariates X. Of the ten estimates of α, eight are positive, of which four have t-statistics

above one. Remembering from Table 2 that the standard deviation of mean looks is 0.53 (averaging boys

and girls), the estimates of the short-run impact of a one standard-deviation increase in average beauty on

value-added in the educational assessment range across the ten waves from -0.02 to 0.09 standard

deviations, with an average estimated impact of a 0.03 standard-deviation increase in achievement per

standard-deviation increase in looks.

        Even at Wave 2, before there has been substantial sample attrition, the number of observations used

to estimate (1) is not large. To increase power and precision and provide sufficiently large sample sizes to

allow estimating gender-specific models, we pool the data for the ten waves, using the measures of St and

S’t-1 at each wave (and cluster the estimated standard errors on the child). We show the results of estimating

the pooled equations in Table 4, for the entire sample and for girls and boys separately, without and with

including the vector X. 9 Examining the estimates of the immediate impact of better looks on the value-

added between assessments for the entire sample, when the vector X is included the immediate impact is

an additional 0.024 (0.045*0.53) standard deviations. The long-run impact of a one standard-deviation

increase in looks on these scores is 0.041 (0.024/[1-0.420]) with covariates included. This is below the

median estimate in the literature on the value-added of a good teacher, but about the same as a recent

estimate of the impact of disruptive peers on test scores (Carrell et al., 2018).

         The bottom rows of Table 4 decompose the sources of the declines in the estimated effects of

standardized beauty on gains in achievement using Gelbach’s (2016) method. For both sexes pooled, and



9
 Re-estimating the equation to include a second-order lag in standardized test scores and both first and second-order
lags in standardized beauty, this latter pair is jointly statistically significant.


                                                         9
for boys and girls separately, over half of the declines result from the addition of the race/ethnicity

indicators, with parents’ education generating one-fourth of the decline, and household income at the child’s

birth never accounting for more than one-sixth. Given the relative differences in standardized beauty by

race/ethnicity (Appendix Table A3), the results of this decomposition are not surprising. 10

         We cannot reject the hypothesis that the estimated impacts of looks on value-added are equal

between girls and boys. Nonetheless, whether the vector X is included or not, the impacts are greater among

boys than girls, consistent with results in the majority of the literature on gender differences in the effects

of looks on labor-market outcomes among adults (summarized in Hamermesh, 2011, Chapter 3).

Confidence in this estimated gender difference is reinforced because the standard errors reflect similar

precision of estimation of the effect for boys and for girls.11

         The value-added rises consistently, other things equal, as we move up the distribution of parental

incomes at birth. Similarly, and consistently, the value-added among African-American children is

significantly less than that among Hispanics. That in turn is less than that among non-Hispanic Whites,

whose value-added is not statistically different from that of the small number of non-Hispanic members of

Other races included in the SECCYD. The average value-added for girls at each wave slightly exceeds that

for boys of the same race/ethnicity and family income background. 12




10
  Parents’ responses to questions about how stressed they feel are available in Waves 2-5. We create a measure of the
parents’ quartile in the distribution of these responses, imputing the Wave 5 position to subsequent waves. While the
estimated value-added of looks is slightly less in the estimates in Table 4 when the parents are more stressed, including
this measure does not even change the estimated impact of looks in its third significant digit.
11
  Estimating the pooled model separately for white non-Hispanics yields slightly smaller estimated effects of beauty
on value-added. The estimates for the smaller samples of other children produces slightly larger estimates than those
shown in Table 4.
12
   Replicating and extending prior studies using the SECCYD (e.g., Crosnoe et al., 2010; Vandell et al., 2010), we find
that persistence in achievement is quite strong. What is most remarkable is the importance of race/ethnicity and
parental income on the change in scores—on the value-added by education and whatever else increases children’s
achievements—between these assessments. The value-added among non-Hispanic Blacks is negative compared to
that among otherwise identical Hispanics, which in turn is uniformly less than that among non-Hispanic Whites.
Children born to families in roughly the top income quartile generally see greater improvements in their test scores
than children born to families of the same race/ethnicity in the lowest income quartile.


                                                           10
        B. Robustness Checks

        One might be concerned about the robustness of the beauty effects to specification errors resulting

from unobservable variables. Following Oster (2019), we can calculate how great a correlation of the

selection on unobservables with that on observables would need to be if inclusion of the former were to

increase the R2 by 30 percent. For the fully specified equations in Table 4, selection on unobservables would

have to be greater than that on the observables to vitiate the significance of the estimated impacts of beauty

on the value-added.

        Given the different assessments at each wave of the SECCYD, numerous additional regressions

could serve as robustness checks on the findings reported in Table 4. Pooling all the waves that include the

variable WJAPSC and re-estimating the full version of (1), thus using the same measure as the dependent

variable for all included observations, yields an estimated impact identical to the 0.045 shown in Column

(4) of Table 4 (although with fewer than half as many observations, the estimate is barely significantly

positive). We present some other results from re-estimating these equations in Appendix Table A6. Perhaps

most noteworthy, given the large coefficient on looks at Wave 2 (in Appendix Table A4), excluding

observations form Wave 2 reduces the estimated effect of looks only slightly. While some of the other

robustness experiments yielded very tiny estimated effects of mean looks on value-added, the majority

produced results that were quantitatively like those in Table 4. Particularly interesting is the lower estimated

impact of looks when the Woodcock-Johnson Picture Vocabulary score replaces WJAPSC, a result

consistent with the general finding in the literature (Hanushek and Rivkin, 2010; Jackson et al, 2013) that

value-added in math by teacher quality exceeds that in reading.

        It is unlikely, but not impossible, that there exists feedback from children’s performance on one of

the measures we use to evaluate cognitive achievement and the evaluations of their looks that our raters

make based on the videos of the child. Our work with the SECCYD provides a ready instrument for

children’s looks. At each of Waves 1, 7, 8 and 11 we made short video slices that isolated the mothers of

the children in our sample. These too were rated by the same people and using the same methods as for

their children. We thus re-estimate the equations presented in Table 4, first predicting the child’s

                                                      11
standardized beauty by the mother’s standardized beauty. The first-round results are shown in Column (1)

of Table 5. The estimated impact of mothers’ looks on their children’s is statistically highly significant,

although it explains only a small part of the variance in the children’s looks.

        Using these predictions, we replace the child’s lagged standardized beauty rating with the lagged

value of the predictions from the first stage. Columns (2)-(4) of Table present these IV estimates based on

equations that include all the available covariates (the same as shown in the right-hand side of Table 4). A

comparison of these instrumental estimates to those in Table 4 shows that these are much larger, with the

estimates being statistically significant for the entire sample and for boys, but not for girls. Accounting for

the much smaller standard deviation of the instrumental variable, however, multiplying by the standard

deviation of the instrument yields short-run impacts per standard deviation of the child’s predicted looks of

0.038, 0.022 and 0.059 among all children, girls and boys. The implied long-run impacts are 0.056, 0.035

and 0.084, somewhat but not greatly above those implied by the OLS estimates in Table 4.

V. A Re-Assessment Using U.K. Data

        While the results in the previous sections provide remarkable evidence of the role of looks in

affecting students’ cognitive development, they are clearly specific to the timing of the SECCYD, its

location (selected sites around the U.S.), the peculiarities of the samples selected, and the measurement of

children’s beauty by assessments of videos of them at various ages. This is an acceptable way of assessing

looks; and our using multiple raters adds to its reliability; but it is only one such way. To examine the basic

idea—whether and to what extent students’ appearance affects their cognitive development, conditional on

other measures including family background—using a different method of assessing looks and different

assessment of cognitive outcomes, we consider children included in the 1958 cohort of the U.K. National

Child Development Study (NCDS).

        The NCDS is one of several longitudinal data sets that followed every child born in the United

Kingdom during a single week, in this sample during the first week of March 1958

(http://www.cls.ioe.ac.uk/page.aspx?&sitesectionid=724&sitesectiontitle=National+Child+Development+

Study). In the Study the child’s teacher at age 7 rated his/her looks, in response to the question: “Which

                                                      12
best describes the student?”, with answers attractive, unattractive, abnormal feature, looks underfed or

scruffy and dirty, with an excluded category of none of the above. 13 We discarded the tiny minority of

students (2.5 percent) who were viewed as underfed or scruffy and dirty, and classified those viewed as

attractive as good-looking, those viewed as unattractive or with abnormal feature as bad-looking, and all

others as average-looking at age 7. The child’s teacher at age 11 provided ratings based on the same scale.

        The means of these indicators of appearance are presented in Rows (1) and (4) of Table 6. A

majority of students were viewed as good-looking, with only around ten percent classified as bad-looking.

Compared to the multiple ratings of videos in the SECCYD data, these single ratings by teachers who knew

the children are weighted even more heavily toward viewing the children as good-looking. Also, 70 percent

of the 61 percent of children rated as attractive at age 7 were rated attractive at age 11; 30 percent of the 8

percent of children rated as unattractive at age 7 were rated unattractive at age 11. As with the SECCYD,

there is substantial persistence of rated beauty but also substantial inter-period variation (or randomness).

        The NCDS records the results of students’ achievements on objective reading and math tests at

ages 7, 11 and 16. At age 7 the arithmetic test is the standard Southgate test, while the reading

comprehension test at age 7 and the reading comprehension and math achievement tests administered at

ages 11 and 16 were purpose-constructed for the NCDS. The tests at ages 11 and 16 are very similar in

construction. The means and standard deviations of the raw scores in this sample on each of the six tests

are presented in Rows (2) and (3), and (5)-(8), of Table 6. The heterogeneity in scores is substantial in each

case, with coefficients of variation much larger on mathematics than on reading tests.

        As in the SECCYD, we unit-normalize the test scores and estimate what are essentially

autoregressions describing the score at t (age 11 or 16) as a function of the teachers’ assessments of the

children’s looks and his/her test score at age t-1 (age 7 or 11). In some of the specifications we also include




13
 The looks assessments in these data were used by Harper (2000) to examine the impacts of looks on earnings, and
by Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2013) to study the effects on earnings and on happiness.


                                                      13
an indicator of the child’s gender and vectors of indicators of the social class of his/her father and region at

time t-1. As is common in U.K. surveys, no information is available on race/ethnicity. 14

         As with the SECCYD, we pool the data across the time periods, estimating over changes in

cognitive measures from age 7 to 11, and 11 to 16. The results for reading and math, without and with

covariates, are presented in Table 7. 15 (Appendix Table A7 shows the estimates separately for each t and

for boys and girls.) The differences in the changes in test scores between the good- and bad-looking children

are uniformly statistically significantly nonzero, 0.187 standard deviations for reading, 0.200 standard

deviations for math. These essentially measure the value-added to the student’s cognitive achievement by

his/her appearance during the four (five) years since the previous test, independent of other factors that

affect the value-added. Even the smaller of these is larger than many of the estimates in the literature on the

impact of large increases in teacher quality on value-added (e.g., Hanushek and Rivkin, 2010, and Aaronson

et al., 2007). As in the SECCYD, the effect of looks is greater on changes in math than in reading scores. 16

         As in the estimates using the SECCYD, the F-statistics for the vector of indicators of father’s social

class show that this measure has important effects on value-added, with greater increases if the child’s

father was in a higher social class. 17 The decompositions reported in Table 7 demonstrate that the



14
  There are several variables that proxy for the child’s health, including number of school days missed in the previous
school year due to ill health. Adding these to the basic equations does not change the estimated impacts of beauty,
although more days missed from school for illness are negatively related to the changes in test scores.

15
  The data set does not indicate whether the child had the same teacher at ages 7 and 11. Practices both of teachers
specializing in a grade and teachers moving up with the student through primary school existed in the U.K. in the
1960s, but were more common in rural areas. To get at this, at least in part, we re-estimate the equations in Table 6
using observations in the more urbanized regions of the U.K.: Yorkshire; the North Midlands; the Midlands; East,
Southeast and South England. The results are essentially unchanged, as they are if we further restrict the sample to
Southeast England (essentially Greater London). They are also unchanged if we restrict the sample to those students
who at age 11 were in schools with at least 200 students.

16
 The effects are entirely due to the children’s looks, not their body types. While a higher bmi at age 7 (11) is associated
with a significant, albeit slight increase in value-added in test scores, the correlations between bmi and the looks
variables never exceed 0.10. Adding bmi to the specifications thus has essentially no impact on the estimated
coefficients on the beauty terms. (The correlations of looks and bmi among adults are also very low--Oreffice and
Quintana-Domeque, 2016.) Similarly, adding the child’s height at each base-period age produces essentially no
changes in the estimated impacts of looks on value-added.
17
  Having a father in a higher social class is generally related to greater value-added in test scores, as was true for
income in the SECCYD. Because aggregating the eight (seven in the age 16 regressions) into three or even four classes

                                                            14
correlations between father’s social class, and looks and achievement, account for the overwhelming

majority of the change in the estimated impact of looks on value-added. Moreover, and as in the SECCYD

estimates, unobservable covariates would need to be as strongly correlated with included looks and

outcomes to vitiate the significance of the estimated impacts of looks.

         Given their looks and demographics, the value-added is significantly less for girls than for boys.

Separate autoregressions (unreported) by gender yield similar estimates of the effects of looks and of the

lagged terms, showing that the negative effects the Table for girls do not stem from correlated gender

differences in the impacts of other factors.

         Because the method of assessing looks is completely different from what we designed for the

SECCYD, the impacts of these ratings on assessments of cognitive development cannot be directly

compared to those presented in the previous sections. In relating them to outcomes and using the averages

of the distributions of looks at ages 7 and 11, a move from the excluded category to being viewed as good-

looking is equivalent to a move from the 25th percentile of looks (the mid-range of average-looking students)

to the 70th percentile (the mid-range of good-looking students). In terms of a unit-normal variate, this is

equivalent to an increase of 1.20 standard deviations of looks. A move from being viewed as bad-looking

to good-looking is equivalent to a move from the 5th percentile of looks (the mid-range of bad-looking

students) to the 70th percentile, an increase of 2.19 standard deviations of looks.

         Applying these equivalences to the estimates in Column (2) of Table 7 yields the result that moving

from average- to good-looking generates an immediate 0.07 standard-deviation increase in reading test

scores per standard-deviation increase in looks. and an immediate increase in reading test scores of 0.08

per standard-deviation increase in looks. Using the estimates in Column (4), the analogous changes are 0.07

and 0.09 standard deviations per standard-deviation improvement in looks. Long-term increases are about




discards information and consistently yields a lower adjusted R2, we do not report results based on aggregated social
classes.


                                                         15
three times as large, ranging from 0.19 to 0.24 standard deviations in value-added per standard deviation

increased in looks.

        The measurement of looks that we have used from this data set is totally different from that created

using the SECCYD. The estimated long-run impact of a one standard-deviation change in looks on the

value-added is much larger here. But the results here and from the SECCYD both suggest the role of

children’s looks in affecting their cognitive development.

VI. Beauty or Intelligence? Channels of Causation?

    A. Do the Results Reflect a Correlation of Beauty and Intelligence?

        We know of no data sets that present acceptable measures of intelligence along with assessments

of the subjects’ beauty. While direct IQ measures are not available in the SECCYD (with the exception of

one late wave), we can re-estimate the pooled version of (1) beginning at t=3 and including Si2, which we

view as a proxy for intelligence in very early life, when estimating for each period t. Re-estimating the

equations, the impact of lagged beauty on the standardized outcomes drops from 0.092 to 0.078 in Column

(1a) of Table A6, from 0.035 to 0.028 in Column (1b) of Table A6. In short, about 20-percent of the impact

of beauty on cognitive development in this sample may be attributable to its positive correlation with a

proxy for early ability.

        With fewer waves during childhood, the NCDS leaves less opportunity for examining this

correlation. To do so, we simply add standardized test scores at age 7 to the equations describing the value-

added in reading and math scores between ages 11 and 16. In this re-specification of the equations pooling

girls and boys, the coefficients on good looks (bad looks) change from 0.086 (-0.087) to 0.062       (-0.061)

for reading, and from 0.053 (-0.044) to 0.051 (-0.041) for math. The decline in the effect of beauty on value-

added in reading is slightly larger than the decline in the re-specification of the SECCYD equations, while

the drop in the impact on math scores is much smaller.




                                                     16
    B. Possible Mechanisms for the Effect of Beauty

        In the SECCYD the interpretation of the role of beauty on value-added as possibly being causal is

strengthened because looks in the base (lagged) period are measured by outside observers, not by anyone

who might have a role in affecting the increase in test score from one period to the next. It is strengthened

further by our demonstration that IV estimates yield results very much like the OLS estimates. In the NCDS

a causal interpretation is arguably also strengthened because looks are an assessment by the teacher in some

early grade. Since the change in test scores occurs over the four- or five-year time periods during most of

which the student will not be in a classroom with the same teacher, the child’s subsequent performance in

most cases does not depend on his/her current teacher’s assessment of looks.

        In the SECCYD we can get some insight into the proximate mechanisms through which beauty

affects value-added by examining how the child’s looks alter his/her treatment by the teacher. In each of

Waves 5-10 the teacher is asked whether s/he feels close to the student, and whether s/he feels in conflict

with the student. Teachers characterize most of their relationships with the student as close and most as

basically without conflict—these variables are highly skewed. In modifying the autoregressions, we thus

create indicators of whether the teacher’s closeness (conflict) with the student is in the upper half of the

distribution of the measures. We add these indicators sequentially to estimates of the basic autoregression

(so that these measures become lagged one period and thus precede the measure of value-added).

        Columns (1) and (4) of the upper panel of Table 8 present re-estimates of the autoregressions in

Table 4, but with samples consisting only of Waves 6-11 for comparability to the expanded specifications

that include the closeness/conflict indicators. The estimates of the impacts of looks are somewhat smaller

than those based on Waves 2-11, but the impact remains statistically significant in the equation without

controls, and nearly so in that including controls. Columns (2) and (5) add the indicator for teacher-student

closeness, while Columns (3) and (6) add the indicator for teacher-student conflict. When the teacher feels

close to the student, the student’s test score increases more—an effect of about 0.04 standard deviations in




                                                     17
Column (5) comparing students in the upper to those in the lower half of this measure. The impact of the

teacher feeling in conflict with the students is about the same size but of opposite sign. 18

            The children’s mothers were asked whether their child was victimized by other children, but only

beginning with Wave 7. To examine whether the impact of looks on value-added works through (bad-

looking) children being bullied in school, we divide this measure too into the upper and lower halves of the

responses and re-estimate the equations in the upper part of Table 8. As with the teachers’ assessments,

while being bullied reduces the value-added (estimated effect = -0.033, s.e.=0.028) in the specification that

contains all covariates including this measure lowers the estimated impact of standardized looks only very

slightly.

            The comparisons are of the impacts of beauty on value-added without and then with these measures

of the teacher-student relationship or of the mother’s views on her child’s treatment by fellow students. The

estimated impacts of looks are smaller when these indicators are included; but the declines are less than ten

percent. A reasonable conclusion is that, while looks affect value-added, almost none of their effects work

through teacher-reported characterizations of relationships with the students or through mothers’

perceptions of how their children are treated by other children.

            Because the measures of looks in the NCDS are by teachers, we cannot use teachers’ assessments

of their relationships with the child to infer the paths through which better looks increase cognitive

development. Rather, we use mothers’ assessments of their children’s behavior, reported in the same wave

as the measure of looks and presumably based on observations outside the classroom, but perhaps based on

reports the parents have received from school. We use vectors of indicators reflecting mothers’ six

assessments, each on a scale of “never,” “sometimes” and “frequently.” These are responses at age 7 to

questions about whether the child has difficulty concentrating; whether s/he is upset by new situations;




18
 Replacing the indicators with the continuous, highly skewed raw measures yields the same qualitative conclusions.
Because these measures are highly correlated, including both in the same specification adds little.

                                                       18
whether s/he fights with other children, and whether s/he is bullied by other children. We also use mothers’

reports at age 11 about whether the child is miserable or tearful, and whether s/he is squirmy or fidgety. 19

         Columns (1) and (3) of the bottom panel of Table 8 re-estimate the models of Table 7 for reading

and math test scores at age 16, using looks measured at age 7 as the base-period. The estimates of the

impacts of looks thus show their effects over the entire period of the child’s compulsory schooling. The

estimates are like those in Table 7, with both having statistically significant effects on value-added in

reading and math. (As before, we include an indicator of gender and a vector of indicators of father’s social

class and region of residence in the base period.) Columns (2) and (4) in the lower panel add the six vectors

of mother’s assessments of the child’s behavior. In each case all six vectors have the expected effects on

value-added: If the mother reports that the child never exhibits the behavior, the value-added in test scores

is higher. Moreover, in most of the cases the vector describing the behavior has a significant impact on

value-added.

         Although mothers’ positive assessments of their children’s behavior are related to improvements

in test scores over the nine-year range, their inclusion in the estimates hardly alters the measured impacts

of looks. While those do decline, the decreases average below ten percent, quite close to the declines

observed in the SECCYD. The estimated impacts of children’s looks are only very slightly reduced by

including maternal ratings of aspects of their children’s behavior that might be viewed as detrimental to

their cognitive development. Viewed alternatively, the impacts of a teacher’s assessments of a child’s looks

are not importantly modified by the mother’s perceptions of the child’s behavior; or it may be that mothers’

ratings do not well reflect how children’s behavior in the school and peer contexts alters the child’s

cognitive achievement.

         A third route through which a child’s beauty might change cognitive development might be through

how s/he projects a persona to others, including teachers, parents and peers. Both data sets have measures

of the child’s self-confidence, although only when the child is an adolescent. In the SECCYD at age 11


19
  Among the four indicators created at age 7, 69, 71, 41 and 65 percent of mothers report that their child never had
this difficulty. On the two reports at age 11, 59 and 60 percent of mothers state their child never exhibited this behavior.

                                                            19
(Wave 10) children are asked a battery of questions designed to elicit their optimism, and are also asked

questions about their confidence about their ability in math and English. While the latter two measures

strongly and significantly increase value-added (in equations based only on data from Waves 10 and 11),

their addition only very slightly reduces (adding self-confidence in English) and slightly increases (adding

self-confidence in math) the estimated effects of looks on value-added. The index of optimism bears no

relation to value-added, and it alters the estimated impact of looks by -0.0002.

        In the NCDS respondents were asked at age 16 whether they agreed with the statement, “There is

no point in planning for the future,” strong disagreement with which we take as an indicator of self-

confidence, an answer given by 59 percent of the 16-year-olds who answered the question. Re-estimating

the autoregression describing improvements in reading scores between ages 11 and 16, the parameter

estimates on the two beauty variables are 0.084 and -0.078. Adding the indicator of self-confidence does

lower these estimates in absolute value, but only to 0.081 and -0.074. For the math scores the effects are

even smaller: Without the self-confidence measure in this auto-regression, the coefficient estimates are

0.050 and -0.041; with them, they fall to 0.049 and -0.040. While self-confidence is associated with greater

gains in test scores between the two waves of the survey, the impacts on the estimated effects of beauty are

tiny.

VII. Children’s Looks and the Economic Returns to Education
        The beauty literature (Hamermesh, 2011) has examined the extent to which differences in looks

affect economic outcomes, particularly earnings, conditional on large numbers of personal and job

characteristics, including educational attainment. It, and the much more massive literature on the returns to

education, in one form or another all measure the impact of an additional year of schooling, or an additional

degree obtained, on wage rates and/or earnings. As we have shown, however, being better-looking also

raises a student’s measured achievement. To the extent that greater achievement in earlier years of school

leads to attaining additional education, part of the effect of education on earnings that has been measured

in the immense literature arises indirectly through the effects of beauty.

        Ideally, we would like to estimate the following triangular model over individuals in some survey:

                                                     20
(2a)     Sct = F(Sc,t-1 , Bc,t-1, Xc,t-1) , t during childhood, c;

(2b)     EDyt = G(Sct , Bc,t-1, Xyt ), t during young adulthood, y;

and:

(2c)     Earningsmt = H(EDyt, Sct, Bc,t-1, Xmt), t during maturity, m,

where X are vectors of controls observed in period c,t-1, y,t or m,t. To estimate this model, we need to

observe people over much of their lives, at least from the primary grades through adulthood. With the

SECCYD we cannot do this—we cannot tell whether greater cognitive achievements lead to additional

education (and thus higher earnings); but we can use the results here and extraneous information on the

relationship between test scores and educational attainment, and educational attainment and earnings, to

infer the magnitude of the effect of beauty on earnings through its impact on education. With the NCDS we

can estimate this model directly, since the respondents have been followed from age 7 though middle age. 20

         A. Indirect Effects Inferred though the SECCYD
         Estimates of the impact of looks at each age can be inferred from the pooled autoregressions

reported in Table 4. We performed these calculations in order to use them to infer the indirect impact of

looks on earnings that occurs through its effects on educational attainment. Chetty et al. (2014a) initially

show that a one standard-deviation increase in teacher quality raises test scores by 0.13 standard deviations,

somewhat more than the 0.114 long-run effect of a one standard-deviation increase in looks on cognitive

achievement implied by the estimates in Table 4 (without covariates). Chetty et al. (2014b, pp. 2655-56)

calculate that such a one standard-deviation increase in tests scores raises earnings by 12 percent. The

implied impact of looks on earnings through its effects on educational attainment in the SECCYD is then

1.4 percent (0.114∙12 percent), i.e., equivalent to the impact on earnings of an additional 1 month of

schooling (assuming a 12 percent annual return to education).



20
   While we do not observe the child’s eventual educational attainment, the SECCYD does include his/her 9th grade
(Wave 11) grade point average. With the same controls as in the expended versions of (1), and including the Wave 10
test score, a one standard-deviation increase in average beauty raises ninth-grade GPA by 0.22 points on a four-point
scale.


                                                             21
            The estimates of the direct impact of looks on earnings are typically much larger than this, with the

equivalent of a one standard-deviation increase in one’s position in the distribution of looks (from the

median to the 84th percentile) increasing earnings by about 7 percent. 21 Taking this estimate and the

simulated indirect effects together suggests that the overwhelming majority of the effect of beauty on

earnings results from its direct effects. In these data perhaps a little below 20 percent (1.4/[1.4+ 7]) stems

from its indirect effect.

            B. Indirect Effects Calculated from the NCDS
            In the NCDS, we create a measure of years of education attained by age 33. 22 In Equation (2b)

describing this outcome we include both reading and math scores at age 16 plus region of residence at age

16. We then estimate Equation (2c) using earnings observed at age 33. The earnings equation also includes

a large vector of controls, including health status, gender and marital status and their interactions, father’s

social class when the person was age 16, and region of residence at age 33. Under the assumption that the

error-matrix describing (2) is diagonal, this triangular system is identified when estimated by generalized

least-squares (Greene, 2003, p. 397), which we use to produce the estimates in Table 9.

            The estimates of Equation (2a) are shown in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 9 and differ slightly

from those shown in Table 8 because the sample here is smaller (due to sample attrition between ages 16

and 33 and item non-response on earnings at age 33). We present the estimates of Equation (2b) in Column

(3) of Table 9. Higher reading and math scores at age 16 strongly affect the amount of education attained,

with one standard-deviation increases in each raising educational attainment by about one year. The direct

effects of looks on years of schooling are also large, with the often-observed asymmetric greater response

of the outcome to bad looks (e.g., Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994).




21
     Authors’ calculations based on estimates of earnings equations over 8 different data sets from 5 countries.

22
 In terms of the variables in the data set, ED=8 if hqual33=10; 10 if nvq1; 12 if nvq2; 13 if nvq3; 15 if nvq4; 17 if
nvq5.


                                                             22
         Column (4) of Table 9, estimating Equation (2c), presents a standard log-earnings model expanded

to include the assessments of the person’s looks at age 7 and his/her standardized test scores at age 16. 23

Looks have only a small direct effect on earnings, although the 60 percent of people who were considered

good-looking as 7-year-old children do earn about 3 percent more than the 10 percent who were considered

unattractive at that age (accounting for all the covariates). Differences in educational attainment produce

the usual significant impacts on earnings, with the return to an additional year of education being about 7

percent conditional on all the other included variables. Higher standardized test scores in both reading and

math at age 16 raise earnings, conditional on looks and all the other covariates. Moving from an adult whose

scores on both were at the mean to a counterpart with scores one standard deviation above the mean yields

9 percent higher earnings. 24

         We can use the estimates in Table 9 to simulate the effect of moving from bad- to good looks (a

2.19 standard-deviation increase). The direct effect per standard deviation is 0.115 on reading, 0.132 on

math, as shown in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 10. More interesting is the calculation of the indirect effect

of looks on educational attainment through test scores, presented along with the estimate of the direct effect

in Column (3). These demonstrate that at least half of the effect of differences in appearance on educational

attainment works indirectly through their effect in raising test scores.

         The central results of this subsection are shown in Column (4) of Table 10, which takes the

estimates of the direct effects on earnings at age 33 from Table 9 and calculates the extra, indirect impact

of looks on earnings arising from their impacts through test scores and hence through educational

attainment. At the bottom the table lists the total effect of differences in looks on earnings. The crucial point

is that the overall impact on earnings per standard deviation of difference in looks is not small, about 4.5

percent; but the overwhelming majority of the effect in this data set works indirectly, through test scores


23
 Ordinary least squares gives very similar results, since, while the correlation of the residuals between the two
measures of test scores is +0.37, none of the other five correlations exceeds 0.02 in absolute value.

24
  To save space we only present the earnings equations for age 33. The estimates for earnings at ages 41, 46 and 51
are qualitatively the same as those shown in the table. This is also the case if, instead of using the imputed years of
education, we use indicators of whether the person obtained any A-levels or had a university degree.

                                                          23
and educational attainment—pre-labor market differences—rather than directly through differences

resulting directly from employers’ responses to looks. The 0.4 additional years of schooling per standard

deviation difference in looks implies a 3 percent higher earnings through this mechanism.

        The results in this section, from two completely independent investigations of the relationship

between looks and cognitive development, suggest that a substantial part of the labor-market return to

beauty arises because better-looking students improve their achievements in school more rapidly than other

students, improvements that lead them to attain a higher level of education. Summarizing, the estimates in

this Section imply that 20 to as much as 80 percent of the economic returns to beauty arises from its prior

indirect effects on educational attainment.

VIII. Conclusions and Implications
        We have engaged in various exercises to examine how looks affect children’s cognitive

development, measured by the changes in what are mostly objective measures of a child’s or adolescent’s

cognitive achievement. One data set, the longitudinal U.S. Study of Early Child Care and Youth

Development, followed a sample of over 1300 infants through age 15, collecting information at 11 waves

based on a variety of measures of achievement, mostly objective from standardized tests. The other is the

1958 cohort of the U.K. National Child Development Study, which has followed all children born in the

U.K. in a particular week up through middle age, with objective assessments of their achievement at ages

7, 11 and 16. In the SECCYD we employed contemporaries of this cohort to rate their looks based on thin

slices of videos taken at each age, using averages of the normalized ratings of each child’s looks at each

age. In the NCDS we use teachers’ assessments of children’s looks at ages 7 and 11.

        Estimating autoregressions describing the change in cognitive achievement between waves as

affected by these looks measures, and in some specifications by sets of class/income and racial/ethnic

indicators, we demonstrate that looks matter—on average better-looking children show greater

improvements in assessments based on objective tests. Because students who perform better in primary and

secondary school are more likely to obtain additional education, these results imply that some of the labor-

market returns to education arise from the indirect effect of looks on educational attainment. This indirect

                                                    24
effect is in addition to the direct effect of looks on earnings and other economic outcomes. This inference

does not mean that schooling is unproductive. Rather, it implies that the benefits of schooling are tilted

toward better-looking students, whose good looks lead them to greater achievements in school and to

greater educational attainment than their less good-looking contemporaries.

        The unanswered economic question here (and in research on beauty more generally) is: What are

the welfare implications of the demonstrated impact of looks on cognitive development? On the side of

teachers, do they spend more time teaching better-looking children without subtracting from time spent

with less good-looking children? Or is their time merely switched from the bad- to the good-looking? The

same questions apply to parents: Do parents tilt their time toward better-looking children without decreasing

time spent with their less good-looking offspring; or do they spend more time with them while reducing

time allocated toward less good-looking offspring? To the extent that interactions with children’s peers

affect their cognitive development, the same questions might be asked about the behavior of a child’s fellow

students.

        In all cases, if teachers merely add to time spent with good-looking children, one might argue that

this apparent discrimination is detrimental only to the extent that teachers’ and parents’ extra time might

have been more productively allocated to children who would most benefit from it at the margin. If they

switch time from bad- to good looking children, and assuming teachers and parents would allocate their

time efficiently absent looks-based discrimination, resources are shifted inefficiently to a use that is less

productive at the margin of their allocations of time.

        We have explored three plausible mechanisms by which better looks might produce higher

achievement—teachers’ closeness to and conflict with the student, the child’s behavior and how s/he is

treated by other children, as reported by their mothers, and the child’s self-confidence. Although each was

associated in expected ways with looks and gains in achievement, none greatly affected the estimated

impacts of looks on cognitive development. Inferring the indirect pathways will require studies designed

specifically to consider how lookism might operate from early childhood through adolescence.



                                                     25
        Studies are needed that connect what is known from the developmental psychology literature to

observational studies tracking the natural unfolding of development and that are specifically focused on

looks. Existing measures of relationships, identities and discrimination can be adapted to measure how

others respond to children’s looks and how youths internalize those responses, including ratings probing

looks-based teasing, avoidance or attraction, and experience-sampling methods capturing how teachers may

differentially respond to equally-able students with better-and worse-rated looks. If such measures were

embedded into longitudinal studies with the kinds of measurements of attractiveness and standardized

achievement used here, the mechanisms generating the robust associations evident here could be better

understood.




                                                  26
REFERENCES


Daniel Aaronson, Lisa Barrow and William Sander, “Teachers and Student Achievement in Chicago Public
        High Schools,” Journal of Labor Economics, 25 (Jan. 2007): 95-135.
Ama Abeberese, Todd Kumler and Leigh Linden, “Improving Reading Skills by Encouraging Children to
      Read in School: A Randomized Evaluation of the Sa Aklat Sisikat Reading Program in the
      Philippines,” Journal of Human Resources, 49 (Summer 2014): 611-33.
Jason Abrevaya and Daniel Hamermesh, “’Beauty Is the Promise of Happiness’?” European Economic
       Review, 64 (2013): 351-68.
Richard Akresh and Ilana Redstone Akresh, “Using Achievement Tests to Measure Language Assimilation
       and Language Bias among the Children of Immigrants,” Journal of Human Resources, 46 (Summer
       2011): 648-67.

Daniel Benjamin and Jesse Shapiro, “Thin-Slice Forecasts of Gubernatorial Elections,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 91 (August 2009), pp. 523-36.

Niclas Berggren, Henrik Jordahl and Panu Poutvaara, “The Looks of a Winner: Beauty and Electoral
       Success,” Journal of Public Economics, 94 (2010): 8-15.

Jeff Biddle and Daniel Hamermesh, “Beauty, Productivity and Discrimination: Lawyers’ Looks and Lucre,”
        Journal of Labor Economics, 16 (Jan. 1998): 172-201.

Daniela del Boca, Chiara Monfardini and Cheti Nicoletti, “Parental and Child Time Investments and the
        Cognitive Development of Adolescents,” Journal of Labor Economics, 35 (April 2017): 565-608.

Scott Carrell, Mark Hoekstra and Elira Kuka, “The Long-Run Effects of Disruptive Peers,” American
       Economic Review, 108 (Nov. 2018): 3377-415.
Qihui Chen, Xiaobing Wang and Qiran Zhao, “Appearance Discrimination in Grading? Evidence from
       Migrant Schools in China,” Economics Letters, 181 (Aug. 2019): 116-9.

Raj Chetty, John Friedman and Jonah Rockoff, “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias in
       Teacher Value-Added Estimates,” American Economic Review, 104 (Sept. 2014): 2593-2632, a.
Raj Chetty, John Friedman and Jonah Rockoff, “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-
       Add and Student Outcomes in Adulthood,” American Economic Review, 104 (Sept. 2014): 2633-
       79, b.
Robert Crosnoe, Fred Morrison, Margaret Burchinal, Robert Pianta, Daniel Keating, Sarah Friedman, K.A.
       Clarke-Stewart, “Instruction, Teacher-Student relations, and Math Achievement Trajectories in
       Elementary School, Journal of Educational Psychology, (2010): 407-17.
Greg J. Duncan, Chantell Dowsett, Amy Claessens, Katherine Magnuson, Aletha Huston, Pamela
       Klebanov, Linda Pagani, Leon Feinstein, Mimi Engle, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Holly Sexton,
       Kathryn Duckworh and Crista Japel, “School Readiness and Later Achievement,” Developmental
       Psychology, (2007): 1428-46.
Susan Dynarski, Daniel Hubbard, Brian Jacob and Silvia Robles, “Estimating the Effects of a Large For-
       Profit Charter School Operator,” NBER Working Paper No. 24428, 2018.


                                                 27
Ralph Waldo Emerson, The Conduct of Life. Boston: James R. Osgood, 1871.
Marco Francesconi and James Heckman, “Child Development and Parental Investment: Introduction,”
      Economic Journal, 126 (Oct. 2016): F1-27.
Roland Fryer, “Financial Incentives and Student Achievement: Evidence from Randomized Trials,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126 (Nov. 2011): 1755-98.
Jonah Gelbach, “When Do Covariates Matter? And Which Ones, and How Much?” Journal of Labor
       Economics, 34 (April 2016): 509-43.

Rachel Gordon, Robert Crosnoe and Xue Wang, "Physical Attractiveness and the Accumulation of Social
       and Human Capital in Adolescence and Young Adulthood," Monographs of the Society for
       Research in Child Development, 78 (2013).
Rachel Gordon, Lilla Pivnick, Sarah Moberg and Robert Crosnoe, “Documentation of Appearance Ratings
       for the Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development (SECCY)” Open ICPSR, (2018).
William Greene, Econometric Analysis, 5th edition. New York: Prentice-Hall, 2003.
Daniel Hamermesh, Beauty Pays. Princeton University Press, 2011.
Daniel Hamermesh and Jeff Biddle, “Beauty and the Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 84 (Dec.
        1994): 1174-94.
Eric Hanushek, “Teacher Characteristics and Gains in Student Achievement: Estimation Using Micro
       Data.” American Economic Review, 61 (May 1971): 280–88.
------------------and Steven Rivkin, “Generalizations About Using Value-Added Measures of Teacher
          Quality,” American Economic Review, 100 (May 2010): 267-71.
Barry Harper, “Beauty, Stature and the Labour Market: A British Cohort Study,” Oxford Bulletin of
       Economics and Statistics, 62 (2000): 771-800.
Elaine Hatfield and Susan Sprecher, Mirror, Mirror: The Importance of Looks in Everyday Life. Albany,
        NY: SUNY Press, 1986.
C. Kirabo Jackson, Jonah Rockoff and Douglas Staiger, “Teacher Effects and Teacher-Related Policies,”
        Annual Reviews of Economics, 6 (2014): 801-25.
Linda Jackson, John Hunter and Carole Hodge, “Physical Attractiveness and Intellectual Competence: A
        Meta-Analytic Review,” Social Psychology Quarterly, 58 (June 1995): 108-22.

Amy King and Andrew Leigh, “Beautiful Politicians,” Kyklos, 62 (Nov. 2009): 579-93.

Judith Langlois, Lisa Kalakanis, Adam Rubenstein, Andrea Larson, Monica Hallam and Monic Smoot,
        “Maxims or Myths of Beauty? A Meta-Analytic and Theoretical Review,” Psychological Bulletin,
        126 (May 2000): 390-423.

Arleen Leibowitz, “Home Investments in Children,” Journal of Political Economy, 82 (April 1974): S111-
       31.

NICHD SECCYD Steering Committee, Child Care Data Report – 1: Hospital Recruitment Data. Nashville,
      TN: Quantitative Systems Laboratory, Peabody College, Vanderbilt University, 1993.



                                                  28
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network, Child Care and Child Development: Results from NICHD’s
     Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development. New York: Guilford Press, 2005.

Sonia Oreffice and Climent Quintana-Domeque, “Beauty, Body Size and Wages: Evidence from a Unique
       Data Set,” Economics and Human Biology, 22 (Sept. 2016): 22-34.

Emily Oster, “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
      Business and Economic Statistics, 37 (April 2019): 187-204.

Marta Rubio-Codina, Orazio Attanasio, Costas Meghir, Natalia Varela, and Sally Grantham-McGregor,
       “The Socioeconomic Gradient of Child Development: Cross-Sectional Evidence from Children 6–
       42 Months in Bogota,” Journal of Human Resources, 50 (Spring 2015): 465-83.

Joseph Salvia, Robert Algozzine and Joseph Sheare, “Attractiveness and School Achievement,” Journal of
        School Psychology, 15 (1977): 60-7.

J. Karl Scholz and Kamil Sicinski, “Facial Attractiveness and Lifetime Earnings: Evidence from a Cohort
         Study,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97 (March 2015): 14-28.

Sean Talamas, Kenneth Mavor and David Perrett, “Blinded by Beauty: Attractiveness Bias and Accurate
       Perceptions of Academic Performance,” PLoS ONE, 11(2), Feb. 17, 2016.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Money Income of Families, Households and Persons in the United States: 1990,
       Current Population Reports P60-174. Washington: GPO, 1991.

Deborah Vandell, Jay Belsky, Margaret Burchinall, Laurence Steinberg, Mathan Vandergrift, NICHD Early
       Child Care Research Network, “Do Effects of Early Child Care Extend to Age 15 Years? Results
       from the NICHD Study of Early Child Care and Youth Development,” Child Development, 81
       (May/June 2010): 737-56.

Robert Woodcock and Mary Bonner Johnson, Woodcock-Johnson Psycho-Educational Battery – Revised.
       Allen, TX: DLM, 1989.




                                                  29
Table 1. Percentage of the Original Sample of 1,364 Children with Short Slices of Video at
Each Wave, and Distribution of Beauty Ratings Overall

                      Percentage                Raw Beauty Ratings             Percentage
                      with Video                (N = 141,369)
 Age:
 Months:
                 6       93.1                   Very attractive, very cute          6.3
                15       90.0                   Attractive, cute                   31.5
                24       84.8                   Average                            41.9
                36       85.3                   Unattractive, not cute             17.7
                54       74.6                   Very unattractive, not cute         2.6
                                                 at all
 Grade:
                 1       72.4
                 3       71.6
                 4       63.3
                 5       69.5
                 6       64.1


 Age:
                15       63.4




                                            1
Table 2. Mean and Standard Deviation of Mean and SD Looks (the Means and Standard
Deviations within Child/Wave of the Rater/Wave Normalized Raw Ratings)

                                   Mean (SD)a                 Standard Deviation of Ratings
                                   Girls   Boys                      Girls    Boys
    Time [N raters]b
    6 mos.                         0.035       -0.031*                    0.903      0.891
    [35]                          (0.465)      (0.445)

    15 mos.                        0.012       -0.006                     0.889      0.881
    [27]                          (0.478)      (0.481)

    24 mos.                        0.048       -0.039*                    0.881      0.896
    [29]                          (0.450)      (0.437)

    36 mos.                       0.059        -0.055*                    0.913     0.896*
    [29]                         (0.449)       (0.419)

    54 mos.                       0.021        -0.018                     0.918     0.886*
    [30]                         (0.441)       (0.408)

    1st grade                     0.075        -0.067*                    0.886     0.835*
    [29]                         (0.509)       (0.462)

    3rd grade                     0.075        -0.135*                    0.842     0.784*
    [29]                         (0.617)       (0.512)

    4th grade                     0.091        -0.062*                    0.826     0.792*
    [34]                         (0.611)       (0.553)

    5th grade                     0.066        -0.069*                    0.822     0.782*
    [32]                         (0.654)       (0.557)

    6th grade                     0.093        -0.119*                    0.778     0.749*
    [12]                         (0.702)       (0.576)

    Age 15                        0.187        -0.192*                    0.683     0.703*
    [35]                         (0.719)       (0.652)

    All Waves                     0.069        -0.065*                    0.858     0.838*
    [45]                         (0.551)       (0.497)
a
 Standard deviations of mean looks in parentheses.
b
 Total number of raters at each wave. Study youth were rated by at least 10 raters at each wave.
*Different from girls at the 95-percent level of confidence.

                                                          2
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics of Outcome Variablesa

Name:           Variable Description                                                   Mean          SD          Range

IMPRSO          Observers’ Ratings of Mother/Child Behavior, Overall                    4.22        0.69          [1, 5]
                Impression:
                Wave 1

MDI             Bayley Mental Development Index:                                      108.58        14.07       [63, 150]
                Waves 2, 3

BKSRCO          Bracken School Readiness Composite:                                    14.76        9.92          [0 50]
                Wave 4

WJAPSC          Woodcock-Johnson Applied Problems Standard                            102.94        15.63       [41, 153]
                Score:
                Waves 5, 6, 7, 9, 11

WASIFC          Wechsler Full Scale IQ:                                               106.86        14.83       [59, 149]
                Wave 8

ASLL            Academic Skills Rating Scale, Language & Literacy                       3.79        0.92          [1, 5]
                Score: Waves 10 (Teacher-rated)


a
 Means and standard deviations shown here are for the variable’s first use in one of the following text tables as a dependent
or lagged dependent variable: IMPRSO--Wave 1; MDI--Wave 2; BKSRCO--Wave 4; WJAPSC--Wave 5; WASIFC--Wave
8; ASLL--Wave 10.




                                                        3
Table 4. Pooled Autoregressions of Normalized Outcomes, SECCYD Waves 2-11*

                                        All       Girls      Boys            All        Girls        Boys
Lagged average stzd. beauty            0.101      0.081      0.117          0.045       0.039        0.059
                                      (0.019)    (0.025)     (0.028)       (0.018)      (0.025)     (0.027)

Lagged dep. var.**                     0.528      0.527      0.527          0.420       0.408        0.429
                                      (0.012)    (0.018)     (0.017)       (0.013)      (0.019)     (0.018)

Female                                                                      0.047          ---         ---
                                                                           (0.024)

Non-Hispanic White                                                          0.109       0.147        0.088
                                                                           (0.046)      (0.068)     (0.059)

Non-Hispanic Black                                                         -0.270       -0.155       -0.366
                                                                           (0.056)      (0.079)     (0.076)

Non-Hispanic Other                                                          0.122       0.209        0.058
                                                                           (0.074)      (0.101)     (0.107)

Household income at birth:
$26,000-$52,000                                                             0.104       0.132        0.078
                                                                           (0.035)      (0.051)     (0.047)

$52,000-$78,000                                                             0.129       0.156        0.102
                                                                           (0.042)      (0.062)     (0.055)

$78,000-$275,000                                                            0.192       0.172        0.213
                                                                           (0.044)      (0.064)     (0.061)

R2                                     0.282      0.281      0.278          0.333       0.403        0.390
N Observations                         8,334      4,173      4,161          8,218       4,140        4,078
N individuals                          1,237       604        633           1,216        596          620

% ∆ beauty effect from:
Race/ethnicity                                                              61.6         69.6         53.1
Family income at birth                                                      12.7         15.4         13.2
Parents’ education                                                          25.6         15.0         33.7
*Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on each child. Also included in the three right-hand columns are
indicators of mother’s education and that of the more educated parent.
**Dep. and lagged dep. vars: Wave 2—MDI, IMPRSO; Wave 3--MDI, MDI; Wave 4--BKSRCO, MDI; Wave
5--WJAPSC, BKSRCO; Wave 6--WJAPSC, WJAPSC; Wave 7—WJAPSC, WJAPSC;
Wave 8—WASIFC, WJAPSC; Wave 9—WJAPSC, WASIFC; Wave 10— ASLL, WJAPSC; Wave 11—
WJAPSC, ASLL.


                                                     4
Table 5. Pooled Autoregressions of Normalized Outcomes, SECCYD Waves 2-11, Using
Mothers’ Looks as Instrument*
                                 First Stage          IV

                                               All              All        Girls        Boys


Lagged Mom’s stzd. beauty                    0.057           0.557       0.314        0.853
                                            (0.008)          (0.211)    (0.260)       (0.323)

Lagged dep. var.**                          ---------        0.332       0.364        0..306
                                                             (0.027)    (0.018)       (0.041)

R2                                           0.014           0.266       0.308        0.232

SD Mom’s beauty                              1.002                       0.069




*Standard errors in parentheses, clustered on each child. Also included in the IV estimates are all the covariates
that were in the specifications in the three right-hand columns in Table 4.
**Dep. and lagged dep. vars: Wave 2—MDI, IMPRSO; Wave 3--MDI, MDI; Wave 4--BKSRCO, MDI; Wave
5--WJAPSC, BKSRCO; Wave 6--WJAPSC, WJAPSC; Wave 7—WJAPSC, WJAPSC;
Wave 8—WASIFC, WJAPSC; Wave 9—WJAPSC, WASIFC; Wave 10—ASLL, WJAPSC; Wave 11—
WJAPSC, ASLL




                                                         5
Table 6. Summary Statistics, NCDS, Ages 7, 11 and 16a


 Age     Variable                                                          Mean
                                                                           (SD)

 7       Good-looking (attractive)*                                         0.608
         Average-looking (all others)                                       0.310
         Bad-looking (unattractive or abnormal feature)                     0.082

 7       Southgate group                                                   23.441
         reading test score**                                              (7.057)

 7       Problem arithmetic                                                 5.138
         test score**                                                      (2.471)

 11      Good-looking (attractive)*                                         0.580
         Average-looking (all others)                                       0.317
         Bad-looking (unattractive or abnormal feature)                     0.103

 11      Reading comprehension                                             16.077
         test score**                                                      (6.252)

 11      Mathematics                                                       16.818
         test score**                                                      (10.333)

 16      Reading comprehension                                             25.614
         test score**                                                      (6.834)

 16      Mathematics                                                       12.895
         test score**                                                      (7.000)

 a
  Standard deviation in parentheses below the mean.
 *Children described as "underfed" or "scruffy and dirty" are excluded..
 **Based on means for the sample with test scores at ages 7 and 11.




                                                         6
Table 7. Effects of Looks on Reading and Math Scores, Changes between Ages 7 and 11, and
11 and 16, Pooled, NCDS 1958 Cohort, 19,676 Observations, 10,307 Individualsa

                                                                 Reading                         Math

                                                      Without            With        Without         With
                                                     covariates        Covariates   Covariates     Covariates

Good-looking at t-1                                      0.091           0.086        0.101             0.087
                                                        (0.012)         (0.011)      (0.012)        (0.012)

Bad-looking at t-1                                       -0.109         -0.101       -0.121             -0.113
                                                        (0.019)         (0.019)      (0.018)        (0.018)

Lagged dep. var.                                         0.710           0.681        0.622             0.628
                                                        (0.006)         (0.006)      (0.006)        (0.006)

Female                                                   -0.106         -0.104       -0.086             -0.090
                                                        (0.010)         (0.009)       0.011)            0.010)

p-value of F-statistic on class
indicators                                             ---------        <0.001       --------       <0.001

p-value of F-statistic on region                        ---------       <0.001       --------       <0.001
indicators

R2                                                      0.508            0.526        0.459             0.483

% ∆ beauty effect from*:
Father’s social class                                                    117.8                          81.2
Region                                                                   -17.8                          18.8
aStandard   errors in parentheses clustered on individuals.
*Average decomposition on good looks and bad looks.




                                                                   7
Table 8. Sources of the Beauty Effect on Value-added, SECCYD and NCDS 1958 Cohorta

SECCYD Waves 6-11
                           No controls                             With controls*
 Ind. Var.

Lagged average
stdzd. beauty           0.069     0.068     0.063               0.030    0.029      0.028
                        (0.020)   (0.020)   (0.020)            (0.020)   (0.020)    (0.020)

Lagged dep. var.        0.629     0.627     0.623               0.532    0.532      0.531
                        (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.015)            (0.018)   (0.018)    (0.018)

Teacher feels                     0.060                                   0.042
close to student                  (0.022)                                (0.022)

Teacher feels in                            -0.083                                  -0.032
conflict with student                       (0.023)                                 (0.023)

Adjusted R2              0.393     0.421    0.395              0.394       0.421     0.421

N=                       4,300     4,241    4,241              4,300       4,241     4,241




                                              8
Table 8, cont.

NCDS 1958*           Dep. Var.: Test Score Age 16 (N = 7,916)

                               Reading                           Math

 Good Looks              0.087        0.084               0.105         0.098
 Age 7                   (0.019)     (0.019)              (0.021)       (0.021)


 Bad Looks               -0.120      -0.111              -0.200         -0.188
 Age 7                   (0.033)     (0.033)             (0.037)        (0.036)


 Test Score              0.572         0.563             0.414           0.404
 Age 7                   (0.010)      (0.010)            (0.010)        (0.010)


 Difficulty concentrating               b                                   b
  Age 7
 Upset by new situations                c                                   c
  Age 7
 Fights other kids                      b                                   b
   Age 7
 Bullied                                b                                    c
   Age 7
 Miserable or tearful                   b                                   b
   Age 11
Squirmy, fidgety Age 11                 c                                   b



 R2                      0.419        0.424              0.321            0.334
 a
     Standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
 b
  Vector of indicators statistically significant at the 5-percent level of confidence.
 c
  Vector of indicators not statistically significant at the 5-percent level of confidence.
 *Also included for the SECCYD are the same controls used in the equations underlying
 Table 4. Included for the NCDS are an indicator of gender and a vector of indicators of
 the father’s social class and region when the child was 7.




                                                             9
Table 9. Educational Attainment and Earnings, Equations (2b), (2c), NCDS 1958 Cohort
(N = 5,238)a

                         Reading Score              Math Score            Years of         ln(W33)**
                            Age 16*                 Age 16*                School*
 Ind. Var.


 Good Looks                       0.110                 0.130            0.077             0.024
 Age 7                            (0.022)              (0.025)           (0.052)           (0.018)


 Bad Looks                        -0.142               -0.160           -0.238             0.005
 Age 7                            (0.040)              (0.046)           (0.103)           (0.033)


 Reading Score                      -----                -----           0.894             0.040
 Age 16                                                                  (0.037)           (0.012)


 Math Score                         -----                -----           1.043             0.044
 Age 16                                                                  (0.034)           (0.012)


 Years of                           -----                -----            -----            0.066
 School                                                                                    (0.004)


 Score                             0.448                0.342             -----             -----
 Age 7                            (0.011)              (0.011)


 R2                                0.385                0.313            0.484             0.439


 Dep. Var.                                                               12.45            ₤140.19
 Mean (SE)                                                               (0.03)            (1.01)
         a
         Standard errors in parentheses below coefficient estimates. The four equations are estimated jointly with the
         equations describing test scores in Table 7 using the method of seemingly unrelated regression.
             *Also includes an indicator for gender and a vector of indicators of the person’s father’s social class
             when the person was age 7 and a vector of indicators of region of residence at age 16.
             **Also includes indicators for health status, for gender and marital status and their interaction, a vector of indicators
             of father’s social class when the person was age 16, and a vector of indicators of region at age 33.




                                                              10
Table 10. Effects of Looks on Test Scores, Educational Attainment and Earnings, NCDS 1958 Cohort,
Effects per SD Difference in Looks at Age 7



                                Test Score Age 16:         Years of    ln Earnings
                                Reading      Math          School        Age 33


   Direct Effect:                 0.115        0.132        0.144        0.009

   Indirect Effects:

   Through Scores                                           0.240        0.010

   Through Education                                                     0.025
   (holding scores constant)

   Total Effect:                  0.115        0.132        0.384        0.044




                                          11
Appendix Table A1. Terminology and Calculations for SECCYD Appearance Ratings

Raw ratings: 10 or more undergraduate raters rate each SECCYD youth at each wave.

Rater/wave normalized ratings (i.e., normalized ratings).

 Raw ratings are normalized to adjust for rater effects within each wave by subtracting the rater’s average
and dividing by the rater’s standard deviation of ratings for that wave.

Youth/wave mean of normalized ratings (i.e., mean looks).

The mean of the 10 or more rater/wave normalized ratings of each SECCYD youth is calculated at each
wave.

Youth/wave SD of normalized ratings (i.e., SD looks).

 The standard deviation of the 10 or more rater/wave normalized ratings of each SECCYD youth is
calculated at each wave.




                                                    12
Appendix Table A2. Percentage Distributions, Control Variables, SECCYD, All Observations


Variable:
Female                       49.5                               Mother’s Education:
Non-Hispanic White           77.5                               HS or less            31.2


Non-Hispanic Black           11.9                               Some college          33.4


Non-Hispanic Other           4.6                                Bachelors             20.8


Hispanic                     6.0                                 > Bachelors              14.6
Household Income at Birth:                               Higher Educated Parent’s Education:
  <$26,000                   24.6                               HS or less                22.7
$26,000-$52,000              34.2                               Some college              33.1
$52,000-$78,000              23.1                               Bachelors                 20.9
$78,000-$275,000             18.1                               >Bachelors         23.3




                                             13
Appendix Table A3. Determinants of Mean and SD Looksa

                          Dep. Var.:               Mean Stdzd. Looks                           SD Stdzd. Looks

Ind. Var.                                       All          Girls       Boys              All           Girls         Boys

Female                                         0.133           ---         ---            0.020            ---           ---
                                              (0.017)                                    (0.005)

Non-Hispanic                                  -0.049         -0.063     -0.050            0.007         0.013         0.002
White                                         (0.028)        (0.047)    (0.035)          (0.011)        (0.017)       (0.014)

Non-Hispanic                                  -0.213         -0.320     -0.121            0.060         0.053         0.067
Black                                         (0.036)        (0.057)    (0.044)          (0.012)        (0.019)       (0.017)

Non-Hispanic                                  -0.041         -0.057     -0.048            0.073         0.082         0.066
Other                                         (0.051)        (0.078)    (0.070)          (0.018)        (0.028)       (0.023)

Household income
at birth:
$26,000-$52,000                                0.025         0.040       0.008           -0.001         -0.007        0.004
                                              (0.025)        (0.039)    (0.032)          (0.007)        (0.011)       (0.010)

$52,000-$78,000                                0.044         0.052       0.033           -0.002         -0.004        -0.001
                                              (0.029)        (0.049)    (0.034)          (0.008)        (0.014)       (0.010)

$78,000-$275,000                               0.044         0.069       0.017           -.0.008        -0.009        -0.009
                                              (0.032)        (0.049)    (0.041)          (0.009)        (0.014)       (0.012)

R2                                             0.034         0.032       0.013            0.011         0.007         0.013

N=                                            10,399         5,181       5,218           10,399         5,181         5,218

N Individuals =                                1,281          619         662             1,281           619           662
a
 Mean and SD looks are the means and standard deviations within child/wave of the rater/wave normalized raw ratings. Standard
errors in parentheses. Also included are indicators of mother's education and of the educational attainment of the more educated
parent. Standard errors are clustered on each child.




                                                        14
    Appendix Table A4. Autoregressions of Normalized Outcome Measures, Waves 2-6a

                  Wave:                  2                3              4                  5                  6

             Age/grade:               15 mos.          24 mos.          36 mos.           54 mos          Grade 1

                    Dep.Var.:           MDI              MDI          BKSRCO            WJAPSC           WJAPSC
             Lagged Dep. Var.:        IMPRSO             MDI            MDI             BKSRCO           WJAPSC

    Lagged average stzd. beauty         0.168           0.048         0.031               0.073             -0.011
                                       (0.066)          (0.050)       (0.058)            (0.059)            (0.061)

    Lagged dep. var.                    0.070           0.416         0.365               0.409             0.594
                                       (0.033)          (0.025)       (0.030)            (0.030)            (0.030)

    Female                               0.191          0.265         0.199               0.060             -0.268
                                        (0.061)         (0.048)       (0.053)            (0.052)            (0.051)

    Non-Hispanic White                  0.082            0.270         0.163              0.189             0.142
                                        (0.129)         (0.104)       (0.113)            (0.112)            (0.110)

    Non-Hispanic Black                  -0.496          -0.195        -0.075             -0.209             -0.070
                                        (0.153)         (0.123)        (0.135            (0.134)            (0.132)

    Non-Hispanic Other                  -0.003           0.241         0.249              0.242             0.274
                                        (0.192)         (0.148)       (0.167)            (0.167)            (0.162)

    Household income at kid’s
    birth:
     $26,000-$52,000                    0.207            0.113         0.046              0.191             0.011
                                        (0.088)         (0.068)       (0.075)            (0.075)            (0.076)

    $52,000-$78,000                     0.307            0.164         0.268              0.140             -0.047
                                        (0.100)         (0.078)       (0.086)            (0.085)            (0.085)

    $78,000-$275,000                    0.188            0.361         0.198              0.251             0.112
                                        (0.113)         (0.089)       (0.097)            (0.097)            (0.096)

    R2                                   0.093           0.432         0.350              0.390             0.449

    N Individuals                      1,008             1,029         1,013               927              892
a
 Standard errors in parentheses. Also included are indicators of mother's education and of the education of the more
educated parent.



                                                         15
Appendix Table A5. Autoregressions of Normalized Outcome Measures, Waves 7-11a

                                Wave              7                  8                9              10                11

                         Age/grade:           Grade 3           Grade 4          Grade 5          Grade 6           Age 15

                      Dep.Var.:              WJAPSC             WASIFC          WJAPSC             ASLL             WJAPSC
             Lagged Dep.Var.:                WJAPSC             WJAPSC          WASIFC            WJAPSC             ASLL

Lagged average stzd. beauty                      0.053            0.030            -0.031            0.104             0.004
                                                (0.050)           (0.045)          (0.043)           (0.055)           (0.054)

Lagged dep. var.                                 0.625            0.563            0.591             0.512             0.391
                                                (0.027)           (0.045)          (0.031)           (0.038)           (0.040)

Female                                          -0.027            0.082            -0.142            0.023             -0.184
                                                (0.048)           (0.054)          (0.051)           (0.067)           (0.070)

Non-Hispanic White                              -0.002            0.014            0.182             -0.062            0.032
                                                (0.104)           (0.105)          (0.104)           (0.142)           (0.139)

Non-Hispanic Black                              -0.204            -0.390           -0.150            -0.230            -0.286
                                                (0.125)           (0.129)          (0.130)           (0.175)           (0.170)

Non-Hispanic Other                              -0.110            0.124            0.199             -0.334            -0.210
                                                (0.156)           (0.162)          (0.159)           (0.206)           (0.214)

Household income at birth:
$26,000-$52,000                                  0.075            0.055            0.061             0.276             0.014
                                                (0.071)           (0.078)          (0.077)           (0.096)           (0.103)

$52,000-$78,000                                  0.122            -0.033           0.022             0.208             0.109
                                                (0.081)           (0.088)          (0.086)           (0.109)           (0.115)

$78,000-$275,000                                 0.121            0.096            0.124             0.166             0.188
                                                (0.092)           (0.100)          (0.097)           (0.126)           (0.132)

R2                                               0.520            0.521            0.476             0.388             0.374

N Individuals                                     814              704              723               558               527
a
    Standard errors in parentheses. Also included are indicators of mother's education and of the education of the more educated parent.




                                                           16
Appendix Table A6. Alternative Specifications, SECCYDa

      Ind. Var.                (1a)             (1b)           (2a)           (2b)

    Lagged average
    stzd. beauty             0.0923          0.0348           0.0704        0.0219
                             (0.0215)       (0.0200)         (0.0186)       (0.0185)

    Lagged dep. var.         0.4871          0.3713           0.6099        0.5016
                             (0.0333)       (0.0321)         (0.0121)       (0.0138)

    Adjusted R2               0.245          0.307            0.375         0.421

    N=                        7,733          7,618            6,804         6,706


                               (3a)           (3b)           (4a)           (4b)

    Mean looks               0.0733        0.0182          0.0489        0.0009
                            (0.0192)      (0.0184)        (0.0139)       (0.0184)

    Lagged dep. var.         0.5071        0.3878          0.5618        0.4352
                            (0.0139)      (0.0144)        (0.0139)       (0.0152)

    Adjusted R2              0.258         0.323           0.315          0.380

    N=                       8,330         8,223           7,317          7,215


a
 Column (a) in each pair excludes the controls used in Table 8, the Column (b) includes them.
(1) Same as Table 8 without Wave 2.
(2) Same as Table 8 without Waves 2 or 10.
(3) Same as Table 8 using Woodcock-Johnson Picture-Vocabulary Score in Waves 5, 6, 7, 9 and 11.
(4) Same as Table 8 using Woodcock-Johnson Picture-Vocabulary Score in Waves 5, 6, 7, 9 and 11, without Wave 2.




                                                     17
 Appendix Table A7. Effects of Looks on Reading and Math Scores, Changes between Ages 7
 and 11, and 11 and 16, NCDS 1958 Cohorta

                                                                                Reading*

                                                                             Girls                                  Boys

                                                            Age 11              Age 16                   Age 11      Age 16

 Good -looking at t-1                                        0.084               0.069                   0.098        0.084
                                                            (0.022)              (0.011)                 (0.022)     (0.022)

 Bad-looking at t-1                                         -0.032               -0.157                  -0.113      -0.107
                                                            (0.036)              (0.036)                 (0.037)     (0.038)

 Lagged dep. var.                                            0.694               0.671                   0.687        0.678
                                                            (0.011)              (0.011)                 (0.010)     (0.010)

 R2                                                         0.535               0.526                   0.531        0.521

 N Individuals                                               4,824               4,818                   5,005        5,029



                                                                                      Math*

                                                                               Girls                                Boys

                                                             Age 11               Age 16                  Age 11      Age 16

  Good -looking at t-1                                        0.090                0.076                  0.093        0.092
                                                              (0.024)             (0.024)                 (0.022)     (0.022)

  Bad-looking at t-1                                          -0.104              -0.122                  -0.095      -0.142
                                                              (0.038)             (0.039)                 (0.038)     (0.039)

  Lagged dep. var.                                            0.603                0.600                  0.656        0.648
                                                              (0.011)             (0.011)                 (0.011)     (0.011)

  R2                                                         0.472                0.451                  0.508        0.495

  N Individuals                                               4,824                4,818                  5,005        5,029
aStandard   errors in parentheses.
*Each   equation also includes vectors of the child’s father social class and region in the base year.

                                                                   18
