NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONDITIONALITY, DEBT RELIEF, AND
THE DEVELOPING COUNTRY DEBT CRISIS

Jeffrey Sachs

Working Paper No. 2644

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1988

This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2644
July 1988

CONDITIONALITY, DEBT RELIEF, AND
THE DEVELOPING COUNTRY DEBT CRISIS

ABSTRACT

This paper raises several cautionary notes regarding high-conditionality lending by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in the

context of international debt crisis. It is argued that the role for highconditionality lending is more restricted than generally believed, because

enforcement of conditionality is rather weak. Moreover, the incentives for
a country to abide by conditionality terms are also likely to be reduced by
a large overhang of external indebtedness.
Given the limited ability to enforce conditionality agreements, nodesty

and realism should be a cornerstone of each program. The experience with
conditionality suggests two major lessons for the design of high-condition-

ality lending. First, debt forgiveness rather than mere debt rescheduling
may increase a debtor country's compliance with conditionality, and thereby

increase the actual stream of repayments by the indebted countries. Second,
given the complexity of the needed adjustments, and the difficulty of
enforcing conditionality agreements, programs are most likely to be successful when macroeconomic stabilization is given priority over large-scale
liberalization.

Jeffrey Sachs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer M-l4
Cambridge, MA 02138

I. Introduction
This paper examines the role of high-conditionality lending by the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank as a part of the overall

managenent of the debt crisis. High-conditionality lending refers to
process in which the international institutions make loans based on

the

the

promise of the borrowing countries to pursue a specified set of policies.

High-conditionality lending by both institutions has played a key role in
the management of the crisis since 1982, though the results of such lending

have rarely lived up to the advertised hopes. One major theme of this
paper is that the role for high-conditionality lending is more

restricted

than generally believed, since the efficacy of conditionality is inherently
limited.

A related theme is that many programs involving high-conditionality
lending could be made more effective by including commercial bank debt

relief as a component of such programs. I shall argue that such debt
relief can be to the benefit of the creditor banks as well as the debtors,
by enhancing the likelihood that the debtor governments will adhere to the
conditionality terms of the IMF and World Bank loans, and thereby raise
their long-term capacity to service their debts.

Almost by definition, countries in debt crisis that appeal to the Fund
or the Bank for new loans have already been judged to be uncreditworthy on

normal market criteria. In such treacheroua circumstances, it is
appropriate to ask why the IMF or the World Bank should be extending new

loans. As an alternative, for example, the international institutions
could allow the creditors and debtors to renegotiate new terms on the old

loans without any official involvement. Such two-party negotiations

2

between creditors and debtors characterized earlier debt crises, before the
IMF and World Bank existed (see Lindert and Morton, in this volume, for a
discussion of the earlier history).
In principle, continued lending by the international institutions

could be justified by several non-market criteria: as a form of aid, as an
investment by the creditor governments that finance the IMF and World Bank

in political and economic stability of the debtor country (see Von
Furstenberg 1985, 1986, for such a view), as an extension of the foreign
policy interests of the major creditor governments, as a defense of the

international financial system, etc. Loans are not usually defended on
these grounds, though in fact such considerations are frequently important.
Of course, these criteria are valid to an extent, but also extremely
difficult to specify with precision as a basis for IMF-World Bank lending.
Another defense of lending, also with considerable merit in some

circumstances, is that the IMF (and World Bank to a far lesser extent>, can
act as a "lender of last resort," in analogue to a central bank in a

domestic economy. The theory of the "lender of last resort" is not fully
developed, though the practical importance of having a domestic lender of

last resort is not much in dispute. The conceptual argument goes something
as follows.

Commercial banks are at a risk of self-confirming "speculative panics"

by their depositors because the banks engage in maturity transformation of
their liabilities, i.e., they borrow short term and lend long term (see

Dybvig and Diamond, 1983, for a formal model of banking panics). If the
depositors suddenly get the idea that all other depositors are going to
withdraw their funds, it is rational for each depositor to withdraw his own

3

funds from the bank, even if the bank would be fundamentally sound in the

sbsence of a sudden rush of withdrswals. The depositors' collective
behavior creates a liouidity crisis for the bank, in that a fundamentally
sound intermediary cannot satisfy the sudden desire of its depositors to

convert their deposits to cash. A lender of last resort, ususlly the
central bank, can eliminate the liquidity crisis by lending freely to the

bank in the short term. The banking panic is a form of market failure,
that can be overcome by a lender of last resort.
The analogous argument for the IMF would hold that the private
commercial bank lenders to a country might similarly panic, and all decide
to withdraw their funds from the country even though the country is a
fundamentally sound credit risk in the longer term (see Sachs, 1984, for

such a model). In this case, lending by the IMF can eliminate the
liquidity squeeze on the country, and thereby help both the creditors and

the debtors. As in the domestic economy, the IMF helps to overcome a welldefined market failure.

This argument was part of the basis of the original IMF intervention

into the debt crisis in the early 1980s. The argument following the
Mexican crisis in mid-1982 was that countries were suffering from a
liquidity crisis, made acute by the simultaneous rise in world interest

rates and the sudden cessation of commercial bank lending. It seemed at
the time that the crisis could be quickly resolved (as argued, for example,

by dine, 1984), since it represented merely a liquidity squeeze.
The liquidity arguments are no doubt true in some cases, but most
observers now doubt that the developing country debt crisis represents

merely a problem of liquidity. Six years after the onset of the crisis,

4
almost no countries have returned to normal borrowing from the
international capital markets, and the secondary-market value of bank loans

to the debtor countries reflect very deep discounts in valuation. For many
countries at least, the crisis represents more fundamental problems of
solvency and longer-term willingness to pay on the part of the debtor
nations.

In these circumstances, other justifications (that can be in addition
to the liquidity argument) have been advanced for the large role of the IMF

and World Bank lending. By far the most important argument is that strict
conditionality attached to IMF-World Bank loans can make such loans

aenaible on normal market terms. The asaumption is that the international
institutions are better than the banks at enforcing good behavior of the
debtor country governments, and therefore have more scope for lending.
The importance of conditionality in justifying IMF-World Bank lending

is certainly well placed. Countries in crisis are often in poor economic
shape in large part because of bad policy choices in the past. IMF and
World Bank policies are appropriately focuaaed on key policy weaknesaea
(excessive budget deficits in the case of the IMF, and excessive inward

orientation in the case of the World Bank). Moreover, the IMF and World
Bank have the expertise and institutional clout to design highconditionality programs, while the commercial banks do not.
Nonetheless, the role for high-conditionality lending is overstated,

especially in the case of countries in a deep debt crisis. In practice the
compliance of debtor countries with conditionality is rather weak, and this
compliance problem has gotten worse in recent yeara, since a large atock of

debt can itself be an important disincentive to "good behavior." In other

5

words, the debt overhang itself makes it less likely that conditionality
will prove successful.

The reason is straightforward. Why should a country adjust if that
adjustment produces income for foreign banks rather than for its own

citizenry?

Since deeply indebted countries recognize that much of each

extra dollar of export earnings gets gobbled up in debt servicing, a very
large stock of debt acts like a high marginal tax on successful adjustment.
Therefore, two counterintuitive propositions could be true when a country

is deeply indebted: "good behavior" (such as a higher investment rate) can
actually reduce national welfare, by increasing the transfer of income from
the debtor country to creditors; and explicit debt relief by the creditors
can increase the amounts

of

actual debt repayment, by improving the

incentive of the debtor country to take the necessary adjustments.
Before turning to these arguments at greater length, we should

consider one additional argument sometimes made for official lending. The
argument is occasionally made that since countries are more averse to

defaulting on official loans than they are on private loans, it is safe
for official creditors to lend even when private creditors will not. This
argument can sometimes be correct, but it is often mistaken. If official
loans just raise the country's debt burden without raising its debtservicing capacity, then repayments to the official creditors might simply
crowd Out repayments to its private creditors, and thereby undermine the
smooth functioning of the international capital markets.
The issues of conditionality and debt relief are now taken up in the

five following sections. Section II outlines the theory of conditionality,
and Section III focuses on the empirical record of high-conditionality

6

lending. Section IV shows the linkages between the overhang of debt and
the effectiveness of conditionality, and demonstrates the potential role

for debt relief in high-conditionality lending. Section V then discusses
the specific problems raised by the macroeconomic situation of the heavily

indebted countries: high inflation, excessive inward orientation, large
budget deficits, and a prolonged economic downturn, all exacerbated by the

problem of high foreign indebtedness. The recent history of stabilization
has shown that few countries have been able to solve even one or two of
these problems at a time, much less all of them simultaneously, and the
record suggests that adjustment programs have the highest probability of
success when macroeconomic stabilization precedes large-scale trade
liberalization and a shift to outward orientation.

II. High-Conditionality Lendina by the IMF and World Bank
The argument for high-conditionality lending is that the IMF and the
World Bank can compel countries to undertake stabilizing actions in return
for loans, thereby making the loans prudent even when the private capital

markets have declared the country to be not creditworthy. A full theory of
conditionality would have to explain three things. First, if the actions
being recommended to the country are really "desirable" for the country,
why is it that the country must be compelled to undertake the polfdy?
Second, if the country must indeed be compelled to undertake the actions,

what types of force or sanctions can be used to guarantee compliance? And
third, why is it that international institutions are better able to impose
conditionality than are the private capital markets?

7

One solution to the conundrum of why countries must be compelled to

accept conditionality is the problem of "time consistency": a debtor
government accepts cx ante the need for a POi1C

adjustment

as the

iro quo for a loan, but the government has a strong incentive to avoid the

policy change once the loan is arranged. In this case, the role of
conditionality is to bind the country to a course of future actions,
actions which make sense today but which will look unattractive in the

future. In other words, the goal of conditionality is to make the ex ante
and cx cost incentives for adjustment the same (where cx ante and ex qost
are with respect to the receipt of the loan).
In earlier papers (Sachs, 1984; Cooper and Sachs, 1985), I have given
a simple illustration of a case in which conditionality is appropriate.
will discuss that case here, relegating the formal model to Appendix A.
Suppose that a government faces the problem of allocating resources between

consumption and investment. The government has a very high time discount
rate (0.30 for purposes of illustration), so that •current consumption is

much preferred to future consumption. The investment opportunities have a
return (0.20) in excess of the world interest rate (0.10), but less than
the time discount rate.

The problem is the following. Once the foreign loans are obtained,
and the government has to decide how to allocate over time the total pool
of resources (equal to domestic resources plus foreign borrowing), the

government will choose to consume rather than invest. That is because its
time discount rate exceeds the rate of return on investment, so that it
doesn't pay to sacrifice consumption expenditures in order to raise

investment. For concreteness, we suppose that a particular export-oriented

8

investment project costs $100 million, and therefore yields $120 million in
the future.

We assume that without investment, the country won't have the

resources to pay off a loan in the following period. The government is
then assumed to pay off as much as it can, and to default on the rest.
Under these conditions, private foreign lenders will not lend much to this
country since they correctly foresee that the government will not invest

the money. The situation can be depicted simply as a two-stage game
between the creditors and the borrower. The creditor must first decide

whether to lend; the borrower then decides whether to invest. As
illustrated in Diagram 1(a), once the money is received, the government's
"utility" is higher by consuming today rather than investing (utility is
assumed to be equal to consumption, with future consumption discounted by

the rate of time preference). In particular, the country gets 100 in
utility by using the loan for current consumption, but only 8 if the loan
is used for investment. Because the country's "impatience" (high time
discount) is recognized by potential private creditors, the country is a

bad credit risk. Since the loan will not in fact be made, the country's
utility from the loan is of course 0.0.
On the other hand, if the country could commit itself to increase
investment by the amount of the foreign loans, as shown in Figure 1(b), it

would result in a better outcome for the country (specifically, a utility
of 8 rather than 0.0). Since the investment opportunities have a return
that is higher than the world cost of borrowing, the returns to the

investment will be more than enough to pay off the loans. Moreover, since
the investment is foreign financed, undertaking it does not have to reduce

Diagram 1. LOAI4 MARKET EQUILIBRIUM

(a) The than Decision Without Conditionality

0

8

-100

100

0

—8

O

'1'

'1•

Lender
(LLend

Country
Decision
(1=Invest

NL—Not Lend)

NINot Invest)

Decision

Utility

(Equilibrium)

Cotttry
Utility

(b) The Loan Decision with Conditionality

0

8 (Equilibrium)

I

L
not applicable
0

—8

not applicable

it

Lender
Decision

dI.

Country
Dec ion

is

'1'

Lender

Country

Utility

Utility

9

current consumption. Thus, if the country can commit itself to use foreign
loans for investment purposes, the country will: (1) maintain current
consumption levels; and (2) generate out of the investment project more

than enough future income necessary to repay the debt. In sum, it ia
advantageous for the government to try to "tie its hands," and commit
itself to use new foreign money for investment rather than consumption
purposes.

The role for conditionality is introduced by assuming that countries

cannot make credible, enforceable commitments with private lenders to use
loans for one purpose or another, but that via conditionality agreements
with the IMF or World Bank, the country can commit itself to a particular

investment program. In such a case, it would be safe for the IMF or World
Bank to make high conditionality loans to the country (since the loans will
be used for investment purposes), while it would be imprudent for the
private sector to make the same loans (since without conditionality, the
government will consume the proceeds of the loan rather than invest).
The remaining problem with conditionality comes from the fact that
once the IMF or World Bank lending is received, the country has the

incentive to renege on its investment commitment. Given the preferences of
the government, it is always better to consume than to invest once a level

of foreign loans has been established. Thus, there must be some way for
the country or the IMF and World Bank to guarantee that the commitment to
invest is actually honored.

In practice bargaining over conditionality almost always involves more
than the debtor goverrment binding itself to a specific path of policies.
Bargaining between a debtor country and the IMF and World Bank may also

10

involve an implicit dispute about which objective function to use in

evaluating a set of outcomes. If a program will lead to a recession next
year, but a recovery over the following several years. is it desirable?
The answer may well be "yes" to the Fund or the Bank (or their creditor
governments, which recognize that adjustment may involve short-run pain in
return for long-run benefits), but the same answer might be "no" to a
precarious regime that might lose power during a period of austerity.

Openness about this difference of opinion would block the signing of many

agreements. In practice, neither the Fund or Bank on the one hand nor the
creditor government on the other fully admit their disagreements, so that
many conditionality packages are signed that have little chance of
fulfillment, a point I return to below.

Official Versus Private Lending in IMF-World Bank Packases
In the framework just described, the major role for the IMF and the
World Bank is to guarantee through conditionality that the country will use

a new loan for investment rather than consumption. We have discussed the
issue as if the loan itself will come from the monitoring institutions, but
in fact, there is no reason why there could not instead be a division of

labor: the international institutions impose the conditionality; the
private capital markets provide the financing. This is a well recognized
idea, that the international institutions should act mainly to provide "a
seal of good housekeeping," and thereby to catalyze private lending.

Since the outbreak of the debt crisis, the IMF and World Bank have

often emphasized such a catalytic role. One of the major innovations early
in the crisis was the IMF's insistence to the commercial banks that any new

11
IMF program for Mexico would require that the commercial banks commit $5

billion of additional lending to Mexico as well. Thus began the pattern of
"involuntaryt' or "nonspontaneous" bank lending, in which the banks agreed

to commit new lending to a debtor country in proportion to their existing

exposures to the country, as part of an IMF stabilization package. More
recently, private cofinsncing with the World Bank has also been added as a
condition of some package agreements (e.g., the Argentine agreement in
1986).
The details of such loan packages are beyond the scope of this paper,

and have been discussed at some length in Sschs and Huizinga, 1987. Here
it suffices to point out the extremely limited nature of such financing,
and to point out that the "catalytic" role of the IMF and World Bank have
been vastly overstated (this may be a result of the lack of credibility of

the conditionality, for reasons suggested below). Three points can be made
here. First, overall net bank lending to the problem debtor countries was
negative during 1982-86, not positive. That is, loan amortizations
exceeded new lending, even after taking into account all of the well-

publicized "concerted lending" arrangement. The concerted lending has been
sporadic, and small in absolute magnitude, compared with the levels of debt

amortizations in recent years. Thus, the levels of commercial bank
exposure in the debtor countries actually fell after the onset of the
crisis.

Second, the new lending by the commercial banks, where it has

occurred, has almost always fallen far short of the debt servicing payments

made by the debtor countries to the creditor banks. In this sense, the net
resource transfers from the banks to the major debtor countries has been

12

highly negative in recent years, despite the occasional application of
concerted lending.

Third, and perhaps most disturbing, the IMF has not devoted much
energy to getting concerted lending programs for the smaller debtor
countries, but only for the larger countries (e.g., Argentina, Brazil, and

Mexico). Almost no debtor country with an outstanding debt below $5
billion has been able to get any concerted lending from its commercial bank

creditors, as shown in Table 6 in Sachs and Huizinga (1987). The smaller
and politically weaker debtor countries have apparently had to make much
larger net resource transfers than have their larger fellow debtor
countries.

Enforcement of Conditionality Agreements: The Theory
The question of enforcement of conditionality agreements is in many

ways tougher than the question of why conditionality is needed. The
justification for IMF-World Bank lending rests on two propositions
regarding enforcement:

(1) that the enforcement of IMF-World Bank

conditionality is sufficiently powerful to result in an "acceptable" rate
of compliance with IMF-World Bank programs; and (2) that the official
institutions have an advantage over the commercial banks in enforcing

conditionality. In this section and the next, we examine the validity of
these views.

-

The Strenath of Conditionality
For both the international institutions and the commercial banks, the
legal bases of conditionality are weak. In the domestic capital markets,

13

bond covenants are legally binding restrictions on the behavior of debtors,

which can generally be enforced with only modest transactions costs. In
the international arena, particularly for loana to sovereign governments,
the transactions coats for enforcing loan agreements are extremely high.
As moat writers have recognized recently, the main method of enforcement
for lenders (whether official or private) involve the threat of cutoffs of

loans to misbehaving borrowers. Such a cutoff in lending can of course
be extremely disruptive and costly to a borrower. Bank creditors can cut
back on short-term trade credits to a country, and thereby disrupt the flow

of international trade in the short term. The IMF similarly can cut back
on balance of payments support, and by doing so, also trigger the cutoff of
lending from other official sources (e.g., the World Bank, the bilateral
official creditors, the multilateral development banks).

Theoretical work and the empirical evidence both establish that the
threat of a lending cutoff is a credible, but inherently limited sanction.
Thus, conditionality, whether by the IMF and World Bank, or by the
commercial banks themselves, should not on an a priori basis be expected to

have the same force as a binding bond covenant in a domestic loan. From
the beginning, we should appreciate the inherent limitations of the
enforcement mechanisms in conditionality on international lending.

A Special Problem of Nesotiatine with a Sovereign Borrower
Conditionality is limited in effectiveness not only because of
enforcement difficulties, but also because of the complexity of negotiating

with a sovereign borrower. In the case of a bond covenant, there is a
clear legal responsibility on the borrower to carry out the conditions of

14

the covenant. When a government is the debtor, however, there is likely to
be a considerable diffusion of power within the government, to the extent
that the individual parts of the government negotiating the conditionality
agreement may well lack the authority to implement the agreement.
This problem is common with IMF agreements, though it is rarely

discussed or carefully analyzed. The IMF invariably negotiates with the
executive branch, and mainly with a small part of the executive branch, the

finance ministry. A small group of technocrats at the ministry of finance
and at the central bank will typically negotiate the IMF agreement in
private, and in splendid isolation from the rest of the government.
However, when the minister of finance signs the agreement with the Fund,
very often there can be little assurance that the minister has the
authority or political standing within the government to carry out the

agreement. This is especially the case when the minister agrees
to spending and tax changes that recuire oarliamentarv aooroval, or that
require the approval of other parts of the government (independent state
enterprises, regional corporations, state and municipal governments, other

ministries, etc.). Often, it is the president himself that undercuts his
finance minister in the execution of an adjustment program.

In this sense, most IMF and World Bank agreements start with a formal
myth, that there is one unified actor in the government that can be bound

by the terms of a conditionality agreement. This may be a necessary myth,
and even sometimes a useful one, but uncovering the myth helps us in a
simple way to account for the fact that most IMF agreements fail, a point
we shall see below.

15

The Debt Overhang and the Weakness of Conditionality
What must also be appreciated is the fact that the current overhang of
external debt to private creditors can greatly hinder the effectiveness of
IMF conditionality, at least under the prevailing design of IMF programs.
Virtually all IMF programs to date have been designed under the assumption
that the debtor country can and will service its external debts in the long

run on a normal market basis. The programs are constructed under the
maintained assumption of such normal debt servicing. (For exsmple, in the
technical calculations in Fund progrsms, interest rates on the existing
debt are assumed to be at market rates; the country is assumed to clear all
arrears on a reasonable timetable, etc.)
Contrary to this assumption, however, it might easily be the case that
a country is better off defaulting on a portion of its debts than it would
be with timely debt servicing (a dozen or more countries have indeed taken

such umilateral action by 1987). There may simply exist no IMF highconditionality program based on full debt servicing, that if followed,
actually makes the country better off than it would be without the program

but with a partial suspension of debt payments. In other words, the IMF
program might simply be too tight relative to the available options of the
debtor government.

In such circumstances, four things could happen. One outcome would be
for the IHF to design a program that is actually based on partial and

explicit debt relief. So far, the IMF has avoided this rather obvious
approach, partly because it has underestimated the possible efficiency
gains for all parties (creditors, debtors, and the Fund) that might result.
The second possibility is that the IMF and the debtor government would fail

16

to sign a program, and the country would simply suspend payments on part of

its private sector debts. This has been the case with Peru during 1985-87,
and Brazil in 1987. The third possibility, and indeed the typical case in
recent years, is that the Fund and the country would sign a program based
on full debt servicing, even though both parties fully exDect that the

agreement will breakdown in due course. Either the conditionality would be
allowed to fall by the wayside and the country would continue to borrow
from the Fund but without living up to earlier commitments, or the IMF
program would eventually be suspended.

Argentina during 1987-88 provides an ideal illustration of the case in
which the IMF and a debtor country signed a series of agreements in which
almost no observers had any confidence, and in which the IMF simply relaxed
the conditionality terms (with formal waivers) throughout the course of the

agreement. Mr. David Finch, the former director of the IMP Department of
Exchange and Trade Relations, writes of Argentina as a case of "renewed
pressures to involve the IMF in an agreement where political solutions [in
Argentina] won't allow a solution to the balance-of-payments problem .

the IMF has been forced to continue lending [to Argentinal to maintain the
facade of the debt strategy." (Finch, 1988, p. 127) In less diplomatic
language, the U.S. government was fearful that Argentina would default to

the commercial banks in the absence of new IMF money. The U.S. therefore
-

pressured the Fund to maintain a program with Argentina despite the failure
of the Argentine government to live up to earlier agreements.

A fourth possibility would be for the IMF and World Bank to approve
programs with debtor countries that allow for a build-up of arrears (i.e.,
nonpayments) to the commercial bank creditors, in well-defined

17

circumstances. These circumstances would include:

(I) a large overhang of

debt that is deemed to be highly inimical to the stabilization efforts of
the country; and (2) the unwillingness of the commercial creditors either

to grant relief or significant new financing. By allowing for the buildup
of arrears to private creditors, the IMF could design more realistic
programs without the need to press the private creditors for specific

amounts of debt relief. The debt relief would instead emerge in the
bilateral bargaining of the debtor and the creditora.
In a later section, we will explore in much greater detail the case
for combining conditionality with debt relief.

The Streneth of Official versus Private Conditionality
It remains to ask whether the Fund and the Bank have more power than
the private banks in imposing conditionality on sovereign borrowers. Here,
experience will have to provide the most conclusive answers, and we discuss

the historical experience in the next section. Some theoretical arguments,
though, go as follows. First, the Fund and the Bank are ongoing
institutions, while bank syndicates are ad hoc. Defaulting to the Fund or
the Bank will presumably put the country at risk of rupturing the relations
with these institutions, while defaulting to some private creditors in a
particular syndicate might not forestall further borrowing from new lenders
elsewhere.

Second, enforcement of loans raises several problems of collective

action. With hundreds or even more than a thousand private creditors for a
major debtor country, there is a problem in allocating the monitoring and
enforcement costs of a conditionality agreement that might be reached

18

between the country and the creditors. With the Fund or the Bank, a single
actor bears the enforcement Costs and reaps the rewards of enforcement.

can

Third, it is sometimes suggested that the Fund or the Bank
terms to a country while
the country

to

the

be respondin&

dictate

private sector cannot because it is easier for

to

an independent political institution than

it is for the country to be responding to "private capital."

Fourth, and perhaps most important, the creditor governments have made
IMF conditionality the practical linchpin of all a debtor country's

financial relations with the creditor governments. With few exceptions, a
debtor country in crisis must have an ongoing relationship with the IMF in

order to qualify for: (I) a rescheduling of official bilateral (i.e.,
government-to-government) loans in the Paris Club; (2) new credits from
official export credit agencies to the debtor government; (3) new lending
from the World Bank and the multilateral development banks (even if there
is no formal cross-conditionality clause between IMF and World Bank
lending, there is often implicit cross-conditionality); and (4) debtor

countries are often instructed by the U.S. to maintain good relations with
the IMF in order to maintain good bilateral relations with the United
States. Thus, a country's concern about foreign policy relations with the
United States often strengthens the hand of the IMF.

On the other side of the ledger, the public institutions also have
several disadvantages in enforcement power relative to the private sector.

With respect to the first point, banks are also ongoing institutions well

aware of their reputations. They have so far been extremely reluctant to
ease the repayment terms for any country (for example to reschedule at
below market interest rates), even for countries in dire straits, because

19

of the demonstration effect on the dozens of other countries with which
these banks are bargaining.

Second, with respect to the free-rider problems of enforcement, the
banks have worked out ways to get around many of the collective action

problems involved in monitoring and rescheduling. For example, small
steering committees of banks are appointed to manage the negotiations with

the debtor countries. A small number of banks is entrusted with most of
the actual mechanics of oversight and negotiation. Syndicated loan
agreements now often contain provisions for certain binding actions by the
entire syndicate upon a favorable vote of some fraction of the syndicate

members. This kind of procedure can help to eliminate the problem of
individual banks attempting to free ride on the actions of others.

Moreover, in some cases, the presence of hundreds of small banks can

actually strengthen the bargaining position of a bank syndicate. The
steering committee is able to point out in some circumstances that even the
small banks might ruin an agreement, so that the country must accede to

better terms for these weak links in the chain. When the country is
negotiating with a single creditor such as the IMF, this appeal of the
creditor to the "weak" fringe members of the bargaining tesm cannot be
made.

As to the third point, that it is easier for a government to take
marching order from the international public institutions rather than from

private banks, the evidence is at best mixed. The epithet that a program
is "fondo monetarista" is about as damning as possible in much of the Latin

American political lexicon. Indeed, there are now several cases in recent

20

years in which countries have explicitly attempted private workouts with
the banks, in order to avoid the opprobrium of agreeing to a Fund program.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the World Bank and the IMF are

in a weak bargaining position for several institutional reasons. First,
they are clients of the very governments to whom they are lending the

money. It may be hard indeed for the IMF or World Bank to tell a member
government to go away. To the credit of the Fund and the Bank, these
organizations have developed several institutional levels of technical
staff that intervene between the country and a final decision with respect
to lending.

Because of the formal position of the multilateral agencies as clients

of the member governments, there is a need for a formal equality of

treatment of all member governments with regard to negotiations. It is
very difficult for the Fund or the Bank to make invidious comparisons among
countries concerning the likelihood that they will actually live up to

commitments. If a program looks good on paper, there are great pressures
for the program to be approved, even if there is widespread skepticism that

the program will actually be carried out. The Fund of course keeps track
of the compliance record of member governments, but it appears to be
difficult to make that record a formal basis for approving or disapproving
a program, assuming that the country is current in its repayments to the

Fund and assuming that on paper a proposed program hangs together.
Another problem is that the Fund and the Bank have many goals other
than profits, which can make them a soft touch with respect to

conditionality. For the private capital markets, there is basically one

bottom line: will the loan make money? The Bank and the Fund must also

21

worry about the political stability of the recipient country, the political
interests of the creditor governments, the standard of living of
individuals in the debtor countries, etc. These are admirable concerns,

indeed crucial concerns. They are the raison d'etre of international
institutions. But these concerns do not always allow for the hard-boiled
judgement about the potential success or failure of a conditionality
package.

These limitations of the IMF are pointed out by Finch [1988], who
cites the case of IMF relations with Egypt as an important example (we have
already noted Finch's observations with regard to Argentina).

For political reasons, Egypt had been receiving sizable support
from the Western allies, much of it in the form of repayable export
credits. With very limited cash aid available, servicing this credit
became virtually impossible. Yet, debt relief was blocked by Paris
Club rules that required that Egypt have an agreement with the IMF
before the creditor countries would reschedule their losns. To
maintain even a semblance of its traditional concern for timely
repayment, the IMF had to insist on major changes in Egypt's economic
policies.
But the Egyptian government, fearing a domestic political
backlash, refused to take the required action. Instead, it sought
protection from other governments. The Fund was told to reach
"agreement" with Egypt without insisting on the necessary policy
changes. In recompense, undoubtedly, the IMF was given assured
priority over other creditors. (p. 127)

In sum, the power of conditionality is certainly present in the case
of IMF and World Bank lending, though conditionality
will face inherent limitations, given the limited enforcement powers at

hand. The alleged superiority of the international institutions in
imposing conditionality is probably correct in general but much oversold

quantitatively. The private sector can indeed impose conditionality, and
has done so in the past. At the same time, the conditionality emanating
from the international institutions is hobbled by the nature of the

22

relationship of those institutions to the member governments. In the last
analysis, the success or failure of conditionality is an empirical matter,
and it is to the historical record that we turn shortly.

Enhancing the Strenzth of Conditionality
Even before proceeding to the empirical record, we can already make
several points regarding ways to enhance the effectiveness of
conditionality agreements. First, given the weakness of conditionality,
the IMF and the World Bank probably undermine their effectivenes by signing

too many (unrealistic) programs. In cases which appear particularly
unrealistic, the IMF and World Bank can protect the conditionality process
by requiring more

actions on the part of the borrowing government, so

that the government proves its resolve to carry through on the negotiated
program (and is forced to build the domestic political base for the policy
changes).

Second, if one source of unrealism is the heavy burden represented by
a large overhang of debt, the IMP and World Bank would increase the
likelihood of success by endorsing some programs that allow for arrears to
private sector creditors, if those creditors are unprepared to allow for a

realistic extent of debt relief. Furthermore, as we shall see, this point
applies more generally to encouraging formal debt relief as part of overall

IMFWorld Bank programs.

23

III. The Recent Experience with Conditionality
The recent experience of the World Bank with high conditionality
lending in aupport of macroeconomic adjustment is rather limited, so that
most of the discussion will focus on the outcomes of IMF programs.
Moreover, measuring the success of Fund programs is a daunting task,

because the inevitable refrain is "compared to what?" (See Williamson
(1983, Chapter 7) for an interesting discussion of possible bases for

evaluation). One useful standard, which I apply here, is to judge the
programs in terms of the compliance of the debtor government with the terms

of the IMF agreement. Even this limited type of assessment is difficult,
both because compliance is multi-dimensional, and because-many of the
details of the programs (particularly the contents of the letters of

intent) are typically beyond the public view. Because of this latter
feature, we must rely almost wholly on studies of compliance undertaken by
the Fund itself, or on case studies of individual countries by outside
authors.

Of course the design of IMF conditionality loans, and to a lesser

extent, World BankStructural Adjustment Loans (SALs), have been subject to
intense criticism and debate among policy makers and academic economists.
These debates often make it appear that the fundamental diagnoses
underlying such loans, and the conditions attached to them remain in

serious dispute. However, the problem of diagnosis is almost surely not
the main source of the problem with compliance. At a recent conference
reviewing IMF conditionality (see Williamson (1983)), Richard Cooper
conjectured (pp.571-573) that despite their differing theoretical views,
the conference participants would find themselves in broad agreement in

24

designing a stabilization program for any specific country other than their

own. He went on to say that the chosen stabilization program would
probably look quite like a "standard" IMF package. Notably, there were few
demurrals, despite the wide range of theoretical positions represented at
the conference.

In that conference (and in the country studies in the NBER Project on
Developing Country Debt) there was much evidence for the prevailing IMF and

World Bank views that: (1) balance of payments problems typically reflect,
inter alia, excessive money creation in support of fiscal deficits; (2)

multiple exchange rate systems lead to serious resource misallocations, and
are often a burden on public sector budgets; (3) overvalued exchange rates,

coupled with exchange controls, capital flight, and smuggling, represent a
tax on exports that is detrimental to long-term development; and (4)

allowing key prices (including real wages, public sector prices, and
interest rates) to respond to market conditions as part of an overall
adjustment effort will improve efficiency and growth.

Ironically, though, there was one more point of agreement running
through most of the analyses at the Williamson conference (and the NEER

studies): IMF programs are very frequently, if not typically, unsuccessful
in restoring stability and growth in countries beset with balance of

payments and inflation problems. Aside from the cases of the developed
country borrowers (Italy, U.K. and Portugal) discussed at the conference,
several of the remaining programs that were described (Argentina, Brazil,

Jamaica, Tanzania) were unsuccessful in meeting stated objectives. These
findings of limited success are in accord with a growing number of other
case studies and cross-sectional analyses of IMF stabilization programs,

25
which in sunt point to a mixed record, at the very best, in the compliance

of countries with Fund programs. (Notably, however, in the cases where
Fund programs were substantially implemented the macroeconomic results seem
to justify the conditions attached to the loans.)

Internal IMF reviews of compliance are similarly mixed. In a review
of Fund programs supported by stand-by arrangements in upper-credit
tranches during 1969-78, Beveridge and Kelley (1980) found that fiscal
targets were achieved in about half the cases, but, "[b]y 1977 and 1978,

expenditures were contained as planned in less than 20 percent of the

programs, compared with over 50 percent in 1969 and 1970" (p. 213). Also,
Beveridge and Kelley found that governments were not generally successful
in meeting targets with respect to the composition of expenditure between

current and capital outlays. In over 70 percent of the programs specifying
a desire to expand capital outlays while constraining current outlays
(exactly the form of conditionality considered in the theoretical model),
"current expenditure in nominal terms exceeded the target or projection.

In about half of the these programs, capital outlays in nominal terms were

lower than projected" (p. 214). With respect to the target on overall
budget balance, as opposed to expenditures alone, budget targets were met
in about 50 percent of the programs overall, but in less than 20 percent of

the programs in 1978. Once again, a sharp downturn in compliance was
noted. Doe's study (1983) has updated the Beveridge and Kelley results for
Fund programs in 1980. Of the 18 programs surveyed that planned a
reduction in the fiscal deficit, half of the programs did result in a
reduced deficit, but in only 4 (22 percent) of the cases did the country
actually meet the agreed upon targets.

26

Stephan Haggard's (1985) recent review of IMF programs under the

Extended Fund Facility (EFF) is no more heartening. The EFF was created in
1974 in the wake of the first oil shock as a way to enlarge the access of

IMF member countries to Fund credits. The goals were similar to those
enunciated for the Baker Plan. In Haggard's words, the EFFs "are
representative of a growing emphasis among development economists on the
importance of microeconomic instruments and on the role of resource
utilization and production as a basis for longer-term structural

adjustment. EFFs often call for fundamental shifts in policy, such as
liberalization of trade, decontrol of prices, and restructuring of

public-sector corporations" (p. 508). The results of the EFFs were poor.
According to Haggard, in his count, "of the thirty adjustment programs
launched under the auspices of the Extended Fund Facility, twenty-four were
renegotiated, or had payments interrupted, or were quietly allowed to
lapse. Of these twenty-four, sixteen were formally cancelled by the IMF,
virtually all for noncompliance" (pp. 505-506).

Haggard's bleak conclusions are echoed in a recent study by Remmer
(1986), of IMF programs during 1954-1984. It is worth quoting Renimer at
length on the question of IMF conditionality:

Unsuccessful implementation of IMF recipes has been the norm in
Latin America, not the exception. A high proportion of standby
programs have failed to push key indicators of government finance and
domestic credit even in the right direction. Moreover, examining IMF
standby programs on a before and after basis shows that changes in key
indicators are more readily attributable to chance than to the
operation of IMF stabilization programs. The obvious conclusion is
that the economic, social, and political impact of IMF programs has
been overstated. To describe the IMF as a 'poverty broker,' as does
the title of a recent book, or to charge the Fund with undermining
democracy is to engage in hyperbole. The power of the IMF remains a
useful myth for governments seeking a scapegoat to explain difficult
economic conditions associated with severe balance of payments

27

disequilibria, but the ability of the IMF to impose programs from the
outside is distinctly limited. (p. 21)

Given all of these unsatisfactory results, it is not surprising that
the Fund has been unable to wean many countries away from IMF support, in

spite of "temporarily available." The accompanying Table 1, taken from
Goode (1985), shows the list of 24 countries that have used Fund resources

consecutively for a period of at least 10 years. Note that of these 24
cases, fully 19 are still using IMF resources as of 1984. In other words,
the lengthy reliance on Fund loans is a contemporary feature of the system.

This table, by definition, does not include even more problematic cases, in
which the country's performance under Fund programs was so unsatisfactory
that its access to further Fund credits was suspended.

The experience with the World Bank Structural Adjustment Loans is too

brief to allow any such comparable review. By design these programs are
intended to yield results only in the intermediate term (say 5-15 years),

so that no comprehensive judgements can yet be made. However, there are
already some very worrisome signs that the compliance with Bank

conditionality is no better than with the Fund's. In a review of recent
SAL experience, Berg and Batchelder (1985) note that three (Senegal,

Guyana, Bolivia) of sixteen SAL countries have already experienced a clear
breakdown of a program in process, or in the denial of a follow-up of SAL

because of inadequate performance. These authors are also skeptical of the
strength of Bank conditionality, pointing to the case of Senegal (whose
SAL was cancelled in mid-1983) as an example of the non-enforceability of
conditionality:

Table 1: Members Making Prolonged Use of IMF Credit
in the Period 1954_84*

Number of Continuous
Years of Use

Member

Period

Chile
Egypt
Sri Lanka
Mali
Sudan

27
27
20
20
20

1958-64
1958—84
1963-84
1965-84
1965-84

Pakistan
Turkey
Burma
Nicaragua
Philippines

19
18

1966—84
1954—71
1958-84
1969-84
1969—84

Guinea
Chad
Syria
India
Uganda

15

17

15
16

14
14

13
13

Yugoslavia
Zambia
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Indonesia
Kampuchea, Democratic
Zaire
Jamaica
Romania

13

1970-84
1971—84
1961-74
1958—70
1972-84

12

1972-84
1972—84
1965—76
1973—84
1962-73

12
12
11
11

1973—84
1974-84
1974-84

12

12
12

197384

*Periods of use are measured between the ends of calendar years and are,
therefore, understated for all transactions occurring before December 31 of the

years in question the maximum understatement can approach twO years.
**Yugoslavia also had an eleven-year period of use from 1959 through 1969.

Sources: From Goode (1985), Table 3, which is based on International Monetary
Fund, international Financial Statistics: Supplement on Fund Accounts,
nO. 3 (1982); IMF, International Financial Statistics Yearbook, 1984;
IMF, International Financial Statistics, February 1985, pp. 22-23.

28

As noted earlier the Bank must shrink from the ultimate sanction,
cancellation. Cessation of disbursements is too strong a response by
the Bank to banal acts of non-performance. In the one case where this
was done (Senegal) the SAL was replaced by new credits.
Non-compliance, at least in the short-run, was virtually costless
to Senegal, whose share of Bank-IDA disbursements has been 50% higher,
during July-February of fiscal 1984, than it was during fiscal 1981
and 1982... [H]owever, new Bank-IDA commitments to Senegal have dropped
off, and it is not clear when that decline will be reversed [p. 44].

The record of failed SAL programs (3 in 16 countries) may well
understate the failure rate in the longer term, particularly if the SALs

become important for the Latin American countries. Many of the existing
SALs cover the successful middle-income developing countries and the NICs,
such as Thailand and Korea, rather than the problem cases of Peru, Chile,
Argentina, Brazil, or Mexico.

IV. External Debt and Conditionality
The theme of this section is that high external indebtedness can

reduce the incentives for a country to undertake necessary macroeconomic
adjustments, and thus further reduce the chance that the terms of a
conditionality agreement will be fulfilled. Indeed, for very high levels
of indebtedness, it may be useful for creditors to forgive some of the debt

as an incentive for better performance, recognizing that such an incentive

could actually raise the repayments to creditors in the long run. Before
proceeding with this argument, a terminological point must be made.

Creditors frequently "write dowi" the value of bad loans in their own
books, without relieving the debtor of the legal obligation to make full

repayments. The thrust of this section is not about writedowns (which may
be wise from an accounting or regulatory point of view), but about explicit

29

relief or forgiveness, in which the creditors reduce the legal obligations
of repayment below the levels originally contracted.

The Basic Efficiency Case for Debt Relief
Let us see how debt forgiveness can work (once again the technical

material is presented at the end of the paper, in Appendix B). Suppose
that a country has a large stock of debt due in the future. We will
assume, for purposes of illustration, that the stock of debt is so large
that the country lacks creditworthiness for any additional borrowing on

international private markets. Moreover, to avoid complications, we will
for the moment ignore conditionality lending. Finally, by assuming that
the debt is due in the future rather than the present, we ignore issues
relating to rescheduling.

The existing creditors have a choice this period: They can sit down
with the country and negotiate some debt relief, or they can "hang tough"

today, and hope to get fully repaid in the future. It might seem, and it
is often argued as if, the creditors should simply hold Out for the maximum

repayment, and take whatever they can get in the future. After all, why
give up on full repayment today, before the debt is due? This is certainly
the attitude of many banks, who recognize that they are unlikely to be

repaid fully but have decided to sit tight until further developments

occur. Unfortunately, this strategy may well ultimately leave the banks
with smaller repayments than they would receive by negotiating forgiveness
in some circumstances.

When the debt overhang is large enough, it can act as a major
incentive against the very adjustments in the debtor country that would

30

contribute to future debt servicing, as can be shown by a simple numerical

example. Suppose that the country owes $150 million, but has a future
capacity for debt servicing of only $100 million. Suppose also that in the
future the country will repay (in present value terms) as much of the $150

million as possible, and will then default on the balance. Note that
improvements in the country's future debt servicing capacity (up to $150
million) would go simply to the creditors' benefit, and not the country's,
since the overhang of debt is so large.
Suppose, for instance, that a wonderful investment opportunity is

available for enhancing exports. If the debtor government sacrifices $10
million of current consumption and raises investments in the export sector,

it will raise its future debt servicing capacity from $100 million to $120
million. From the creditors' point of view this would be quite beneficial.

Rut from the country's point of view, it would be highly irrational. The
country would lose $10 million in consumption today, and would gain nothing
in consumption in the future, since all of the added export earnings would
go to the creditors, and the export earnings still not be enough to repay

the debt! The benefits of higher future production would fall entirely to
the creditors.
Since the government will not undertake the investments in such

circumstances it is most likely that the debt servicing capacity of the

country will not be enhanced. The debtor will not adjust (i.e., the
export-promoting investments will not be made). The future debt servicing
capacity will remain at $100 million, which is the amount that the
creditors will receive in the future.

31

Now suppose instead that the creditors offer some debt relief. The
creditors might agree to forgive $45 million, and to continue to demand
$105 million of repayments (i.e., the creditors settle for 70 cents on the

dollar). This could be done, for example, by a swap of the outstanding
$150 million of debt for exit bonds with face value of $105 million.
if the country invests, it loses $10 million in consumption today, gains

$20 million in additional export earnings in the future (total export
earnings now equal $120 million), and repays $105 million in debt (i.e.,

the exit bonds would be fully serviced). Future consumption therefore
rises by $15 million (— $120 million - $105 million). Assuming that the
government's rate of time discount is not too high, the opportunity to pay
$10 million in current consumption in order to raise future consumption by
$15 million will seem attractive, and the investment will be made.
In sum, by aareeing to debt relief, the creditors raise the ultimate

reoayment from $100 million to $105 million. The debtor is better off as
well, since it accepts a short-run cut in consumption in return for a much

larger future increase in consumption. The whole game is diagrammed in
Diagram 2. With now debt relief, the equilibrium involves no investment,

and $100 million in debt repayment. with debt relief, the equilibrium
involves investment with repayments of $105 million.
This argument for debt relief would be misplaced if the debtor
countries are actually in the range of indebtedness in which they will

eventually service all of their debts at market terms. However, most of
the direct and indirect evidence that we have on the market value of claims
on the major debtor countries shows that the investors indeed believe that
there is a significant chance that much of the debt will not be fully

Diagram 2. THE EFFICIENCY CASE FOR DEBT RELIEF

1'

'1
Debtor

Lender
Decision

Decision

105

2

100

0

120

—10

100

t
0

1'
Lender
Utility

Debtor
Utility

(ft—Relief

NR—No Relief)

Explanation: Without debt relief, the creditor is repaid $100 million, and the
debtor consumes. Debtor utility in this case is set at 0.0, and utility in the
other caaea ia measured as a deviation from this baseline, according to the for-

mula u —

-i

+ max £100 + 2I — D, 0] 1(1.3), where D is the amount of debt

that is due. D = 150
relief.

in the case of no relief, and D =

105

in the case of

is 0.0, or $10 million. Lender utility is measured by the amount of

repayment in the second period, and is equal to mm [ioo + 2 I, DJ , which

equals $100 million if I • 0; $120 million if I = $10 million and no relief is
granted; and $105 million if I a $10 million and D is reduced from $150 million
to $105 million.

32

serviced in the long run. (See Sachs and Huizinga, 1987, for further
details on the market valuation of the outstanding debt).
If this analysis is correct, there nay be significant welfare gains
from forgiving some of the existing stock of debt, rather than piling up

more debt in the form of new loans and reschedulings. The question of how
actually to engineer debt relief is a very difficult one. Equity and
efficiency considerations will dictate that the existing creditors from all

classes must coordinate any forgiveness. This will pose serious
administrative and regulatory problems, since creditors in different
countries and in different sectors would face very different costs and

benefits. Commercial banks might even face shareholder lawsuits if they
were to forgive some debt without adequate administrative support from the
batik regulators and perhaps from the legislatures of the various creditor

countries. Moreover, the debt relief must be in a way to limit the moral
hazard problem of countries intentionally mismanaging their international
economic policies for the sake of achieving debt relief.

Of course debt relief could come in all shapes and sizes, varying from
an Alan Garcia-style cap on debt repayments relative to exports, to a
conversion of existing debt into new securities with a lower contractual
present value, to a rescheduling at below market interest rates, to a
scheme in which each dollar of amortization reduces the debt outstanding by
some multiple of a dollar (by agreement with the creditors), or finally to
an explicit elimination of claims by the creditors without a auid pro auo

(as in the cancellation of inter-allied war debts in the early l930s). The
relative advantages and disadvantages of these various methods are beyond
the scope of this paper.

33

The Interaction of Debt Relief and Conditionality
There are really two linkages between a debt overhang and the
effectiveness of conditionality, one obvious and the other a bit more

subtle. The obvious linkage has already been made: in the absence of debt
relief, a country may have no incentive to honor a conditionality

agreement, and to carry through on an economic reform program. The foreign
debt acts like a tax on adjustment. The debt relief removes the tax, and
encourages the country to undertake efficient reforms.

The second linkage occurs when debt relief is a necessary but not
sufficient condition for inducing the country to undertake needed reforms.

In the previous numerical example, the country chooses to undertake reforms

once debt relief is granted, even in the absence of conditionality. As
soon as the debt is reduced from $150 million to $105 million, the country
voluntarily reduces current consumption by $10 million in order to raise
future consumption by $15 million. It might easily have been the case,
however, that even with debt relief, the needed reforms would still look

unattractive. This would happen, for example, if the government's rate of
time discount is so high that an increase in future consumption of $15
million would not justify a cut in current consumption of $10 million.

In such a case, relief would not result in any improvement in the
debtor country's economy, and so would be unattractive from the creditors'

point of view. It might still be the case, however, that the combination
of debt relief and conditionality would raise the welfare of both the
creditors and the debtor, even though relief by itself and conditionality
by itself, could not do so.

34

To see how this would work, suppose that the following highconditionality loan package is put together:
debt relief, which reduces the overhang of debt from $150 million to
$105 million;
II4F lending of $5 million to the country, and with repayment to the IMF
of $5.5 million in the future;
the country commits to undertake the export-enhancing reform, at the
cost of $10 million today.

Assuming that the conditionality is enforced, the country increases its

future productive capacity from $100 million to $120 million. Current
consumption falls by $5 million (since half of the cost of the investment

is financed by the IMF loan). Future consumption goes up by $9.5 million
($120 million in exports minus $5.5 million in debt repayment to the IMF
minus $105 million in debt repayment to the original creditors).

Now, instead of giving up $10 million today to get $15 million in the
future, the government gives up only $5 million today to get $9.5 million

in the future. As long as the rate of time discount is neither too low nor
too high (specifically, as long as the discount rate is between 0.5 and
0.9), the country will reject the investment in the absence of the IMF-

World Bank loan, but will accept the investment cum conditionality with the

official loan. In that case, the original creditors are better off, since
their repayments rise by $5 million relative to the case of no reform. The
debtor is better off by $9.5 million in the future. The IMF breaks even
since its loan gets repaid.

And yet none of this would happen in the absence of debt relief (in
which case the country reaps no benefit from reform),

in

the absence of

conditionality and new IMF lending (since the country would not undertake

35

the investment without new lending, and would not get the new lending
without a credible commit to undertake the investment).

The key to this example is that the investment requires kQ new
external financing and debt relief, and the external financing requires
conditionality, since the country would prefer to borrow abroad and then

not undertake the reform, as in the first example in Diagram 1. Again we
can resort to a formal game analysis, as in Diagram 3. In Diagram 3(a) we
have the case without debt relief. The country will not undertake the
investment, and will not consent to a conditionality package. In Diagram
3(b) we have the case with relief, but without conditionality. Again, the
country will not undertake the investment out of its own resources, but

also will not get any new loans. In Diagram 3(c), we have the combination
of debt relief and new external financing cum conditionality.

This example belies two common views: that debt relief must hurt the
creditors; or that if debt relief helps the creditors, it will be achieved

without official intervention. The example makes clear that both relief
and official intervention via conditionality are necessary for a successful
adjustment program to the mutual benefit of the debtor and its creditors.

V. Some Imulications for the Pace and Phasing of Adiustment Programs
The postwar history of stabilization, liberalization, and

conditionality can make a pessimist of the most tenacious optimist. Few
stabilization and liberalization plans meet their initial objectives, and

many fail miserably. We have seen that conditionality is inherently
limited in its capacity to effect adjustment in the debtor countries, and
that the limitations are even more severe in the presence of a debt

Diagram 3. DEBT RELIEF WITH CONDITIONALIIY

(a) No Debt Relief

—5 + 0/1.6 = —5

No
IMP

program
0

1

Debtor
Utility

(b) Debt Relief, No New Lending
(Country discount rate assumed to equal 0.6)

105

—1

100

0

120

—10

100

0
1.

Lender
Utility

Debtor
Utility

(c) Debt Relief, New I} Lending cum

Conditionality

R

I

105

0

100

114.5

—5

NE

0

100

Debtor
Utility

Creditor
Utility

Explanation: Without debt relief, the debtor's second period consumption

0.0. Thus, if it accepts the $5 million IMP

loan,

the change in C1,. which equals —$10 million (

I)

is always

the utility effect is simply

+

$5 million (— IMP loan), or

—$5 million. With debt relief, but no new lending, the benefit of investment is

—$10 + ($120 — $105)I1.6, which is approximately —1. With debt relief and conditionality, the benefit of the IMP package is

—$5 + ($120 — $5(I.1) — $105)/1.6
which is approximately 1. Note that $5(1.1) represents the repayment of the $5
million IMP loan at 10 percent interest.

36

overhang. In many cases, deht relief might have to be combined with
conditionality to improve the likelihood of success of IMF and World Bank
programs.

Given these limitations, it is important to make the objectives of
conditionality consistent with the limited efficacy of conditionality.
Programs of the IMF and World Bank should be tailored according to a

realistic assessment of the possible accomplishments. One of the most
important issues in this regard is the balancing of the demands of

stabilization with those of longer-term structural reform. Since the major
debtor countries suffer from acute macroeconomic disequilibria (with
inflation rates in Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico well exceeding 100 percent
per year in 1987), a crucial issue is the balancing of macroeconomic
stabilization with other types of structural reform.
The main theme of this section is that structural reform (especially a
shift towards greater outward orientation and trade liberalization) is a

very difficult process that takes many years to bring to fruition. The
process is so difficult economically and politically that it is likely to
fail under the best of macroeconomic circumstances, and is in general
greatly jeopardized by a concurrent macroeconomic stabilization crisis.

The historical record suggests that adjustment programs rarely succeed
unless stabilization is their first step, with structural reforms
proceeding gradually and mostly after macroeconomic balance has been
restored.

The historical record points to a high failure rate in general
regarding attempts at trade liberalization and a shift towards outward

orientation. One thoroughly documented record of liberalization

37

experiences can be found in the multi-country study on "Foreign Trade
Regimes and Economic Development" directed by Jagdish Bhagwati and Anne

Krueger at the National Bureau of Economic Research, and summarized in
Krueger (1978). Krueger (pp. 219-220) identified 22 attempts to liberalize
from a situation of heavy reliance on quantitative restrictions and

exchange controls. By her own count, 13 of these episodes were
unsuccessful and nine were successful. Even this count is too optimistic,

however, since only 4 of the 9 "success" cases (measured as j years of
successful liberalization) proved to be enduring until the time of
Krueger's study (these cases are Brazil, 1964; South Korea, 1964; Israel,

1962; and Colombia, 1967). Perhaps most discouraging from the current
policy vantage point is the fact that the Latin American countries show the

most repeated failures in attempts at liberalization. And the legacy of
past failures can have an important bearing on the success of any future
plan, as I argue below.

Tab1egives the breakdown of success and failure, with the dates of
the program, and the inflation rate of the preceding year. Two points
stand out clearly. In almost all cases, the internal imbalances in the
economy at the time of the liberalization attempts, as measured by the
inflation rate, are far smaller than the crisis conditions now confronting

the Latin American debtors. Second, a high inflation rate seems to be a
serious hindrance in successful stabilization, since in four of the five
cases in which liberalization was attempted with an inflation rate above 30

percent, the experiment failed. Of those five, only Brazil, in 1964,
demonstrates a successful liberalization cum stabilization. That episode
might be the only modern case of the type of adjustment now demanded of the

Table 2: Successful and Unsuccessful Liberalization Attempts,
Krueger-Bhagwati NBER Study

Year

Cases

Inflation Rate,
Preceding Year

Successful

Brazil
Colombia
Israel
Israel
Korea
Philippines
PhilippineS
Turkey
Turkey

1964
1967

66.7
19.8

1952

n.a.

1962
1964

5.6

1960
1970
1958
1970

2.9
17.4

7.0

unsuccessful
Brazil
Brazil
Chile
Chile
Chile
Colombia
Colombia
Colombia
Colombia
Egypt
Ghana
India
South Korea

1957
1961

1956
1959
1965
1951
1957
1962
1965
1962
1967
1966
1961

29.6
32.5
n.a.

8.6
17.6
0.7
13.1
9.2
10.2

Note: Note that the definition of success used here is rather modest: a

Phase

III liberalization S converted to a Phase IV liberalization for at least
four years. Several of the success cases ultimately became failures, as
qualitative restrictions (QR5) were reapplied. The precise definitionS
of Phases III and IV can be found in Krueger (1978. pp. 25-27). Phase
III signifies a trade regime in which the exchange rate has been devalued

"to reflect the de facto price of foreign exchange." QRs may be reduced

in scope but will generally remain. Phase iv

"features

greater emphasis

on price mechanisms than on quantitative restrictions in managing
balance of payments."
Source: Krueger, 1978, pp. 219-220.

the

38

Latin American countries. It had its own special conditions that allowed a
successful program, not the least of which was a strong military
dictatorship that could sharply squeeze real wages in the period of
disinflation, 1964-67.

The appropriate link between stabilization and liberalization may be
the most important policy issue facing the World Bank in choosing a

strategy for high-conditionality lending. The suggestion in Table 4 that
an initially high inflation rate can do in a liberalization effort finds

independent support in several quarters. First, Krueger herself notes that
liberalization attempts are most successful in countries that are not at
the same time pursuing anti-inflationary policies or policies

to restrict

the level of foreign borrowing. One clear reason is that the fear of
inflation induced governments to undertake inadequate devaluations

at the

start of a liberalization exercise, and then failed to keep the exchange
rate adjusting downward in correction for a domestic inflation rate in
excess of the world rate.

Unfortunately, this lesson was not learned in time for the recent
Southern Cone stabilization exercises, which foundered exactly on this

conflict of goals. In their excellent survey of these episodes in
Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay, Corbo and de Nelo conclude that

"policy

inconsistencies were the main reason for the eventual failure of the
reforms" (1985, p.864), with the inconsistencies revolving first around the
use of the exchange rate to both promote trade and restrict
second around the inconsistent application of tariff and

inflation, and

regulatory

policies. Even the tariff inconsistencies can often be traced to the
anti-inflation program, since unexpected and unplanned tariff changes were

39

to further reduce

often made (especially in Argentina) in an attempt
inflation.

The Southern Cone countries were attempting to pursue two targets, low
inflation and liberalized trade, and had the freedom to relax a third

constraint: external borrowing. In the late 1980s, the Latin American
countries are being called upon to pursue three objectives simultaneously:
lower inflation, liberalization, and reduced dependence on foreign
historical example in which

borrowing. I am still searching in vain for a

could be found for the

all three targets were satisfied. (Even if one

1960s, it would probably be possible to distinguish
circumstances by virtue of the buoyant growth

it from current

in world trade in the 1960s.)

Brazil and Korea, in 1964, and Indonesia in

1967 come closest to being

examples. It is clear, however, that certain factors disposed these cases
to success. Brazil and Korea started out their programs with sharp real
wage reductions, backed by a strong military regime (comparable real wage
data for Indonesia are not available). Also, all proceeded gradually with
liberalization, and after a few years (starting
on increasing foreign borrowing in order

growth. Finally, Brazil and Korea began

in the late l960s) relied

to maintain the momentum of
the episode with much smaller

internal imbalances than are typical in Latin

America today. Korea had an

inflation rate of a mere 19.7 percent in the year

before the stabilization

program began, and Brazil's rate of 66.7 percent, while very high, is still

dwarfed by today's rates. (Indonesia's inflation

rate reached a very high

1044 percent in 1965.)

Other research, by Killick et al. (1984) and Ching-yuan Lin (1985),
agree with the proposition that the simultaneous application of

40

stabilization and widespread liberalization is unlikely to be sustainable

and successful. Killick notes that a degree of liberalization was sought
alongside stabilization in at least 8 of 23 standby arrangements in

1978-79, with meager results. He concludes "It does not seem that the
means available to, or employed by, the Fund are strong enough to achieve

its liberalization objective in more than rare cases" (p. 238). Lin has
made a persuasive case, this time based on a comparative economic

history

of East Asia and Latin America, that a reduction in inflation should take
precedence over all other targets, including liberalization, when inflation

rates are high and prone to rise. In a detailed comparison of the
stabilization experiences of Latin American and East Asian countries, Lin
argues that the success of the Asian cases was built on a reduction of
inflation that preceded the liberalization attempts by 5 years or more:

In both Chile and Argentina, the control of hyperinflation and
the liberalization of the economy occurred at the same time [in the
mid-1970's]. This greatly compounded the difficulties of the domestic
industries by forcing them to cope with both the depressive effects of
the stabilization policies and the increased competition of foreign
producers at the same time. This contrasts sharply with the situation
4n Taiwan and South Korea, where the control of hyperinflation
preceded intensive trade policy reforms by several years.

Lin also points out at some length that inflation control was
supported by a worsening rather than an improvement of the trade balance,

since foreign funds were used to support the governments of Taiwan and
Korea after the resort to money creation was brought under control:
In all of the cases mentioned, the eventual contraction of the
inflationary process required the restoration of political stability
and productive capacity, with the injection of massive foreign aid and
the restriction of deficit financing by the central bank playing
important roles. (Chapter 4, p.8)

41

Lin is persuasive in arguing that improvements in the real economy
have been unlikely to be long-lasting when attempted in a setting of rapid

inflation and large budget deficits. The analytical arguments in favor of
giving anti-inflationary policies a strong priority include the following:
(a) the damage to financial intermediation that occurs in a climate
inflation, including bank failures, widespread disintermediation,

of high

the

absence of financial instruments of long-term maturities, capital flight;
(b) the likelihood of major relative price distortions in an inflationary

environment; (c) the damage to tax

collection

and the public sector

finances; (d) the damage to real investment and financial

institutions as

governments implement increasingly onerous methods of collecting the
inflation tax (e.g., rising reserve requirements on banks); (e) the

likelihood of policy conflict and policy inconsistency in management of the
exchange rate to meet both trade and inflation targets; (f)

the high

transactions costs that are incurred as individuals and firms economize on
monetary transactions; and (g) the ever-present fear of the public that
major new tax increases or capital levies will be used in order to close

large public sector deficits. Such fears will constrain the private sector
from making the real investment expenditures necessary for a successful
liberalization in the longer term.

VI. Conclusions: Towards an ImDroved Use of Conditionality
We have noted that the efficacy of conditionality is inherently
limited, and that the current overhang of debt greatly complicates the

situation. In cases of extreme indebtedness, the debt itself might set up
incentives that are adverse to significant adjustment or liberalization.

42

In such a case, partial debt forgiveness can actually raise the expected
repayments to the creditors, while at the same time giving greater

incentive to the country for favorable adjustment. To be most successful,
combining debt relief with IMF-World Bank conditionality would enhance the
likelihood that the debt relief actually turns into economic reform.
The historical experience with liberalization alone, and with

stabilization alone, are not very encouraging. The difficulties of
combining the two policy initiatives are formidable. The historical record
suggests that it is virtually impossible to bring inflation under control,
while simultaneously trying to liberalize the economy. One is hard pressed

to find an example of an economy which stabilized, liberalized, and
improved the external position all at the same time. Only Korea,
and Indonesia seem to provide examples of implementing the first

measures, and in those cases the programs were supported by a

Brazil,
two

strong

military government that substantially reduced real wages (at least in
Brazil and South Korea) at the outset of the programs, and favorable world

conditions, including growing world trade, and after a few years, access to
foreign borrowing in significant amounts.
These findings suggest that the 11fF and World Bank should

recognize

the limited efficacy of conditionality. The following list of guidelines
for the use of conditionality in future lending by the 11fF and the World
Bank would increase the chances of success for LDC adjustment programs and
improve the effectiveness of conditionality:
-

approve fewer programs;

-

require

more prior actions in cases where the efficacy of the

conditionality is doubtful;

43
-

encourage governments to enlist the necessary range of political

support behind the terms of a high-conditionality program

before the

program is finalized;
-

approve programs which allow a buildup of arrears to private

creditors in cases where the private creditors:

(a) fail to grant debt

relief; and (b) fail to provide sufficient amounts of new financing;
-

encourage the use of debt relief schemes as a way to enhance the

likely adherence to conditionality terms;
-

narrow the goals of conditionality: put macroeconomic

stabilization as the first step, with structural reform to be implemented
only as macroeconomic stability is restored.

44

Appendix A
A Formal Analysis of Conditionality

The model in this appendix provides a

very simple illustration of the

function of conditionality in international lending.

are two periods (t —

1,2),

Suppose that there

and that a government of a small economy faces

an allocation problem of consunption and investment. In the first period,
the government can consume (C1) or invest
budget constraint that total spending,

1 resources, subject to the

C1 + Il must equal domestic output

(Q1) plus borrowing from abroad (D1). The foreign loans carry an interest
rate r, so that repayments due in the second period

are (l+r)D1. Output in

the second period is a function of investment in the first. As a simple

illustration, I assume a linear technology, with
also assume that investment opportunities

utility function is U —

—

+

(l+g)11, and

are bounded by I s I. The

C1 + C2/(l+d), where d is the rate of pure time

preference. For purposes of illustration, I assume that we have the
following relative parameter values: d > g > r. With this
investments are profitable when evaluated at world

ordering,

interest rates, but not

worthwhile when evaluated according to the subjective rate of time
discount d.

I assume that the country repays all of its

subject to the constraint that C2

foreign borrowing,

0. If the debt is

so large that full

repayment would require C2 C 0, then the country pays as much as possible,
suspends further repayments, and consumes 0 in the second period. Under
conditions of certainty, the lenders will ration credit such that

D1

Q2/(1+r). Of course C2 — 0 should be taken figuratively. The model

is virtually unchanged if the

consumption constraint is C2

M where M is

45

some minimum

level

of consumption, based on political or economic

constraints. Also, C2 implicitly refers only to tradeable goods (since

With C2 = 0 or

only those goods can be used to finance debt servicing).

C2

M, there could still be positive levels of nontradeables consumption.

However, to introduce nontradeable goods at this point would unnecessarily
complicate the model.

Now, to see the role of conditionality, suppose that private lenders
must make loans before the country chooses the level of investment in the
first period, while the IMF or the World Bank, to the contrary, can
The private-sector

condition a loan on a particular level of investment.

creditor must determine how much investment the country will make once a
Q2/(l+r) ties the

loan is received, since the safe lending constraint D1
sustainable debt

to the level of Q2.

It is easy to verify that for any level of debt D1, the country

will

always prefer a zero level of investment, as long as we have the inequality

that d > g. The reason is straightforward: an increment

of investment

reduces welfare by 1 in the first period and raises it in the second period
by (l+g)/(l+d) in terms of first period goods.

Therefore, the welfare

return from an increment of investment is negative.

Since the country will

choose I 0, Q2 will equal Q1, and the lending limit

for the commercial

banks is given by Q1/(l+r).
It may be possible for the Fund or the Bank

to

lend more than this

safely, if the new loans can be conditioned on investment expenditure.
Suppose that the World Bank or the IMF can obtain a credible commitment of

the country to invest 0 < II

I in return for a stabilization or

adjustment loan. In such a case, the country will be able to support total

46

foreign borrowing in the amount [Q1 +

(l+g)11]/(l+r),

which is

(l+g)11/(l+r) greater than in the absence of the program. Will the country
agree to such a program? The answer is clearly yes, since first-period
consumption rises by (l+g)11/(l+r) -

Il

and second-period consumption is

unchanged (since the rise in income (l+g)11, equals the increase in debt
servicing).

It is not necessary, in this scenario, for the World Bank or the 11fF

to actually make the conditionality loan in the amount

(l+g)11/(l+r). In

principle, any smaller loan should attract additional private resources to

make up the difference. The Fund or the Bank is important only in the
"seal of good housekeeping" role rather than as a supplier of funds.

47
Appendix B
A Model of Debt Forgiveness

To see how a given stock of debt can interfere with conditionality,

let us return to the simple two-period model presented in Appendix A. We
now amend the model in two important ways. First, the utility function is
written in general form as as U — U(C1,C2), with the standard concavity
conditions. Second, we assume that as of the first period, there is an
existing stock of debt, inherited from the past and due in the second

period. Let D be the legal amount due in the second period (interest plus
principal), and let S denote the actual debt servicing in that period (S
may be a stochastic variable as of the first period).

The creditors might,

we shall see, be willing to forgive some of the debt as of the first
period, in which case we denote the post-forgiveness amount due as N..

Thus, with D >

N.,

there is some formal forgiveness of the debt as of the

first period, and with N. >

5,

there is a partial default in the second

period (since as of the second period, N. is due and only S is actually

repaid). The production technology is as before: Q2 — Q1 +

11

(l+g)1t,

I.
Suppose that the country is cut off from the world capital markets by

virtue of the preexisting stock of debt D, or by virtue of its general lack
of creditworthiness, and ignore conditionality lending for the moment.

All

investment therefore comes from internal savings. We assume as before that
as of the second period the country repays as much of the foreign debt as

it can. If savings and consumption allocations are made by a central

48

planner, then the planner's problem is:

max U(C1,C2) such that

-

C1 —

Ii

C2 — Q2(11)
S —

-

S

min(R, Q2)

The creditors have a corresponding problem. Should

they demand full

repayment of the debt D, or should they agree as of the first period to
forgive part of the debt, and to demand a smaller repayment R < D ?
Assuming that the creditor "moves first" by announcing the debt

decision,

and that the debtor country thereafter solves the optimal allocation
problem, the creditor must solve the following:

max S such that R S

R

D and that S is the solution to the

debtor problem given above

In words, the debtor chooses the repayment level R that maximizes actual

debt servicing, 5, subject to the constraint that R be less than or equal
to the original debt, D.

As noted in the text, it might seem, and it is often argued as if,
the creditor should simply hold out for the maximum repayment D, and take

whatever he can get in the second period. Such

a strategy, however, can be

improved upon.

Consider the debtor's problem, taking R as a parameter. For low
values of R, the debtor will repay everything, since

it will turn out that

R < Q2UP. Thus, the allocation problem becomes one of maximimizing
U(C1,C2) such that C1 =

Q1

-

IlP

and C2 —

Q2(11)

-

R.

The interior

solution to this problem sets the gross rate of return on investment, l+g,
equal to the marginal rate of substitution between first and second period

49

consumption: 1J1/1J2.

Take, as an illustration, the special case of

additively separable utility, U(C1,C2) = IJ(C1)
then sets (l+g)

(l+d)U'(Q1-11)/U'[Q2(11) -

+

The planner

U(C2)/(l+d).

R].

It is then easy to verify

In a sense, high

that II is an increasing function of R in this rsnge.

debt repayments are a spur to adjustment. The social planner

knows that

there is a big reduction to real cash flow next period, because of the debt

repayment, and therefore he smooths consumption across periods by saving
today and investing more in order to raise second-period output.
For large values of R, however, it will be the case that R > Q2(11)
-

R. In that case, the

so that the debtor will not make the full repayment,

allocation problem become
and C2 — 0.
C1 —

one of maximizing 1J(C1,C2) such that

Clearly, for very high levels of debt, the

R* be the
optimal policy is zero investment, since C is fixed at 0! Let
minimum repayment due at which I is set at zero. For

R R*, I — 0.

For

R above R*, the entire increase in GDP due to higher investment would
accrue to the existing creditors, rather than to

the country itself. The

debt is so high that the country works for the bank

rather than for itself.

The equilibrium level of utility is given as TJ(Q1,O).

level of utility U*. The country's utility can never

Call this thresbhold
fall below this

level, since it is always feasible for the country to make no investments
and to pay as much of the debt as is feasible, subject to the constraint

C2

0.

—

At high levels of debt, the actual debt servicing is equal to

01 — Q1.

The key point from the creditor's point of view is that actual
repayments S will fall when R increases above R*,

since investment Il falls

50

to zero. The resource base from which the country makes debt repayments
shrinks, so that actual repayments decline. Thus, for R
S — R; for R >

R*,

we have

R*, we have S < R* < R.

Now let us return to the creditor's problem. For

levels of debt D

less than the threshhold R*, it is clear that the creditors should hold out

for full repayment. Indeed, the higher the level of the debt, the greater
will be the "adjustment" in the debtor

country, with adjustment measured by

the amount of first period investment.

However, for D > R*. it is a

mistake to hold out for full repayment. The

creditors will get more

repayment by agreeing in the first period to lower the required debt

repayments in second! Forgiving debt can be to the advantage of the
creditors, by spurring investment in the debtor country, and thereby
spurring the means of the debtor to service the debt.

The two-period model just explored lends itself to a standard

diagramnatic analysis, as in Figure 1. As usual, the X-axis measures
production and consumption in the first period, and the Y-axis measures
production and consumption in the second period.

C1 —

-

and C2 —
— max[0,
max(0,Q2-D)

+

Note that since

(l+g)11

-

D],

we can draw

the consumption posaibility frontier as C2 — max[0,
(2+g)Q1 (l+g)C1
When D — 0, the consumption frontier is given by the
curve CC in

Figure 1(a). The point Q —

-

DJ

(Q1,Q1) is the consumption point when Il — 0;

the CC curve has slope -(l+g), since each

increment of foregone consumption

in the first-period raises second-period

consumption by (l+g).
When D > 0, the consumption frontier shifts downward
as in Figures

1(b) and 1(c). The curve shifts

vertically downward by the amount D,

except if D is so large that C2 would turn negative if

fully repaid. The

51

resulting CC curve is shown for small levels of D (< Q1) in Figure 1(b),

1(c). In Figure 1(c) note

and for large level of debt D (> Q1) in Figure

the restriction that C2

that the CC curve is kinked, because of

The social planner picks the point on the

domestic welfare. In Figure 1(a), equilibrium

is at the point A where CC

first-period investment Ii. In

Note that the existence of a small

Figure 1(b), equilibrium is at B.

amount of foreign debt D

CC schedule that maximizes

Note that the horizontal distance

is tangent to the indifference curve U.
between A and Q is the level of optimal

0.

investment (seen by the fact that the
exceeds the distance from A

horizontal distance from B to Q, equal to Ii.

to Q). In this case, the foreign

debt drives the social planner to smooth
raise Q2 enough to service the debt.

consumption by reducing C1 in order to

set 11 —

In Figure 1(c), the optimal policy is to

0.
point E, with C1 — Q1, C2 —

and to consume at the

The point here is straightforward. Since

is so large that it will not be fully repaid,

second-period output jgut raising

D

each increment of I raises

second-period consumption. In such
invest! With zero investment,

circumstances there is no incentive to

—

0,

as shown.
and actual repayment in period 2 is S — Q1,

in case (c) the creditors can

The key point of this section is that

forgiveness. Instead of demanding
raise the debt repayments through debt
D, they can instead demand a smaller

equilibrium at point F. The country

amount R. The result is a new
undertakes more investment and

therefore has more resources with which to

service the debt. Aa drawn, the

debt writedown raises debt repayments (from

country's utility unchanged. It is

S to R) and leaves the

obvious that a greater level of debt

7Lvre 1.

•d £terfl IDdebt.dD...
C... (a) No Debt

C2, Q2

CC

A

Q

Qi

Cue (b) Low Debt
C2, Q2
CC

A

QI

Cii1_ (c) H4.

1b

C2,

a

S

Cl, Qi

52

forgiveness could leave gft

the

country and the creditors better off than

at point E.

It might be objected that the foregoing model is artificial, in that
it establishes a zone in which a high external debt level makes

second-period investment completely worthless from the country's point of

view. To see a more nuanced view, we could use the model of default and
debt renegotation in Sachs and Cohen (1985). Suppose that if the country
defaults, the retaliation penalty from the creditors is a fraction h of

national GDP. Thus, if the country repays the debt due, second period
consumption is

-

R.

If instead it defaults, it saves repayments R, but

suffers a loss of CDP equal to hQ2, so that second period consumption would

be C2

(l-h)Q2. Clearly, the country would find default attractive

whenever R >

hQ2.

Finally, suppose that in lieu of default cum

retaliation, we can assume that in the second period if R >

hQ2,

the

creditors and debtor reach a cooperative outcome such that the debtors pay
a fraction of the repayment due, in the amount hQ2, and the creditors

agree

to forego any further retaliation.

In this case, the debtor's problem can be restated as follows:

max U(C1,C2)

such that C1 —
C2

-

—

S —

-S
mm

[R, (l-h)Q2(11)]

In this case, the marginal return to investment in the zone in which debt

is fully repaid is simply (l+g). On the other hand, in the region in which
debt is not fully repaid, the marginal return to investment is (l-h)(l+g).
The overhang of debt now imposes a marginal tax of h percent on the social

53

return to investment. Once again, it is easy to show that explicit debt
relief can in fact raise the creditors' eventual repayments,

and can spur

"adjustment" (i.e. investment) in the debtor country, by eliminating the
implicit "marginal tax" on the returns to investment.

54

Appendix C
The Interaction of Debt Relief and Conditionalit1

In this appendix, we combine the models of Appendix A and Appendix B,

to illustrate the case in which the combination of

conditionality and debt

relief is both necessary and sufficient for raising the welfare of both
creditors and debtors.

For convenience, we work with the case of linear utility and linear
technology. The government objective function is given as:

u —

C1

+

C2/(l-i-d)

Production in period 2 is given as:

Q2—Q1+(l+gn1

IlI.

There is an initial overhang of debt in the second period D2, with
D2 > Q1

+

(l+g)

I.

In the absence of debt relief, the

government will undertake zero

investment spending in the first period.

Moreover, the country would not

agree to any binding package of new official lending c
the official lenders were financing

conditionality if

anything less than 100 percent of the

investment. Suppose that a share s of the investment could be financed

with an IMF-World Bank loan. Then initial
(l-s) *

Ii,,

consumption would fall by

i.e. by'the amount not financed externally. Future consumption

would not rise at all, however, since after repayment to the IMF Bank, and partial repayment to the original
left over for the country.

World

creditors, nothing would be

55

Next, suppose that there is debt relief alone, without the involvement

of the official institutions. Suppose, for example, that the debt is
reduced to the level Q1. Then, the country will surely repay the remaining
debt in the second period. However, it will still choose to do no
investment spending, as long as the rate of time discount, d, is greater

than the return to investment, g. Moreover, in the absence of
conditionality, it would not be safe to make new loans to the country even
after the debt is written down to Q1, since the country will use the loans
for consumption, and not for investment.

Now, suppose that the debt relief is combined with a high-

conditionality loan, in the following manner. The country undertakes to
make investment ll with the share s to be financed by the IMF-World Bank.
The initial debt is reduced to

+ e, where e is a small amount. First

period consumption falls by (l-s) Il and second period output rises by
(l-i-g)11. Second-period consumption now rises

in the amount (l+g)l1 - s

(l+r) I - e, which will surely be positive as long as e is sufficiently
small. (Note that the rise in consumption equals the rise in output, minus
the repayment to the IMF, minus the increment e in repayment to the

original creditors above the level Q1). Now, as long as the rate of time
discount d is sufficiently small or the share of IMF-World Bank financing
is sufficiently large, then the overall effect on the government's

objective function is positive. Specifically, the condition for an
improvement in the government's objective function is:

-(1-s) Il +

[(l+g)11

-

s Il (l+r) -

e]/(l+d) >

0

56

Since g >

r,

and e is close to 0.0, the condition in (C.3) is surely

satisfied for s very close to 1.0, or d very close to 0.0, and may well be
satisfied for intermediate values of s and d.

57

References

Agarwala, R. (1983), 'Price Distortions and Growth in Developing

Countries,' World Bank Staff Working Papers, no. 575, Washington, DC.
Balassa, B. (1984), "Adjustment Policies in Developing Countries: A
Reassessment," World Development, vol. 12 (September), pp. 955-972.
Berg, E. and A. Batchelder (1985), "Structural Adjustment Lending:

A

Critical View," CPD Discussion Paper No. 1985-21, January.

Beveridge, W.A. and MR. Kelley (1980), "Fiscal Content of Financial
Programs Supported by Stand-by Arrangements in the Upper-Credit

Tranches, 1969-78," IMF Staff Papers, vol. 27, no. 2, June.
Cooper, R. (1971), "Currency Devaluation in Developing Countries," in G.

Ranis (ed.), Government and Economic Development, New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Cooper, R. and J. Sachs (1985), "Borrowing Abroad: The Debtor's
Perspective," in G.W. Smith and J.T. Cuddington (eds.), International
Debt and Developing Countries, World Bank.

Corbo, V. and J. de Melo (1985), "Overview and Summary: Liberalization
with Stabilization in the Southern Cone of Latin America," World
Development, vol. 13, no. 8, August.

Doe, L.K. (1983), "Fiscal Policyand Adjustment in the 1980 Fund Financial
Programs," DM 83/52,

Feinberg, R. and Kallab, V. (1984) (eds.), Adjustment Crisis in the Third
World, Overseas Development Council, Washington, DC.

Finch, David (1988), "Let the IMF
January/February.

be

the IMF," World Economy,

58

Goode, R. (1985), Economic Assistance to the Developing Countries

Through

the IMF, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.

Haggard, S. (1985), "The Politics of Adjustment," International
Organization, vol. 39, no. 3.

Kelley, M. (1982), "Fiscal Adjustment and Fund-Supported Programs,
1971-80," IMF Staff Papers, vol. 29, no. 2, December.

Killick, T., with G. Bird, J. Sharpley and M. Sutton (1984), The Quest for
Economic Stabilization, Overseas Development Institute, London.

Krueger, A. (1978), Liberalization Attempts and Consequences, National
Bureau of Economic Research, New York.
Krugman, P. (1988), "Financing versus Forgiving a Debt Overhang,"

Working Paper Series, No. 2486, January.
Lin, Ching-yuan (1985), Latin America and East Asia: A Comparative
Development Perspective, International Monetary Fund, unpublished
manuscript.

Obstfeld, M. (1986), "Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance of

Payments

Crises," American Economic Review, March, 72-81.
Sachs, J. (1984), "Theoretical Issues in International

Borrowing,"

Princeton Studies in International Finance, no. 54, July.

Sachs, J. (1985), "External Debt and Macroeconomic Performance in Latin
America and East Asia," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2.

Sachs, J. (1987), "Trade and Exchange Rate Policies in Growth-oriented
Adjustment Programs", in V. Corbo, M. Goldstein, and M. Than (eds.),
Growth-oriented Adjustment Protrams, Washington, D.C.:
Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

International

59
Sachs, J. and D. Cohen (1985), "LDC Borrowing with Default Risk," Kredit
und Kapital, Heft 8.

Sachs, J. and H. Huizinga (1987), "The U.S. Commercial Banks and the
Developing Country Debt Crisis", Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1987:2.

Short, R.P. (1983), "The Role of Public Enterprises: An International
Statistical Comparison," IMF Fiscal Affairs Department, DM 83134.

Von Furstenberg, G.M. (l985a), "Adjustment with IMF Lending," Journal of
International Money and Finance, Vol. 4, June, 209-222.

Von Furstenberg, G.M. (l985b), "The IMF as Marketmaker for Official
Business Between Nations," Indiana University, processed.

Williamson, J., ed. (1983), IMF Conditionality, Institute for International
Economics, Washington, DC.
Yaeger, L.B. (1981), Experiences with Stopping Inflation,

American

Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC.

Yagci, F., Ramin, S. and V. Rosenbaum (1985), "Structural Adjustment
Lending: An Evaluation of Program Design," World Bank Staff Working
Papers no. 735, Washington, DC.

