                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SOME CONTRIBUTIONS OF ECONOMICS TO THE STUDY OF PERSONALITY

                                        James J. Heckman
                                          Tomáš Jagelka
                                        Timothy D. Kautz

                                       Working Paper 26459
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26459


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2019




This research was supported in part by: NIH Grants R24AG048081 and R37HD065072, a seed
grant from the briq Institute on Behavior and Inequality, many years of funding from the Spencer
Foundation, a grant from FAIR (Center for Experimental Research on Fairness, Inequality and
Rationality) at NHH Norwegian School of Economics, and in-kind sponsorship through
partnerships from the Institute for Economic and Social Research at Jinan University and the
TrygFonden Centre for Child Research at Aarhus University. The views expressed in this paper
are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the funders, the official
views of the National Institutes of Health, nor the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2019 by James J. Heckman, Tomáš Jagelka, and Timothy D. Kautz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Some Contributions of Economics to the Study of Personality
James J. Heckman, Tomáš Jagelka, and Timothy D. Kautz
NBER Working Paper No. 26459
November 2019
JEL No. C91,C93,D12,D9,D91

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper synthesizes recent research in economics and psychology on the measurement and
empirical importance of personality skills and preferences. They predict and cause important life
outcomes such as wages, health, and longevity. Skills develop over the life cycle and can be
enhanced by education, parenting, and environmental influences to different degrees at different
ages. Economic analysis clarifies psychological studies by establishing that personality is
measured by performance on tasks which depends on incentives and multiple skills. Identification
of any single skill therefore requires isolation of confounding factors, accounting for
measurement error using rich data and application of appropriate statistical techniques. Skills can
be inferred not only by questionnaires and experiments but also from observed behavior.
Economists advance the analysis of human differences by providing anchored measures of
economic preferences and studying their links to personality and cognitive skills. Connecting the
research from the two disciplines promotes understanding of the number and nature of skills and
preferences required to characterize essential differences.

James J. Heckman                                 Timothy D. Kautz
Department of Economics                          Mathematica Policy Research
The University of Chicago                        600 Alexander Park Drive
1126 E. 59th Street                              Princeton, NJ 08540
Chicago, IL 60637                                tkautz@mathematica-mpr.com
and IZA
and also NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Tomáš Jagelka
Institute for Applied Microeconomics
University of Bonn
Regina-Pacis-Weg 3,D
Bonn, -- 53113
Germany
jagelka.tomas@gmail.com
   Economics and psychology have long traditions investigating preferences that affect choices.
Psychologist L. L. Thurstone (1927) created the modern framework for characterizing choices
among discrete outcomes used in psychology and economics. Economists and psychologists
investigate: (a) attitudes toward risk (“risk aversion”), (b) responses to ambiguous situa-
tions (ambiguity aversion), (c) valuation of future benefits relative to current benefits (time
preference), (d) altruism, (e) positive and negative reciprocity, (f) trust, and (g) the ability
to make rational decisions, which is closely related to intelligence (Choi et al., 2014). There
are many other aspects of choice behavior that are studied in both standard neoclassical
and behavioral economics, as well as psychology (for discussions, see Becker et al., 2012,
Loewenstein et al., 2001 or Falk et al., 2016).
   Economists and psychologists also assess life-relevant skills. The dominant paradigm
in economics is the human capital model developed by Becker (1964). In that framework,
human capital is usually envisaged as a homogenous substance that raises productivity in
the workplace and in the home. It is a skill that is produced by families, schools, and firms
and that is embodied in individuals. Variations in levels of human capital explain variations
in earnings and in a variety of other lifetime outcomes such as health, employment, and
wealth, to name only a few.
   In the early days of human capital theory, there was a raging controversy associated
with the “signaling hypothesis” (see Spence, 1972) that claimed that job market returns
to schooling were only a return to cognitive ability, and not to any acquired skill. IQ and
human capital were assumed to be measured on the same one-dimensional scale.
   As economists developed a deeper understanding of the determinants of earnings, they
discovered that multiple skills were required in various labor market and life tasks (see Roy,
1951, Mandelbrot, 1962 and Bowles and Gintis, 1976). These skills include conscientiousness,
ability to work with others, and a variety of attributes that personality psychologists codified
and analyzed. While the evidence was initially fragmentary, it was strongly suggestive and
stimulated much further work. Relevant market skills were understood to be heterogenous


                                               1
in nature. Different labor market and life tasks require skills in different amounts and
proportions. Earnings are rewards to multiple tasks in different markets (Mandelbrot, 1962).
People differ in their endowments of skills.
    Economists contribute to personality psychology by using psychological skills (primarily
the Big Five and its relatives) to predict life outcomes (see for example Heckman et al.,
2006 and Flinn et al., 2019) and to evaluate the outcomes of educational interventions (see
Cunha and Heckman, 2008b; Cunha et al., 2010; Heckman et al., 2013; Alan and Ertac,
2018; Kosse et al., 2014). They enrich personality psychology by developing and applying
rigorous methodologies for measurement and assessment.
    Economists relate the psychologists’ skills to economic preference parameters which are
the fundamental drivers of decisions in economic theory (see Becker et al., 2012, Borghans
et al., 2008, and Jagelka, 2018). Research on this topic is rapidly expanding in economics.
An open question for both fields is the number and nature of preferences, personality types,
and skill indicators required to adequately characterize differences in human potential.
    This research has illuminated the information contained in the scores from achievement
tests. Modern societies rely on written tests to sift and sort people, to evaluate students and
schools, and to assess the performance of entire nations.1 Achievement tests play a prominent
role. The OECD actively promotes PISA tests. In the US, high school dropouts can take a 7-
and-a-half hour achievement test—the General Educational Development (GED) exam—to
certify that they are equivalent to high school graduates.2
    Achievement tests were developed in the mid-twentieth century to measure a new concept—
“general knowledge”—in an attempt to measure skills that are useful inside and outside of
   1
      The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) evaluates student performance in math,
science, and reading across countries, and its results attract a lot of media attention and influence policy.
Scores from the year 2000 PISA test led Germany to reevaluate its educational system and introduce a
variety of reforms (Grek, 2009). The creators of the original PISA tests called them literacy tests, not
achievement tests, because PISA was designed to capture how knowledge can be applied to other contexts
(OECD, 2013b). However, this was also the goal of the original achievement tests. We are unable to find any
studies establishing that the original PISA measures were fundamentally different skills from those measured
by achievement tests. Recently, however, PISA 2012 has added some component tests designed to capture
aspects of non-cognitive skills including openness, locus of control, and motivation (OECD, 2013a).
    2
      See Heckman et al. (2014) for a detailed discussion of the GED program and an evaluation of its benefits.


                                                      2
the classroom.3 Their developers thought that they had designed pencil-and-paper tests that
would predict success in the labor market, in education, and in many other aspects of life.
However, initially they did not validate their predictive power for important life outcomes
outside the classroom.
    Instead, validation of these tests is usually circular as we illustrate below in our discussion
of the GED. Achievement tests are typically validated using IQ tests and grades, and not
by their ability to predict important nonacademic life outcomes. The recent literature has
conducted more meaningful evaluations of these tests.
    Achievement test scores predict only a small fraction of the variance in later-life success.
For example, adolescent achievement test scores explain at most 17% of the variability in
later-life earnings.4 Measurement error accounts for at most 30% of the remaining variabil-
ity.5
    Achievement tests do not adequately capture non-cognitive or socioemotional skills, a
broad set of characteristics including preferences and personality. Examples include perse-
verance (sometimes called “grit”), conscientiousness (also called “grit”), self-control, trust,
attentiveness, self-esteem and self-efficacy, resilience to adversity, openness to experience,
empathy, humility, tolerance of diverse opinions, and the ability to engage productively in
society, which are valued in the labor market, in school, and in society at large. Until recently
these skills have largely been ignored in evaluations of persons, schools, and interventions
to improve lifetime prospects. In recent research economists and psychologists have con-
structed measures of these skills and provide evidence that they are stable across situations
and predict meaningful life outcomes.6
    Skills are not set in stone at birth and determined solely by genes. They can be fostered.
    3
      For histories of achievement tests see Quinn (2014); Heckman and Kautz (2014a).
    4
      See Heckman and Kautz (2012). IQ tests alone explain at most 7% of this variability. Other work by
Borghans et al. (2011b) shows that achievement tests explain a smaller proportion of lifetime success.
    5
      See Bound et al. (2001).
    6
      See the studies by Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011). The modern literature traces back
to Bowles and Gintis (1976), and Bowles et al. (2001). An important study in sociology is the work of Peter
Mueser reported in Jencks (1979).



                                                     3
Cognitive and non-cognitive skills change with age and with instruction. Interventions to im-
prove skills are effective to different degrees for different skills at different ages. Importantly,
non-cognitive skills are more malleable at later ages than cognitive skills.
    A growing body of empirical research shows that non-cognitive skills rival IQ in predicting
educational attainment, labor market success, health, and criminality.7 Both IQ and non-
cognitive skills predict scores on achievement tests. Non-cognitive skills predict outcomes
above and beyond their effects in predicting scores on achievement tests.8
    This essay provides an overview of the main findings from the study of personality by
economists. It acquaints psychologists with recently developed economic frameworks and the
frontier of research in economics. It challenges psychologists to make sharper measurements
with conceptually stronger foundations.
    The rest of the essay is in three parts. Part 1 discusses issues of measurement. Part 2
presents evidence on the predictive power of personality skills. Part 3 discusses research on
skill formation.



1       Measuring Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills

1.1     Cognitive Skills

Measures of cognition have been developed and refined over the past century. Cognitive
ability has multiple facets.9 Psychologists distinguish between fluid intelligence (the rate at
which people learn) and crystallized intelligence (acquired knowledge).10 Achievement tests
are designed to capture crystallized intelligence,11 whereas IQ tests like Raven’s progressive
    7
      See Heckman and Kautz (2012, 2014a,b), Almlund et al. (2011), Borghans et al. (2008), and Roberts
et al. (2007) for reviews.
    8
      See Kautz and Zanoni (2019).
    9
      See Carroll (1993) and Ackerman and Heggestad (1997) for discussions.
   10
      See, e.g., Nisbett et al. (2012).
   11
      Roberts et al. (2000).




                                                  4
matrices (1962) are designed to capture fluid intelligence.12,13
    This new understanding of cognition is not widely appreciated. Many use IQ tests,
standardized achievement tests, and even grades as interchangeable measures of “cognitive
ability” or intelligence.14 Scores on IQ tests and standardized achievement tests are strongly
correlated with each other and with grades.15 However, these general indicators of “cogni-
tion” measure different skills and capture different facets of cognitive ability.16,17 Scores on
these tests are also influenced by non-cognitive skills and the amount of effort that a test
taker exerts.


1.2     Measuring Non-cognitive Skills

We use the term non-cognitive skills to describe the personal attributes not thought to be
measured by IQ tests or achievement tests. These attributes go by many names in the
literature, including soft skills, personality traits, non-cognitive abilities, character skills,
and socio-emotional skills. These different names connote different properties.18 “Traits”
suggests a sense of permanence and possibly also of heritability. “Skills” suggests that these
attributes can be learned. In reality, the extent to which these personal attributes can change
lies on a spectrum. Both cognitive and non-cognitive skills can change and be changed over
the life cycle, but through different mechanisms and with different ease at different ages. We
use the term skill throughout this paper precisely because all attributes can be shaped.
    Personality psychologists have studied noncognitive skills for the past century. Psycholo-
   12
      Raven et al. (1988). The high correlation between scores on intelligence tests and scores on achievement
tests is in part due to the fact that both require intelligence and knowledge. Fluid intelligence promotes the
acquisition of crystallized intelligence. Common developmental factors affect the formation of both skills.
   13
      Carroll (1993) and Ackerman and Heggestad (1997) discuss more disaggregated facets of cognitive
ability.
   14
      This practice is true even among leading professional psychologists. For example, all of these measures
are assumed to capture intelligence in Flynn (2007), Nisbett (2009), and Nisbett et al. (2012).
   15
      See Heckman and Kautz (2012).
   16
      See Borghans et al. (2011a).
   17
      It is an irony of the testing literature that high school grades are more predictive of first-year college
performance than SAT scores (Bowen et al., 2009). The SAT and related tests were once thought to be a
more objective measure of student quality than high school grades (Lemann, 1999).
   18
      See Almlund et al. (2011) and Borghans et al. (2008) for comparisons of some of these different tax-
onomies.


                                                       5
gists primarily measure noncognitive skills by using self-reported surveys or observer reports.
They have arrived at a relatively well-accepted taxonomy of non-cognitive skills called the
Big Five, well-known to readers of this volume. Some argue that the Big Five are the “lon-
gitude and latitude” of non-cognitive skills, by which all more narrowly defined skills may
be categorized.19
    While the Big Five measures are now widely used in psychology, there are several other
taxonomies, including the Big Three, the MPQ, and the Big Nine that are conceptually
and empirically related to the Big Five.20 Other taxonomies, including psychopathology
as measured by the DSM-IV and measures of temperament, have also been related to the
Big Five.21 In earlier research, Almlund et al. (2011) and Becker et al. (2012) summarize
evidence showing that economic preference parameters are not closely related to the Big Five
measures and apparently represent different attributes. Preference parameters along with
the non-cognitive skills measured by personality psychologists govern behavior.22 Recent
work by Jagelka (2018) challenges this research and establishes a much tighter link than
previously thought due to careful treatment of measurement error and mistakes made by
persons being surveyed. The search is on for a minimal set of skills required to characterize
empirically based human differences. The field is currently wide open.


1.3      A Task-Based Framework for Identifying and Measuring Skills

A leading personality psychologist (and author in this volume) defines personality (non-
cognitive) traits (skills) as follows:

        Personality traits are the relatively enduring patterns of thoughts, feelings, and
   19
      Costa and McCrae (1992).
   20
      See Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011) for comparisons of these taxonomies.
   21
      See, e.g., Cloninger et al. (1999).
   22
      A deeper question, as yet not systematically investigated in the literature in economics or psychology, is
whether the “traits” captured by the alternative measurement systems are the expression of a more basic set
of preferences or goals. McAdams (2006) adds goals to the list of possible skills. Almlund et al. (2011) and
Heckman and Kautz (2012) develop a model in which preferences and endowments of skills determine the
effort applied to tasks. As shown in the next section, performance on tasks is the source of any measurement
of a skill. Hence, in their framework, measures of skills are determined, in part, by preferences.


                                                       6
       behaviors that reflect the tendency to respond in certain ways under certain cir-
       cumstances. (Roberts, 2009, 140)

Roberts’ definition of personality (“non-cognitive”) skills, and the one favored by Almlund
et al. (2011), suggests that all psychological measurements are calibrated on measured be-
haviors or “tasks” broadly defined. Tasks include taking IQ tests, answering personality
questionnaires, performing a job, attending school, completing secondary school, participat-
ing in crime, or performing in an experiment run by a social scientist. Figure 1 depicts
how performance on a task can depend on incentives, effort, and cognitive and non-cognitive
skills. Performance on different tasks depends on these components to different degrees.23
People can compensate for their shortfalls in one dimension by having strengths in other
dimensions.

                          Figure 1 Determinants of Task Performance




                      Incentives                Effort




                                              Character                     Task
                                                Skills                    Performance




                                              Cognitive
                                               Skills




   Common practice in personality psychology assesses skills by self-reported questionnaires
(see John, 2000; John and Srivastava, 1999a for one widely used questionnaire). However,
  23
     There is a growing body of research which shows that performance on tasks is moderated by a variety
of behavioral biases (see Chapman et al., 2018, and Stango and Zinman, 2019 for recent summaries).


                                                    7
performance on any task or any observed behavior can be used to measure personality and
other skills.24
    However, one needs to be careful in going this route. For example, completing high school
requires many other skills besides those measured by achievement tests, including showing
up in school, paying attention, and behaving in class.25 A good score on an IQ test requires
both ability and effort, which is affirmed by incentives to succeed in this task. While this
point is generally known, it tends to be forgotten in naive use of personality and achievement
inventories.
    Inferring skills from performance on tasks requires standardizing all of the other con-
tributing factors that produce the observed performance. The inability to parse and localize
behaviors that depend on a single skill or ability gives rise to a fundamental problem of
assessing the contribution of any particular skill to the successful performance on any task
(or measure). This problem is commonly ignored in empirical research that studies how
cognitive and non-cognitive skills affect outcomes.26
    There are two distinct issues that need to be addressed in designing measures of skills
based on performance of any task. First, behavior depends on incentives created by situ-
ations. Different incentives elicit different amounts of effort on the tasks used to measure
skills. Accurately measuring non-cognitive skills requires standardizing for the effort applied
in any task. Second, performance on most tasks depends on multiple skills. Not standardiz-
ing for other relevant skills that determine performance on a particular task used to measure
a particular skill can produce misleading estimates of that skill.
    These issues are empirically relevant. For example, incentives can increase effort and thus
influence scores on IQ tests. Studies conducted over the past 40 years show that incentives
  24
       See Almlund et al. (2011).
  25
       The idea of using behaviors to measure non-cognitive is old. Ralph Tyler suggested using measures
of behavior to capture non-cognitive skills in his first proposal for the National Assessment of Educational
Progress tests. See Tyler (1973) and Rothstein et al. (2008). This idea is being been pursued in the recent
literature (Heckman et al., 2018; Jackson, 2018). See Kautz and Zanoni (2019) for a recent application of
this idea. We discuss this approach more extensively in Section 1.5.
    26
       See Borghans et al. (2011a), Almlund et al. (2011), and Heckman and Kautz (2012) for discussions of
this problem.


                                                     8
can increase IQ scores, particularly among low-IQ individuals. Providing M&M candies for
correct answers can increase scores by an amount equivalent to the black-white gap in IQ.27
However, there is no evidence that this incentive-induced performance persists. It has yet
to be shown that creating incentives for performance on one test improves performance on
subsequent tests even of the same nature, or in any other life task. Indeed, there is some
evidence that such incentives, in fact, may worsen subsequent performance (Deci and Ryan,
1985; Ryan and Deci, 2000).
   Not all persons respond with equal strength to incentives. Research by Borghans et al.
(2008) and Segal (2012) shows that the responsiveness of persons to incentives on IQ and
achievement tests depends on their non-cognitive skills. Borghans et al. (2008) survey a
body of literature that establishes the power of incentives to shape IQ scores. Duckworth
et al. (2011) show that the motivation of test takers predicts IQ scores.
   The same issues apply to measures of non-cognitive skills. While less is known about the
degree to which situations or incentives can affect how people respond to self-reported mea-
sures of non-cognitive skills, Chen et al. (2019) provide some experimental evidence. They
conduct two experiments that show how survey conditions—part of a student’s situation—
can affect student responses on the Big Five questionnaire. The first experiment shows that
providing information about the Big Five affects how students report on their skills. The
second experiment shows that providing incentives for performance on a separate task af-
fects how students respond on the primary task. This evidence demonstrates the need to
standardize for aspects of the situation and incentives when measuring non-cognitive skills.
   The recent literature shows that non-cognitive skills predict standardized achievement
test scores, which some psychologists assume are good measures of intelligence.28 Figure
2 (based on Dutch data) shows how the variability across persons in the scores on one
  27
     See Borghans et al. (2008); Clingman and Fowler (1976); Edlund (1972); Ayllon and Kelly (1972);
Breuning and Zella (1978); Holt and Hobbs (1979); Larson et al. (1994); Segal (2008). This evidence is
summarized in Borghans et al. (2008) and Almlund et al. (2011).
  28
     See, e.g., Nisbett (2009).




                                                  9
achievement test, the Differential Aptitudes Test (DAT),29 are determined by IQ and non-
cognitive measures. Non-cognitive skills explain a substantial portion of the variability across
persons in DAT scores. Non-cognitive skills explain the variance in achievement scores above
and beyond the variance that IQ explains when both measures of non-cognitive skill and IQ
are included in a regression. These findings caution the interpretation that standardized
achievement tests only measure cognitive ability. They also capture non-cognitive skills.30
   The Bell Curve by Herrnstein and Murray argues that intelligence is a primary deter-
minant of later-life outcomes. However, they use an achievement test (the Armed Forces
Qualification Test, AFQT) as their measure of intelligence. Therefore, as discussed above,
their findings implicitly show the power of both cognitive and non-cognitive skills in shaping
life outcomes in the United States. Furthermore, recent studies have also demonstrated that
other measures of non-cognitive skills can add predictive power above and beyond achieve-
ment tests (see Kautz and Zanoni, 2019; Heckman et al., 2014).
  29
      The correlation between DAT and the widely used Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) scores in
the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) is 0.75 (Borghans et al., 2011c). Friedman and
Streicher (1985) estimate correlations between 0.65 and 0.82 in a sample of high school sophomores and
juniors. Kettner (1976) estimates correlations between DAT and the AFQT subtests of 0.76 to 0.89 in a
sample of juniors and seniors.
   30
      In the Stella Maris data, openness to experience is strongly correlated with IQ. See Borghans et al.
(2011c).




                                                   10
Figure 2 Decomposing Variance Explained for Achievement Tests and Grades into IQ and
Non-Cognitive Skills: Stella Maris Secondary School, Maastricht, Holland




Source: Borghans et al. (2011a).
Note: Grit is a measure of persistence on tasks (Duckworth et al., 2007).




1.4      Reference Bias

Answers from self-reports can be misleading when comparing levels of personality skills across
different groups of people. Most personality assessments do not anchor their measurements
in any objective outcome.31 For example, the German Socio-Economic Panel (GSOEP)
asks respondents to rate themselves on the following statement:“I see myself as someone
who tends to be lazy” (Lang et al., 2011). The scale ranges from 1 = “strongly disagree”
to 7 = “strongly agree.” In answering this question, people must interpret the definition
of “lazy,” which likely involves comparing themselves to other people. If different groups
have different standards or reference points, comparing skills across groups can be highly
misleading. Laziness may mean different things to different groups of people.
    This measurement problem—sometimes called reference bias—is empirically important.32
Schmitt et al. (2007) administer a Big Five personality questionnaire to groups of people
   31
    These are called Likert scales (Likert, 1932).
   32
    Reference bias is also problematic in health surveys that use self-reported, subjective health assessments.
See Groot (2000).


                                                             11
in a variety of different countries. Using their estimates, Figure 3 shows how Organization
of Economic Cooperation of Development (OECD) countries rank (from high to low) in
conscientiousness – the tendency to be hard-working and persistent. The bars display the
average number of hours that people work in the country.
   At first glance the results are surprising. South Korea ranks second to last in terms
of conscientiousness but also ranks first in the number of hours worked. South Korea is
not an anomaly. Country-level reports of Big Five conscientiousness are unrelated to the
number of hours worked. The rank correlation between hours worked and conscientiousness
across countries is negative, though statistically insignificant.33 This finding contrasts with
studies showing that non-cognitive skills tend to be positively related with labor supply
within individual countries.34
   Anchoring vignettes improve the performance of surveys. For example, the PISA 2012an
instrument that assesses student achievement across countries also included a teacher support
scale based on subjective student ratings of their teachers and corresponding anchoring
vignettes. Before adjusting responses using vignettes, the correlation across countries of
achievement and (positive) teacher support suggested a negative relationship between the
two variables (Kyllonen and Bertling, 2013). This result is surprising since teacher support
and achievement are typically positively related. After adjusting the scale using the vignettes,
the correlation between the two variables increased and became positiveas would be expected.
The unadjusted negative relationship was the misleading result of reference bias. In addition,
Primi et al. (2016) found that anchoring vignettes improved internal consistency (reliability)
for measures of socioemotional skills, that is, it improved the extent to which a group of
items hung together.
  33
       r = −0.07 (p = 0.73).
  34
       See the studies summarized in Almlund et al. (2011).




                                                     12
Figure 3 National Rank in Big Five conscientiousness and Average Annual Hours Worked


                                                                       Finland 1
                                                                 United States 2
                                                                          Chile 3
                                                                        France 4
                                                                      Slovenia 5
                                                                       Canada 6
                                                                        Turkey 7


                         Rank in Big Five Conscientiousness
                                                                           Italy 8
                                                                      Portugal 9
                                                                      Greece 10
                                                              United Kingdom 11
                                                                        Spain 12
                                    (High to Low)


                                                                      Austria 13
                                                                    Germany 14
                                                                      Poland 15
                                                                     Australia 16
                                                                      Estonia 17
                                                                      Mexico 18
                                                                  Switzerland 19
                                                                New Zealand 20
                                                                  Netherlands 21
                                                                     Belgium 22
                                                              Czech Republic 23
                                                                     Slovakia 24
                                                                 South Korea 25
                                                                       Japan 26
                                                                                1300   1500   1700        1900         2100   2300   2500

                                                                                                 Annual Hours Worked




Source: The conscientiousness ranks come from Schmitt et al. (2007). These measures were taken in 2001 (Schmitt, 2002). The
hours worked estimates come from Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2001).
Note: Several countries are omitted due to lack of data.



    These findings are relevant for constructing measures of non-cognitive skills. Granting
that achievement tests miss important skills, would the self-reported Big Five be a useful
supplement to school evaluations? The possibility of reference bias suggests that it might not.
For example, self-reports of conscientiousness might measure different things for different
schools.
    This issue is especially relevant given that some school districts are using self-reported
measures of non-cognitive skills in their accountability systems (West, Buckley, Krachman,
and Bookman, 2018). One obvious concern with accountability is that teachers or principals
might coach students to give favorable responses on non-cognitive skill surveys. The evidence
of Chen et al. (2019) previously discussed and the potential for reference bias suggests that
such surveys are susceptible to more subtle biases.
    Psychologists have addressed this problem.35 Some surveys include vignette-based ques-
tions that attempt to standardize for aspects of the culture or situation. They attempt to
  35
     For further discussion of reference bias, see Duckworth (2012); Goldammer (2010); Peng et al. (1997);
Heine et al. (2001, 2008, 2002); Naumann and John (2011); and Schmitt et al. (2007).


                                                                                                     13
frame questions so that the people in the survey answer within a common situation. How-
ever, this approach might not work well for evaluating schools, especially if teachers have
incentives to coach children on taking these tests so that they score better and give answers
perceived to be positive. Direct use of standard psychological measures can be problematic.36


1.5     Studies Measuring Skills Using Behaviors

Ralph Tyler, who pioneered the development of achievement tests, recognized their limi-
tations.37 He suggested using measures of behavior such as performance, participation in
student activities, and other observations by teachers and school administrators to com-
plement achievement tests when evaluating students and schools. Several recent papers
demonstrate that this is a promising approach. Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013) show
that teacher ratings of elementary schoolchildren’s behaviors are strong predictors of adult
outcomes and that early childhood interventions promote the non-cognitive skills measured
by these ratings. Heckman et al. (2014) estimate the causal effect of cognitive and socio-
emotional (non-cognitive) skills on a variety of outcomes. They measure socio-emotional
(non-cognitive) skills using risky and reckless behaviors measured in the adolescent years.38
They develop and apply methods to use high school grades to measure both cognitive and
non-cognitive skills. They show that non-cognitive skills promote educational attainment,
beneficial labor market outcomes, and health.
    Jackson (2018) studies the effect of teachers on student cognitive and non-cognitive skills.
In a fashion similar to Heckman et al. (2018), Jackson measures cognitive skills using achieve-
ment test scores, while measuring noncognitive skills using absences, suspensions, grades,
  36
       In an attempt to address reference bias, some psychologists measure skills using behaviors. Heine et al.
(2008) examine cross-country differences in conscientiousness using objective measures, including walking
speed, postal workers’ speed, and the accuracy of clocks in public banks. To measure walking speed, re-
searchers timed how long it took for a random sample of people to walk 60 feet in public areas. Postal
workers’ speed was assessed by measuring how long it took for postal workers to sell stamps.
    37
       See Heckman and Kautz (2014a).
    38
       The measure of risky and reckless behavior is based on whether adolescents engaged in any of the
following behaviors: stealing from a store, purposefully damaging property, taking something worth less
than $50, or conning someone.



                                                      14
and grade progression. These measures of non-cognitive skills predict adult outcomes with
a strength similar to measures of cognitive ability. His measures of non-cognitive skills are
commonly available from the administrative records of schools. Kautz and Zanoni (2019)
use early measures of behavior in school to predict graduation and college attendance.
   Similar to Ralph Tyler’s suggestion of using participation in extracurricular activities to
measure noncognitive skills, Lleras (2008) measures noncognitive skills in part by using tenth
grade participation in sports, academic clubs, and fine arts activities. Participation in these
activities predicts educational attainment 10 years later, even after controlling for cognitive
ability as measured by achievement tests.
   Similarly, some studies have measured self-control using psychological scales, while others
have used behavioral measures. A meta-analysis by Pratt and Cullen (2000) finds that
behavioral measures are at least as good at predicting crime as are measures based on self-
reported taxonomies. In a similar vein, Benda (2005) uses both types of measures in the same
study and finds that behavioral measures predict crime better than psychological scales.
   Hirschi and Gottfredson (1993) suggest that objective behavioral measures might be
preferred to self-reports, partly because the act of filling out a survey requires some level of
self-control. Answering survey questions is in itself a task that relies on skills beyond the
ones targeted by the survey. Similarly, any self-reported questionnaire is also based on a
behavior in two distinct ways. On the one hand, completing the questionnaire is a behavior
that could be influenced by aspects of the situation, such as through incentives to respond
in a particular way or through survey administration conditions. On the other hand, many
questionnaires require respondents to reflect on past behavior, which could in turn depend
on the situation or incentives they faced at the time. For example, one commonly-used Big
Five item asks respondents the extent to which they agree with the statement, “I see myself
as someone who tends to be lazy” (John and Srivastava, 1999b). The extent to which they
might have behaved in a lazy way might depend on the incentives they faced to work hard
at the time.


                                              15
   Some criticize this approach and argue that it is tautological to use measures of behavior
to predict other behaviors even though the measures are taken early in life to predict later
life behaviors.39 However, as suggested by Figure 1, all tasks or behaviors can be used to
infer a skill as long as the measurement accounts for other relevant skills and incentives
of the situation in which the task is performed. In addition, many of the recent studies
in economics use early measures of behaviors to predict behaviors in adulthood (see, e.g.,
Heckman et al., 2013, 2014, 2018). Self-reported scales should not be assumed to be more
reliable than behaviors, although personality psychologists often assume so. The question
is which measurements are most predictive and which can be implemented in practice. The
literature suggests that there are objective measurements of non-cognitive skills that are not
plagued by reference bias.


1.6       Measuring Economic Preferences

In economic theory, preferences for risk and time are considered to be fundamental drivers of a
wide range of decisions. Economists assume that people make choices so as to maximize their
well-being or “utility.” Attitudes toward risk are commonly embodied by the “coefficient of
risk aversion”, a parameter that governs the shape of an individual’s utility function. Risk
preference affects decisions beyond those directly related to uncertainty (such as whether
to buy insurance). Attitudes towards time are captured by discount rates. They represent
the rate that compares the value of outcomes that occur today to the value of outcomes
that occur in the future. More recently, economists have devoted increasing attention to an
expanded list of preferences such as altruism or trust, and to behavioral biases which skew
decisions.
   Choices on incentivized tasks are one way to measure preferences.40 Games and choice
tasks have been developed to elicit each preference with careful attention devoted to ensuring
  39
       See the discussion in Pratt and Cullen (2000) and Benda (2005).
  40
       See Golsteyn and Schildberg-Hörisch (2017) for a review.




                                                     16
that they are incentive compatible.41 For example attitudes toward risk are commonly
elicited by having an individual make a series of choices between a lottery and an increasing
fixed payment (see Harrison and Elisabet Rutström, 2008 for an overview). Initially, when
the fixed payment is low, most individuals will choose the lottery. They will switch to the
fixed payment once it becomes sufficiently attractive to them. The later out in the sequence
of choices when they switch, the more they are willing to tolerate risk. These tasks can be
augmented to test for various behavioral biases such as loss aversion (by making one of the
options in the lottery a negative payment, see Fehr and Goette, 2007) or certainty premium
(by replacing the fixed payment in each choice task with a second lottery, see Callen et al.,
2014). Analogously, time preference can be elicited from a series of choices between a fixed
payment today and an increasing series of payments in the future (Andersen et al., 2008),
altruism is measured as the amount that an individual would gratuitously transfer to another
person out of an endowment given to him by an experimenter (Forsythe et al., 1994), etc.
Each experimental task is designed to engage a specific preference while minimizing the role
of confounding preferences or skills on performance.
    Inferring preferences from choices which involve precise monetary tradeoffs avoids the
reference bias discussed in the previous sections. As individuals are paid according to their
choices, their decisions should be informative of their true preferences42 and can be converted
to specific preference parameters if one is willing to impose certain assumptions regarding
the underlying structure of the utility function.43 These parameters can then be compared
across schools, districts, and cultures.
    When incentivized elicitation is impractical due to logistical difficulties or budgetary con-
straints, researchers sometimes use hypothetical questions that do not offer actual payoffs.
  41
      A mechanism is said to be incentive compatible if it provides individuals with an incentive to truthfully
and fully reveal their preferences. As of now, there is no existing theory regarding incentive compatibility
in making hypothetical choices. However, there is some evidence that people have a preference for being
honest and for being seen as honest (Abeler et al., 2019).
   42
      There is evidence that the level of incentivization (stakes) also matters (see Holt and Laury, 2002).
   43
      Harrison and Swarthout (2016) show how appropriately designed experimental elicitation can be used
to empirically test competing theories of decision-making under risk which allow for various biases.



                                                      17
However, this approach can result in “hypothetical bias.”44 Some questionnaires only com-
pare hypotheticals, as in contingent evaluation surveys that ask respondents to place a value
on hypothetical choices. Others have respondents compare choices between hypothetical and
incentivized measures, i.e., between stated and revealed preference (see Harrison, 2006).
    One possible approach to avoid hypothetical bias is instrument calibration. It involves
experimentally identifying a hypothetical question or task that yields preferences that most
closely approximate those elicited in an incentivized setting. Falk et al. (2018) implement this
approach to elicit and compare economic preferences around the world. Another approach,
statistical calibration, relies on identifying differences between preferences elicited in an
incentivized and non-incentivized setting and correcting for them.45 It is best employed
when these differences vary in a systematic way with observed characteristics. Special care
needs to be taken when eliciting preferences from young children. Simple, clearly explained
games and choice tasks work best in this setting.46


1.7     Are Economists’ Preferences Psychologists’ Personality Skills?

Economists and psychologists consider preferences and personality skills respectively to be
person-specific determinants of behavior which are stable across situations. The natural
question is whether they represent two different approaches to studying the same underlying
concepts or whether they capture fundamentally separate aspects of human differences. In
the latter case combining them together would yield a more complete model for explaining
human behavior. Despite an intuitive link between certain preferences and personality skills
– risk aversion and extraversion, time preference and conscientiousness, altruism and agree-
ableness – early attempts to empirically document the hypothesized relationships yielded
mixed results (see e.g., Daly et al., 2009; Dohmen et al., 2010; Anderson et al., 2011, and
  44
      Hypothetical bias refers to differences in response between settings in which consequences are hypothet-
ical and real.
   45
      The responses from a hypothetical setting are corrected for “hypothetical bias” so as to match those
which would have been obtained in an incentivized setting (where choices would have had real consequences).
   46
      Sutter et al. (2019) provides a comprehensive summary of this literature.


                                                     18
Almlund et al. (2011) which summarizes existing literature up to the point of publication).
Indeed, Becker et al. (2012) conclude that while both preferences and personality skills pre-
dict behavior such as labor market success, health, and life satisfaction, they are only weakly
related and thus likely capture separate underlying constructs.
    Recent work by Andersson et al. (2018) and Jagelka (2018) advances this literature. They
show that failure to find a tight mapping between preferences and personality may be an
artifact of the inherent difficulty in relating two unobserved constructs, both of which are
difficult to measure.47 They demonstrate that carefully separating true preferences from
noise in observed decisions and in answers to survey questions about personality is essential
in advancing this line of research. Jagelka (2018) shows that four factors related to cognitive
ability and three related to the Big Five personality skills explain up to 50% of the variation
in both average preferences for risk and time and in individuals’ capacity to make consistent
rational choices. Variation among individuals in conscientiousness by itself explains 45% of
heterogeneity in people’s impatience and 10% of the variation in their risk aversion. Fur-
thermore, attitude towards risk is linked to both extraversion and to cognitive ability while
the latter also explains individual propensities to make mistakes (i.e., to pick options which
they in fact do not prefer).48
    Over the past decades, behavioral economists have documented numerous departures
from decision-making implied by standard preferences and rationality assumptions of neo-
classical economic theory. Individuals with lower cognitive ability are more likely to make
    47
       Other research also suggests that preferences and personality are measured with a significant amount of
error. For example, Beauchamp et al. (2017) find that adjusting for measurement error increases both the
predictive power of risk preference in terms of observed outcomes and leads to higher measured correlations
with non-cognitive skills. Castillo et al. (2018) find that only risk aversion estimates corrected for decision
error predict life outcomes.
    48
       Risk and time preferences are also related to cognitive ability; however, the relationship is likely weaker.
Higher cognitive ability is associated with more patient behavior (see for example Dohmen et al., 2018 and
Jagelka, 2018). The effect of cognitive skills on risk aversion is more controversial and there have been
studies which found a positive, negative or no link (see Dohmen et al., 2018 for a recent summary of the
literature). Andersson et al. (2018) suggests that estimated relationships may have been biased by features
of the experimental design while Jagelka (2018) shows that explicitly modelling for noise in observed choices
and survey responses flips the estimated link between cognitive ability and risk preference from negative to
positive.



                                                        19
make inconsistent choices (Choi et al., 2014), do not seem to learn efficiently by updating
their priors on probabilities which they place on outcomes when presented with new evidence
(El-Gamal and Grether, 2012), are overconfident with respect to their absolute and relative
performance (Chapman et al., 2018), and so on. The literature documents that people some-
times seem aware of these biases and are willing to pay to have their choices restrained so
that they do not regret them later (Augenblick et al., 2015).49
    The proliferation of documented patterns in deviations from rational decision-making
has led to efforts to synthesize them in a general tractable model using behavioral summary
statistics (Gabaix, 2014 and Chetty, 2015). Stango and Zinman (2019) measure 17 behavioral
biases linked to financial decision making alongside standard economic preferences, cognitive
skills, and non-cognitive skills. Most individuals in their sample display multiple behavioral
biases with the average person exhibiting 10 out of 17. They show that biases are related to
cognitive but not to non-cognitive skills. They are highly correlated with financial outcomes:
a one standard deviation increase in their summary of bias parameters is associated with an
approximately 30% decrease in subjective and objective measures of an individual’s financial
condition.
    Dean and Ortoleva (2019) present evidence that some of these biases are strongly corre-
lated with each other, but there are still multiple independent dimensions. These findings
suggest that decisions are strongly influenced by a rich interplay of preferences, biases, and
skills as well as the other factors depicted in Figure 1. Economists and psychologists have
begun to understand the drivers of heterogeneity in decisions using disparate techniques.
Evidence is mounting that there is an overlap between the economists’ system of preferences
and the psychologists’ system of personality. Interestingly, standard economic preference pa-
rameters are mainly related to non-cognitive skills while the ability to effectively implement
those preferences in practice (the quality of decision-making) is associated with cognitive
ability. Further study examining a broader array of preferences and skills will yield a more
  49
     Note that “bias” is in general measured against a maintained model of rational decision-making, which,
in fact, may not be widely accepted.


                                                    20
complete mapping and ultimately a unified set of determinants of human behavior drawing
from the strengths and insights of the two fields.


1.8     Are Non-Cognitive Skills Stable Across Situations?

Many have questioned whether there are stable non-cognitive skills, i.e., whether people
exhibit the same non-cognitive skills across different situations at a fixed point. Walter Mis-
chel’s 1968 book, Personality and Assessment, gave rise to a heated “personality–situation”
debate within psychology, which pitted social psychologists who favored situational factors
as primary determinants of behavior against personality psychologists who considered sta-
ble personality (non-cognitive) traits (skills) as more consequential. Mischel argued that
aspects of situations overshadow any effect of personality (non-cognitive) traits (skills) on
behavior. Ironically, Mischel himself later demonstrated the stability and predictive power
of non-cognitive skills over the life cycle (as measured by the performance of subjects in
demonstrating self-control in early childhood) in his celebrated “marshmallow experiment.”50
Oblivious to this evidence, behavioral economists continue to echo Mischel’s 1968 claim. (See,
e.g., Thaler et al., 2008).
    A large body of evidence reviewed in Almlund et al. (2011) shows that stable non-
cognitive skills exist and are predictive of many behaviors.51 An early paper by Epstein
(1979) presents compelling evidence that, averaging over tasks and situations, people act
in a predictable fashion with a high level of reliability of average behavior (“measured non-
cognitive skills”) across situations.52 Some non-cognitive skills show predictable patterns
over the course of a person’s life. Todd and Zhang (2019) present evidence on the life cycle
evolution of non-cognitive skills using Australian longitudinal data. People become more
  50
      A participant (usually a child) was given a marshmallow. The experimenter left the room and told
the participant that he or she would receive a second marshmallow if he or she resisted consuming the
marshmallow until the experimenter returns. The length of time that the participant waits is a measure
of short-term discounting. The children who could wait had much better lifetime outcomes. (For a recent
discussion of this study, see Mischel et al., 2011.)
   51
      See the special issue of Journal of Research in Personality (2009) entitled “Personality and Assessment
at Age 40 ” for a recent discussion.
   52 2
      R of 0.6–0.8, where R2 is a measure of variance explained.


                                                     21
conscientious with age and more agreeable, but less extraverted. Their causal study shows
that schools foster these skills. Overall, many non-cognitive skills seem to stabilize around the
age of 30, but agreeables increases thereafter. However, there is little longitudinal evidence
on the evolution of time and social preferences. See Golsteyn and Schildberg-Hörisch (2017)
for a recent summary of the literature on the stability of preferences and personality.



2     The Predictive Power of Non-Cognitive Skills

2.1    Correlational Evidence

A substantial body of evidence shows that non-cognitive skills predict a wide range of life
outcomes, including educational achievement, labor market outcomes, health, and criminal-
ity. For many outcomes, the predictive power of non-cognitive skills rivals that of measures
of cognitive ability. Of the Big Five, conscientiousness – the tendency to be organized,
responsible, and hardworking – is the most widely predictive across a variety of outcomes
(see Borghans et al., 2008; Roberts et al., 2007; Almlund et al., 2011; Heckman and Kautz,
2012). Conscientiousness predicts years of schooling with the same strength as measures of
intelligence (Almlund et al., 2011).
    Aspects of job performance are also related to academic performance. Both require com-
pleting work on a schedule and involve intelligence to varying degrees. As with academic
performance, numerous studies and meta-analyses have found that conscientiousness is as-
sociated with job performance and wages (Nyhus and Pons, 2005; Salgado, 1997; Hogan and
Holland, 2003; Barrick and Mount, 1991). Figure 4 presents correlations of the Big Five and
IQ with job performance. Of the Big Five factors, conscientiousness is the most strongly
associated with job performance but is about half as predictive as IQ. Conscientiousness,
however, may play a more ubiquitous role than IQ. The importance of IQ increases with job
complexity (the information processing requirements of the job). Cognitive skills are more
important for professors, scientists, and senior managers than for semiskilled or unskilled


                                               22
laborers (Schmidt and Hunter, 2004). The importance of conscientiousness does not vary
much with job complexity (Barrick and Mount, 1991); this suggests that it applies to a wider
spectrum of jobs.
    Recently, other measures of persistence and self-control have been advocated as new
and relevant dimensions of human potential. Grit is one of the proposed alternatives (see
Duckworth et al., 2007 and Duckworth and Quinn, 2009). However, the case for grit as an
independent dimension of human performance is, at best, weak. Credé et al. (2017) show
that grit has negligible predictive power once one controls for conscientiousness.
    Cobb-Clark et al. (2019) show in German data that self-control measured using the
“Tangney scale” (Baumeister et al., 2004) predicts better health, educational, financial, and
labor-market outcomes as well as increased self-reported life satisfaction. Using a series of
natural experiments, they show that self-control is a cause rather than a consequence of
increased schooling and that it is responsive to the overall institutional environment. Indi-
viduals who went to high school in East Germany prior to the fall of the Berlin Wall exhibit
higher levels of self-control that those who lived in West Germany. After adding controls for
cognitive ability, the Big Five, schooling, and economic preferences, the association between
self-control and labor market outcomes goes away but remains statistically significant in
explaining years of schooling, health, and life satisfaction. The authors thus conclude that
beneficial effects of self-control are largely mediated by its impact on educational attainment.
However, it is also possible that the marginal predictive power of self-control over economic
preferences and the Big Five in this study can be explained by a more precise measure of
self-control available in their data relative to other non-cognitive skills.53
  53
     The authors use 13 indicators to construct a measure of self-control, but only 3 for each of the Big Five
personality traits, and only one general question for measuring each of risk and time preference.




                                                     23
                                                                                                                       Hanushek_2011 978-0-444-53




                                                                                 Personality Psychology and Economics
                                           Figure 4 Associations with Job Performance                                                               1


                Emotional stability

                    Agreeableness

                        Extraversion

              Conscientiousness

                            Openness

                          Intelligence

                                            0             0.1            0.2            0.3             0.4            0.5            0.6
                                                                                  Correlation

Figure 1.16 Associations with Job Performance.
         Source: The correlations reported for personality skills come from a meta-analysis conducted by Barrick and Mount (1991).
         The correlation reported for intelligence comes from Schmidt and Hunter (2004).
Notes: The values for personality are correlations that were corrected for sampling error, censoring,
         Notes: The values for personality are correlations that were corrected for sampling error, censoring, and measurement error. Job
         performance was based on performance ratings, productivity data, and training proficiency. The authors do report the timing
and measurement error. Job performance was based on performance ratings, productivity data,
         of the measurements of personality relative to job performance. Of the Big Five, the coefficient on conscientiousness is the only
and training proficiency. The authors do report the timing of the measurements of personality relative
         one statistically significant, with a lower bound on the 90% credibility value of 0.10. The value for intelligence is a raw correlation.

to job performance. Of the Big Five, the coefficient on Conscientiousness is the only one statistically
significant with a lower bound on the 90% credibility value of 0.10. The value for IQ is a raw
correlation.Measures of non-cognitive skills rival IQ and measures of socioeconomic status in pre-
Source: dicting
          The correlations
                 longevity.54 reported  foral.personality
                               Roberts et                 traits
                                               (2007) review     come from
                                                              evidence from34a different
                                                                                meta-analysis
                                                                                         studies conducted
                                                                                                 on the    by
Barrick and Mount (1991). The correlation reported for IQ and job performance come from Schmidt
         predictive
and Hunter          validity of the Big Five personality measures, relative to that of cognitive ability
              (2004).
         and socioeconomic status. Most studies they survey control for relevant background factors,
    Facets related to Emotional Stability (the opposite of Neuroticism) are also important
        including gender and severity of disease. Roberts and colleagues convert the results of each
for labor market success. However, accounting for reverse causality is particularly impor-
        study into
tant because           correlation
                    strong           coefficients
                               evidence            that can
                                             suggests    thatbelabor
                                                                  compared      acrossparticipation
                                                                           market       studies. Figure can5 presents
                                                                                                                affect traits
relatedresults
          to Neuroticism            (see the
                  from their analyses.          discussion ofis aGottschalk,
                                           Conscientiousness                            2005,of in
                                                                        stronger predictor           Section
                                                                                                 longevity   than8).anySeveral
studiesother
          haveBigaddressed         thisa problem
                      Five skill and                   by using
                                          stronger predictor    thanmeasures
                                                                        either IQ orofsocioeconomic
                                                                                           personalitystatus.
                                                                                                            measured
                                                                                                                 55
                                                                                                                     In well
before general,
         individuals       enter the labor market and find that locus of control and self-esteem,
                    skills related to conscientiousness, openness to experience, and agreeableness are
two facets 54
               of Emotional Stability, predict wages ( Judge and Hurst, 2007; Drago, 2008;
              For a recent study, see Friedman and Martin (2011).
Duncan 55and       Dunifon,
              The timing           1998). Table
                           of the measurements        1.11 presents
                                                of non-cognitive             results
                                                                 skill relative        from the
                                                                                to the outcomes      structural
                                                                                                varies by study. model of
Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006), suggesting that standardized adolescent measures
of locus of control and self-esteem predict adult earnings to a similar degree as cognitive
ability. However, the effects vary across educational         24               levels. In general, their measure of
noncognitive ability (personality) affects wages to a similar degree across all education
levels, whereas cognitive ability tends to have little effect for GED recipients, high-school
      associated with longer lives.56 The magnitudes of the relationships vary across studies.
                                                                                                        Hanushek_2011 978-0-444-53444-6 00001

      Figure 5 Correlations of Mortality with Non-Cognitive Skills, IQ, and Socioeconomic Status
      (SES)
                                                                                             Personality Psychology and Economics       113


                                               0.30


                                               0.25


                                               0.20
                                 Correlation




                                               0.15


                                               0.10


                                               0.05


                                                 0
                                                      SES   IQ          C         E/PE          N           A

f0095           Figure 1.18 Correlations of Mortality with Personality, IQ, and Socioeconomic Status (SES).
                Notes: The
      Source: Roberts        figure
                        et al.       represents results from a meta-analysis of 34 studies. Average effects (in the correlation
                                (2007).
      Notes: Themetric)
                   figureofrepresents
                            low socioeconomic      status
                                        results from       (SES), low IQ,of low
                                                       a meta-analysis          Conscientiousness
                                                                             34 studies.             (C), low
                                                                                          Average effects    (inExtraversion/Positive
                                                                                                                 the correlation metric) of low
                Emotion
      socioeconomic       (E/PE),
                      status       Neuroticism
                               (SES),            (N),conscientiousness
                                       low IQ, low    and low Agreeableness
                                                                        (C), low(A)extraversion/positive
                                                                                     on mortality. Error bars    represent
                                                                                                            emotion  (E/PE),standard
                                                                                                                               neuroticism (N),
      and low agreeableness     (A) onofmortality.
                error. The lengths                 Error
                                         the studies      bars represent
                                                      represented         standard
                                                                    vary from       errors.
                                                                                1 year  to 71The lengths of the studies represented vary from
                                                                                              years.
      1 year to 71 years.
                Source: Roberts, Kuncel, Shiner, Caspi, and Goldberg (2007).

p1495               Personality may affect health-related behavior, such as smoking, diet, and exercise.
                For
          Of the Big example,
                           Five,Hampson,      Goldberg, and
                                   conscientiousness      Vogt,agreeableness
                                                                  and Dubanoskiare   (2007)
                                                                                       mostfind   that highofscores
                                                                                              predictive         criminality.
                of teacher assessments of Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness during
      In a sample       of at-risk
                elementary     schoolyouth,
                                       predict boys
                                               overallwho   committed
                                                       health   behaviors severe     delinquent
                                                                            during midlife          behaviorsmore
                                                                                             (less smoking,       were more
                exercise, better self-rated health) and indirectly affect health through educational attain-
      than threement.quarters
                       203        of a standard
                            The effects  that were deviation
                                                   statistically lower   in agreeableness
                                                                 significant at the 5% level and    conscientiousness,
                                                                                               or less ranged from         as
      measured  0.06byformothers’
                           the effectreports
                                       of Extraversion
                                               at age 12 on orphysical  activity
                                                                 13, than    boysto who
                                                                                     0.12 had
                                                                                          for the   effectorofno
                                                                                                minor          Con-
                                                                                                                  delinquent
                scientiousness on self-reported health status. Both the initial level and the growth in
      behaviors      up to
                hostility      that ofage
                           (a facet        (John et throughout
                                       Neuroticism)    al., 1994). elementary
                                                                        Non-cognitive     skills also
                                                                                   school predict         predict
                                                                                                    cigarette, alco-financial
                hol, and marijuana use in high school, and sociability (a trait related to Extraversion)
      outcomes.      For example,
                predicts    drinking buthouseholds    with a(Hampson,
                                            not smoking        high internal     locus of
                                                                            Tildesley,     control57Luyckx,
                                                                                        Andrews,        save moreand of their
                Mroczek, 2010). As Fig. 1.19 illustrates, Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua (2006) find that
      income (Cobb-Clark et al., 2016).
                their personality factor affects the probability of daily smoking for males. The gradient is
         56
            See steepest
                 Friedman at and
                              the Martin
                                  high and   low quantiles
                                          (2011); Martin etofal.the  distribution.
                                                                  (2007);  Kern and Friedman (2008); Mroczek and Spiro
     (2007); Boyle et al. (2005); Schulz et al. (1996); Kubzansky et al. (2001) .
        57
           Judge et al. (2002) find that locus of control is highly related to emotional stability which is the
              203
     inverse
fn1020            Conti, Heckman,Indeed,
             of neuroticism.        and Urzuathey
                                               (2010a,b)
                                                   say and
                                                         thatHeckman, Humphries,
                                                               “measures           Urzua, and
                                                                            purporting      to Veramendi (2011) present locus
                                                                                                assess self-esteem,      evidenceof control,
     neuroticism,onand
                    the causal relationship
                         generalized        between education
                                         self-efficacy   may and health, and of
                                                              be markers     alsothe
                                                                                  survey the previous
                                                                                      same   higher literature on this question.
                                                                                                      order concept.”


                                                                        25
   There is a growing literature in economics on the predictive power of economic prefer-
ences and behavioral biases. Falk et al. (2018) conduct a comprehensive survey-based study
of economic preferences across the world. They find that contemporaneous measures of
preferences within countries are correlated with savings decisions, labor market choices, and
prosocial behaviors. Furthermore, they present some evidence that differences in preferences
across countries are related to differences in per capita income, entrepreneurial activities,
and the frequency of armed conflicts. Choi et al. (2014) show that a 1 standard deviation in-
crease in choice inconsistency is associated with an almost 20% increase in household wealth.
Stango and Zinman (2019) find a similar impact of an increase in the number of exhibited
behavioral biases on objective and subjective measures of financial well-being.
   There is comparatively little evidence on the predictive power of early measures of prefer-
ences on later life outcomes. Golsteyn et al. (2014) show that survey-based time preferences
elicited in Swedish data at age 13 predict outcomes decades later, mirroring the findings
from Mischel’s marshmallow study. In fact the impact seems to grow over time. Individuals
who were more patient at age 13 had higher grades through high school and college, higher
incomes, a lower probability of being unemployed, lower obesity, and a lower likelihood of
dying before the age of 50. The effects are heterogenous and the association between early
measures of patience and outcomes seems to be mediated by increased investments in human
capital. Cadena and Keys (2015) confirm the link between patience and human capital accu-
mulation using U.S. data. They find that impatience is related to time-inconsistent behavior
such as dropping out of college after having already attended it for 3 years and conjecture
that present bias (or short-run impatience) is the main culprit. Not only do impatient in-
dividuals accumulate less human capital and thus earn less, they also tend to express more
regret later in life.
   Accounting for randomness in observed decisions seems crucial and offers a promising av-
enue for future research. A large body of previous literature treated estimates of preferences
and skills as if they were error-free. This is a strong assumption. Beauchamp et al. (2017)


                                             26
show in a study of twins that accounting for measurement error increases the predictive
power of estimates of risk preferences. Lower risk aversion is related to more risky financial
decisions, a higher probability of owning a business but also higher alcohol consumption and
more smoking. Castillo et al. (2018) find that after correcting for decision error, more risk
averse 8th graders in Georgia, USA have fewer behavioral problems a year later and are more
likely to graduate from high school.58
    As with most studies in personality psychology, the evidence presented in Figures 4–5
and most of the literature do not address the question of causality; that is, do measured
skills cause (rather than just predict) outcomes? Empirical associations are not a reliable
basis for policy analysis. As previously noted (see Figure 1), multiple skills and effort all
generate performance in a given task. Many studies in personality psychology do not control
for all of the factors that produce performance on measured tasks. They equate measures
of outcomes with the skill being measured.59 This practice can lead to a substantial bias in
inference about the importance of any particular skill. The discussion of the GED program
and survey of the intervention literature in the section 3 presents evidence on the causal
relationship between skills and outcomes.


2.2     The Skills Needed for Success in the Labor Market

Another perspective on the importance of non-cognitive skills comes from surveys of em-
ployers and workers. In a 1991 American report, the Secretary’s Commission on Achieving
Necessary Skills (SCANS) conducted an extensive analysis of which skills workers needed
in the American workforce.60 The Commission researched the literature, consulted with ex-
perts, and conducted detailed interviews with workers and/or supervisors in 50 occupations.
The interviews rated the importance of various skills in the context of illustrative tasks and
  58
      Castillo et al. (2011) showed that higher patience was also associated with fewer disciplinary referrals
at school.
   59
      Selecting measures and verifying them is part of the mysterious and inherently subjective process of
“construct validity” in psychology. For a discussion, see Borghans et al. (2008)
   60
      Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (1992).



                                                     27
tools on the job. Using these sources, the Commission categorized necessary skills into basic
skills, thinking skills, personal qualities, and a set of workplace competencies. In addition to
reading, writing, and math skills, basic skills include listening and speaking. The thinking
skills cover creative thinking, decision making, problem solving, reasoning, and the ability to
learn. SCANS specifies that personal qualities include responsibility, self-esteem, sociability,
self-management, integrity, and honesty. SCANS identifies five groups of workplace compe-
tencies: the ability to allocate resources (time, money, facilities), interpersonal skills (such
as teamwork, teaching others, leadership), the ability to acquire and to use information, the
ability to understand systems, and the ability to work well with technology.
   Furthermore, some authors claim that the importance of social skills for success in the
labor market is increasing. Deming (2017) claims that between 1980 and 2012, jobs requir-
ing high levels of social interaction grew by nearly 12 percentage points as a share of the
U.S. labor force. Social skills are complementary to cognitive skills and jobs which require
a combination of both have become increasingly prevalent. Given the increased automatiz-
ing of the production process, social skills are at the heart of the remaining advantage of
humans over machines. They allow workers to coordinate tasks more efficiently and thus
to specialize in those tasks in which they are relative more productive. Accordingly, the
labor market return to social skills was much greater in the 2000s than in the mid-1980s
and 1990s while that of cognitive skills has declined slightly. However, Deming’s estimates
have been challenged and appear to be sensitive to alternative treatments of the same data.
Caines et al. (2017a) show that the greatest growth in economic returns accrue to bundles
of cognitive and non-cognitive skills and not to either separately. This is consistent with the
pioneering work of Mandelbrot (1962).
   Employer surveys reinforce the importance of skills that go well beyond academic skills.
In a survey of 3,200 employers in four large metropolitan areas in the Unites States, employ-
ers reported that such personal qualities as responsibility, integrity, and self-management
are as important as or more important than basic skills (Holzer, 1997). In another employer


                                              28
survey undertaken in the mid-1990s of 3,300 businesses (the National Employer Survey),
employers ranked attitude, communication skills, previous work experience, employer rec-
ommendations, and industry-based credentials above years of schooling, grades, and test
scores as part of the skills needed for success in the workplace (Zemsky, 1997).
   Non-cognitive skills are especially critical for entry level and hourly workers. Of employers
drawn from a national sample in the United States in 1996, 69% reported rejecting hourly
applicants because they lacked basic employability skills, such as showing up every day,
coming to work on time, and having a strong work ethic. This percentage is more than
double the percentage of rejecting applicants due to inadequate reading and writing skills.
Rejections for not passing a drug test were almost as common as rejections for lack of
literacy skills.61 In a 2007 survey of employers in Washington State, about 60% reported
difficulty in hiring. They experienced less difficulty finding workers with adequate reading,
writing, and math skills than with appropriate occupational, problem solving, teamwork,
communication, and adaptability skills as well as positive work habits and a willingness to
accept supervision.62
   Evidence from the United Kingdom supports these findings. A 1998 survey of 4,000
employers found that the four skills found most lacking in 16 to 24-year-olds were technical
and practical skills, general communication skills, customer handling skills, and teamwork
skills.63 At the bottom of the list were numeracy and literacy skills. In a 2002 survey of 4,000
employers in the UK, 23% of employers reported a significant number of their staff were less
than fully proficient at their jobs. Skill shortfalls were most common in communication,
teamwork, other technical and practical skills, customer handling, and problem solving and
least common in numeracy and literacy.64
   Consistent with these findings, the Confederation of British Industry defines employa-
bility as (1) values and attitudes compatible with the work, including a desire to learn, to
  61
     Barton (2006).
  62
     Washington Workforce Training Board (2008).
  63
     Westwood (2004).
  64
     Hillage et al. (2002).


                                                   29
apply that learning, to improve, and to take advantage of change; (2) basic skills (literacy
and numeracy); (3) key skills (communication, application of numbers, information technol-
ogy, improving one’s own learning and performance, working with others, problem solving)
sufficient for the needs of the work; (4) other generic skills such as modern language and
customer service skills; and (5) job-specific skills and the ability to manage one’s own career.
   An ethnographic approach provides some revealing examples of how skills are used in
context and how nonacademic skills are often developed and used as part of a “community
of practice”.65 In addition to formal knowledge, Nelsen (1997) points out that workplaces
require facts, principles, theories, and math and writing skills, but also informal knowledge
embodied in heuristics, work styles, and contextualized understanding of tools and tech-
niques. In her revealing case study of auto repair workers, Nelsen argues that social skills
of new workers are very important for learning the informal knowledge of experienced work-
ers, as captured in stories, advice, and guided practice. For a more recent discussion, see
Garcı́a (2014). The Atlanta Federal Reserve (Jones, 2018) recently issued a comprehensive
assessment of workforce improvement strategies that include mentoring and fostering social
skills of prospective workers. This reflects the growing understanding of the importance of
multiple skills in the labor market and highlights the need to measure them appropriately.
   Differences in personality and preferences appear to be responsible for some of the appar-
ent puzzles concerning wage disparities between individuals and groups of individuals. Using
Australian data, Cobb-Clark and Tan (2011) show that sorting into occupations by gender is
in part driven by different sector-specific returns to non-cognitive skills for men and women.
However, they find that the wage gap is largely driven by disparities for men and women
within occupations.66 Caliendo et al. (2015) explicitly model for the job search process and
allow it to depend on an individual’s locus of control and other characteristics. Using data
from a German survey of the newly-unemployed, they find that people with a higher locus
of control believe that effort in searching for a job is more productive. Accordingly, they
  65
       Stasz (2001).
  66
       Antecol and A.Cobb-Clark (2013) corroborate these findings using US data.


                                                    30
search more intensely and have higher reservation wages67 than those with a lower locus
of control. Flinn et al. (2019) build on this research, use the same dataset, and add wage
bargaining which turns out to be important in explaining the gender wage gap. They show
that heterogeneity in endowments of non-cognitive skills and in their valuations on the labor
market largely account for the much discussed disparity. Specifically, women tend to score
higher on agreeableness than men and are penalized for it in the wage bargaining process.
Furthermore, men are compensated more highly for conscientiousness which is an important
contributor to productivity.


2.3       Evidence from the GED Testing Program

Studies of the GED testing program provide additional causal evidence on the effect of non-
cognitive skills on life-relevant outcomes. The GED is a standardized achievement test that
serves as an alternative to a high school diploma. High school dropouts can take the seven-
hour GED exam to certify that they have the “general knowledge” of a high school graduate.
The test was widely used but is now in decline. The GED testing program produced as many
as 12% of high school certificates issued each year in the United States. The GED program
provides insight into the effects of personality skills on outcomes. GED recipients have the
same cognitive skill as high school graduates, but differ in their non-cognitive skills (see
Heckman et al., 2014).
   Table 1 displays the “validity” of the GED test as analyzed by psychometricians. It gives
correlations between GED scores and other achievement test scores. GED test scores are
strongly correlated with scores on other standardized achievement tests. The correlations
range from 0.61 with the General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB) to 0.88 with the Iowa Test
of Educational Development, the progenitor of the GED. By the standards of psychometrics,
the GED test is “valid.”
  67
       A reservation wage is the minimum wage for which a person is willing to accept a job.




                                                     31
                                      Table 1 Validities of GED Test


        Test                                                Correlation       Source(s)

                                                                          †
        Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT)              0.75 - 0.79       Means and Laurence (1984)

                                                                   †
        Iowa Test of Educational Development                0.88              Means and Laurence (1984)

                                                                   †
        ACT                                                 0.80              Means and Laurence (1984)

                                                                   †
        Adult Performance Level (APL) Survey                0.81              Means and Laurence (1984)

                                                                   †
        New York’s Degrees of Reading Power (DRP) Test      0.77              Means and Laurence (1984)

        Test of Adult Basic Education (TABE)                0.66-0.68†        Means and Laurence (1984)

        General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB)                0.61-0.67†        Means and Laurence (1984)

                                                                   ‡
        National Adult Literacy Survey (NALS) factor        0.78              Baldwin (1995)



† Uses mean GED subtest scores
‡ Uses a general GED factor




    By psychometric standards, GED recipients have higher skills than other dropouts. Fig-
ures 6a and b shows the distributions of a factor extracted from the components of the Armed
Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) for male high school dropouts, GED recip-
ients, and high school graduates.68 The sample excludes people who attend post-secondary
education. The distribution of the scores of GED recipients is much more like that of high
school graduates than that of high school dropouts.
   68
        Similar results are found for females.




                                                       32
                            Figure 6 Cognitive ability by educational status


                         (a) Males                                                    (b) Females




Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al. (2011), which uses data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979
(NLSY79). Notes: The distributions above represent cognitive ability factors estimated using a subset of the Armed Services
Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) and educational attainment as laid out in Hansen et al. (2004). The sample is restricted
to the cross-sectional subsample for both males and females. Distributions show only those with no post-secondary educational
attainment. The cognitive ability factors are normalized by gender to be mean zero standard deviation one.



    If they have the same cognitive ability as high school graduates, then why do they drop
out of high school? Success in school requires other skills. On a variety of other dimensions,
GED recipients behave much more like other dropouts. Figure 7 shows measures of early
adolescent drug use, crime, sex, and violence extracted from three data sources.69 Male
high school graduates perform better on all measures than high school dropouts or GED
recipients. GED recipients are much more similar to dropouts, but in several cases are
statistically significantly more likely to engage in risky behaviors than other dropouts. On no
outcome measure in that figure are dropouts statistically significantly more likely to engage
in risky behaviors compared to GED recipients. Figures 8a and b summarize these adolescent
behaviors using a single factor and shows that unlike the cognitive summary measures, the
distribution of the noncognitive (personality) summary measure of GED recipients is much
closer to that of dropouts than to that of high school graduates.
   69
     See National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79), National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
1997 (NLSY97), and National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS). For discussion of these data sets,
see Heckman et al. (2014).




                                                            33
Figure 7 Measures of Adolescent Behaviors for Male Dropouts, GED Recipients, and High
School Graduates


                    (a) Smoking and Drinking                                                         (b) Sex and Violent Behavior




                                                                                     .6
  .6




                                                                                     .4
  .4




                                                                                     .2
  .2
  0




                                                                                     0
          Smokes       Drinks    Smokes       Drinks    Smokes   Binge Drinks                        Sex             Fight         Gang     School Fight
           by 15       by 15      by 14       by 14      Gr.8       Gr.10                           by 15            by 14         by 14       Gr.8
         (NLSY79)    (NLSY79)   (NLSY97)    (NLSY97)    (NELS)     (NELS)                         (NLSY79)         (NLSY97)      (NLSY97)     (NELS)

                Drop             GED              HSG              +/− S.E.                           Drop                 GED      HSG         +/− S.E.




                                                                (c) Criminal Behavior
                                           .8
                                           .6
                                           .4
                                           .2
                                           0




                                                   Minor      Major       Violent      Arrested    Prop Crime     Theft
                                                   Crime      Crime        Crime        by 14         by 14       by 14
                                                 (NLSY79)   (NLSY79)     (NLSY79)     (NLSY97)     (NLSY97)     (NLSY97)

                                                         Drop                 GED            HSG                +/− S.E.




Sources: Heckman et al. (2014, Chapter 3). National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979, National Longitudinal Survey
of Youth 1997, National Educational Longitudinal Survey. Notes: Minor crime includes vandalism, shoplifting, petty theft,
fraud, holding or selling stolen goods. Major crime includes auto theft, breaking/entering private property, grand theft. Violent
crime includes fighting, assault, aggravated assault. Tests of Significance: The estimates for GED recipients and high
school graduates are statistically significantly different at the 5% level for all variables. The estimates for dropouts and high
school graduates are statistically significantly different at the 5% level for all variables, except for “Minor Crime (NLSY79)”
and “Drinks by 14 (NLSY97).” The estimates of “Smokes by 14 (NLSY97),” “Drinks by 14 (NLSY97),” and “Theft by 14
(NLSY97)” between GED recipients and dropouts are statistically significantly different at the 5% level.



       Figures 8a and b shows the distribution of a factor summarizing the diverse measures of
adolescent risky behavior for dropouts, GED recipients, and high school graduates. On this


                                                                                34
index, GED recipients are nearly identical to high school dropouts.

Figure 8 Distribution of Non-Cognitive Skills by Education Group and Distribution of a
Summary Measure of Noncognitive Ability by Education Group


                          (a) Males                                                     (b) Females




Source: Reproduced from Heckman et al. (2011), which uses data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1979
(NLSY79). Notes: The distributions above represent non-cognitive ability factors estimated using measures of early violent
crime, minor crime, marijuana use, regular smoking, drinking, early sexual intercourse, and educational attainment as in Hansen
et al. (2004). Sample restricted to the cross-sectional subsample for both males and females. Distributions show only those with
no post-secondary educational attainment. The non-cognitive ability factors normalized to be mean zero standard deviation
one.



    The skills that cause GED recipients to drop out of high school manifest themselves in
many other life outcomes. One potential benefit of the GED certificate is that it opens
doors to post-secondary education. Figure 9 shows post-secondary educational attainment
for GED recipients and high school graduates. About 40% of GED recipients enroll in a 2-
or 4- year college. Nearly half drop out within the first year. Only 3-4% earn a BA or AA
degree by age 40.




                                                              35
Figure 9 Post-Secondary Educational Attainment Across Education Groups Through Age
40 (NLSY79) - Males




                                   .8
                                   .6
                      Proportion
                                   .4
                                   .2
                                   0




                                        Some   Some Coll, More        A.A.              B.A.
                                        Coll     Than 1 Year

                                                   GED              HSG              S.E.



Sources: Heckman et al. (2014, Chapter 4). National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. Notes: The graph shows post-
secondary educational attainment of GED recipients and high school graduates. Variable Definitions: “Some College”
represents people who entered any post-secondary institution ever. “Some College, More Than a Year” represents people who
completed at least a year of some post-secondary education ever. “A.A.” represents people who obtained associate’s degrees
ever. “B.A.” represents people who obtained bachelor’s degrees ever. “B.A.” also includes people with higher education: M.A.
Ph.D and professional degrees. Tests of Significance: The estimates for GED recipients and high school graduates are
statistically significantly different at the 5% level for all but attainment of the A.A. degree.



    GED recipients lack persistence in a variety of tasks in life. Figure 10 shows the survival
rates in employment (overall), employment in a given job, marriage, and in the condition of
not having been incarcerated. GED recipients tend to exit employment, become divorced,
and enter jail at rates similar to those of high school dropouts, while high school graduates
are much more persistent.




                                                            36
Figure 10 Survival Rates in Various States for Male Dropouts, GED Recipients, and High
School Graduates

                                              (a) Survival Rate in Employment                                                                    (b) Survival Rate in Staying on a Job

                                     1                                                                                                          1
   Survival Rate in Employed State




                                                                                                      Survival Rate in Current Job
                                                                                                                                                .8
                                     .8


                                                                                                                                                .6
                                     .6

                                                                                                                                                .4
                                     .4
                                                                                                                                                .2

                                     .2
                                                                                                                                                0
                                          1      2   3    4        5      6       7      8   9   10                                                      1       2   3    4        5      6       7      8   9   10
                                                          Years Since Start of Spell                                                                                      Years Since Start of Spell
                                                         Dropout        GED            HSG                                                                               Dropout        GED            HSG




                                               (c) Survival Rate in Marriage                                                                    (d) Survival Rate in Staying Out of Jail

                                     1                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                      Survival Rate in Non−Incarcerated State
   Survival Rate in Marriage




                                     .8                                                                                                         .95




                                     .6                                                                                                          .9




                                     .4                                                                                                         .85
                                          1      2   3    4        5      6       7      8   9   10                                                          1   2   3     4       5      6       7      8   9   10
                                                          Years Since Start of Spell                                                                                      Years Since Start of Spell
                                                         Dropout        GED            HSG                                                                               Dropout         GED           HSG




Source: Heckman et al. (2014, Chapter 4). National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79), nationally representative
cross sectional sample. Notes: The spell to first time being incarcerated begins in the first year that individuals exit school.
Tests of Significance: The estimates for GED recipients and high school graduates are statistically significantly different at
the 5% level for all but the 2nd year of “Survival Rate in Not Having Been Incarcerated.” The estimates for dropouts and high
school graduates are statistically significantly different at the 5% level for all but the 2nd year of “Survival Rate in Not Having
Been Incarcerated.” The estimates for dropouts and GED are statistically only significantly different at the 5% level for the
5th year of the “Survival Rate in Marriage.”



                                     Adjusting for their differences in cognitive ability, male GED recipients perform virtually
the same as high school dropouts in the labor market. Figure 11 shows the hourly wages
and annual earnings of male GED recipients and high school graduates compared to high
school dropouts for different age groups. The first set of bars shows the outcomes after
adjusting for age, race, and region of residence. The second set of bars shows the effects


                                                                                                                          37
after additionally adjusting for scores on the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT). The
third set of bars shows the effects after additionally adjusting for standard measures of family
background. GED recipients and high school graduates outperform dropouts in regressions
that only adjust for age, race, and region of residence. After adjusting for cognitive ability,
GED recipients are indistinguishable from dropouts, whereas high school graduates earn
more and have higher hourly wages. Adjusting for family background characteristics does
not change the story.70
  70
      Most of the patterns found for women parallel those found for men. However, there are some important
differences.71 While female GED recipients share similar cognitive and personality skills as male GED
recipients, their outcomes differ. After accounting for differences in cognitive ability, female GED recipients
do not earn higher hourly wages than other dropouts, but unlike men they have higher annual earnings
because they are more likely to participate in the labor force. The increased labor supply response is largely
due to female GED recipients who attain some post-secondary education or who have dropped out of high
school due to pregnancy. See Heckman et al. (2014) for a full discussion of the evidence on the performance
of GED recipients.




                                                      38
          Figure 11 Labor Market Outcomes Differences - By Age - NLSY79 - Males

                                                                 (a) Annual Earnings




                                          30000
                                          20000
                        Annual Earnings
                                          10000
                                          0




                                                  Raw Abil BG     Raw Abil BG    Raw Abil BG      Raw Abil BG
                                                  Age 20 to 24    Age 25 to 29   Age 30 to 34      Age 35 to 39

                                                                    GED          HSG            S.E.




                                                                  (b) Hourly Wage
                                          10
                                          5
                        Hourly Wage
                                          0
                                          −5




                                                  Raw Abil BG     Raw Abil BG    Raw Abil BG      Raw Abil BG
                                                  Age 20 to 24    Age 25 to 29   Age 30 to 34      Age 35 to 39

                                                                    GED          HSG            S.E.




Source: Heckman et al. (2014, Chapter 3). National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. Controls: “Raw” – age, race,
and region of residence; “Abil” –age, race, region of residence, and AFQT adjusted for schooling at time of test; “BG” –
mother’s highest grade completed, urban status at age 14, family income in 1978, broken home status at age 14, south at age
14, AFQT, and factors based on adolescent behavioral measures, crime and school performance. Regressions exclude those
reporting earning more than $300,000 or working more than 4,000 hours. Notes: All regressions allow for heteroskedastic
errors and when appropriate clustering at the individual level.




                                                                           39
3         Causal Evidence from Intervention Studies

Predictive studies do not establish causality. Most studies in personality psychology do
not address the question of causality, i.e., whether measured skills cause (rather than just
predict) outcomes. Empirical associations are not a reliable basis for policy analysis. In this
section, we discuss difficulties in establishing causality. We also summarize several studies
that provide evidence that personality skills cause outcomes.
     We introduce a simple framework to analyze the effect of skills on outcomes and how
skills evolve over time.72 Equation (1) shows how an outcome at age a, Ta , which is the
performance on a task, depends on cognition Ca , personality Pa , other acquired skills such
as education and job training Ka , and the effort allocated to the task eTa :




                      Ta          = φa (     Ca ,         Pa , Ka ,                  eTa ) a = 1, . . . , A.   (1)
                     |{z}                   |{z}         |{z}  |{z}                 |{z}
                  Outcome on a             Cognition   Personality     Other        Effort
                  task at age a                                       acquired    devoted to
                                                                        skills       task


Equation (2) shows how the effort allocated to task Ta depends on cognition Ca , personality
Pa , other acquired skills Ka , incentives RTa , and preferences Υa :


                                   eTa = ψTa (Ca , Pa , Ka ,           RTa ,          Υa        ).             (2)
                                                                       |{z}          |{z}
                                                                     Incentives   Preferences
                                                                     to perform
                                                                       on task


This representation distinguishes preferences from skills, although as previously noted, the
two are likely closely related. Their relationship is an ongoing topic of research.
     The effort applied to a task is the outcome of a choice problem that depends on skills,
preferences, and incentives, much like a supply equation in the standard economic theory
of consumer choice. Preferences can be thought of as additional skills. Some psychological
theories posit that people have limited effort that they can divide among different tasks (see,
    72
         This framework draws on Almlund et al. (2011).


                                                               40
e.g., Baumeister and Tierney, 2011).
   Equations (1) and (2) formalize the difficulty in establishing causal relationships between
outcomes and skills. Multiple skills and effort generate performance in a given task. Many
studies in psychology and economics do not control for these inputs and equate measurement
of a set of outcomes with the skill the analyst is trying to measure.73 This practice can lead
to a substantial bias in inference about any particular skill.
   In addition, most studies assume a linear or at least monotonic relationship between
outcomes and skills. This practice is particularly problematic for measuring personality
skills, where the effect of a skill on an outcome is not always linear or monotonic. Too
much of a good thing can be bad. For example, extreme levels of skills are associated with
psychopathologies. High levels of conscientiousness are associated with obsessive-compulsive
disorder, which hinders task performance (Samuel and Widiger, 2008). Nonlinearities can
also arise when skills and incentives interact, as in the analyses of Borghans et al. (2008)
and Segal (2008) who show that people with different personality skills respond differently
to incentives on tests.74
   Skills evolve over time through investment and habituation.75 Equation (3) shows that
skills at age a + 1 are age-dependent functions of cognitive ability, personality skills, other
acquired skills, and investment Ia at age a. In this way, previous levels of skills and acquired
skill affect current levels of skills and acquired skill. Equation (3) formalizes the notion that
skills governing performance at a point in time are themselves the outcome of investment
and habituation:


          (Ca+1 , Pa+1 , Ka+1 ) = ηa (Ca , Pa , Ka ,             Ia ),         a = 1, . . . , A.     (3)
                                                                |{z}
                                                              Investment
                                                                 and
                                                              experience

  73
      Selecting measures and verifying them is part of the sometimes mysterious and inherently subjective
process of “construct validity” in psychology. For a discussion, see Borghans et al. (2008).
   74                              ∂ 2 ψTa
      Formally, this occurs when ∂Pa ∂R  Ta
                                            6= 0.
   75
      Todd and Wolpin (2006) find that differences in parental investment (home inputs) explain almost a
third of the Black-White and Hispanic-White achievement gap. See also Cunha and Heckman (2008a).


                                                   41
In conjunction with resource constraints, a “deeper” set of preference parameters at age a
may govern investment decisions and effort allocated to tasks. See Figure 12 for a schematic.
   In addition, investment today increases the stock of future skills, which in turn increases
the return to future investments. Economists call this phenomenon dynamic complementar-
ity. This channel increases the returns to early investments because it makes future invest-
ments more productive. For this reason, Cunha et al. (2010) show that it is economically
efficient to invest in the most disadvantaged young children because it raises their payoffs
from future investments. Heckman and Mosso (2014) present a more complete discussion of
static and dynamic complementarity and a formal proof of when early investment is more
effective compared to later investment.
   An important extension of this modelling approach is that performance on current tasks
themselves can depend directly on performance of past tasks independently of a person’s skills
or effort. This embodies the idea of habituation that was discussed by Aristotle76 : constant
practice of moral behavior can make persons moral habitually. Formally, Equation (1) can
be modified as:


                                        0                      0
                                Ta = φa (Ca , Pa , Ka , eTa , Ta−1 )                        (4)

           0
where Ta−1 might represent a fundamentally different task that measures the same set of
                       0
skills. For example, Ta−1 could represent the number of course credits that a student earns
and Ta could represent graduating from high school. Both are valid measures of skills. As
suggested by Jackson (2018) and Kautz and Zanoni (2019), credits earned is a valid measure
of non-cognitive skills because successfully completing courses depends on non-cognitive
skills. Similarly, as argued by Heckman et al. (2014), graduating from high school is a task
that depends in part on non-cognitive skills (see d, Section III). A complication arises because
students who earn more credits in 9th grade might be more likely to graduate from high school
in part because they have higher levels of skills, but also because high school graduation is
  76
       Ross (1956)


                                                42
                                                                      0
a direct function of credits earned. More generally, task Ta−1 captures something other than
the underlying skills of students that can affect performance on Ta . Econometric methods can
separate the direct of past measures from the effect of skills (Athans and Falb, 2013; Granger,
1969; Heckman, 1981a,c,b; Harvey, 1989; Torgovitsky, 2015; Williams, 2018). Models of this
type are also common in the economics literature and are beneficial, because they capture
learning (Becker and Murphy, 1988; Hai and Heckman, 2019; Pollak, 1976).

                Figure 12 Framework for Understanding Skill Development



                      Prenatal                    Inherited               Prenatal
                    Investments                     Traits




                                                   Skills                   Birth
                       Parenting,
                   Self Investments,
                 Environment, School

                                                   Skills                 Childhood
                      Parenting,
                  Self Investments,
                Environment, School
                                                   Skills                 Adulthood




               Higher Education        Earnings               Crime         Health




   This framework recognizes that different skills might be relatively easy to shape at differ-
ent stages of the life cycle. Sensitive periods for a given skill are periods when investments are
relatively more productive. Critical periods for a particular skill are periods when investment
during any other period is not productive.
   Figure 12 illustrates why understanding the effects attributable to specific interventions


                                                    43
is such a challenging task. Most empirical studies only investigate the interventions aimed
at one slice of the life cycle. They do not connect the links in the figure or correct for
the effects of later investment in producing the outcomes attributed to early investments.
One important area for future research on skill formation is to better document how early
interventions influence the efficacy of later interventions.


3.1     Evidence from The Perry Preschool Program and Other In-

        terventions

Evidence from the Perry Preschool Program shows how non-cognitive skills can be changed
in ways that produce beneficial lifetime outcomes. The Perry Preschool Program enriched
the lives of three- and four-year-old low-income Black children with initial IQs below 85 at
age 3.77
    Participants were taught social skills in a “plan-do-review” sequence where students
planned a task, executed it, and then reviewed it with teachers and fellow students. They
learned to work with others when problems arose.78 In addition, home visits promoted
parent-child interactions. The program ended after two years of enrollment and both treat-
ments and controls entered the same school. The program was evaluated by the method of
random assignment.
    The program did not improve IQ scores in a lasting way. Figure 13 shows that, by
age ten, treatment and control groups had the same average IQ scores. Many critics of
early childhood programs seize on this finding and related evidence to dismiss the value of
early intervention studies. Similar evidence from Head Start programs and a faith in IQ
as a central determinant of life success strongly influenced Arthur Jensen’s views about the
genetic determination of skills (Jensen, 1969).
  77
     We draw on the analysis of Heckman et al. (2008).
  78
     Sylva (1997) describes the Perry program as a Vygotskian program fostering personality skills. Vygotsky
developed a psychology of child development in structured social settings that emphasized development of
social and personality skills.



                                                    44
             Figure 13 Perry Preschool Program: IQ, by Age and Treatment Group


           100
                              95.5
                                               94.9
            95
                                                            91.3           91.7
            90                                                                         88.1         87.7
    IQ




                                                                          87.1                                     85
            85                                               86.3                      86.9        86.8
                                                                                                              84.6
                                83.3          83.5
                  79.6
            80
                                                                                               Treatment group
                   78.5                                                                        Control group
            75
                 Entry          4             5             6            7             8             9             10
                                                                 Age


Notes: IQ measured on the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale (Terman and Merrill, 1960). The test was administered at program
entry and at each of the ages indicated. Source: Cunha et al. (2006) and Heckman and Masterov (2007) based on data provided
by the High Scope Foundation.



    Nevertheless, the program improved outcomes for both boys and girls, resulting in a
statistically significant rate of return of around 6-10% per annum for both boys and girls.
(See Heckman et al., 2010.) These returns are above the post-World War II, pre-2008
meltdown in stock market returns to equity estimated to be 5.8% per annum.79
    The Perry Preschool Program worked primarily through improving personality skills.
Participants had better direct measures of personal behavior (a weighted average of “ab-
sences and truancies,” “lying and cheating,” “stealing,” and “swears or uses obscene words”
measured by teachers in the elementary school years). Participants of both genders improved
their “externalizing behavior,” a psychological construct related to agreeableness and consci-
entiousness. For girls, the program improved openness to experience (proxied by academic
motivation). The program also improved scores on the California Achievement Test (CAT).
This evidence supports the evidence previously presented that shows that performance on
   79
        See DeLong and Magin (2009).



                                                            45
achievement tests depends in part on personality skills. Arthur Jensen’s lifetime campaign
against early intervention program was based on using faulty measures of relevant lifetime
skills.
    Other studies are broadly consistent with the evidence from the Perry Preschool study.
Analyses of data from Project STAR, a program that randomly assigned kindergartners and
teachers to classes of different sizes, yields results similar to the Perry Program. Using data
from Project STAR, Dee and West (2011) find that assignment to a small class is associated
with positive changes in personality. In a follow-up analysis, Chetty et al. (2011) examine
the Project STAR program and find that students placed in higher quality kindergarten
classes–as measured by their peer’s average performance on a Stanford Achievement Test–
had significantly higher earnings in early adulthood.
    The curriculum of Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies (PATHS) teaches self-
control, emotional awareness, and social problem-solving skills and is aimed at elementary
school children (see Bierman et al., 2010). A recent random-assignment, longitudinal study
demonstrates that the PATHS curriculum reduces teacher and peer ratings of aggression,
improves teacher and peer ratings of prosocial behavior, and improves teacher ratings of
academic engagement.80 PATHS is an exemplar of school-based social and emotional learning
(SEL) programs. A recent meta-analysis shows that the program improved grades by 0.33
standard deviations and achievement test scores by 0.27 standard deviations.(Durlak et al.,
2011).81 Likewise, several random assignment evaluations of Tools of the Mind, a preschool
and early primary school curriculum targeting development of self-control, show that it
improves classroom behavior as well as executive function, defined as higher-level cognitive
skills including inhibitory control, working memory, and cognitive flexibility (Barnett et al.,
2008, 2006; Bodrova and Leong, 2001, 2007; Diamond et al., 2007; Lillard and Else-Quest,
   80
      Bierman et al. (2010).
   81
      Note however that the largest federal study to date on character education programs, including PATHS,
failed to find evidence for improvements in behavior or academic performance (see Social and Character
Development Research Consortium, 2010).




                                                    46
2006).82 Positive findings are reported for the Montessori preschool curriculum (Lillard and
Else-Quest, 2006). Unlike the Perry study, these studies do not have long-term followups.
    There is evidence that targeted intervention efforts can improve preferences and skills.
In contrast to the multi-faceted curricula described above, studies targeting improvement
in aspects of conscientiousness are designed to isolate a particular mechanism producing
behavioral change. In early work, Rueda et al. (2005) designed a set of computer exercises
to train attention in children between four and six years of age. Children in the intervention
group improved in performance on computer tasks of attention relative to children who
instead watched interactive videos for a comparable amount of time. Similarly, Stevens
et al. (2008) designed a 6-week computerized intervention and showed that it can improve
selective auditory attention (i.e., the ability to attend to a target auditory signal in the face
of an irrelevant, distracting auditory signal). While yielding interesting preliminary results,
these programs had only short-term follow-ups and involved very small samples.
    A recent strand of research has focused on testing and implementing interventions on
a larger scale and directly in school. Alan and Ertac (2018) show that an intervention in
Turkey designed to encourage forward-looking behavior by increasing the salience of future
selves improves patience measured on experimental tasks. The effect is persistent three years
later and associated with an improved “behavior grade” for girls and high achieving students.
Kosse et al. (2014) show that social skills can also be impacted. They study a mentoring
intervention program in Germany which randomly paired children from low income families
with college student mentors. Before the intervention, children from low income families
scored lower on measures of prosociality. The gap across income groups disappeared for the
treated group was still found two years later. Finally, Algan et al. (2014) study a two-year
intervention (implemented at the time of entry into primary school) aimed at improving
non-cognitive skills in boys who were disruptive in kindergarten. They find that it increased
self-control and trust; improved labor market participation; and reduced criminal behavior
  82
     However, a more recent large-scale study (Farran et al., 2011) does not find any effect of the program
on self-regulation or literacy, language, and mathematics achievement.


                                                    47
in early adulthood.
    Several studies suggest that non-cognitive skills can be remediated in adolescence. Mar-
tins (2010) analyzes data from EPSIS, a program developed to improve student achievement
of 13-15 year-olds in Portugal by increasing motivation, self-esteem, and study skills. The
program consists of one-on-one meetings with a trained staff member or meetings in small
groups. The intervention was tailored to each participant’s individual skill deficit. Overall,
the program was successful and cost-effective, decreasing grade retention by 10 percentage
points. Kautz and Zanoni (2019) find similar effects for a mentoring program in high schools
in disadvantagef neighborhoods.
    Heckman et al. (2006) estimate a version of Equation (3) to analyze the effects of in-
creases in education on measured cognition and non-cognitive measures.83 Controlling for
the problem of reverse causality that schooling may be caused by non-cognitive skills, they
find that schooling improves both personality and cognitive skills and that these skills, in
turn, boost outcomes.84 Heckman et al. (2018) estimate a sequential model of education
to study the effects of education on a variety of outcomes. Correcting for selection into
education, they find that early cognitive and personality skills affect schooling choices, labor
market outcomes, adult health, and social outcomes and that increasing education promotes
beneficial labor market, health, and social outcomes.
    Todd and Zhang (2019) confirm that returns to schooling are in part a consequence
of positive changes to personality through education. They find that these changes are
concentrated predominantly among individuals from poorer families and tend to stabilize
by the age of 30. Furthermore, some authors claim that cognitive and non-cognitive skills
are associated with sorting into different job types and individuals who score high on both
tend to choose more schooling and subsequent employment in white collar occupations.
  83
      They estimate the effect of schooling on self-esteem and locus of control, personality skills related to
neuroticism. The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale attempts to assess the degree of approval or disapproval of
oneself (Rosenberg, 1965). The relationship between these measures and the Big Five skills of neuroticism
is discussed in Almlund et al. (2011).
   84
      Both Heckman et al. (2011) and Heckman et al. (2006) use an identification strategy based on matching
on proxies for unobserved skills that corrects for measurement error and the endogeneity of schooling.


                                                     48
Kassenboehmer et al. (2018) contribute to this literature and provide estimates of the effect
of university education on the Big Five personality skills. Controlling for selection into
college, they show that it increases the extraversion skill by 0.3 standard deviations and
seems to have some impact on agreeableness although the later is quite heterogeneous and
depends on family background.
    Cunha et al. (2010) estimate a model of the technology of skill formation using longitudi-
nal data on the development of children with rich measures of parental investment and child
skills. They control for the endogeneity of investment using shocks to family income along
with other instruments. Their model is a version of Equation (3). Skills are self-productive
and exhibit dynamic complementarity – current values of skills affect the evolution of future
skills through direct and cross effects. A leading example of a cross effect is that more mo-
tivated children are more likely to learn.85 They estimate parameters that summarize how
past personality skills affect future cognitive skills.
    They find that self-productivity becomes stronger as children become older, for both
cognitive and personality skills.86 It is more difficult to compensate for the effects of adverse
environments on cognitive endowments at later ages than it is at earlier ages. This finding
is consistent with the high rank stability of cognition over ages past 10-12 reported in the
literature. It also helps to explain the evidence on the ineffectiveness of cognitive remediation
strategies for disadvantaged adolescents documented in Cunha et al. (2006); Knudsen et al.
(2006) and Cunha and Heckman (2007).
    Personality skills foster the development of cognition but not vice versa (see Cunha
and Heckman, 2008a and Cunha et al., 2010). It is relatively easier at all stages of life to
   85
      There is preliminary evidence that the personality of one’s peers may also have an impact on his
outcomes. Golsteyn et al. (2017) exploit random variation in assignment of students to university tutorial
sections to estimate a positive effect on performance from having more persistent and more risk averse peers.
This effect is limited to students who themselves have a low degree of persistency and is twice as large in
magnitude than that of having peers with higher GPA. As the hours spent studying are unaffected, the
authors conclude that the presence of persistent and risk averse peers directly enhances the productivity of
low-persistence students in their company.
   86
      In the language of economics, the elasticity of substitution for cognitive inputs is smaller later in life.




                                                       49
compensate for early disadvantage in endowments by boosting personality skills.87 However,
personality seems to stabilize around the age of 30.88 Thus, the most effective adolescent
interventions target personality skills.89
    Some life experiences, like employment, can also improve personality. Gottschalk (2005)
analyzes evidence from a randomized control trial that working at a job can improve locus
of control, a trait related to neuroticism that measures the extent to which individuals
believe that they have control over their lives through self-motivation or self-determination
as opposed to the extent that the environment controls their lives (Rotter, 1966).90 He uses
data from the Self-Sufficiency Project (SSP) in which some welfare recipients were randomly
offered substantial subsidies to work. The subsidy more than doubled the earnings of a
minimum wage worker. People in the experimental group worked about 30% more hours
than those in the control group. After 36 months, those who received the subsidy were more
likely to have an improved locus of control.
    Negative life experiences can have lasting effects on preferences and personality as well.
Americans who experienced sexual abuse and parental neglect in childhood appear to have
increased levels of neuroticism and lower conscientiousness and openness to experience at
age 30 (Fletcher and Schurer, 2017). Afghanis who experienced violence exhibit more risk
tolerance but also a higher preference for certainty when asked to recall fearful events (Callen
et al., 2014). Furthermore, Malmendier and Nagel (Malmendier and Nagel) document that
individuals who experienced negative financial events such as the Great Depression exhibit
a lower willingness to take financial risks.91 Anger et al. (2017) show that trauma can
sometimes also result in positive changes in personality. Studying German data, they find
  87
      Elasticities of substitution are essentially the same at different stages of the life cycle.
  88
      See Todd and Zhang (2019) and Terracciano et al. (2010).
   89
      Cunha et al. (2006) report that 16% of the variation in educational attainment is explained by adolescent
cognitive skills, 12% is due to adolescent personality (socioemotional skills), and 15% is due to measured
parental investments.
   90
      The relationship between locus of control and the Big Five trait of neuroticism is discussed in Almlund
et al. (2011).
   91
      However, it is unclear what part of these changes can be attributed to changes in risk preferences as
opposed to altered beliefs about returns to investing.



                                                      50
that job loss due to factory closings increases openness to experience for highly educated
workers while leaving other dimensions of personality unchanged.
     Economic preferences have also been shown to have a causal impact on outcomes.92
Montizaan et al. (2015) exploit a change in the Dutch public pension system in 2006 which
affected workers born after 1950. By comparing the reaction of public sector workers born
just after the reform took effect to those born just before, they are able to show that affected
individuals who score higher on negative reciprocity reduced their work effort (measured by
self-reported on the job motivation). Furthermore, this decline seems proportional to the
degree of perceived unfairness – it is larger for workers born very close to the cutoff date and
among those who work with many colleagues who were unaffected – and also to the closeness
to the “perpetrator” of the injustice (workers working directly for the central government
shirk more).



4        Summary

This paper reviews recent evidence from economics and psychology on the importance of
personality. It shows that success in life depends on many skills, not just those measured
by IQ, grades, and standardized achievements tests. Personality skills predict and cause
outcomes.
     Economic analysis clarifies psychological studies by establishing that psychological at-
tributes are measured by performance on tasks. It enriches the analysis of human differences
by providing anchored measures of economic preferences and studying their links to person-
ality and cognitive skills. Psychological attributes have different productivities in different
tasks. Performance on tasks depends on incentives and multiple skills, giving rise to a funda-
mental identification problem when measuring any single skill. This identification problem
is empirically important even for measures of cognitive skills.
    92
     As discussed before, recent research suggests that they may be strongly related to non-cognitive per-
sonality skills traditionally measured by psychologists.



                                                   51
   The importance of cognitive and non-cognitive skills increases with the complexity of a
task. Given their endowments of skills and the incentives they face, people sort into tasks in
life in pursuit of their comparative advantage. Recent research by Caines et al. (2017a) and
Beaudry et al. (2016) shows that labor market rewards are increasing for those who have
large bundles of both social and cognitive skills. They perform complex tasks. The demand
for such bundles is increasing, not the demand for cognitive or non-cognitive skills alone,
despite some recent claims to the contrary. In fact, there is evidence that the demand for
cognitive skills alone is in decline (see Caines et al., 2017a,b, and Beaudry et al., 2016), and
the evidence for a rise in the demand for non-cognitive skills by themselves is debated in the
literature.
   Skills are stable across situations. However, their manifestations depend on incentives to
apply effort in the situations where they are measured and also on other skills.
   However, skills are not set in stone. They change over the life cycle and can be enhanced
by education, mentoring, parenting, and environmental influences to different degrees at
different ages.
   Scores on achievement tests capture both cognitive and personality skills. Children who
are more academically motivated and more open to experience learn more and have higher
test scores. More motivated children also try harder on achievement tests.
   The studies surveyed here demonstrate that the growing partnership between economists
and psychologists is contributing greatly to knowledge. Each field has a lot to learn from each
other. Recent evidence changes the way we think about the sources of individual differences
in life performance and ways to design effective policies for equalizing opportunities.




                                              52
References

Abeler, J., D. Nosenzo, and C. Raymond (2019). Preferences for truth-telling. Economet-
  rica 87 (4), 1115–1153.

Ackerman, P. L. and E. D. Heggestad (1997, March). Intelligence, personality, and interests:
  Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin 121 (2), 219–245.

Alan, S. and S. Ertac (2018). Fostering patience in the classroom: Results from randomized
  educational intervention. Journal of Political Economy 126 (5), 1865–1911.

Algan, Y., E. Beasley, F. Vitaro, and R. E. Tremblay (2014). The impact of non-cognitive
  skills training on academic and non-academic trajectories: From childhood to early adult-
  hood. Unpublished.

Almlund, M., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2011). Personality psychology
  and economics. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L. Wößmann (Eds.), Handbook of the
  Economics of Education, Volume 4, Chapter 1, pp. 1–181. Amsterdam: Elsevier B. V.

Andersen, S., G. W. Harrison, M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutström (2008). Eliciting risk and time
  preferences. Econometrica 76 (3), 583–618.

Anderson, J., S. Burks, C. DeYoung, and A. Rustichini (2011). Toward the integration of
  personality theory and decision theory in the explanation of economic behavior. Unpub-
  lished manuscript. Presented at the IZA Workshop: Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills,
  January 27, 2011.

Andersson, O., H. J. Holm, J.-R. Tyran, and E. Wengstr´’om (2018). Robust inference in
  risk elicitation tasks. Unpublished.

Anger, S., G. Camehl, and F. Peter (2017). Involuntary job loss and changes in personality
  traits. Journal of Economic Psychology 60, 71–91.



                                            53
Antecol, H. and D. A.Cobb-Clark (2013). Do psychosocial traits help explain gender segre-
  gation in young people’s occupations? Labour Economics 21, 59–73.

Athans, M. and P. L. Falb (2013). Optimal control: an introduction to the theory and its
  applications. Courier Corporation.

Augenblick, N., M. Niederle, and C. Sprenger (2015). Working over time: Dynamic incon-
  sistency in real effort tasks. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (3), 1067–1115.

Ayllon, T. and K. Kelly (1972). Effects of reinforcement on standardized test performance.
  Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 5 (4), 477–484.

Baldwin, J. (1995). Who Took the GED? GED 1994 Statistical Report. Washington, DC:
  American Council on Education, GED Testing Service, Center for Adult Learning.

Barnett, W. S., K. Jung, D. J. Yarosz, J. Thomas, A. Hornbeck, R. Stechuk, and S. Burns
  (2008). Educational effects of the Tools of the Mind curriculum: A randomized trial. Early
  Childhood Research Quarterly 23 (3), 299–313.

Barnett, W. S., D. J. Yarosz, J. Thomas, and A. Hornbeck (2006). Educational effectiveness
  of a Vygotskian approach to preschool education: A randomized trial. Technical report,
  National Institute for Early Education Research, New Brunswick, NJ.

Barrick, M. R. and M. K. Mount (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job
  performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology 44 (1), 1–26.

Barton, P. (2006). High School Reform and Work: Facing Labor Market Realities. Princeton,
  NJ: Educational Testing Service.

Baumeister, R. F., A. L. Boone, and J. P. Tangney (2004). High self-control predicts good
  adjustment, less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of Person-
  ality 72 (2), 271–324.



                                            54
Baumeister, R. F. and J. J. M. Tierney (2011). Willpower : rediscovering the greatest human
  strength. New York: Penguin Press.

Beauchamp, J. P., D. Cesarini, and M. Johannesson (2017). The psychometric and empirical
  properties of measures of risk preferences. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 54 (3), 203–237.

Beaudry, P., D. A. Green, and B. M. Sand (2016). The great reversal in the demand for skill
  and cognitive tasks. Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1), S199–S247.

Becker, A., T. Deckers, T. Dohmen, A. Falk, and F. Kosse (2012, July). The relationship
  between economic preferences and psychological personality measures. Annual Review of
  Economics 4, 453–478.

Becker, G. S. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
  Reference to Education (1 ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Becker, G. S. and K. M. Murphy (1988, August). A theory of rational addiction. Journal of
  Political Economy 96 (4), 675–700.

Benda, B. B. (2005). The robustness of self-control in relation to form of delinquency. Youth
  & Society 36 (4), 418–444.

Bierman, K. L., J. D. Coie, K. A. Dodge, M. T. Greenberg, J. E. Lochman, R. J. McMahon,
  and E. Pinderhughes (2010). The effects of a multiyear universal social-emotional learning
  program: The role of student and school characteristics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
  Psychology 78 (2), 156–168.

Bodrova, E. and D. J. Leong (2001). Tools of the Mind: A Case Study of Implementing
  the Vygotskian Approach in American Early Childhood and Primary Classrooms. Geneva:
  International Bureau of Education, UNESCO.




                                             55
Bodrova, E. and D. J. Leong (2007). Tools of the Mind: The Vygotskian Approach to Early
  Childhood Education. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc.

Borghans, L., A. L. Duckworth, J. J. Heckman, and B. ter Weel (2008, Fall). The economics
  and psychology of personality traits. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4), 972–1059.

Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011a, August). Iden-
  tification problems in personality psychology. Personality and Individual Differences 51 (3:
  Special Issue on Personality and Economics), 315–320.

Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011b). IQ, achieve-
  ment, and personality. Unpublished manuscript, University of Maastricht and University
  of Chicago (revised from the 2009 version).

Borghans, L., B. H. H. Golsteyn, J. J. Heckman, and J. E. Humphries (2011c). Reinterpreting
  estimated effects of cognition on social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript, Department
  of Economics, University of Chicago.

Borghans, L., H. Meijers, and B. ter Weel (2008, January). The role of noncognitive skills
  in explaining cognitive test scores. Economic Inquiry 46 (1), 2–12.

Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Mathiowetz (2001). Measurement error in survey data. In J. J.
  Heckman and E. E. Leamer (Eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 5, Chapter 59, pp.
  3705–3843. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B. V.

Bowen, W. G., M. M. Chingos, and M. S. McPherson (2009). Test scores and high school
  grades as predictors. In Crossing the Finish Line: Completing College at America’s Public
  Universities, Chapter 6, pp. 112–133. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Bowles, S. and H. Gintis (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational Reform and
  the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: Basic Books.




                                             56
Bowles, S., H. Gintis, and M. Osborne (2001, December). The determinants of earnings: A
  behavioral approach. Journal of Economic Literature 39 (4), 1137–1176.

Boyle, S. H., R. B. Williams, D. B. Mark, B. H. Brummett, I. C. Siegler, and J. C. Barefoot
  (2005). Hostility, age, and mortality in a sample of cardiac patients. American Journal of
  Cardiology 96 (1), 64–66.

Breuning, S. E. and W. F. Zella (1978). Effects of individualized incentives on norm-
  referenced IQ test performance of high school students in special education classes. Journal
  of School Psychology 16 (3), 220–226.

Cadena, B. C. and B. J. Keys (2015). Human capital and the lifetime costs of impatience.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (3), 126–53.

Caines, C., F. Hoffmann, and G. Kambourov (2017a). Complex-task biased technological
  change and the labor market. Review of Economic Dynamics 25, 298–319.

Caines, C., F. Hoffmann, and G. Kambourov (2017b). Training programs, skills, and human
  capital: A life-cycle approach. Unpublished.

Caliendo, M., D. A. Cobb-Clark, and A. Uhlendorff (2015). Locus of control and job search
  strategies. Review of Economics and Statistics 97 (1), 88–103.

Callen, M., M. Isaqzadeh, J. D. Long, and C. Sprenger (2014). Violence and risk preference:
  Experimental evidence from Afghanistan. American Economic Review 104 (1), 123–48.

Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human Cognitive Abilities: A Survey of Factor-Analytic Studies. New
  York: Cambridge University Press.

Castillo, M., P. J. Ferraro, J. L. Jordan, and R. Petrie (2011). The today and tomorrow
  of kids: Time preferences and educational outcomes of children. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 95 (11–12), 1377–1385.



                                             57
Castillo, M., J. L. Jordan, and R. Petrie (2018). Childrens rationality, risk attitudes and
  field behavior. European Economic Review 102, 62–81.

Chapman, J., M. Dean, P. Ortoleva, E. Snowberg, and C. Camerer (2018). Econographics.
  NBER Working Paper No. 24931.

Chen, Y., S. Feng, J. J. Heckman, and T. Kautz (2019). Sensitivity of self-reported non-
  cognitive skills to survey administration conditions. Forthcoming, Proceedings of the Na-
  tional Academy of Sciences.

Chetty, R. (2015). Behavioral economics and public policy: A pragmatic perspective. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 105 (5), 1–33.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, T. Olsen, and L. Pistaferri (2011, May). Adjustment costs,
  firm responses, and micro vs. macro labor supply elasticities: Evidence from Danish tax
  records. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (2), 749–804.

Choi, S., S. Kariv, W. Müller, and D. Silverman (2014). Who is (more) rational? American
  Economic Review 104 (6), 1518–1550.

Clingman, J. and R. L. Fowler (1976). The effects of primary reward on the I.Q. performance
  of grade-school children as a function of initial I.Q. level. Journal of Applied Behavior
  Analysis 9 (1), 19–23.

Cloninger, C. R., D. M. Svrakic, C. Bayon, and T. R. Przybeck (1999). Measurement of
  psychopathology as variants of personality. In C. R. Cloninger (Ed.), Personality and
  Psychopathology, pp. 33–66. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.

Cobb-Clark, D. A., S. C. Dahmann, D. A. Kamh´’ofer, and H. Schildberg-H´’orisch (2019).
  Self-control: Determinants, life outcomes and intergenerational implications. DICE Dis-
  cussion Paper 319, D´’usseldorf Institute for Competition Economics (DICE).




                                            58
Cobb-Clark, D. A., S. C. Kassenboehmer, and M. G. Sinning (2016). Locus of control and
  savings. Journal of Banking & Finance 73, 113–130.

Cobb-Clark, D. A. and M. Tan (2011, January). Noncognitive skills, occupational attain-
  ment, and relative wages. Labour Economics 18 (1), 1–13.

Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992). Four ways five factors are basic. Personality and
  Individual Difference 13 (6), 653–665.

Credé, M., M. C. Tynan, and P. D. Harms (2017). Much ado about grit: A meta-analytic
  synthesis of the grit literature. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 113 (3),
  492–511.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2007, May). The technology of skill formation. American
  Economic Review 97 (2), 31–47.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008a, Fall). Formulating, identifying and estimating the tech-
  nology of cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Journal of Human Resources 43 (4),
  738–782.

Cunha, F. and J. J. Heckman (2008b, September). A new framework for the analysis of
  inequality. Macroeconomic Dynamics 12 (2 (supplement)), 315–354.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. J. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the
  evidence on life cycle skill formation. In E. A. Hanushek and F. Welch (Eds.), Handbook
  of the Economics of Education, Chapter 12, pp. 697–812. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, and S. M. Schennach (2010, May). Estimating the technology of
  cognitive and noncognitive skill formation. Econometrica 78 (3), 883–931.

Daly, M., C. P. Harmon, and L. Delaney (2009, April–May). Psychological and biological
  foundations of time preference. Journal of the European Economic Association 7 (2–3),
  659–669.

                                            59
Dean, M. and P. Ortoleva (2019). The empirical relationship between nonstandard economic
  behaviors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 (33), 16262–16267.

Deci, E. L. and R. M. Ryan (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination in Human
  Behavior. New York: Plenum Press.

Dee, T. S. and M. R. West (2011). The non-cognitive returns to class size. Educational
  Evaluation and Policy Analysis 33 (1), 23–46.

DeLong, J. and K. Magin (2009, Winter). The U.S. equity return premium: Past, present
  and future. Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (1), 193–208.

Deming, D. (2017). The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1593–1640.

Diamond, A., S. Barnett, J. Thomas, and S. Munro (2007). Preschool program improves
  cognitive control. Science 318 (5855), 1387–1388.

Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2010, June). Are risk aversion and
  impatience related to cognitive ability? American Economic Review 100 (3), 1238–1260.

Dohmen, T., A. Falk, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2018). On the relationship between
  cognitive ability and risk preference. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (2), 115–34.

Duckworth, A. (2012, November). Reference bias. Presented at the University of Chicago.

Duckworth, A. L., C. Peterson, M. D. Matthews, and D. R. Kelly (2007, June). Grit:
  Perseverance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
  ogy 92 (6), 1087–1101.

Duckworth, A. L. and P. D. Quinn (2009, March). Development and validation of the Short
  Grit Scale (Grit-S). Journal of Personality Assessment 91 (2), 166–174.




                                            60
Duckworth, A. L., P. D. Quinn, D. R. Lynam, R. Loeber, and M. Stouthamer-Loeber (2011,
  May). Role of test motivation in intelligence testing. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences 108 (19), 7716–7720.

Durlak, J. A., R. P. Weissberg, A. B. Dymnicki, R. D. Taylor, and K. B. Schellinger (2011).
  The impact of enhancing students’ social and emotional learning: A meta-analysis of
  school-based universal interventions. Child Development 82 (1), 405–432.

Edlund, C. V. (1972). The effect on the behavior of children, as reflected in the IQ scores,
  when reinforced after each correct response. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 5 (3),
  317–319.

El-Gamal, M. A. and D. M. Grether (2012). Are people Bayesian? uncovering behavioral
  strategies. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90 (432), 1137–1145.

Epstein, S. (1979). The stability of behavior: I. On predicting most of the people much of
  the time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (7), 1097–1126.

Falk, A., A. Becker, T. Dohmen, B. Enke, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2018). Global evidence
  on economic preferences. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (4), 1645–1692.

Falk, A., A. Becker, T. J. Dohmen, D. Huffman, and U. Sunde (2016). The preference
  survey module: A validated instrument for measuring risk, time, and social preferences.
  IZA Discussion Paper No. 9674.

Farran, D. C., M. W. Lipsey, and S. Wilson (2011, August). Experimental evaluation of the
  Tools of the Mind pre-k curriculum. Technical report, Peabody Research Institute Report.

Fehr, E. and L. Goette (2007). Do workers work more if wages are high? evidence from a
  randomized field experiment. American Economic Review 97 (1), 298–317.

Fletcher, J. M. and S. Schurer (2017). Origins of adulthood personality: The role of adverse
  childhood experiences. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 17 (2).

                                            61
Flinn, C., P. Todd, and W. Zhang (2019). Personality traits, job search and the gender wage
  gap. Unpublished.

Flynn, J. R. (2007). What is Intelligence?: Beyond the Flynn Effect. New York: Cambridge
  University Press.

Forsythe, R., J. Horowitz, N. L.Savin, and M. Sefton (1994). Fairness in simple bargaining
  experiments. Games and Economic Behavior 6 (3), 347–369.

Friedman, D. and A. H. Streicher (1985). Reliability of scores for Fiscal Year 1981 Army
  applicants: Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery forms 8, 9, and 10. Technical
  report, Defense Technical Information Center.

Friedman, H. S. and L. R. Martin (2011). The Longevity Project: Surprising Discoveries for
  Health and Long Life from the Landmark Eight-Decade Study. New York, NY: Hudson
  Street Press.

Gabaix, X. (2014). A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 129 (4), 1661–1710.

Garcı́a, E. (2014). The need to address noncognitive skills in the education policy agenda.
  EPI Briefing Paper 386, Economic Policy Institute, Washington, D. C.

Goldammer, C. (2010). Skills, investment, and race: Evidence from the ECLS-K. Unpub-
  lished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Golsteyn, B., A. Non, and U. Zölitz (2017). The impact of peer personality on academic
  achievement. University of Zurich, Department of Economics, Working Paper (269).

Golsteyn, B. and H. Schildberg-Hörisch (2017). Challenges in Research on Preferences and
  Personality Traits: Measurement, Stability, and Inference. Elsevier.

Golsteyn, B. H., H. Grönqvist, and L. Lindahl (2014). Adolescent time preferences predict
  lifetime outcomes. The Economic Journal 124 (580), F739–F761.

                                            62
Gottschalk, P. (2005). Can work alter welfare recipients’ beliefs? Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management 24 (3), 485–498.

Granger, C. W. J. (1969, August). Investigating causal relations by econometric models and
  cross-spectral methods. Econometrica 37 (3), 424–438.

Grek, S. (2009). Governing by numbers: The PISA ‘effect’ in Europe. Journal of Education
  Policy 24 (1), 23–37.

Groot, W. (2000, May). Adaptation and scale of reference bias in self-assessments of quality
  of life. Journal of Health Economics 19 (3), 403–420.

Hai, R. and J. J. Heckman (2019). A dynamic model of health, education, and wealth with
  credit constraints and rational addiction. University of Chicago.

Hansen, K. T., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004, July–August). The effect of schooling
  and ability on achievement test scores. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1–2), 39–98.

Harrison, G. W. (2006). Experimental evidence on alternative environmental valuation meth-
  ods. Environmental and Resource Economics 34 (1), 125–162.

Harrison, G. W. and E. Elisabet Rutström (2008). Risk aversion in the laboratory. In Risk
  Aversion in Experiments, pp. 41–196. Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

Harrison, G. W. and J. T. Swarthout (2016). Cumulative prospect theory in the laboratory:
  A reconsideration. Center for the Economic Analysis of Risk, Working Paper 2.

Harvey, A. C. (1989). Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter.
  New York: Cambridge University Press.

Heckman, J. J. (1981a). Heterogeneity and state dependence. In S. Rosen (Ed.), Studies in
  Labor Markets, National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 91–139. University of Chicago
  Press.


                                             63
Heckman, J. J. (1981b). The incidental parameters problem and the problem of initial
  conditions in estimating a discrete time-discrete data stochastic process and some Monte
  Carlo evidence. In C.Manski and D. McFadden (Eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete
  Data With Econometric Applications, pp. 179–195. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Heckman, J. J. (1981c). Statistical models for discrete panel data. In C. Manski and
  D. McFadden (Eds.), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications,
  pp. 114–178. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.) (2014). The Myth of Achievement
  Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life. Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.

Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, S. Urzúa, and G. Veramendi (2011). The effects of edu-
  cational choices on labor market, health, and social outcomes. Unpublished manuscript,
  University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and G. Veramendi (2014). Education, health and wages.
  Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J., J. E. Humphries, and G. Veramendi (2018). Returns to education: The
  causal effects of education on earnings, health and smoking. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 126 (S1), S197–S246.

Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2012, August). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour Eco-
  nomics 19 (4: European Association of Labour Economists 23rd Annual Conference, Pa-
  phos, Cyprus, 22–24th September 2011), 451–464.

Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014a). Achievement tests and the role of character in
  American life. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of
  Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life, Chapter 1,
  pp. 3–56. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                                           64
Heckman, J. J. and T. Kautz (2014b). Fostering and measuring skills: Interventions that
  improve character and cognition. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries, and T. Kautz (Eds.),
  The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character in American Life,
  Chapter 9, pp. 341–430. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Heckman, J. J., L. Malofeeva, R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2008). The effect of the
  Perry Preschool Program on cognitive and noncognitive skills: Beyond treatment effects.
  Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Heckman, J. J. and D. V. Masterov (2007). The productivity argument for investing in
  young children. Review of Agricultural Economics 29 (3), 446–493.

Heckman, J. J., S. H. Moon, R. Pinto, P. A. Savelyev, and A. Q. Yavitz (2010, Febru-
  ary). The rate of return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public
  Economics 94 (1–2), 114–128.

Heckman, J. J. and S. Mosso (2014, August). The economics of human development and
  social mobility. Annual Review of Economics 6 (1), 689–733.

Heckman, J. J., R. Pinto, and P. A. Savelyev (2013, October). Understanding the mechanisms
  through which an influential early childhood program boosted adult outcomes. American
  Economic Review 103 (6), 2052–2086.

Heckman, J. J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzúa (2006, July). The effects of cognitive and noncog-
  nitive abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior. Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 24 (3), 411–482.

Heine, S. J., E. E. Buchtel, and A. Norenzayan (2008). What do cross-national comparisons
  of personality traits tell us? The case of Conscientiousness. Psychological Science 19 (4),
  309–313.




                                             65
Heine, S. J., S. Kitayama, D. R. Lehman, T. Takata, E. Ide, C. Leung, and H. Matsumoto
  (2001). Divergent consequences of success and failure in Japan and North America: An
  investigation of self-improving motivations and malleable selves. Journal of Personality
  and Social Psychology 81 (4), 599–615.

Heine, S. J., D. R. Lehman, K. Peng, and J. Greenholtz (2002, June). What’s wrong with
  cross-cultural comparisons of subjective Likert scales? The reference-group effect. Journal
  of Personality and Social Psychology 82 (6), 903–918.

Herrnstein, R. J. and C. A. Murray (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure
  in American Life. New York: Free Press.

Hillage, J., J. Regan, J. Dickson, and K. McLoughlin (2002). Employers skill survey: 2002.
  Research Report RR372, Department for Education and Skills.

Hirschi, T. and M. Gottfredson (1993). Commentary: Testing the general theory of crime.
  Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 30 (1), 47–54.

Hogan, J. and B. Holland (2003). Using theory to evaluate personality and job-performance
  relations: A socioanalytic perspective. Journal of Applied Psychology 88 (1), 100–112.

Holt, C. A. and S. K. Laury (2002). Risk aversion and incentive effects. American Economic
  Review 92 (5), 1644–1655.

Holt, M. M. and T. R. Hobbs (1979). The effects of token reinforcement, feedback and
  response cost on standardized test performance. Behaviour Research and Therapy 17 (1),
  81–83.

Holzer, H. (1997). Is there a gap between employer skill needs and the skills of the work
  force? In A. Lesgold, M. Feuer, and A. Black (Eds.), Transitions in Work and Learning:
  Implications for Assessment, Chapter 2, pp. 6–33. Washington, DC: National Academy
  Press.


                                             66
Jackson, C. K. (2018). What do test scores miss? The importance of teacher effects on
  non-test score outcomes. Journal of Political Economy 126 (5), 2072–2107.

Jagelka, T. (2018). Are economists’ preferences psychologists’ personality traits? Working
  Paper.

Jencks, C. (1979). Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success in America.
  New York: Basic Books.

Jensen, A. R. (1969). How much can we boost IQ and scholastic achievement. Harvard
  Educational Review 39 (1), 1–123.

John, O. (2000). The big five personality test. http://www.outofservice.com/bigfive/
  ?score-bigfive.

John, O. P., A. Caspi, R. W. Robins, and T. E. Moffitt (1994). The “little five”: Exploring
  the nomological network of the five-factor model of personality in adolescent boys. Child
  Development 65 (1), 160–178.

John, O. P. and S. Srivastava (1999a). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement
  and theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin and O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of Per-
  sonality: Theory and Research (2 ed.)., Chapter 4, pp. 102–138. New York: The Guilford
  Press.

John, O. P. and S. Srivastava (1999b). The big five trait taxonomy: History, measurement,
  and theoretical perspectives. Handbook of personality: Theory and research 2 (1999), 102–
  138.

Jones, M. A. (2018). The middle-skills gap: Community-based solutions to meet employer
  demands. Technical Report Chapter 12 in Investing in America’s Workforce: Improving
  Outcomes for Workers and Employers, Atlanta Federal Reserve.




                                            67
Kassenboehmer, S. C., F. Leung, and S. Schurer (2018). University education and non-
  cognitive skill development. Oxford Economic Papers 70 (2), 538–562.

Kautz, T. and W. Zanoni (2019). Measuring and fostering non-cognitive skills in adoles-
  cence: Evidence from Chicago Public Schools and the OneGoal Program. Unpublished
  manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.

Kern, M. L. and H. S. Friedman (2008). Do conscientious individuals live longer? Health
  Psychology 27 (5), 505–512.

Kettner, N. (1976). Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB form 5): Com-
  parison with GATB and DAT tests: Final report for period May 1975–October 1976.
  Technical report, Department of Defense, Department of the Air Force, Air Force Sys-
  tems Command, Air Force Human Resources Laboratory, Brooks Air Force Base, TX.
  Prepared by Contemporary Research, Incorporated with Personnel Research Division, Air
  Force Human Resources Laboratory, Lackland Air Force Base for Air Force Human Re-
  sources Laboratory, Brooks Air Force Base.

Knudsen, E. I., J. J. Heckman, J. L. Cameron, and J. P. Shonkoff (2006, July). Economic,
  neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce. Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (27), 10155–10162.

Kosse, F., T. Deckers, H. Schildberg-Hörisch, and A. Falk (2014). Formation of human
  prosociality: Causal evidence on the role of social environment. University of Bonn,
  Germany.

Kubzansky, L. D., D. Sparrow, P. Vokonas, and I. Kawachi (2001). Is the glass half empty
  or half full? A prospective study of optimism and coronary heart disease in the normative
  aging study. Psychosomatic Medicine 63 (6), 910–916.

Kyllonen, P. C. and J. P. Bertling (2013). Innovative questionnaire assessment methods to


                                            68
  increase cross-country comparability. Handbook of international large-scale assessment:
  Background, technical issues, and methods of data analysis, 277–285.

Lang, F. R., D. John, O. Lüdtke, J. Schupp, and G. G. Wagner (2011). Short assessment
  of the Big Five: Robust across survey methods except telephone interviewing. Behavior
  research methods 43 (2), 548–567.

Larson, G. E., D. P. Saccuzzo, and J. Brown (1994). Motivation: Cause or confound in
  information processing/intelligence correlations? Acta Psychologica 85 (1), 25–37.

Lemann, N. (1999). The Big Test: The Secret History of the American Meritocracy. New
  York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

Likert, R. (1932). A technique for the measurement of attitudes. Archives of Psychol-
  ogy 22 (140), 55.

Lillard, A. and N. Else-Quest (2006).      The early years: Evaluating Montessori.      Sci-
  ence 313 (5795), 1893–1894.

Lleras, C. (2008). Do skills and behaviors in high school matter? The contribution of
  noncognitive factors in explaining differences in educational attainment and earnings. So-
  cial Science Research 37 (3), 888–902.

Loewenstein, G. F., E. U. Weber, C. K. Hsee, and E. S. Welch (2001). Risk as feelings.
  Psychological Bulletin 127, 267–286.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel. Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect risk
  taking? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 373–416.

Mandelbrot, B. B. (1962). Paretian distributions and income maximization. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 76, 57–85.




                                            69
Martin, L. R., H. S. Friedman, and J. E. Schwartz (2007). Personality and mortality risk
  across the life span: The importance of conscientiousness as a biopsychosocial attribute.
  Health Psychology 26 (4), 428–436.

Martins, P. S. (2010). Can targeted, non-cognitive skills programs improve achievement?
  Discussion Paper 5266, IZA.

McAdams, D. P. (2006). The Person: A New Introduction to Personality Psychology (4 ed.).
  Hoboken, N.J.: J. Wiley and Sons.

Means, B. and J. H. Laurence (1984, May). Characteristics and performance of recruits
  enlisted with General Educational Development (GED) credentials. Final Report 84-6,
  Human Resources Research Organization, Alexandria, VA.

Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.

Mischel, W., O. Ayduk, M. G. Berman, B. J. Casey, I. H. Gotlib, J. Jonides, E. Kross,
  T. Teslovich, N. L. Wilson, V. Zayas, and Y. Shoda (2011). ‘Willpower’ over the life span:
  decomposing self-regulation. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 6 (2), 252–256.

Montizaan, R., A. de Grip, F. Cörvers, and T. Dohmen (2015). The impact of negatively
  reciprocal inclinations on worker behavior: Evidence from a retrenchment of pension rights.
  Management Science 62 (3), 668–681.

Mroczek, D. K. and A. Spiro (2007). Personality change influences mortality in older men.
  Psychological Science 18 (5), 371–376.

Naumann, L. P. and O. P. John (2011). Toward a domain-specific approach to cultural dif-
  ferences: The influence of cultural values and reference-group standards on self-reported
  personality. Unpublished manuscript, Sonoma State University, Department of Psychol-
  ogy.




                                             70
Nelsen, B. (1997). Should social skills be in the vocational curriculum? Evidence from the
  automotive repair field. In A. M. Lesgold, M. J. Feuer, and A. M. Black (Eds.), Transitions
  in Work and Learning: Implications for Assessment, Chapter 4, pp. 62–88. Washington,
  DC: National Academy Press.

Nisbett, R. E. (2009). Intelligence and How to Get It: Why Schools and Cultures Count.
  New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

Nisbett, R. E., J. Aronson, C. Blair, W. Dickens, J. Flynn, D. F. Halpern, and E. Turkheimer
  (2012, February–March). Intelligence: New findings and theoretical developments. Amer-
  ican Psychologist 67 (2), 130–159.

Nyhus, E. K. and E. Pons (2005). The effects of personality on earnings. Journal of Economic
  Psychology 26 (3), 363–384.

OECD (2013a). PISA 2012 results: Ready to learn: Students engagement, drive and self-
  beliefs (volume iii). Technical report, OECD Publishing.

OECD (2013b). What is PISA? In PISA 2012 Results: What Students Know and Can Do,
  Volume I of Student Performance in Mathematics, Reading and Science, Chapter 1, pp.
  23–30. OECD Publishing.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2001).           OECD employment
  and labour market statistics. Data available from http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/
  employment/data/oecd-employment-and-labour-market-statistics_lfs-data-en.

Peng, K., R. E. Nisbett, and N. Y. Wong (1997). Validity problems comparing values across
  cultures and possible solutions. Psychological Methods 2 (4), 329–344.

Pollak, R. A. (1976). Interdependent preferences. The American Economic Review , 309–320.

Pratt, T. C. and F. T. Cullen (2000). The empirical status of Gottfredson and Hirschi’s
  general theory of crime: A meta-analysis. Criminology 38 (3), 931–964.

                                             71
Primi, R., C. Zanon, D. Santos, F. De Fruyt, and O. P. John (2016). Anchoring vignettes.
  European Journal of Psychological Assessment.

Quinn, L. M. (2014). An institutional history of the GED. In J. J. Heckman, J. E. Humphries,
  and T. Kautz (Eds.), The Myth of Achievement Tests: The GED and the Role of Character
  in American Life. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Raven, J., J. C. Raven, and J. Court (1988). Manual for Raven’s Progressive Matrices and
  Vocabulary Scales. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment.

Raven, J. C. (1962). Advanced Progressive Matrices: Sets I and II (Revised ed.). London:
  H.K. Lewis.

Roberts, B. W. (2009). Back to the future: Personality and assessment and personality
  development. Journal of Research in Personality 43 (2), 137–145.

Roberts, B. W., N. R. Kuncel, R. L. Shiner, A. Caspi, and L. R. Goldberg (2007, December).
  The power of personality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic
  status, and cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives in Psy-
  chological Science 2 (4), 313–345.

Roberts, R. D., G. N. Goff, F. Anjoul, P. C. Kyllonen, G. Pallier, and L. Stankov (2000).
  The Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB): Little more than acculturated
  learning (Gc)!? Learning and Individual Differences 12 (1), 81–103.

Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the Adolescent Self-Image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
  University Press.

Ross, D. (1956). Aristotle: The Nicomachean ethics. Philosophy 31 (116), 77–77.

Rothstein, R., R. Jacobsen, and T. Wilder (2008). Grading Education: Getting Accountability
  Right. New York: Economic Policy Institute and Teachers College Press.



                                            72
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of rein-
  forcement. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied 80 (1), 1–28.

Roy, A. (1951, June). Some thoughts on the distribution of earnings. Oxford Economic
  Papers 3 (2), 135–146.

Rueda, M. R., M. K. Rothbart, B. D. McCandliss, L. Saccomanno, and M. I. Posner (2005).
  Training, maturation, and genetic influences on the development of executive attention.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102 (41), 14931–14936.

Ryan, R. M. and E. L. Deci (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions
  and new directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology 25 (1), 54–67.

Salgado, J. F. (1997). The five factor model of personality and job performance in the
  European Community. Journal of Applied Psychology 82 (1), 30–43.

Samuel, D. B. and T. A. Widiger (2008). A meta-analytic review of the relationships between
  the five-factor model and DSM-IV-TR personality disorders: A facet level analysis. Clinical
  Psychology Review 28 (8), 1326–1342.

Schmidt, F. L. and J. Hunter (2004). General mental ability in the world of work: Oc-
  cupational attainment and job performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
  ogy 86 (1), 162–173.

Schmitt, D. P. (2002). Are sexual promiscuity and relationship infidelity linked to different
  personality traits across cultures? Findings from the International Sexuality Description
  Project. Online Readings in Psychology and Culture 4 (Unit 4), 1–22. Retrieved from
  http://scholarworks.gvsu.edu/orpc/vol4/iss4/4.

Schmitt, D. P., J. Allik, R. R. McCrae, and V. Benet-Martı́nez (2007). The geographic
  distribution of Big Five personality traits: Patterns and profiles of human self-description
  across 56 nations. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 38 (2), 173–212.


                                             73
Schulz, R., J. Bookwala, J. E. Knapp, M. Scheier, and G. M. Williamson (1996). Pessimism,
  age, and cancer mortality. Psychology and Aging 11 (2), 304–309.

Secretary’s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills (1992).         Learning a Living: A
  Blueprint for High Performance: A SCANS Report for America 2000. Washington, DC:
  United States Government Printing Office.

Segal, C. (2008, October). Working when no one is watching: Motivation, test scores, and
  economic success. Economics working papers, Department of Economics and Business,
  Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Segal, C. (2012, August). Working when no one is watching: Motivation, test scores, and
  economic success. Management Science 58 (8), 1438–1457.

Social and Character Development Research Consortium (2010, October). Efficacy of school-
  wide programs to promote social and character development and reduce problem behavior
  in elementary school children. Research Report NCER 20112001, National Center for
  Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education.

Spence, A. M. (1972). Market Signalling: The Informational Structure of Job Markets and
  Related Phenomena. Ph. D. thesis, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Stango, V. and J. Zinman (2019). We are all behavioral, more or less: Measuring and using
  consumer-level behavioral sufficient statistics. NBER Working Paper No. 25540.

Stasz, C. (2001). Assessing skills for work: Two perspectives. Oxford Economic Papers 53 (3),
  385–405.

Stevens, C., J. Fanning, D. Coch, L. Sanders, and H. Neville (2008). Neural mechanisms of
  selective auditory attention are enhanced by computerized training: Electrophysiological
  evidence from language-impaired and typically developing children. Brain Research 1205,
  55–69.


                                             74
Sutter, M., C. Zoller, and D. Glätzle-Rützler (2019). Economic behavior of children and
  adolescents–a first survey of experimental economics results. European Economic Re-
  view 111, 98–121.

Sylva, K. (1997). The quest for quality in curriculum. In L. J. Schweinhart and D. P.
  Weikart (Eds.), Lasting Differences: The High/Scope Preschool Curriculum Comparison
  Study through Age 23, pp. 89–93. Ypsilanti: High/Scope Press.

Terman, L. M. and M. A. Merrill (1960). Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale: Manual for the
  Third Revision Form L-M. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Terracciano, A., R. R. McCrae, and P. T. Costa Jr. (2010). Intra-individual change in
  personality stability and age. Journal of Research in Personality 44 (1), 31–37.

Thaler, R. H., S. Mullainathan, and D. Kahneman (2008, July). A short course in behavioral
  economics. Edge Master Class, Sonoma, CA, July 25–27, 2008.

Thurstone, L. L. (1927, July). A law of comparative judgement. Psychological Review 34 (4),
  273–286.

Todd, P. and K. I. Wolpin (2006). Assessing the impact of a school subsidy program in
  Mexico using experimental data to validate a dynamic behavioral model of child schooling.
  American Economic Review 96 (5), 1384–1417.

Todd, P. and W. Zhang (2019). A dynamic model of personality, schooling, and occupational
  choice. Forthcoming, Quantitative Economics.

Torgovitsky, A. (2015, May). Identification of nonseparable models using instruments with
  small support. Econometrica 83 (3), 1185–1197.

Tyler, R. W. (1973). Assessing educational achievement in the affective domain. Measure-
  ment in Education 4 (3), 1–8.



                                            75
Washington Workforce Training Board (2008). Washington state employers workforce needs
  and practices survey. Statewide report.

West, M. R., K. Buckley, S. B. Krachman, and N. Bookman (2018). Development and
  implementation of student social-emotional surveys in the core districts. Journal of Applied
  Developmental Psychology 55, 119–129.

Westwood, A. (2004).     Skills that matter and shortages that don’t.       In C. Warchust,
  I. Grugulis, and E. Keep (Eds.), The Skills that Matter. New York, NY: Palgrave-
  Macmillan.

Williams, B. (2018). Identification of the linear factor model. George Washington University,
  Department of Economics. Unpublished manuscript.

Zemsky, R. (1997). Skills and the economy: An employer context for understanding the
  school-to-work transition. In A. Lesgold, M. Feuer, and A. Black (Eds.), Transitions in
  Work and Learning: Implications for Assessment. Washington, DC: National Academy
  Press.




                                             76
