                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE EFFECTS OF HOURS CONSTRAINTS
                         ON LABOR SUPPLY ESTIMATES




                               Shalumit Kahn
                                 Kevin Lang




                           Working Paper No. 2647




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1988




This study was supported in part by NSF Crant no. SES-8707422 and by Lang's
Sloan Faculty Research Fellowship.   This analysis is based on Statistics
Canada microdata collected in  1985 for the Survey of Work Reduction. All
                                                               and the
computations on these microdata were prepared by the authors,
               for the use and  interpretation of these data is entirely that
responsibility
of the authors.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2647
                                             July 1988


                      THE EFFECTS OF HOURS CONSTRAINTS ON
                            LABOR SUPPLY ESTIMATES


                                     ABSTRACT



     Almost all labor    supply models are   estimated under the assumption that

workers are free to choose their hours.       However,   theory, casual empiricism

and survey data suggest that many workers are not free to vary the hours

within a job.   Consequently, labor supply estimates based on actual hours of

work may be biased.     Using Canadian data on desired hours of work, we find

that using actual hours causes labor supply estimates to be biased upwards

but the bias is small.




Shulamit Kahn                                Kevin Lang
Department of Finance and Economics          Department of Economics
School of Management                         Boston University
704 Commonwealth Avenue                      270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215                             Boston, MA 02215
    Almost all labor supply models are estimated under the assumption that

workers are free to choose their hours.           In contrast there exists a wide

range of theories which suggest that employment relations will specify hours

as well as wages.    These include implicit contract models in which workers

wages are 'insured" by the firm while hours fluctuate (see Lilien and Hall

1986 and the references therein);        agency and firm-specific capital models in

which wages diverge from VMP in order to deter workers or firms from

'misbehaving'   (Lazear 1979,   1981); hedonic models with hours of a job fixed

either because of the need for coordination of workers or because there are

fixed "set-up' costs of working (Rosen, 1986); efficiency wage models in

which firms set long hours to capture workers' rents (Bulow and Summers,

                                                   of bonding increases                with
1986), and costly bonding models in which the cost

hours worked (Lang 1987).       In sum   theory   strongly suggests that the

assumption that workers can freely vary their hours on a particular job is

incorrect.

     Nevertheless,   relatively little empirical work has been devoted to

labor supply models with constrained hours.           Two   studies   have used the Panel

Study of Income Dynamics data on hours constraints. Ham               (1982)   estimates


labor supply using a sample selectivity approach to correct for bias due to

some workers being underemployed (i.e. working fewer hours than desired) or

unemployed. He finds that correcting the sample selection bias changes the

estimated wage elasticity from - .16 to -.14.          However, this effect appears

to be due primarily to the bias from unemployment. Failing to control for

                                                                         a
underemployment appears to bias the estimated wage elasticity upwards by



     11t appears that unless coordination requirements completely fix hours,
this model must be complemented by legal or social restrictions on firms
ability to pay workers hourly wages that decline as hours increase.
trivial and statistically insignificant    amount.    Ball (1987) finds that

observed behavior better accords with predictions of an intertemporal labor

supply model when workers who face hours constraints are eliminated from the

sample.   His intertemporal labor supply elasticities are not significantly

different using the constrained and the unconstrained samples, with the

unconstrained sample yielding lower point estimates of this elasticity.

     Two other papers have addressed tied wage/hours offers without using

direct questions on hours constraints. Lundberg (1985) estimates a

wage/hours hedonic locus simultaneously with a labor supply equation,

finding a significant but weak effect of hours on wages.'       This suggests

that while labor supply estimates which ignore hours constraints are biased,

the bias may be small.     Dickens and Lundberg (1985) develop a model in which

the offer distribution and labor supply are estimated simultaneously from

observed hours and wages.     In contrast to the other studies discussed, they

find that ignoring hours constraints significantly biases the estimated wage

elasticity upwards.

     While these papers represent significant advances in our knowledge,

they all depend on restrictive identifying assumptions especially with

respect to nonlinearities and functional form.       These identifying

restrictions were necessary because the data available to the authors was

limited: none of the data sources used included direct information on

desired hours.   Thus,   some of these papers (Lundberg,   Dickens and Lundberg)

were entirely based on data on actual hours and wages, while others also had

data on the existence and direction of any hours constraints, but not the


      'In addition, Lundberg (1985), using panel data, finds that hours
 'Granger cause" wages, which lends Support to the existence of a wage/hours
hedonic locus.
                                                                           3


size of the constraints (Ham,        Ball).
       This paper is able to reduce dependence on such restrictions by

directly considering desired hours of work using a Canadian survey which

elicited self-reports of preferred hours of work given pro-rated salary

changes. We use our measure of the divergence between actual hours and

desired hours to cast light on the magnitude of the bias which results from

using actual rather than desired hours in a simple labor         supply    model.

Despite the fact that we find considerable evidence of divergence between

actual and desired hours, our point estimates suggest that the degree of

bias from using the former as the dependent variable is small.



I.    Methods

       The basic approach we adopt in this paper is kept quite simple.              We

asswie a constant elasticity labor supply equation

(1)          lnh,*X,B+blnwage, +c
where h* is desired hours of work, X is a vector of explanatory variables

and c is an i.i.d. random error term.

                      we do not observe h* but only h, actual hours.        The standard
        Typically,
regression equation is therefore

(2)          in   h    = X, B +   b in wage   +   +


where      is an error term representing the deviation in    h   -   in   h*.   If t     is
not orthogonal to the explanatory variables, OLS estimates of B and b will

not be consistent.         Intuitively, we expect this to bias labor supply

elasticities towards zero, since actual hours are likely to be much less



     This point holds mutatis mutandis if additional econometric problems
require more sophisticated estimation techniques.
flexible than desired hours and hence less responsive to wages.          Thus,

assuming a positively sloped desired labor supply, we expect wages to be

negatively correlated with p.

     We take two approaches to evaluating the degree of bias in labor supply

elasticities that use actual hours.        First, we investigate   whether or not p

is orthogonal to the explanatory variables in equation (2).           Second, we

provide direct estimates of the bias by comparing labor supply estimates

using actual and desired hours for some sub-samples.         We do not intend to

portray our results as superior labor supply point estimates:         for instance,

we do not attempt to deal with nonlinearities of the budget set, the

intertemporal nature of labor supply, or any other of a myriad of problems

in labor supply estimates.        In fact, the wage data in our data source are

far from ideal for estimating labor supply equations,        as will be explained

below.     However,    our purpose is only to give a sense of the size of bias

incurred when estimating an equation such as       (2)   based on actual rather than

desired hours.        We argue below that although the imperfect wage data leads

to biased estimates of labor supply elasticities,         it is unlikely to cause

any substantial bias in the difference between labor supply estimates, and

thus should not significantly detract from our estimate of the bias

introduced by using actual rather than desired hours.



II. Data

     Our data are from the Survey of Work Reduction (SWR) which was

collected as a written supplement to the Canadian Labor Force Survey (the

equivalent of the U.S. Current Population Survey) in June 1965.          The

questions in this survey pertaining to desired work hours are included in
                                                                      5


the Appendix to this paper.     These questions are much more specific than

either of the two major U.S. surveys on hours constraints, the Panel Study

of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the May 1985 Current Population Survey (CPS),

which do not elicit data on the actual numbers of desired hours.          Moreover,

long introductions to the questions on desired hours of work reduction (see

Appendix) were designed to ensure that respondents understood these

questions, and especially that they understood that the hypothetical hours

reductions or increases would imply prorated salary changes.4

     Despite the considerable effort which Statistics Canada put in to

ensuring that the data measure what they are intended to measure, there is

ample evidence of imperfections     in the data as in all surveys.    About 2% of

respondents both wanted to work more and to work less.      In our analysis,

these respondents were dropped from the sample.

     Other people were dropped from the sample because we could not

ascertain their desired number of hours.       Specifically, those with     NAs   to

the questions about how much they would prefer their hours to change were

excluded.    In addition,   a substantial fraction of respondents    said that the

reason they did not want to work fewer hours was that it was not possible on

their job.   Respondents who did not want to work more hours and who

responded that the reason that they did not want to work fewer hours was


     In contrast, the PSID questions wording would leave salaried workers
uncertain about whether hypothetical hours increases would be accompanied by
any salaries changes.

      1n addition, outliers who replied that they wanted to work more than
72 hours per week were assumed to have miscalculated, and were replaced with
72 desired hours per week.  Note that the maximum actually worked in the
sample was 65 hours per week, and the arbitrarily chosen 72 hours was 1 hour
more per day than this maximum.
                                                                      6
because    it was not possible on their jobs were also eliminated from the

sample because it was impossible to determine their desired hours.         This

removed roughly one-eighth of the observations from the sample.

        A final concern arises about whether or not the respondents    interpreted

the questions as intended, despite the questionnaires elaborate

introduction. The survey posed a series of follow-up questions about how

important various factors were in causing the respondent to want to work

fewer hours.     About half of respondents who said they wanted to work fewer

hours    said that a very or somewhat important reason for their wanting to

work fewer hours was to reduce the probability of being laid-off.         Clearly,
this reason for wanting to work less does not correspond to our concept of

wanting to supply fewer hours at the going wage.     Moreover,   in the

introduction to the survey respondents had been explicitly told to assume

that the hypothetical hours reductions would not affect their job security

or job situation in general.

        However, it is unclear that the implied importance of layoff avoidance

should be taken a face value for two reasons. First, even those respondents

who claimed that not getting laid-off was an important reason for wanting to

reduce hours generally gave a number of other important reasons for wanting

to reduce hours.    Secondly,   the survey was preceded by a prologue which

explained that the reason the survey was being conducted was to examine the
possibility of reducing unemployment by having workers voluntarily reduce
their   hours of work.   This might have made the possibility of unemployment

salient in their minds when asked specifically whether reducing the

probability of being laid off was a factor.

     Despite these concerns,    the data used here appear to be the only
                                                                    7


measures of desired hours available. Moreover, the wording of the SWR

questions and their introductions generally introduce fewer ambiguities than

the other surveys'    questions.

     The wage data in the SWR pose much more serious problems.      The survey

does not collect specific figures for wages or income.      Instead, respondents

are asked to place their (total) own income into one of seven bracketed

ranges.    Translating the categorical income variable into a continuous wage

variable is by no means straight-forward      First of all, the income figures

must be divided by hours.     The SWR asked questions both on usual weekly

hours and hours last week.     As is often the case, it is unclear whether

usual weekly hours includes 'normal" overtime.     We therefore experimented

with both "hours' variables. Second, the decision had to be made whether

and how to translate the brackets into a continuous variable.       To ascertain

how much information was lost by constructing a continuous index from this

categorical data, we compared specifications for nonunion     men   including   six

income dummy variables to specifications using one of two continuous income

variables, the first using midpoints of the brackets and the second using a

simple index where 1 was the lowest wage category,    2   the second, etc.'


Resulting F tests suggested that little information was lost by treating the

categorical variable as continuous.     Of the two continuous income variables,

the simple index had more explanatory power.     Results were similar whether

hours were measured as usual hours or desired hours.      We therefore estimated


     "We   limited   experimentation to nonunion men to lessen any problems of
"data mining."

     'These measures are not very different except for scale, since all
income brackets were equal sized ($10 thousand Canadian) except the lowest
    - $20thoosand) and the highest $70+ thousand (assigned a midpoint of $80
($0
thousand). Scale is irrelevant since all specifications were in log form.
                                                                   8

the log wage as log(income index/hours last week).

     Bracketed data reduces the accuracy of our estimates, but does not

introduce inconsistency.    However, other aspects of the constructed wage

variable do introduce inconsistency. Most significant    is the fact that

hours are included in the denominator which will cause a spurious negative

correlation between the wage variable and the error term in equation (2).

In addition,    income includes non-labor income, which may be correlated with

the error term.

     To mitigate the latter two problems,   we use instrumental variables with

twenty-eight occupation dummy variables as instruments for wage.       To the

extent that occupation affects hours only via the wage, inconsistency is

eliminated. However, occupation dummies are not ideal instruments for wage,

since there is likely to be some correlation between occupation and hours

(both desired or actual) not due to wage differences.    (For instance,    the

inherent propensity towards workaholism might belong in labor supply

equation but is, of course, unmeasurable.    However, workaholism may be

correlated with occupation.)     This correlation between occupation and hours

implies that instrumented wages, a linear combination of the occupation

dummies, is still somewhat negatively correlated with the error term.      Thus,

using occupation to instrument wages is likely to reduce but not eliminate

the bias due to hours in the denominator of the wage measure.    Partially

because of the lack of perfect instruments for wage, we also consider

reduced    form labor supply equationsin which wages have been eliminated.
     The   bias is further reduced by concentrating on the results of
equations where i, the     difference between actual and desired hours, is the

dependent variable.    Asymptotic bias will occur only to the extent that
                                                                   9


over- or under-employment in particular occupations is correlated with the

average hours in those occupations for reasons unrelated to wages.

Intuitively,    there seems no reason to expect such a correlation.

     On the other hand, the bias from including nonlabor income with labor

income should be solved by instrumenting wages with occupation, since

occupation is unlikely to be significantly correlated with nonlabor income.

     In the case of women, almost all respondents indicated that they were

in the first or second income category.     As a consequence almost of the

variation in estimated wages would be due to variation in hours, and it is

impossible to estimate the labor supply-wage relationship.     Therefore, for

women, only reduced form equations excluding wage are reported.

     The remaining variables used in this study are URBAN, a dummy variable

equal to   1   if the individual lives in an urban area, MARRIED, a dummy

variable equal to 1 if the individual is presently married, AGE measured in

10 year intervals, CHILDREN, the number of children in the household under

age fourteen's, four dummy variables for education levels, no education

beyond primary school being the left out variable and UNION, a dummy

variable if the worker is covered by a collective bargaining agreement.

We limited the sample to individuals who were employed in the private

nonagricultural sector who were age 25-64 and for whom a complete set of

data were available.



III. Results

     The responses indicate considerable divergence between actual and


     However, if there were more than three children in any one category
                                                      three children for
(five or less, 6-11, 12-14), the survey recorded only
that age group.
                                                                             10

desired hours.    Just over half of respondents would like to work a different

number of hours at their present wage.        Of these, over two-thirds would like

more hours.    The difference between the proportion wanting to work more and

those wanting to work less is somewhat more pronounced for nonunion men than

it is for union men or women. (See Table I)            Of those expressing a preferred

number of hours, the average nonunion male worker wanted to work 3.8 more

hours than he actually worked, while on average union male workers and women

workers wanted to work 3.0 and 3.7 more hours, respectively.

     Responses to the question about wanting to work more, fewer or the same

number of hours appear to be somewhat but not qualitatively different from

those obtained in the United States CPS in May 1985 (Shank 1986).                  In the

CPS, on average 64.8% of wage and salaried workers wanted to work the same,

7.5% wanted to work less, and 27.7% wanted to work more.             Thus,    in Canada,

it seems that a somewhat lower proportion of workers are satisfied with

their present hours, and that of those who would like to change their hours,

in Canada a somewhat higher proportion want to work fewer hours.                  We can

only speculate whether these differences are due to the wording of the

questions in the surveys in the two countries or to actual U.S.-Canada labor

market differences.

     As discussed in Section   I,   labor supply estimates using the log of

actual hours h rather than desired hours h* are likely to be biased only if

the deviation between    ln h* and ln   h,.   or   i    in   equation (2), is orthogonal

to the explanatory variables in the labor supply equation. Table II,

columns   (1)-(3), gives the results from regressing p.           the difference

between log actual hours worked and log desired hours worked, on exogenous

variables besides wage typically included in labor supply equations, while
                                                                             11

columns (4) and (5) give the results including wage (instrumented)                 as well.

Since the wage variable cannot be constructed for women, only the reduced

form estimates in Table II allow us to compare all three demographic groups,

union men, nonunion men and women.          For each of these three groups the

explanatory variables in columns (l)—(3) are jointly significant although

their explanatory power is small.

           Table II indicates that higher wages increase the extent to which

individuals work more than they wish         to.    Thus,   in columns (1) and (2)

those variables which raise wages also increase             ,   the   log(actual

hours/desired hours), consistent with the positive significant coefficients

on wage in columns (4) and (5).          Nevertheless,   the magnitude of this wage

effect is quite small and is statistically insignificant in the case of

union men.       The small positive point estimates of the effect of wage on

implies that labor supply elasticities for men are slightly biased upwards:

i.e.   ,    the true   labor supply curve based on desired hours (equation         1) is

steeper than the labor supply equation based on actual hours (equation 2),

since low wage workers tend to desire to work (on average) more extra hours

than do high wage workers.          This bias is in the opposite direction from that

expected a priori.

           For women, the Table II coefficients generally tell a similar if less

consistent story:         most but not all variables which raise wages also tend to

increase i, and thus decrease         underemployment,   the tendency to want to work

more.       This is particularly clear in the case of education. The exceptions

are the "married' variable,         which is generally negatively correlated with


     Additional tabulations (not shown) demonstrate that this reflects both
an increase in the fraction wanting to work less and a decrease in the
fraction wanting to work more as wages rise.
                                                                   12
wages   for women but here,   decreases underemployment and age which has no

effect.

      Age is the only other coefficient which is statistically significant

for both nonunion and union men when wage is included in the equations.

Overemployment (actual minus desired hours) increases with age.      To the

extent that age proxies tenure, this is the opposite of what is predicted by

the Lazear (1979, 1981) agency model where wages exceed VMP later in the

work relation to deter cheating,     so that more senior workers wish to work

more hours than the contract permits.      On the other hand, the finding is

consistent with specific-capital models in which workers and firms share the

investment so that VMP exceeds the wage for senior workers.'°

        To check whether the Table IT results are reasonable despite the

imperfect wage measure and instruments,     Table III reports the labor supply

equations underlying the last two columns of Table II.      Elasticities from

the labor supply equations of log(actual hours) are close to zero and in the

general range of unsophisticated labor supply estimates using better wage

data reviewed in Killingsworth (1983).      This suggests that the downwards

bias on the elasticity estimates from using the poor wage measure is not

too   great.   It Is likely that problems due to the poor wage measure are very

small even in the labor supply equations, where we would expect its effect

to be much greater than in the equations of log(actual/desired hours).         This

therefore lends credence to our estimates in Table IT.




     '°For a more detailed consideration of this point using U.S. data see
Kahn and Lang (1987).
                                                                      13

IV.   Conclusion

        Despite our finding that the majority of workers desire to work a

different number of hours from that which they actually work and that a

strong majority of these are underemployed,      our findings generally suggest

that the implications for studies of labor supply are fairly modest.        The

bias from using actual rather than desired hours is on the order of .05 or

.1.     This small bias is consistent with Ball (1987), Ham (1982) and Lundberg

(1985).

        Moreover, in contrast to what might have been expected,     labor supply

elasticities appear to be lower using desired rather than actual hours.        If

hours constraints simply made workers' actual hours inflexible compared to

their desired hours, for instance if hours are fixed at forty hours per

week, we would expect desired hours to respond more sharply to wage

differences than actual hours.     However,   the bias observed is in the

opposite direction. The bias results from a positive correlation between

[log(actual/desiredhours)j and wages that results from      fewer   higher wage

workers than lower wage workers wanting to work more, more wanting to work

less.     This finding calls for further theoretical and empirical study

consideration. It implies that a positively sloped relationship between

actual hours and wages may, at least partially,     be the result of employers

preferring low wage workers to work fewer hours than desired while

preferring high wage workers to work additional hours, rather than the

result of labor supply responses.
                                                                       14

                                      REFERENCES


Ball,   Laurence,   "Intertemporal Substitution and Constraints on Labor Supply:
Evidence from Panel Data,' mirneo,         1987.

                                                    of Dual Labor Markets
Bulow, Jeremy I. and Summers, Lawrence H. 'A Theory
with Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and Keynesian
                                           4              376-414.
Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics, (July 1986):
                                                             and Labor
Dickens, William T. and Shelly Lundberg, "Hours Restrictions
Supply,' NBER Working Paper No. 1636, 1985.
                                                                 Due to
Ham, John C., Estimation of a Labor Supply Model with Censoring49 (July
Unemployment and Underemployment," Review of Economic Studies,
1982): 335—54.

                           Labor Supply.     New York: Cambridge University Press,
Killingsworth, M.R.
1983.

                                                               or Why Was
Lang, Kevin, 'The Impossibility of Efficient Bonding Contracts
There Mandatory Retirement?" NBER Working Paper No. ????.

Lazear, Edward, "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity and Hours
                                                              606-20.
Restrictions," American Economic Review, 71 (September 1981):
                                            Journal of Political Economy,
______ "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?"
87 (December 1979): 1261-84.

 Lilien, David M. and Robert E. Hall, "Cyclical Fluctuations in the Labor
 Market," in Orley Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, Handbook of Labor
 Economics Volume    II.
                       Amsterdam: North Holland, 1986.

                                                               of Wages,"
 Lundberg, Shelly, "Tied Wage-Hours Offers and the Endogeneity
 P.iew     of Economics and Statistics 1985:405—410.
 Rosen, Sherwin, "The Theory of Equalizing Differences," in Orley Ashenfelter
 and Richard Layard, Handbook of Labor Economics Volume I. Amsterdam: North
 Holland, 1986: 641-692.

 Shank, Susan E. 'Preferred Hours of Work and Corresponding Earnings,"
 Monthly Labor Review, 109 (November 1986): 40-4.
                                                               15
                                 APPENDIX

     The question about reduced work hours was preceded by the following
preamble:
        "The following questions are about working less time for less pay.
     Assume that you would lose one hours pay for each hour that you no
     longer work. Put another way, you would lose 5% of your pay if you
     work 5% less time. When you are answering the question, assume that
     your job situation stays the same. Your job security would not be
     affected.   You would not jeopardize your chances for promotion or pay
     raises.   You wouldn't lose your pension or other benefits."
The first question was:
     "In the next two years, would you take a cut in pay if you received
     more time off in return?'
Those who answered 'no" were asked "Why not?' with reply categories "Can't
afford it," "Like my hours now," "Not possible in my job," and "Other
reason."
Those who answered "yes" were told:
     "Think about how much of your pay you could afford to give up to work
     less time. Remember, for every hour less you work, you would lose one
     hour's pay. Before answering the next question, here are some figures
     to help you:    A week off is about 2% of a full work year (and 2% of
     your pay); two weeks would be 4%; three weeks would be 6%. A half hour
     less per day all week long for a full work year is about 6% of your
     time and pay; one hour a day would be 12%; two hours a day would be
     24%. One day off every week all year long is about 202 of a full work
     year (and 20% of your pay); two days off would be 40%; two and a half
     days would be 50%. If you worked for 4 years at reduced pay in order
     to have the fifth year off, you would be reducing your pay by 20%. Use
     the chart below to help you think about these figures."
A chart relating percent pay cuts to dollar cuts for different salary levels
followed.
Respondents who had answered "no" to the first question were then asked
     "What percent of your pay would you give up to have more time off?"
All respondents were asked:
      "If you continue to be paid at the same rate of pay that you are now,
     would you work more hours for more pay?"
Respondents who answered "yes" were then asked:
      "How many more hours per week would you want to work?"
                               TABLE   I
             DESIRED HOURS OF WORK RELATIVE TO ACTUAL WORK

               Nonunion Men         Union Men                Women

WANTS MORE            40.6                 33.0               32.0

SAME                  45.5                 50.4               51.1

WANTS LESS            13.8                 16.6               16.9
                                         TABLE       II
                 DETERMINANTS OF LOG (ACTUAL HOURS/DESIRED HOURS)

                              I-statistics   are    in parentheses

                              Reduced Form       Estimates             IV Esttmates*

                          (1)                (2)              (3)        (4)           (5)
                  Non-Union Men       Union Men                      Non-Un. Men   ILtt   Men

URBAN                    0010            0.007               0.016      -0.011      0.003
                         (1.1)           (0.6)               (1.3)       (1.0)      (0.2)

MARRIED                  0.040           0.003             0.035        0.028      -0.001
                         (3.4)           (0.2)               (2.7)      (2.2)       (0.0)

AGE/b                    0.028           0.023            -0.003        0.019       0.020
                         (6.3)           (3.5)             (0.4)        (3.7)       (2.8)

(SOME) HIGH SCHOOL       0.033           0.041             0.020        0.010       0.031
                         (2.5)           (2.6)             (0.9)        (0.7)       (1.8)

SOME POST-SECONDARY 0.033                0.039             0.043        0.007       0.024
                         (1.9)           (1.5)             (1.6)        (0.3)       (0.8)

POST-SEC.   DIPLOMA    0.039             0.061             0.047       -0.007       0.043
                         (2.5)           (2.8)             (2.0)        (0.3)       (1.6)

UNIVERSITY             0.071            0.100             0.086         0.007       0.077
                       (4.5)            (3.6)             (3.1)         (0.3)       (2.3)

CHILDREN              -0.004           -0.002             -0.020       -0.007      -0.003
                       (0.9)             (0.2)             (3.1)        (1.6)       (0.4)
UNION                     -                  -            0.045
                                                           (3.3)
LOG WAGE                  -                  -                -         0.091       0.045
                                                                        (4.0)       (0.4)

                       0.032            0.022             0.015


Mean of dependent     -0.081           -0.067             -0.110       -0.081      -0.067
Variable

                         2239            1267                2793        2239        1267
First-stage regressors    include all explanatory variables          except log wage plus
28 occupation dummy   variables.
                                      TABLE III

             INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES ESTIMATES OF LABOR SUPPLY EQUATIONS

                               _________________
                                NONUNION MEN             UNION MEN
                           Loz         Log Desired
                               Actual ___________
                           __________                 Log Actual Log Desired

LOG WAGE                    0.046        -0.045        0.016           -0.029
                             (1.5)        (1.5)        (0.4)            (0.6)

URBAN                       -0.019       -0.009       -0.037           -0.040
                             (1.3)        (0.6)        (2.4)            (2.6)

MARRIED                     0.056        0.028         0.066           0.067
                            (3.2)         (1.7)        (2.9)           (2.9)

AGE/lO                      -0.009       -0.027        0.006           -0.014
                             (1.2)        (4.1)        (0.6)            (1.7)

(SOME) HIGH SCHOOL          0.011        0.001         0.014           -0.018
                            (0.5)        (0.0)         (0.6)            (0.8)

SOME POST-SECONDARY         0.014        0.007        -0.045           -0.069
                             (0.5)       (0.3)         (1.2)            (1.9)

POST-SEC.    CERTIFICATE    0.001        0.007         0.022           -0.021
                            (0.0)        (0.3)         (0.7)            (0.6)

UNIVERSIfl                  -0.024       -0.032        0.060           -0.018
                             (0.8)        (1.0)        (1.4)            (0.4)

CHILDREN                    0.003        0.010         0.001           0.003
                            (0.5)        (1.7)         (0.2)           (0.4)


T-statistics in parentheses.
First-stage regressors include all explanatory variables       except log wage plus
28 occupation dummy variables.
