                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM:
                         DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS




                              Jacob A. Frenkel

                              Morris Goldstein




                           Working Paper No. 2648




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NEER Working Paper #2648
                                        July 1988


                      THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM:
                          DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS


                                  ABSTRACT




     This paper addresses several fundamental issues raised by recent

developments in the world economy and considers their implications for

the design and functioning of the international monetary system.   We do

not make any proposals.

     The four issues examined in the paper are:

     (1)   Can the exchange rate regime do much to discipline fiscal

policy?;

     (2)   What are the extent and costs of reduced monetary independence

under greater fixity of exchange rates?;

     (3)   How can the equilibrium exchange rate best be determined?;


     (4)   Does a well functioning international monetary system require

a clearly defined set of rules, an acknowledged leader, and an
                                                               explicit

anchor?




Jacob A. Fremkel                        Morris Goldsteim
International Monetary Fumd             International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.                   700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431                    Washington, DC 20431
                                 I.     tntroduction */

       I.      This paper addresses   several   fundamental issues raised by

recent developments in the world economy and considers their implications

for the design and functioning of the international monetary system.

We do not make any proposals.         Our purpose instead is to identify

factors that merit attention in any serious examination of the system.

       2.     First, some background.    Over the past two—and—a—half years,

the international economic landscape in the industrIal world has been

dominated by the following key developments.

       To begin with, there have been unprecedented current account

imbalances for the three largest economies.           Last year,   the United

States recorded a current account deficit of $160 billion, while Japan

and the Federal Republic of Germany registered surpluses of $85 billion

and $43 bilLion, respectively; see Table         1.   A   primary objective of

policy has been to reduce these external imbalances while still

maintaining satisfactory growth of the world economy. The contribution
that fiscal policy should make to reducing absorption relative to
output      in the United States, and to   increasing it in surplus countries,
has   become an integral——and often a contentious——element in the policy

dialogue.       Suffice to say that the adjustment of fiscal positions has
proven to be a difficult process, with firm evidence of a narrowing
of earlier divergencies apparent only within the last year or so;
see Table 2.
   Table 1. Major Industrial Countries: Balance of Payments on Current Account, 1980—87 1/



                            1980        1981    1982      1983     1984       1985      1986      1987


                                                  (In billions of U.S. dollars)
Balance on   current
  account

  United States              1.87        6.89   —8.68    —46.25 —107.01 —116.39       —141.35   —161.31
 Japan                     —10.75        4.77    6.85     20.80    35.00      49.27     85.85     86.69
 Federal Republic
   of Germany              —15.69       —5.22    4.07      4.15     8.42      15.25     38.10     44.21
                                                        (In percent of GNP)

 United States               0.07        0.23   0.27      —1.76    —2.84      —2.90     —3.34     —3.60
 Japan                      —1.01        0.41   0.63       1.76     2.78       3.67      4.34      3.64
  Federal Republic
   of Germany               —1.92       —0.76   0.62      0.63      1.35       2.41      4.23      3.92
  if Including    official transfers.
                                                   basis.   accounts income       national   a    on    are Data     1/
0.23      0.21                                                  •
                    —0.79      0.55     —0.42     —1.87      1 5 —0   19 —0.                         Germany of
                                                                                                 Republic Federal
0.16      —0.87     —0.71      —1.22    —0.19     —0.52      —0.78    40 —0.                                Japan
—1.00     0.22      0.67       0.60     0.57      0.55       —0.50    0.65                             States   United
                                                                                             coittractiouary) —
                                                                                              ry, bun expaus (+
                                                                                                        impulse Fiscal
—1.69     —1.21     —1.15      —1.90    —2.52     —3.29      —3.67    —2.89                      Germany of
                                                                                             Republic Federal
—0.81     —0.58     —1.03      —2.09    —3.66     —3.60      —3.84    1   4 —4.                         pan a
—2.39     —3.49     —3.33      —2.78    —3.78     —3.50      —0.97    —1.26                     States United
                            CNP) of percent (In
—19.06    —10.87    —7.25      —11.87   —16.60    65 —21.    —25.17   —23.68                     Germany of
                                                                                             Republic Federal
—19.38    —11.52    —13.77    —26.25    —43.23    15 —39.   —44.86    —46.94                            Japan
—107.30   —147.80   —133.60   —105.00   —128.60   —110.80   —29.60    —34.50                    States United
                                                                                                          deficit)
                                                                                                           —
                                                                                    surplus, (+ balance Fiscal
 1987      1986      1985       1984     1983      1982       1981        1980
                               1/ 1980—87 Impulses, and Balances Fiscal
                      Government General Countries: Industrial Major 2. TabLe
                                    —4—


        Heavy official intervention in exchange markets (especially during

1987)    and episodes of coordinated adjustments In interest rates——both

undertaken in an effort to foster more stability in key—currency

exchange rates——have been a second prominent feature of the landscape;

see Chart 1.      These, in combination with the monetary response to the

global stock market crash of October 19, 1987 and plans for a liberali-

zation of capital controls in the European Monetary System (EMS) by

1992——have once again put the spotlight on an old question:     how succes-

sful can monetary policy be when it is asked to wear two hats, one for

internal and the other for external balance?

        Another distinguishing characteristic of the last two—and—a—half

years has been the sizable decline in both the nominal and real value

of the U.S. dollar.      8y now, all of the 1980—85 real appreciation of

the dollar (on an effective basis) has been reversed; see Chart 2.

The central question has been:      do you think the dollar decline has

gone far enough?     On a number of occasions (e.g., Louvre, February 22,

1987; the September 1987 meetings of the Interim Committee; and the

0—7   statement   of December 22, 1987), officials have supplied their own

answer——by offering a concerted view on the consistency of the exist-

ing pattern of exchange rates with 'fundamentals."      Moreover, interest

continues to be expressed in some reform proposals——including a

system of target zones——that hinge on knowledge of equilibrium exchange

rates.
                                                —    —




           Chort     1.   THe DoLLar and ReaL Interest Rates
                              01 1980 - 04 1987


                                                                                         12



                                                                                         10



                                                                                         8



                                                                                         6


                                                                                         4



                                                                                         2


                                                                                         0


                                                                                         150



                                                                                         115


                                                                                         130




                                                                                         70
   1980       1981        1982           1983       1984    1985       1986       1987

    Oot.-1th.o.-o9.                              t,-or,L or obot 90 do
1/
d.flot.d       xot..ho.-t—t.,-,non.
                     do,....tLc d.,.ord d.rLotor. 0ih. 97 Lot.r..t rot.
        ol ,Lo,dooL "ot... W.L9ht. o. d.rLn.d      n footoot.2.
                                                                              ,otuLL
                                                                                o

2/ TF. NU..C odju.tsd doltor L. o o..9ht.d oo.rog. d.o of the cochoog. voLo. of the dolLzr
o9aLn.t th. curr.nci.. of the other 97  countrc.., jh.r.nomcnoL .ochongs rote, ore
sOLtLpLL.d b9 the reLot'.rorsotL.d nt Lobor coo to .c.oru                        ore
                                                                 foctorcg. ke.qhte
proportconot to
3/ U.S. root
                  sooN
                    countr9,
              .horttero  tore
                          L
                                 shor,
                                     otesLrws other 9—7 reoL ehort—tere   Lroe.
                                       of worLd trod. LflOOflofOCLurLfly durcny 990.
        Chart 2. tlojor lndustrLOL Contnos: ReaL Effectve Exchan9e Rates, 1980                                                      88 1/
                                                                      1980 — 100)



                                                                                                                                                60




                                                                                                                                                15




                                                                                                                                            I   30




                                                                                                                                            I IS



                                                        Jopor
                                                               ,                                                                            IOU
                                                  —'
                                                   —
                                                                            —
                                                                                                                                            115




                                                                                                                                            70
        1980               1981          982
H. FLozo        H0roro,L, Sep1ober' 22,            985.
El. Tk1        flL eL       M9 16,                             986.
C. Los Ird, lsbnry   22, 1087.
                          1987.
0       Vee 6on. ,
                i,re                 1110,
1.      Crp ol           Ss.er 5t.oLeoer1, [)ocs,rber   22, 987
I   /   Rc;iI   ti   I        v   ';litniiy  it  is littitil    iii Iloinli I its) niti   Ituloir cooLs ill uIuuiuuuIrtL(1r1111!.
                                        —5—


      Last but not least, the period since the Plaza Agreement has

witnessed a strengthening of international economic policy coordination

among the major countries.         Coordination agreements have featured both

country—specific policy commitments and official pronouncements on the

pattern of exchange rates, but have not specified rules, anchors, or a

center—country for the exchange rate system.           Debate continues on

whether the present coordination process is merely an intermediate

stage on the way to a more far—reaching rule—based reform of the system,

or is instead a durable, workable compromise between what some regard

as the excesses of decentralized floating and the straitjacket of

fixed rates.

      3.      So much for the landscape. How does it relate to prospects

for the international monetary system?          We would say "quite a lot."

Indeed,     much of the controversy over reform of the system can be

traced back     to   different views about the capabilities and limitations

of more managed exchange rates        regimes   to deal with   just the sort of
policy problems outlined above.         In our view,   four central issues

merit particular attention in the Current climate:

      First, can the exchange rate regime do much to help discipline

fiscal     policy;
      Second, what       are the extent and costs of reduced     monetary

independence        greater fixity of exchange rates;
                 under

      Third, how can the equilibrium exchange rate best be determined;
and
                                           —6—

        Fourth,   does a well—functioning internstional monetary system

explicit anchor?

        We examine each of these issues in turn.


                  II.    Fiscal Policy and the Exchange Rate   Regi
        L.   The proposition that the commitment to defend the parity provides

economic agents with Increased discipline to avoid inflationary policies

is one of the oldest sod most durable arguments for fixed           rates.   Yet

close scrutiny of the typical focus of the discipline hypothesis

suggests that it could be akin to Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark.

In what follows, we elaborate on this point.

        2.   The traditional province of the discipline hypothesis is monetary

policy.      Under      the well—known Mundell—Fleming model, monetary policy is


completely ineffective for a small country with fixed exchange rates in
a world of high capital mobility.           This is merely one application of

the dictum that policymakers who seek to achieve simultaneously fixed

rates, open capital markets, and an independent monetary policy will

be frustrated.          The best they can dn is to achieve any two of the

three    objectives.       Thus,   once the choice is made for fixed rates and

open capital markets, monetary policy is effectively disciplined.             The


exchange rate could be devalued to give monetary policy a longer leash,

but this is ruled out by the assumption that devaluation would bring

with it heavy political costs.

        More recently,       the domain of the discipline argument has been

extended to wage policy.            The basic idea here is that if exchange rate


adjustments don't completely offset inflation differentials, then the
                                        —7—



resultant real appreciation for high inflation countries will deter
exports, real output, and employment——thereby acting as a disincentive
to   excessive wage settlements.    I    An   interesting   and   unresolved
question     is how long it will take to convince workers of the downward

slope of the labor—demand schedule, especially if wage developments are

dominsted by insiders with jobs rather than by outsiders without them.

       3.     Surprisingly enough, disciplinary effects on        fiscal policy
have   been relatively neglected——and this despite the role often attributed

to lax fiscal policy (particularly in the United States) in both the

breakdown of Bretton Woods and the large——many would say "excessive"——

real appreciation of the dollar during the 1980—85 period.

       4.     It is therefore worth asking if and how alternative exchange rate


regimes might influence fiscal policy.

       First, consider fixed rates.      With high capital mobility,      a fiscal

expansion will yield an incipient positive interest rate differential,

a capital     inflow,   and a balance of payments surplus——not a deficit.

Hence, exchange rate fixity helps to finance——and by no means

disciplines——irresponsible fiscal policy.         As suggested in the recent

literature on "speculative attacks,        3' only if and when the markets

expect fiscal deficits to be monetized will they force the authorities

to choose between fiscal policy adjustnent and devaluation.             The better

the reputation of the monetary authorities, the longer in coming will

be the discipline of markets.        In this connection,     it is worth observing

that whereas the EMS has produced significant convergence of monetary


policy,     convergence of fiscal policies has not taken place. 4I
                                       —8—


     Second,     consider the outcome under target zunea.     Suppose the

zones   are to   be   defended by monetary policy.    In that case, a fiscal

expansion   that puts appreciating pressure     on   the exchange rate will
produce   a loosening of monetary policy to keep the rate from leaving

the zone.    Again,     the exchange rate regime will have exacerbated——not

disciplined——the basic cause of the problem.          Only if the threatened

departure of the exchange rate from the zone initiates a review of the

whole range of policies and if that (multilateral) review tilts the

balance of power in the domestic debate toward fiscal responsibility,

will target zones discipline fiscal policy.          This missing link between

exchange rate movements and fiscal policy under target zones is being

increasingly recognized.        Note that whereas first—generation target

zone proposals spoke meinty of monetary polLtytecond—generation

proposals have added a specific rule to rein in fiscal policy; contrast

Williamson [1985] with Williamson and Miller [1987].

        What about floating rates? With high capital mobility, one would

again expect fiscal expansion tu prompt appreciation of the real

exchange rate.        Pressures for reversal are then likely to come from

the beleaguered traded goods sector,       as it looks for ways to turn

around its decline in competitiveness. The trouble here is that there

is also the protectionist alternative to fiscal discipline,         which,    if


adopted, would again follow one inappropriate polfcy with another. 5/

The recent U.S. experience is suggestive of the difficulties associated

with forging a dominant constituency for fiscal reform, and of the

perseverance necessary to combat measures for quick—fix protectionist

alternatives.
                                       —9—


     Finally, consider the influences operating on fiscal policy in
a regime of managed floating with international economic policy
coordination, One immediate advantage is that the potential for        a

perverse monetary policy response is reduced since specific fiscal

policy commitments     can be specified directly as part of a negotiated

policy package.      That is, one avoids the intermediate link between the

exchange rate signal and the policy response.        But this regime too is

not entirely without pitfalls.        For one thing, the kind of specific,

quantitative policy commitments that lend themselves to reliable

monitoring may be perceived as intruding too much on national sover-

eignty.   For another,    there is no explicit mechanism for shsrng the

fiscal adjustment across participants. Also, there is the problem of

implementation of    fisLa'.   policy agreements when the responsibility for

implementation lies with different branches of government in different
countries. 6/

     5.   The bottom line of all this is that if proposals for modifi-

cation or reform of the exchange rate system are truly to lead to more

disciplined macroeconomic policies,      more attention has to be given to

how the exchange rate regine will impact on fiscal policy behavior.

To some observers,    the answer is that fiscal reform must precede reform

of the exchange rate system.       To nthers, the answer may be that better

fiscal discipline requires mechanisms outside of the exchange rate

system, such as Gramm—Rudmsn legislation. And to still others,        the

answer may be that the multilateral give—and—take encouraged by

polIcy coordination or a system of target zones is a necessary, if not
                                     —   10 —




sufficient,   tool for achieving greater fiscal responsibility.    One

thing is clear:    it will be hard to know how to shape the evolution of

the exchange rate system without knowing beforehand how to better

discipline fiscal policy.


                      III.   Monetary Policy Independence

     1.    As suggested earlier, a strong message from the theoretical

literature is that a more fixed exchsnge rate regime requires keeping

more of an "eye' on the exchange rate in the conduct of domestic

monetary policy.     What is much more controversial is what such s

reduced independence of monetary policy would cost.

     2.    Concern about reduced monetary independence is often strongest

in countries with either relatively low or relatively high inflation

rates.    In the former, there is a worry about repetition of the latter

days of Bretton Woods when disequilibrium exchange rates, heavy

exchange market intervention,    and massive capital flows combined to

wrestle control of the money supply away from the authorities.        In

their view,   a similar occurrence would jeopardize both their price—

stability objectives and their hard—won anti—inflationary reputations.

For the high inflation countries, there is a concern that less monetary

independence could handicap the battle against the cyclical component

of high unemployment. In addition, high—inflation countries       often

suffer from weak fiscal systems with relatively heavy reliance on the

inflation tax.   J    In this regard, they worry that a lower inflation

rate will reduce their revenue from seignorage, run up against tax
                                               —         —
                                                    11




evasion      in seeking to compensate for it by raising other taxes, and

hence,      complicate what are already difficult fiscal problems.

       3.      More generally, there is a concern that greater stability of

exchange rates would be purchased at the cost of both greater

instability of other prices in the economy——including interest rates

and prices of nontraded goods, and of a diminished capacity to use

monetary policy to pursue other objectives of policy.                         For example, a

large hIke in interest rates            taken to protect a weak currency could

disrupt stock market prices.             Similarly, a firm commitment to defend

a given exchange rate pattern might lImit the freedom of maneuver of

monetary authorities in combating a weakness of certain financial

institutions.

       4.      Some would say that exchange market intervention offers a

solution to the 'two—hat           problem by introducing an additional policy

instrument to handle the exchange rate.                       Note that this line of argument

should refer exclusively to sterilized intervention since non—sterilized

intervention is best regarded as monetary policy by another name.                          Yet

the   available empirical evidence             on   sterilized intervention is not
very encouraging to Chose         who    favor highly managed rates. In brief,
the Jurgensen Report [1983 concluded                     that sterilized intervention

is not      likely to   have a   powerful      effect        on   the level of the exchange
rate over the medium to          long   run.       Thus, while       intervention may be
helpful     in smoothing short—run volatility and in providing the market

with a 'signal' about the future course of policies,                       8/ it is not by

itself likely Co deliver monetary policy from having to serve two

masters.
                                     —   12 —




     5.      Another possible way out of the box would be controls on

international cspital flows.      This is indeed the route sometimes

taken in the past by some members of the EMS, as evidenced by the

widening of interest differentials (adjusted for differences      in tax

traatment)     between onshore and offshore financial instruments

(denominated in the same currency) during periods of exchange rate

crisis.   9/    No one asserts that capital controls are costless.   The


argument instead is that such controls are less costly to the real

side of the economy than alternative policy options.       In fact, Tobin's

[19801 "sand—in—the—wheels" proposal for an international round—tripping

tax on all capital flows employs just this rationale.

     In our view, the case for capital controls is a weak one, on at

least five counts.

     First,     the benefits from liberalization of capital controls appear

to be substantial, including higher real returns to savers, smaller

spreads between borrowing and lending rates, a lower cost of capital to

firma,    better hedging possibilities against a variety of risks, and a

more efficient allocation of investment. 10/

     Second,    capital controls themselves induce changes in financial

structure and rent—seeking activities that make it difficult to

subsequently reverse them; yet the longer they stay in place, the more

serious the distortions associated with them.

     Third, there is no effective way to separate a priori productive

from nonproductive capital flows.        Also, the costs of an inappropriate

classification could be large.      In this connection, if some speculators
                                         —   13 —




are deterred       from seeing through the 'J-curve," exchange market

stability       could be adversely affected——a      result directly opposite to
the   original rationale for controls.
       Fourth, since controls are seldom negotiated            on a   multilateral
basis, they can poison the atmosphere for advances in coordination and
cooperation in other areas; in particular, controls on capital flows
run counter to the development of an outward—looking policy strategy.
        Fifth,    round—tripping taxes are    neIther practical nor desirable.
To   work, such taxes      need to be applied   universally; yet an incentive
always       exists for some   country not to impose the tax and thereby to
capture much of other countries' business, i.e.,              their effectiveness

will be diminished by 'reguiatory arbitrage.'           UI Also,       they would

require a       country that wishes to attract a capital inflow to raise
interest rates even more, to offset the effect of the tax, thereby
possibly      increasing the variability of interest rates.

        6.      Yet another tack would be to assign fiscal policy to internal

balance so that monetary policy can concentrate more on the exchange

rate.        Such an argument, however, faces two immediate problems.          One   is
that fiscal policy is considerably less flexible than monetary policy

in almost all industrial countries; contrast,           for   example, the frequency
in   the United States of meetings of the FOMC with the frequency of

budget submissions to Congress. The other problem is that fiscal

policy is not oriented to short—run stabilization goals in most

industrial countries; it is instead guided by other considerations

(e.g., reducing the share of government in GDF, reducing the burden of
                                     —   14   —




taxation,   etc.)   that often become objectives in themselves.    For these

reasons, it is hard to think of fiscal policy as a close substitute

for monetary poiicy.

      7.    Thus far, we have outlined some of the costs   and trade—offs that

might be associated with less independent monetary policy.        There is,

however, another side of the issue that sees both the loss and

consequences of monetary independence under greater exchange rate fixity

as much less serious. Advocates of this position make the following

points:

     First, the independence of monetary policy disappears once the

exchange rate is transformed from a policy instrument to a policy

target.    Experience suggests that few countries are able to treat the

exchange rate with "benign neglect" once it moves by a large smount. 12/

     Second, increased independence of monetary policy is not synonymous

with increased effectiveness. The true constraint on the latter is not

the exchange rate regime but instead the openness of national economies,

particularly high international capital mobility. With floating rates,

exchange rates respond rapidly to perceived changes in monetary policy;

nominal wages and prices adjust rapidly to changes in exchange rates;

and the invariance of real wages to exchange rate changes——guaranteed

over the long run by the homogeneity postulate——limits the effects of

monetary policy on real output and employment. 13/      In the end, the real

choice is betveen accepting reasonable constraints beforehand or having

them imposed at higher cost later by markets. 14/
                                       —
                                           15 —




       Third,   the inflexibility of fiscal policy is an asset——not a


lIability——in a world of inflation—prone authorities.           Growth and price

stabilIty will be best served when fiscal policy is put on a steady,

medium—term course.      If there is an unusual situation that is widely

recognIzed as calling for a shorter—term adjustment of fiscal policy,

it can be accomplished (witness recent temporary departures from the

medium—term path of fiscal consolidation in Japan and in the Federal

Republic of Germany).

       8.    To sum up, the real issue is not whether monetary policy is

capable of restoring more stability to exchange rates,           Surely it can.

It is instead what one has to give up in terms of other objectives to

get   it.   To some observers, that shadow price is too high and they

would therefore prefer to live with a "natural degree of exchange

rate stability——much in the way that one accepts a "natural'          rate of

unemployment. To others, the exchange rate regime cannot take away

what is no longer there in any case, namely,        the   ability of monetary

policy to influence real output and employment in the long run under

conditions of high capital mobility.         Again, the view that prevails

in the end will have a lot to do with the structure of any modification

or reform of the exchange rate system.


                 IV.   Identifying Equilibrium Exchange Rates
       1.   As highlighted in our     earlier snapshot of   key developments    in
the   world economy,   the 1980s   have been marked by large swings in major

currency exchange rates. One popular position has been that these

currency swings have been subject to large and persistent misalignments,
                                        —   16 —




where by "misalignment"        one means a departure of the actual (real)

exchange rate from its equilibrium level.          One   implication   of this

                                                                    be
view is that the exchange rate is too important a relative price to

left entirely to the market and therefore that officials should guide

the market by supplying it with their own          concerted view   of the


equilibrium rate.         An opposing position is that the very concept of an

                                                         is so riddled
equilibrium exchange rate different from the market rate

with conceptual and empirical problems as to render it operationally

vacuous. 15/

      2.     The case that the equilibrium exchange rate may differ from the

rate generated by the free operation of the marketplace rests on a

number     of arguments:
      One    is   that   the equilibrium rate should reflect the sustainability
of   policies.     16/    For example, if the market exchange rate reflects an

unsustainable budget deficit, then this rate may not be considered as

an equilibrium even though it clears demand and supply in the market.

       A   second rationale for rejecting the market rate as an equilibrium

rate is that it may imply undesirable values for certain objectives of

                                               or the degree of restriction in
policy, such as unemployment, growth,

goods and capital markets.          Nurkse [19451, for example, defined the

                                                            in the
equilibrium rate as the rate that would produce equilibrium

balance of payments,         without wholesale unemployment, undue restrictions

on trade, or special incentives to incoming or outgoing capital.

       The existence of market imperfections represents another possible

reason for eschewing the market's verdict, this time on second—best

 considerations. Specifically, the existence of imperfect labor
                                    —
                                        17   —




mobility    is sometimes put forward as a reason for concluding that the

market rate is too "noisy," 17/ and that exchange rate stability shares

certain "public good" attributes. 18/

     The recent literature on "speculative bubbles" can also be seen as

antagonistic to the market—rate—is—the—right—rateposition by

demonstrating that models of profitable destabilizing speculation can

exist.

     On the empirical side, there is likewise by now a large body of

empirical work which suggests that there have been periods over the

past 15 years when the market's evaluation of the equilibrium rate was

considerably different from the sustainable rate (Krugman [1985]), or

when it was difficult ex post to explain actual rate movements in

terms of "fundamentals" (Buiter and Miller [1983]),

     Finally,   even if one did want to look to the market for the

equilibrium rate, opponents of floating rates point out the market rate

is distorted by a variety of official interventions that render it

a far cry from s "clean float."     Since there are many ways to skin a

cat and since it is hard to envisage a prohibition on all such inter—

ventons, the market rate     is, in their view,       of limited use.

                                                                        That is, if
     3.      Still, it takes an estimate to beat an estimate.

the market's view is rejected, then authorities need to supply their

own estimate of the equilibrium rate.            What then are the leading

approaches? 12/

     Perhaps    the most long—lived is the purchasing—power—parity (PPP)


approach.     This can be expected to generate reasonable estimates if one
                                        —   18   —




can   identify an equilibrium base period            and   if   all   shocks between the
base and      current periods are monetary in origin.             But when there are    real.


shocks,      one normally wants a   departure from         PPP.   Trend inter—country
differences in      labor productivity (not just in tradables relative to

nontradables a la Balassa [19641 but in tradables                 as well); 20/

permanent changes in the terms of trade; and shifts from net creditor

to net debtor positions——are just some of the real factors that call

for a change in real exchange rates.             In this sense, it can be

hazardous to assume that the equilibrium exchange rate is constant over

time.

        A   second option is to resort to structural models of exchange rate

determination to produce estimates of the exchange rate consistent with

 fundamentals.       The fly in the ointment here, aside from measurement

problems for some of the right—hand side variables, is that these

models——be they of the monetary or portfolio balance variety——have

been shown to possess poor out—of—sample forecasting properties. 21/

But why then should markets trust them as reliable indicators of

equilibrium rates?

        Yet a third way to go is to use an econometric trade model to

solve for the level of the exchange rate that——given anticipated

real output and inflation paths over the next 18 months or so, and given

any relative price effects still "in the pipe——will produce a current

account equal to "normal capital flows."              This is often referred to as

the underlying balance approach.        The main sticking point with this

approach,     aside from the wide range of estimates of trade
                                   —   19   —




elasticities,   22/ is the need to estimate "normal capital        flows.'     Given

the instability of perceived investment opportunities across countries

and over time, it is hard to say if, for example,          the United States

should be regarded as a net capital exporter or a net capital importer,

and if the latter, whether normal inflows are $10 billion or $100

billion.

     4.    All of this suggests——at least       to   us——that estimates of equi-

librium exchange rates could be subject to rather substantial margins

of error, and that official estimates of equilibrium rates should be

allowed to change over time in response to changes in real economic

conditions. Those who favor a modification or reform of the exchange

rate system therefore need to ponder two questions: (i) are official

estimates of the equilibrium exchange rate likely to be better on

average than the market's estimate, and (ii) would a moving official

estimate of the equilibrium exchange rate with a relatively wide band

be helpful as an anchor for medium—term expectations about exchange

rates?    If both these questions can be answered in the affirmative,

then the recent evolution of the system toward more "management' and

more "fixity" of exchange rates is likely to continue.           If not, then


strong reliance on the market to determine the right exchange rate,

like democracy, may be the worst system——except for all the others.


                       V.   Leaders, Rules and Anchors

     1.     The strengthening of international economic policy coordination

that began in earnest at the Plaza in September 1985 represents,             as

noted above, a move in the direction of more cooperative management of
                                       —   20 —



the system.       Yet some might describe present arrangements as a "non—

system"      because   relative to, say, Bretton Woods or the EMS, there is a

less formal structure, no acknowledged leader, and no explicit anchor.

It is therefore of interest to consider whether such factors are likely

to influence the effectiveness of an exchange rate system.

        2.     A convenient way of characterizing the Bretton Woods system is

as an "implicit contract" between the leading country, or hegemon, and

the satellite countries. 23/         The leader accepted the obligation to conduct

its macroeconomic policies in a prudent, stable way——perhaps best

summarized by a steady, low rate of inflation. This obligation was

also reinforced by the leader's commitment to peg some nominal price——in

this case,      the price of gold.    Since there were only N—l separate exchange

rates    among N currencies,     the leader was paasive about his exchange rate.

The satellite countries were committed to peg their exchange ratea within

agreed margins to the leader.         As a reaction to the competitive depre-

ciations of the l930s, all exchange rate adjustments were placed under

international supervision and were to be undertakan under conditions

of "fundamental disequilibrium." As a consequence of their exchange

rate obligations, the satellites gave up independence in their monerary

policies but received the assurance that they had hitched their wagons

to an engine that wouid stay on the tracks.         Under   this implicit contract,

both sides can be said to be "disciplined" by their obligations and

both share any efficiency gains associated with moving closer to an

international money.
                                         —   21 —




        With      the benefit of hindsight, it is apparent that such implicit

contracts can come under strain from a number of directions (in

addition to Triffin's [1960] well—known confidence probLem").               One

such strain is a breakdown of discipline by the leader such that the

satellites come to see it as exporting inflation rather than stability.

The satellites are then likely to sever their links with the leader and

to seek stability through other mechanisms,           including money—supply

targeting         and regional exchange rate arrangements with a more stable

leader.       A   second strain is a change in underlying conditions that

calls for a change in the real exchange rate between the leader and some

of the satellites to restore external balance.            If that equilibrating


change       in   the real exchange rate is blocked by too much r!gid!ty of

nominal      exchange   rates (in surplus satellite    countries),   then the

leader is apt to abandon his commitment to be passive about the exchange

rate.

        3.        The European Monetary System (EMS) like Bretton Woods, places


exchange rate adjustments under common supervision.               It also has clear

rules about the intervention obligations            of members.   While there is

no formal leader, many observers regard the Federal Republic of Germany

(and its Bundesbank) as the de facto or acknowledged leader. 24/                 In

this sense, it might be regarded as a system with informal hegemony.

The implicit contract is similar         n many     ways to that under Bretton

Woods.       Germany follows macroeconomic policies       that "export" price

stability and anti—inflationary credibility to the others.               It is


noteworthy that while there have been 11 realignments within the EMS,
                                              —   22 —




none of them has resulted             na    revaluation relative to the deutsche

mark,    thus leaving Germany's reputation aa an exporter of stability

intact.       Other EMS members are often described as                 tying their hands"

on domestic monetary policy.               Exchangs rate realignments may not

always       provide   full     compensation for past     inflation differentials.           In
this way, the resulting real appreciation for high inflation countries
can   act as a disincentive to inflation,                while low inflation countries

receive a gain in competitiveness that provides some compensation for

their export of anti—inflationary credibility. Monetary policy in

Germany is typically regarded as the anchor.

        4.     While there clearly have been periods when large countries have

exerted a      stabilizing influence         on the system,      it    in our view,
                                                                      would,
be erroneous to conclude that hegemony               is a necessary characteristic
of s well—functioning international monetary system.                      For one   thing,
Eichengreen's          [19871 careful study of alleged hegemonic systems,

including the gold standard,             reveals    that the amount nf coordination

needed for smooth functioning was substantisl. A case in point is the

coordinated action of last Fall in the EMS when Germany and the

Netherlands lowered their interest rates, while France raised its rate.

Second,       the appearance of hegemony can sometimes result as much from

common       objectives    as from aavnmetries in economic size or reputation

among countries. Again, the EMS               serves     as a   fascinating laboratory.
In the early l980s, disinflation              was   the top priority in virtually all
EMS   countries. Since            Germany had the best reputation for price
stability, there          was    a commonality of interests in trying to converge
                                          —   23 —




to   the German Inflation rate.         Now, however, some observers (e.g.,

Dornbusch 11988]) argue that given both the progress already made on the

inflatIon front and the high unemployment rates prevailing in some EMS

(and potential EMS) countries,         it is time to give greater weight to

objectives other than inflatIon. To some, such a decision would

inevitably result in a more symmetric EMS.               Indeed, these observers

(e.g., Holtham et al [1987]) view the proposals              on the EMS put forward

to the EC Monetary Committee last Fall by Minister Balladur of France

as prefacIng such a development of the EMS.

       5.      The system of floating rates that replaced Bretton Woods in

1973   could    be   said to have   its own   implicit   contract.   This contract

suggested that each country should adopt sound and stable macroeconomic
policies at the national level, with the expectation that stability of
exchange    markets would emerge as a useful by—product.             In the event,

some major countries did not adopt sound and stable policies at the

national level, spillovers or externalities associated with these

poor policies were significant (including protectionIst pressures),

and exchange rates displayed considerable volatility.                In this

decentralized system, there was no acknowledged leader.                National

macroeconomic policies served as anchors. The fact that intervention

practices were sometimes different and uncoordinated led some (McKinnon

[1984])     to argue that an upward rise was imparted to the world money

supply.

       6.    The perceived inadequacies of the decentralized floating rate

system were, not surprisingly, the impetus for the move to stronger
                                   —   24 —




international   economic policy coordination.   The rationale behind the

coordination process——and we think it can only be regarded as an

evolving process——is that you need a mechanism to internalize the

externalities of policy actions by the larger countries. 25/     Specifi-

cally, multilateral surveillance is employed to see that the interna-

tional spillovers——both good and bad——of each country's policies——

including the feedback of these spillovers to the country itself——are

taken into sccount in the final, multilateral policy bargain.     In some

cases, countries may also be able to use "peer pressure" to help them

take policy actions that are unpopular domestically but which are

beneficial to them in the long run. 26/

     Although successive coordination agreements share several common

elements (policy commitments, a concerted view on exchange rate

developments, and pledges for closer cooperation on exchange market

intervention), there are no explicit rules that apply across agree-

ments.    This flexibility carries both advantages and disadvantages. On

the one hand, the agreements can cover a broad range of policies

(including structural as well as macroeconomic policies), they can be

quite country—specific and quantitative, and they can be custom—

tailored to the most pressing problems of the day.    On the other hand,

without rules there are higher negotiation and recontracting coats.

     Countries' monetary and fiscal policies serve as anchors in this

system.   Recently, however, U.S. Treasury Secretary Baker and U.K.

Chancellor Lawson suggested the possible use of a commodity—price

basket indicator as an early warning signal of future aggregate price

developments. This might provide some assurance that stabilization of
                                    —
                                        25 —




exchange markets does not come at    the expense of either globsi inflation

or deflation.

     Another recent and noteworthy Innovation in the coordination

exercise is the consideration of aggregate indicators for the G—7

countries as a group.    Their rationale is straightforward: even when

members of the coordination group reach agreements that are viewed as

mutually beneficial,   care still needs to be taken to ensure that such

policy packages have satisfactory implications for those not at the

table.   This is particularly relevant in the case of the G—7 countries

since the spillover effects of their policies on the rest of the world

are known to be large.   Aggregate indicators,   covering such variables

as G—7 growth rates, C—i interest rates, the C—7 current account, and

the C—i real exchange rate are simply an analytical vehicle for getting

a better handle on these spillovers.      In this connection, it is well

to remember that there is a debt problem as well as a problem of improv-

ing the functioning of the international monetary system, and measures

introduced to alleviate one will inevitably affect the other.


                         VI.   Concluding Remarks

     It follows from the preceding remarks that we do not view refori&of

the international monetary system as an instrument of crisis management.

Instead, we see it as akin to a constitutional change that should be

governed by a long—term perspective.      In keeping with that orientation,

there is much to be gained by subjecting all proposals for modification of

the system to careful scrutiny and study so that their full implications——

both positive and negative——can be fully understood.
                                    —   26 —



  *1 An    earlier version of this paper was presented at the Cato

Institute's Sixth Annual Monetary Conference on "Dollars, Deficits,

and Trade: The Changing World Economy," held in Washington, D.C.

on February 25—26, 1988.

  1/   The issue of whether the consequences of a more expansionary

monetary policy will be as visible under a fixed rate as under flexible

rates is discussed in Frenkel and Goldstein [1986].

  2/   See Giavazzi and Giovannini [1988].

  3/   See Flood and Garber [1980]      for a model of such speculative

attacks.

  4/   See Holtham et al. [1987].

  5/   Obstfeld [1985].

  6/   See Feldstein [19871.

  7/   See Frenkel [1975] and Dornbusch [1988].

  8/   See bissa [1981].

  9/   See Giavazzi and Giovannini [1988].

 10/   See Folkerts—Landau and Mathieson [1988].


 11/   See Levich [1987].

 12/   See Goldstein [19801.

 13/   For an elaboration of these considerations, see Frenkel and Mussa

[1981] and Frenkel [1983].

 14/   See Duisenberg [1988].

 15/   See Haberler [1987].

 16/   See   Frenkel [1987].
                                                     —
                                            —   27




 17/   For an empirical attempt to judge whether actual exchange rates

are too noisy in terms of departures from fundamentals generated by a

monetary model of exchange rate determination, see West [1987].

 18/   See Frenkal, Goldstein and Masson [1988].

 19/   See Goldstein    [19841   and       Frenkel and Goldstein [1986] for more

comprehensive   discussions of alternative methods for estimating the
equilibrium exchange     rate.

 20/   See Marston [1986] for an empirical analysis of trend differences

in labor productivity in tradables as between the United States and

Japan, and for evidence on the drawbacks of measures of competitiveness

that rely on broad price indices such as the CPI.              On the broader issues

concerning the limitations of the PPP approach, see Frenkal and Mussa

[1980] and Frenkel [1981].

 21/   See   Meese and Rogoff [1983].

 22/   See Goldstein and Khan [1985] for a survey of trade elasticities.

 23/   See Frenkel    and Goldstein [1988].

 24/   See   Giavazzi and Giovannini. [1986].

 25/   See Frenkel,    Goldstein, and Masson [1988].

 26/   See   Haberler [1987] for       a    different view on peer pressure.
                                    —   28   —


                                  References


Balassa, Bela, 'The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,"

    Journal of Political Economy, 1964, PP. 584—596.

Buiter, William and Marcus Miller, "Changing the Rules: Economic

     Consequences of the Thatcher Regime," Brookings Papers on

    Economic Activity, 1983:2, pp. 305—79.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Money and Finance in European Integration,"

     European Free Trade Association, Geneva, January 1988.

Duisenberg, W.F., "Toward European Exchange Rate Stability,"

     European Free Trade Association, Geneva, January 1988.

Eichengreen, Barry, "Hegemonic Stability Theories of the International

    Monetary System," Discussion Paper No. 193, Centre for Economic

     Policy Research, London, September 1987.

Feldsten, Martin, "Rethinking International Economic Coordination," A

     Lecture on the Occasion of the Fiftieth Anniversary of Nuffield

     College (mimeographed, Oxford, October 23, 1987).

Flood, Robert and Peter Garber, "Market Fundamentals vs. Price Level

     Bubbles: The First Tests,"     Journal of Political Economy,

     August 1980.

Folkerts—Landau, David and Donald Mathieson, "The Process of Innovation

     Institutional   Changes,   and Regulatory Response in         International
     Financial Markets," paper presented to           AEI   Conference on
     Restructuring Financial Markets,        Wash. D.C., November 1987.

Frenkel,   Jacob A., 'Reflections on European Monetary Integration,"
     Weltwirtschaftljches Archiv     ill, No.    2,    1975
                                           —
                                               29 —



_____     "The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parities in the 1970's,"

     European Economic Review, 16, No. 1, May 1981, pp. 145—65

_____     "Monetary Policy:       Domestic Targets and International

     Constraints," American Economic RevIew, May                    1983,   pp. 48—53.

_____     "The International Monetary System: Should                  It Be Reformed,"

     American Economic Review, May 1987,                  pp. 205—210.

_____ and Morris     Goldstein,      'A Guide to Target Zones," Staff Papers,


        International Monetary Fund (Washington), Vol. 33 (December 1986),

     pp. 633—670.

_____ and _____,     "The Evolution of          the International Monetary System

     and the Choice Between Fixed and Flexible Exchange RateS,"

        Informacion Comercial Espanola (forthcoming, 1988).

         Morris Goldstein, and Paul Masson, "International Coordination

        of Economic Policies: Scope, Methods, and Effects," paper

        presented at INF/HWWA Conference on National Economic Policies

     and their Impact on the World Economy,' Hambrug, May 1988.

______ and Michael     Mussa,      "The   Efficiency       of   Foreign   Exchange   Markets

     and Measures     of   Turbulence,"        American     Economic Review,       May 1980,

     pp. 374—81.

           and ______,      'Monetary      and Fiscal Policies in an Open

            Economy," American Economic Review, May 1981,                    pp.   253—258.

Giavazz, Francesco, and Alberto Giovannini, "The EMS and the Dollar,"

     Economic Policy (April 1986), pp. 455—73.

_____   nd _____, "Interpreting the             European Disinflation: The Role of

        the Exchange Rate Regime," Informacion Comercial Espanola (forth-

        coming, 1988).
                                         —
                                             30   —




Goldstein,    Morris, Have Flexible Exchange Rates Handicapped MacroeconomIc

     Policy?, Special Papers in International Economics, No.           14,    Prince-

        ton University (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton UniversIty Press,

     June 1980).

_____     The Exchange Rate System: Lessons of the Past and Options for the

     Future, IMP Occasional Paper No. 30 (Washington: International

     Monetary Fund, July 1984).

_____ and Mohsin Khan,        Income    and Price Effects in Foreign Trade,"

        Chap. 20 in Ronald Jones and Peter Kenen (eds), Handbook of

        InternatIonal Economics, North—Holland, Amsterdam, 1985,         pp.

        1041—1105

Harberler, Gottfried, "Recent Developments in Historical Perspective,"

     Asussenwirtschaft, Heft IV, 1987, pp. 373—385.

Holtham,    Gerald, Giles Keating, and Peter Spencer,      EMS:   Advance    or Face
     Retreat, Credit Suisse First Boston Ltd., London, 1987.
Jurgensen,    Report of the Working Group on Exchange Market Intervention,

     Washington, U.S. Treasury, 1983.

Krugman, Paul, 'Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?"           The U.S. Dollar —

     Recent    Developments, Outlook, and Policy Options, Federal Reserve

     Bank    of Kansas City, 1985, pp.         103—132.

Levich,    Richard, "Economic Consequences of Innovations in Interna-

     tlonal Financial Markets," New York University Business School,

     New    York,   New   York,   July 1987.
McKianon,    Ronald, An International Standard for Monetary

     zation, Policy Analysis in International Economics No. 8,

     InstItute for International Economics, Wash. D.C., 1984.
                                    —
                                         31 —




Marston,   Richard, "Real   Exchange   Rates and Productivity Growth in

      the United States and Japan," NBER Worldng Paper No. 1922,

      Cambridge, May 1986.

Meese,   Richard and Kenneth Rogofff, "Empirical Exchange Rate Models

     of the Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" Journal of

      tional Economics, February 1983,      PP.   3—24.


Mussa, Michael, The Role of Official Intervention, Occasional Paper

     No. 6, Group of Thirty, 1981.

Nurkse, Regnar, "Conditions of International Monetary Equilibrium,"

     Essays in International Finance, No. 4, Princeton University

     Press, 1945.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and Prospects,"

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Volume 2, pp. 369—450.

Tobin, James, "A Proposal for International Monetary Reform,           Cowles

     Foundation Paper No. 495, Cowles Foundtion for Research in

     Economics, Yale University Press, 1980.

Triffin, Robert, Gold and the Dollar Crisis: The Future of Convertibilit

     Yale University Press, 1960.

Williamson, John, The Exchange Rate System, Institute for International

     Economics, Policy Analyses in International Economics, No. 5 (1983;

     second edition, 1985).

_____ and Marcus H. Miller,    Targets    and Indicators:   A   Blueprint for the

     International Coordination of Economic Policy, Institute for Inter-

     national Economics, Policy Analyses in International Economics

     No. 22 (September 1987).
