                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE EFFECTS OF FISCAL POLICY ON INTERNATIONAL IMBALANCES:
                         JAPAN AND THE UNITED STATES




                              John F. Helliwell




                            Working Paper No. 2650




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1988




Department of Economics, University of British Columbia, Research Asaociate,
National Bureau of Economic Research, and Clifford Clark Visiting Economist,
Department of Finance, Ottawa. This paper was prepared for the Japanese
Economic Planning Agency Symposium in Tokyo, March 15-17, 1988. It was also
part of the research program of the working group in international macro-
economics, based in the Department of Fir,ance.  I am grateful to the members
of that group for extensive advice and assistance, especially Grant
Macpherson for assistance in preparing and analyzing data. In revising the
paper, I have benefitted from the helpful comments of many symposium parti-
cipants, especially Ralph Bryant, Gerry Holtham, Paul Masaon, Larry Summers,
and Maaaru Yoshitomi.   This research is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #2650
                                          July 1988


          THE EFFECTS OF FISCAL POLICY ON INTERNATIONAL    IMBALANCES:
                         JAPAN AND THE UNITED STATES


                                    ABSTRACT


     Evidence from three multicountry models is used to assess the current-

account effects of U.S. and Japanese fiscal
                                            policies.     Asymmetries in the
effects of U.S. and Japanese policies are
                                          analyzed in some detail, and
attribuced to differences   in country size, in trade patterns (which have

only a small effect) and in the extent to which induced changes in real

exchange rates switch demand from domestic to foreign output.    Fiscal

policy has aubstantial current account effeccs in the models.    For example,

switching $50 billion of suatained government   spending from the United States
to Japan would, in the third year, improve the U.S. current account
                                                                    by
$24 billion and worsen that of Japan by $20 billion.    Induced changes in

nominal exchange rates are found to play a relatively small role in deter-

mining the effects of fiscal policy on the nominal current account.


                                         John F. Helliwell
                                         Department of Economics
                                         University of British Columbia
                                         Vancouver BC, Canada V6T 1Y2
              The Effects of Fiscal Policy on International Imbalances:

                                   Japan and the United States



                                          1. Introduction




     To what extent do the current account imbalances among the major industrial

countries, the Asian NlCs and the heavily indebted countries of South and North
America represent the inevitable counterparts of fiscal imbalances? To what
extent are these imbalances likely to respond to changes in fiscal policies in

the major industrial countries? To what extent are exchange rate changes        a

necessary part of translating changes in fiscal policy into changes in external
balances? These are three of the key issues facing domestic and international

macroeconomic policy. This paper attempts to address these issues by using
evidence from three major multicountry models to explain the effects that

fiscal policies in Japan and the United States have on their own current

account balances as well as on the current balance of the other country.


     There has already been a substantial amount of quantitative research on the

linkages between fiscal policies and the current account of the United States.

Most of the existing multinational models were involved in a comparative

exercise in 1985, in which one of the major experiments involved comparing the
international effects of fiscal policies in the United States and in the rest

of the OECD (ROECD).1 The sources of the U.S. current account deficit,

including the roles of divergent fiscal policies in the United States and the

     1
       The results are presented in full in Bryant, Henderson, Holtham, Hooper,
and Symansky, eds. (1988), and shown briefly in section 2 of this paper.
                                            2

rest of the OECD, treated as a single unit, were the subject of a workshop at

the Brookings Institution in January 1987, based on results from a number of

major multicountry models.2


      The EPA symposium extends the earlier work in a number of respects: the

research is symmetric in its consideration of the Japanese and United States
current accounts, the perspective is forward-looking, and the structure of the

Japanese economy is being studied in some detail, both on its own and in

comparison with other countries.   In addition,   more attention is paid to the

effects   of each country's policies on   the other country's current account, and

to the explanation of any asymmetries that may appear when the effects of

Japanese and U.S. policies are compared. Three multicountry models were used to

prepare evidence for the seminar: those      of   the Japanese Economic Planning

Agency (the EPA World Model, referred to here as EPA). the U.S. Federal Reserve

Board (the MultiCountry Model, referred to here as MCM), and the OECD (the

INTERLINK model, referred to here as OECD).



      This paper deals principally with the current account effects of fiscal

policies, based on simulation experiments run over a six year horizon extending
from 1987 through 1992. The figures drawn for this paper show results over the

whole six years. while the analytical tables explaining the current account

effects in more detail concentrate on the first-year and third-year results of

the changes in fiscal policy. The typical fiscal policy change studied is a


       2 The main results, which are
                                       presented in Bryant, Hoitham and Hooper,
eds., (1988) showed (e.g. Helkie and Hooper 1988, p. 48) that divergent fiscal
policies in the United States and the rest of the OECD could explain most of
the U.S. current account deficit that emerged during the 1980s.
                                            3

sustained increase in real government spending equal to 1% of baseline real

GNP. Money supplies are held fixed and exchange rates are flexible in the

experiments that are the main focus of this paper. Comparable results under
fixed exchange rates will, however, be used to show the role that exchange rate
movements play in determining the link between budget deficits and external

deficits.



        The paper starts with an overview of some of the main features of the new

evidence, including comparisons with the results prepared for the earlier

Brookings conference. The analysis then turns to           a   more intensive examination
of the reasons for some of these results. This is done in two sections, section

3 dealing with the reasons     for some of the asymmetries in the current-account
effects of Japanese and US. fiscal policies, and section 4 briefly analyzing

the role of exchange rate movements in establishing the relationship between

fiscal policies and international imbalances. The final section then summarizes
the results and draws some implications for the analysis            of fiscal   policy.



                                    2. Overview   of   the Evidence



      To provide   a basis   for comparison, Figure    1       summarizes the average

macroeconomic effects of U.S. and ROECD fiscal expansion, as represented by the

multicountry models drawn together for the 1985 Brookings experiments.3 The


         The results were put in comparable form in October 1985, in preparation
for a conference held in March 1986. The average results shown in figure 1, and
in the bottom panels of figure 2, are taken from Table B (p. 52) and Table G
(p. 113) of Part Two of Bryant, Henderson, Hoitham, Hooper, and Symansky, eds.,
(1988). The signs of the results of the U.S. fiscal policy have been changed to
make it a fiscal expansion, for easier comparison with the ROECD results, and
with the results prepared for the EPA Symposium, all of which refer to fiscal
                                             4

bottom panels of Figure 2 then show the average U.S. current account effects,

from the same experiments, of U.S. fiscal expansion.4 The top panels of figure
2   show the U.S. current account effects separately for each of the three models

(EPA, MCM, and OECD) involved in the EPA Symposium. By showing comparable

results for the 1985 and 1988 experiments, these figures are especially useful

in revealing any major changes in model structure between the two sets of

experiments. The bottom right two panels of figure 3 compare the 1985 and 1988
results, from the same three models, for the effects of U.S. fiscal policy on

the Japanese current balance.



      What are the main features of the 1985 results?      In terms of the first-year

international transmission   of income in response to fiscal policies, the top

panels of figure   1   show almost complete symmetry between U.S. and ROECD fiscal

policies, with each region's fiscal expansion raising real GNP at home by
1.25%, in response to a fiscal expansion equal to 1% of GNP, with real GNP in

the other region rising by O.25%. This apparent symmetry is actually the net

result of three asymmetries, however, as the larger size of the ROECD, which
would tend    to make the    transmission larger from the ROECD to the United States

than vice versa, is offset by the net effect of two other factors. These are

the higher propensity to import in the ROECD5 and the fact that 50% of U.S.

imports come from the ROECD, while only          12% of ROECD    imports come from the


expansions.

           Comparable results    for   Japanese fiscal expansion are not available from
the 1985 experiments.

         1985 imports were 9% of GNP for the United States, compared to 20% for
the ROECD. This factor, which would tend to make the transmission relatively
smaller from the United States to the ROECD, is more than offset by the
difference in trade patterns described in the text.
                                         5

United States.



     This initial equality of transmission soon disappears, however, as the

domestic income effects of the U.S. fiscal expansion are crowded out by the

higher prices, exchange rates (except for OECD), and interest rates, and an
increasing proportion of the induced income is in the ROECD. By contrast, the
ROECO income multiplier remains much higher, with much smaller induced

increases in the price level, in the value of the domestic currencies, and in

interest rates. The bottom right-hand panel of figure 2 shows the substantial

extent to which the U.S. current account continues to weaken in response to the

fiscal expansion, with the average induced current account deficit being about

0.5% of GNP by the sixth year of the fiscal expansion.



     The upper panels of figure 2 show the Current account effects of U.S.
fiscal expansion on a model-by-model basis for the EPA, MCM and OECD models,

with the 1985 and 1988 results compared, expressed both in terms of billion

U.S. dollars (on the left-hand side of the page) and as percent of GNP. Looking

first at the 1985 results from the three models, the EPA and MCM results show
the U.S. current account worsening by more than the average across all twelve

models, while the OECD current account effects are smaller than average and
show little tendency to grow over the six years.



     Comparing the 1985 and 1988 results, it can be seen that
the models have changed slightly, so as to move their estimated U.S. current

account effects closer to each other, and to the average from the 1985

experiments. Thus all three models now show the U.S. current account
                                                   6

consequences growing with time, and to be between 0.5% and 0.7% of GNP by the
sixth year of the fiscal expansion.



     Turning to figure         3, illustrating the effects of fiscal expansion on   the
Japanese current balance, the bottom right-hand panels show that in 1985 the
EPA model showed by far the largest Japanese effects               of   U.S. fiscal policy,

growing with time to reach almost 2% of GNP by the sixth year. In the 1988

results, these effects have been cut in half, although they are still somewhat

larger than those of the MCM, and twice as high as those of the OECD model. In
all three models the effects of U.S. fiscal expansion on the Japanese current

balance are as great as on the U.S. current balance, and somewhat higher in the
case of EPA, where the effects are measured as a percent of baseline GNP in all

cases.


     The top half of figure 3 contains the new results showing the Japanese

current account effects of Japanese fiscal expansion. These are largest for

EPA, but in all three models are less than one half as large as the effects of

U.S. fiscal policy, as shown in the bottom half of the figure. All three models

show the Japanese fiscal expansion to worsen the Japanese current account by

about 500 billion Yen in the first year, as shown by the top right-hand panel

of figure 3. Thereafter, the EPA effects continue to grow, while the MCM

effects remain fairly constant and the OECD effects gradually disappear.



     As seen by comparing figures             2 and 3,   the three models give very similar
estimates   of the   effects    of   U.S. fiscal policy on the U.S. current account, but

rather different estimates of the effects of Japanese fiscal expansion on the
                                          7


Japanese current account. To understand these differences better, we can
exploit the fact that the current account is simply the difference between

private investment and the sum of gross private saving and net saving of the

public sector. Similarly, any worsening in the real current account deficit in

response   to fiscal stimulus can be expressed    equally well as the amount by

which induced absorption exceeds induced real output. To make use of these

alternative ways of viewing the current account, figure 4 shows the own-country

effects of fiscal expansions in terms of real GNP, real absorption, gross

private savings and gross private investment.6



      Looking first at the results for Japan, the EPA model's increases in real

absorption and GNP, with real absorption steadily rising to     a level 2% above

baseline by the sixth year, show that the growing current account effects shown
in figure 3 are not the result of crowding out, but of imports increasing with

absorption and income as all three continue      to grow. For   the other two models,

the real GNP and domestic absorption effects are both crowded out; for the MCM

some of this crowding out takes the form of increased real imports, but in
neither case is there a widening gap between absorption and GNP. Thus in none

of the three models is there evidence   of    the multiplier process being truncated

by increasing real import penetration. The    panel showing private investment as

a   share of GNP reveals that the crowding out of domestic absorption that takes

place in MCM and OECD is of private investment, which is slightly above

       6 The
              matching results for the induced changes in the government balance
as a share of GNP, which reveal the extent to which additional tax revenues
serve to finance the increase in government spending (equal to 1% of GNP), are
shown in the second-row panels of figures 5, 7, and 9, which contain the model-
by-model results for EPA, MCM and OECD, respectively. Since the government
spending is financed by borrowing, the cumulating debt also increases
government spending further through its impact on public debt charges.
                                            8

baseline throughout for EPA, but increasingly below baseline for MCM, and

especially for OECD.


      The situation is quite different in the case of the United States. Here,

all the models agree that the current account deficit will continue to grow as
a share of baseline GNP, reaching 0.5% by the sixth year. As shown by figure 4,

however, this agreement about the current account effects is the net result of

some offsetting differences. Although all three models show declining real

multipliers for the United States, the first-year multiplier is about 1.75 for
MCM compared to about 1.0 for the OECD, with EPA midway between.



      Although all three models show steady crowding out      of the   U.S. GNP effects

as   time progresses, the MCM multiplier falls much less slowly than the other

two, and is still above 1.0 in the sixth year. There is an offsetting

difference in the behaviour of real absorption, which is continually falling,
relative to its initial increase, in MCM and OECD, while consistently remaining

roughly 1.5% above baseline values for     EPA.   Higher investment is the key to the

sustained absorption in EPA, with investment higher by almost 1% of GNP by the

sixth year. In the other two models, investment is below baseline by increasing

amounts, averaging about 0.25% of GNP over the six year period.



      The models also reveal some substantial differences in U.S. private savings

behaviour, with savings up by much more than the induced change in GNP in OECD.

up only slightly in MCM, and with the EPA falling in between. The EPA estimate

of induced private savings (as a % of GNP) continually rises, thus helping to

finance the growing government deficit.
                                                 9



       Figures 5 through 10 broaden the focus to consider both the own-country and

the cross-country effects       of   Japanese and U.S. and fiscal policies on a

comparative        basis. To do this, there are two figures for each of the three

models. The left-hand panels of each figure show the own-country and cross-

country effects of Japanese fiscal expansion, while the right-hand panels do

the same for U.S. fiscal expansion. What are the main points of similarity and

difference revealed by these figures?



           Important points of similarity include:



 -     In all three models, U.S. fiscal      policy has large and growing effects on
the current accounts of both countries, with the effects on Japan being about

as large as those on the United States, when measured as percent of GNP.


 - In all three models, Japanese fiscal policy initially affects the Japanese

current balance by about as much as does the U.S. fiscal expansion (although of

course in the opposite direction), while the influence on the U.S. current
account is close to zero.


  -   In    all three models, U.S. interest rates rise by substantial amounts that
increase as the U.S. fiscal expansion continues.         y   the sixth year, U.S. long-

term rates are 150 to 200 basis points higher in nominal terms. Japanese
interest rates are pulled up by about one-third as much (less in MCM) in

response to the U.S. fiscal expansion.
                                            10
 - In all three models, U.S. fiscal expansion produces continuing U.S.

inflation averaging about 0.5% annually in each of the models. Thus real long-

term interest rates are 100 to 150 basis points higher by the sixth year.



 -   In all three models, U.S. fiscal expansion produces   a substantial change in
the U.S. unemployment rate, while Japanese fiscal expansion has almost       no

impact on the Japanese unemployment rate.


       The most striking of these results is the contrast between the very large
current account effects of U.S. fiscal expansion and the much smaller effects
of Japanese fiscal expansion. This asymmetry has been the subject of much

comment, and will be analyzed in some detail in the next section of the paper.



       Important differences among the models include:


 - Although all three models show the Japanese GNP effects of U.S. fiscal

expansion to be greater than the U.S. effects by the sixth year, the difference

is much greater   for   EPA, which shows Japanese GNP up by over 2% by the fifth

year. This appears to reflect a possibly non-convergent real multiplier process

in the Japanese block     of   the EPA model.



 -   Although none of the models shows large changes in the Japanese price level

in response to Japanese fiscal expansion, there are noticeable differences

among the models. There is no induced inflation in EPA, despite the much

stronger multiplier process in operation in that model.
                                              11

 -
         By contrast, in response to U.S. fiscal expansion, the EPA model shows

substantial Japanese inflation, even more than in the United States over the

first two years, while MCM shows about one-third as much inflation as in the

United States and the OECD almost none.



 -       In both EPA and MCM, the U.S. dollar appreciates    by about 3% in nominal

terms in response to U.S. fiscal expansion, while the OECD model shows a

depreciation of the dollar.



     -    In real terms, MCM shows the real value of the    dollar returning to baseline

by the sixth year, while EPA shows a real appreciation of about 4%              and OECD a

real appreciation of about 2%.



 - The initial depreciation of the dollar in OECD under U.S. fiscal expansion

appears to be related primarily to the movement of short-term interest rates
outside the United States. In that model, Japanese short-term rates rise almost

as much as U.S. rates in response to U.S. fiscal expansion, while the induced

changes in Japanese interest rates are much smaller in the other two models.7


 -       All three models show initial appreciation of the yen in response to

Japanese fiscal expansion, although by the sixth year the combination of price
and exchange rate changes are such that the real value of the yen is up by 2%



         Viewed ri terms of conventional LM and BP curves, a depreciation in
response to fiscal expansion arises if the LM curve is flatter than the BP
curve. The rise in foreign interest rates can be treated as an upward shift of
the BP curve, increasing the chances that the LM and IS curves, after the
latter has shifted right ri response to fiscal expansion, should intersect
below the BP curve, thus indicating incipient depreciation.
                                               12

in EPA, and down by 1% in MCM and OECD.


      The most striking of the differences listed above relate         to    the multiplier

process in the      EPA model and to the different movements          of exchange rates. The

latter issue will be addressed further in section         4. which analyzes in more

detail the role of exchange rate changes in the transmission            of   the effects   of
fiscal policy.


                      3. Asymmetries    in Current Balance Effects



      This section attempts to spell out in more detail why the models show that

U.S. fiscal policies have much larger effects on the Japanese current account

than vice versa. To do this most clearly,        it is   perhaps helpful to start with
the simplest case, where relative prices are initially unchanged and all

current account effects are due to increases in real imports of the country

undertaking fiscal expansion. In that simple case, the effect of U.S. fiscal

expansion on the Japanese current account depends only on the U.S. multiplier,

the U.S. marginal propensity to import, and the marginal share of U.S. imports

that comes from Japan. A similar relationship, with the names changed,

determines the effects of Japanese fiscal expansion on the U.S. current

account.



      If one compares the Japanese current account effects of U.S. fiscal

expansion to the U.S. current account effects of Japanese fiscal expansion,

measuring the effects in relation to the second country's GNP, then the
relative size    of the   countries enters in two ways. First, if the fiscal
                                                13

expansion is defined in relation to GNP, then the initial increase in spending
will be larger if the larger country expands. Second, for given trade ratios

and import propensities, any change in real trade flows will be a larger share

of the smaller country's GNP. Using purchasing power parity exchange rates8,

U.S. GNP was about    28 times as           large as that of Japan in 1987. This would

imply that if the two countries had the same propensity to import from each
other, and if both countries had the same domestic expenditure multipliers,

then U.S. fiscal expansion of 1% of U.S. GNP would affect the Japanese current

account (measured as    a %        of Japanese GNP) by     about eight times as much

(2.8x2.8=7.84) as a Japanese fiscal expansion of 1% of GNP would affect the
U.S. current account, measured as a percent of U.S. GNP.



     To take a concrete example, the top right hand panels of figures          5, 7 and   9

show that U.S. fiscal expansion improves the Japanese current balance, in the

first year, by about 0.25%        of GNP.   If the structures of the two economies were

identical, in the manner described above, then one would expect to find in the

top left panel of the same figures that the U.S. current balance would improve

by about 0.03% (= 0.25/7.84) of U.S. GNP in response to the Japanese fiscal
expansion. On average over the first year, the MCM improvement is about 0.045%,

while in EPA and OECD        it   is substantially less, about 0.01%.



     In the rest of this section, we shall take a more systematic look at the

nature and the sources   of these
differences, separating the influences operating through exchange rate changes,
second-round trade effects, and trade in services. This will be done by a

       8 The PPP                   rates are from Blades and Roberts (1987).
                 exchange
                                             14

series of five tables, each of which builds upon the previous tables.


     Table   1   starts by showing the induced real current account effects in the

expanding country. The first columns show how induced real imports can be

explained as the product of the fiscal multiplier and the marginal propensity

to import. Columns 1 and 2 show the multipliers and marginal propensities to

import under fixed exchange rates,9 and columns        3 and   4 show how these two
numbers are altered by the induced changes in exchange rates. The propensities

to import   are for merchandise only, because of the restricted information

available about service imports in real terms. The numbers in column five          for
induced real merchandise imports are thus equal to the increase in government

spending, measured in billion 1980 yen for Japan and in billion 1982 dollars
for the United States, times the flexible exchange rate multiplier (from column

3) times the marginal propensity to import (from column        4)10   Column 6 shows

the column    5 figures   as   a percent of baseline real GNP, while column 7 reports

the change in the real current account balance as a percent of GNP. Column               7 is

thus equal to the negative of column 6 plus any induced changes in real

merchandise exports and net real exports of services.



     Comparing the results for the United States and Japan, we might expect to
find fairly similar values in column 6 for the United States and Japan,

assuming the same fiscal multipliers, since, as shown at the bottom       of the

          These are obtained from the results of the fiscal expansions run with
exogenous exchange rates.
       10 The
                "marginal propensities" reported are not the partial effect of real
GNP on real imports, but the total change in real imports divided by the total
change in real GNP. The numbers reported in column 5 can thus be obtained
directly from the simulation output.
                                          15

table, Japan and the United States had about the same average propensities to

import in 1987. All three models show induced real imports in the first year to

be substantially larger for the United States than for Japan: more than 50%

larger in the case of EPA, twice as large in MCM and more than three times as
large in OECD.


      The reasons for the larger bulge in U.S. imports differ by model. In the
case of   EPA,   lhe import propensities are approximately the same in the two

countries, and the difference is due entirely to the larger first-year fiscal

multiplier in the United States. For MCM, the fiscal multipliers and the

marginal propensities are both about 50% larger for the United States than for

Japan. For both EPA and MCM, the differences are larger with flexible than with

fixed exchange rates, as would be expected in the light of the greater real

appreciation of the dollar11 that takes place in those models. For OECD, the
difference appears to be entirely due to a much higher U.S. marginal propensity

to   import goods. This is not due to exchange rate effects, as the U.S.
depreciates in nominal terms in that model in response to U.S. fiscal

expansion.



       How do these comparisons    change when account is taken of induced real

exports of goods, and of net exports of services? For both EPA and MCM, taking

these changes into account more than offsets the higher U.S. imports of goods,

so that the induced real trade deficit is higher for Japan than for the United

States. Before discussing these effects in slightly more detait, we first


          The comparison being made here is between the appreciation of the
dollar under U.S. fiscal expansion and the appreciation of the yen under
Japanese fiscal expansion.
                                                    16

consider tables 2 and         3,    which spell out more systematically the sources of the

asymmetries flowing through real merchandise imports.


     Table    2 simply restates the induced real imports of goods            in terms of the

real GNPs     of   the two countries, to provide raw material for table 3, which

shows indices of asymmetry and reveals their sources. The total index shown in

column   1   of table    3 is,     as discussed before, the ratio of the effects of U.S.

fiscal policy (on Japanese merchandise exports to the United States) to the
effects of Japanese fiscal expansion (on U.S. merchandise              exports to Japan),

where the fiscal expansion is 1% of real GNP and the induced real exports are

measured as percent of the exporting country's real GNP. Columns                 2 to   5 of

table 3 show the components explaining the overall index of asymmetry. The

index in column      1   is the     product of the sub-indices in columns 2 to 5, and

would take the value of 1.0            if   the two countries had exactly the same size and

economic structure.


     Table    3 shows that         the first-year indices of asymmetry range from about 12.

for EPA to 16. for MCM and 23. for OECD, in all cases well above the value of
7.8 that would be accounted for simply by the differences in the sizes of Japan

and the United States. For EPA, the additional asymmetry flows mainly from the

higher value of the U.S. multiplier. For MCM there is an equally large
additional effect from the higher U.S. marginal propensity           to   import. For OECD,

the high asymmetry is entirely due to a marginal propensity to import that is

more than three times as high for the United States as for Japan. Trade

patterns are not part of the explanation of the observed asymmetry,              as the
index in column 2        is   under 1.0, reflecting the fact that in 1987 the United
                                           17

States obtained 21%    of its   merchandise imports from Japan, while Japan obtained

22% of its merchandise imports from the United States.12



     Tables 4 and    5 extend the analysis to    cover the entire current account in
nominal terms, thus including the effects of terms-of-trade changes along with

the effects of changes in the volumes of goods and services exports. Table            4

examines the U.S. current balance effects of U.S. and Japanese fiscal

expansion, while table 5 shows the effects      of   the same policies on the Japanese

current balance. To remove the asymmetry caused by the different size of the

expenditure increase in the two countries, the size of the Japanese fiscal

expansion is scaled up in table 4 to be equal to 1% of U.S. GNP, the same                 as
the fiscal expansion in the United States. This requires the Japanese results

to be multiplied by 1.9, which is the ratio of U.S. to Japanese GNP5 in 1987,

when evaluated at average 1987 exchange rates.13 Similarly, in table 5 the size

of the U.S. fiscal expansion is scaled down to make it equal to 1%           of Japanese
GNP. The numbers in table 4 are reported in billion U.S. dollars (at 1982

prices for the real variables), while the results in table   5   are in 100 billion

yen (at 1980 prices for the real variables).


      The figures in column 5 of table 4 show that, by the end of the third

       12 These
                 percentages are based on merchandise trade data for the first
three quarters of 1987.
         13 The
                 ratio of GNP5 at market exchange rates is used to make the fiscal
expansion the same size, in terms of U.S. dollars, in both countries, so as to
facilitate the comparisons in terms of the changes to current accounts in
nominal terms. Since market value of the yen was well above its PPP value in
1987 (almost 50% above, as reported by Blades and Roberts (1988)). this implies
that the real value of the Japanese fiscal expansion is substantially less than
in the United States, by roughly the ratio 1.9/2.8.
                                                18

year, a $50 billion increase in U.S. spending would worsen the U.S. current
account by about $20 billion (slightly more in MCM), while a similar amount of

spending in Japan would improve the U.S. current account by $4 to $5 billion in

MCM and OECD, and about $2 billion in EPA.



     In   the EPA and MCM results, the higher value of the U.S. dollar brought

about by fiscal expansion produces terms-of-trade gains (shown in column 2, and

included as part of the column         5 figure) averaging about $3 billion in   the
first year. For OECD, with its slight depreciation of the dollar in response to

either U.S. or Japanese fiscal expansion, there are terms-of-trade losses to

the United States in both cases. EPA and MCM show yen appreciation in response

to Japanese fiscal expansion, so they agree with OECD in showing-terms-of-trade

losses to the United States in this case.



     Table 5 shows the effects         of   Japanese and scaled-down U.S. fiscal expansion

on the Japanese current balance, measured in 100 billion yen. In the first year

a fiscal expansion of roughly 35 hundred billion yen worsens the Japanese
current account by roughly      5 to   7 hundred billion yen if the fiscal expansion

takes place in Japan, or improves the Japanese current balance by 3.5 to 5

hundred billion yen   if the   fiscal expansion takes place in the United States.



     The reasons for the differences between the results in tables 4 and               5   lie

in the higher U.S. marginal propensity to import (especially as modelled by

OECD) and in the higher U.S. multipliers, initially in EPA and throughout for

MCM. As has already been seen, the crowding out of domestic output in the

United States increases as time passes, with a larger fraction of the
                                            19

additional U.S. spending taking the form of imports. In the way our

calculations have been made, this shows up as a higher U.S. marginal propensity
to import, which then increases the effects of the U.S. fiscal policy on the

Japanese current balance. There is less tendency for this to happen in response
to Japanese fiscal policy, so that U.S. fiscal expansion eventually has larger

effects on the Japanese current balance than does Japanese policy.



                                  4.   The Role at Exchange Rates



       In   discussions about the policies required to remove external imbalances,
there are often disagreements about the relative roles to be played by fiscal

policies and by exchange rate changes. At one extreme,        it   is argued, for

example, that a reduction in the external value of the U.S. dollar will suffice
to restore U.S. current account balance. At the other extreme, it       is   argued
that an exchange rate change is neither necessary nor desirable, and that a

drop in the value of the U.S. dollar would induce inflationary effects in the

United States and recessionary effects abroad that would remove any positive

effects on the balance of payments.



      The evidence presented so far in this paper suggests that exchanges rates
do move as part of the adjustment to fiscal policy, but their relative

importance,   either as a part of the translation of fiscal actions to external

balances, or as independent instruments, remains to be assessed. This is done

in figure 11, which shows how much difference exchange rate movements make to

the income and current balance effects of fiscal policy.
                                              20

       The left-hand side of figure 11 shows the effects on Japan of Japanese

fiscal expansion, with the right-hand side doing the same for the United
States. The top panels show the exchange rate changes that are triggered by the

fiscal expansion. with all fiscal expansions showing appreciations of the local

currency except for U.S. fiscal expansion in the OECD model. The next panels
show the difference between the fiscal multipliers triggered by these changes
in exchange rates, and the bottom two rows show the resulting changes in real

net exports and in nominal current balances.


        The multiplier results show a difference among the models in the real

output effects   of   exchange rate change. All three models show lower multipliers

in response to the appreciations of the yen, and MOM shows a parallel result

for the United States. OECD shows the dollar to depreciate, and has a slightly

higher multiplier as a consequence. The exception to the pattern is provided by
EPA. which shows a higher multiplier (after the second year) in response to the

appreciation of the dollar.


         The current balance results show that the induced appreciations do tend to

contribute to the current account effects of the fiscal policies, but that the

contributions are a small part of the total current balance effects shown in

earlier figures. Since the induced exchange rate changes vary over time, and

among models, it is difficult to assess their contributions clearly from figure
 11.   To provide     a   clearer picture, figure 12 shows the effects of 10% exogenous

depreciations, first of the yen and then of the dollar.


         Figure 12 also compares the results of partial and whole-model simulations
                                          21

of exchange rate changes to show the extent to which macroeconomic feedbacks

alter the current balance effects of exchange rate changes. The left-hand

panels show the effects of a 10% depreciation on the depreciating country's

real net exports and nominal current accounts, based on partial simulations      of
each model's current account block, while the right-hand panels show the

corresponding results from full model simulations. The top half of the page
shows the Japanese results of yen depreciation, while the bottom half shows the

U.S. effects of dollar depreciation.



       For Japan. all of the models show that net exports increase about twice as
much in the partial simulations as they do in the full model results. A similar

result holds for the nominal current account balance, although here the

reduction is rather less for the OECD than for the other models.


       For the United States, all of the models show even greater differences

between the partial and whole-model results than   is the case for   Japan. On

average, the 10% depreciation of the dollar improves the current account, in
the third year. by $35 billion in the partial simulations, compared to $10

billion in the full model results. The macroeconomic offsets are greatest in
EPA and rather modest in OECD. which shows substantially the largest full-model

current balance effects of dollar depreciation.


      The general conclusion from the evidence presented in this section is that
while exchange rates do tend to move in response to fiscal expansion, these

movements are not in themselves a very important part of the current account

adjustment process that follows in the wake of changes in fiscal policy. The
                                            22

comparisons between the partial and full-model results of exchange rate changes
show that the results does not come from small direct effects of exchange rates

on trade flows, but from the macroeconomic repercussions that tend to cut

absorption    ri the appreciating countries and increase inflation in the

depreciating countries, thus offsetting the effects on the current balance.


                                             5. Conclusions



         This paper has had a double purpose; to compare the structures of three

important multinational models, and to use their evidence, in conjunction with

that from other models, to analyze the effects of Japanese and United States
fiscal policies on their own and the other country's current balance. This

conclusion draws these two strands together by summarizing what the three

models have to say about the three questions presented at the beginning of the

paper.



         The experiments prepared for this symposium did not attempt to estimate

the extent to which fiscal imbalances were responsible for international

imbalances, although earlier research using these and other multinational
models to determine the sources of the U.S. current account deficit suggests14
that divergent fiscal policies in the United States and the rest of the OECD
were responsible for about two-thirds of the increase in the U.S. deficit, with

the additionat appreciation of the dollar and other factors accounting for the
rest. To what extent are these imbalances likely to be reversed by changes in


      14 See
              especially the chapter by Helkie and Hooper in Bryant, Hoitham and
Hooper, eds. (1988).
                                           23

fiscal policies? This paper has considered      Only changes in   the United States
and Japan.



         Based on the evidence from the three models assessed in this paper, each

$50 billion reduction in U.S. government spending is estimated to lead, by the

third year, to a $20

billion reduction in the U.S. external deficit. A similar amount of extra

spending in Japan would, by the third year, improve the U.S. current balance by

about $4 billion.15    Thus shifting $50 billion of spending from the United

States   to Japan   would improve the U.S. current balance by $24 billion in the

third year, about half of the amount of spending transferred. What about the

effects on the Japanese current account?



         Increasing Japanese government spending by 3700 billion yen would, in the
third year, reduce the Japanese current account surplus by about 700 billion

yen. Reducing U.S. spending by the same amount would reduce the Japanese

current account surplus by an average of 800 billion yen.16 Thus transferring
3700 billion yen of spending (1% of Japanese GNP) from the United States to

Japan would reduce the Japanese current account surplus by about 1500 billion

       15 These results are from
                                   table 4. Relative to the typical results quoted
in the text, MCM shows effects of U.S. fiscal policy that are about 25% larger,
and EPA shows effects of Japanese fiscal policy that are about half as great,
with a third-year effect on the U.S. current account equal to $2 billion for
each $50 billion spent in Japan.
       16 These
                  results are from table 5. There is less unanimity among the
models in their estimates of the effects of fiscal policies on the Japanese
current balance. All three models suggest, however, that U.S. and Japanese
fiscal policies have similar effects on the Japanese current balance. MCM and
EPA show rather similar results, while OECD shows effects that are roughly half
as big as for the other models.
                                             24

yen, or about 40% of the amount of spending transferred.



       Combining this evidence, the models suggest that decreasing U.S.

government spending by $50 billion, with spending in Japan increased by the

same amount, would, in the third year, reduce the U.S. current account deficit

by about $25 billion and reduce the Japanese external surplus by $20 billion.


      The models are not uniform in their estimates, but they all agree in

finding some asymmetry in the current balance effects of Japanese and U.S.

fiscal policies, even after account is taken of the differing sizes and trade

patterns of the two countries. The main reason for this lies in the greater

crowding out apparent in the U.S. models, and the greater extent to which the

crowding out of domestic GNP effects is in favour       of   imported goods and

services. This asymmetry grows with time, so that the third-year results

reported above for U.S. fiscal contraction would show less improvement in the
U.S. balance of payments if reported for the second year, and more if reported

for the fourth and subsequent years. The implication of this for policy is that
while there may be substantial linkages from fiscal policies to current

balances, they accumulate with time, and cannot be expected to have dramatic

effects in the short term. Viewed from the perspective of the early 1980s, the

inference is that the differential fiscal stances of the United States and the
rest of the OECD might have been anticipated to lead eventually to the current

account results of the late 1980s.



       Finally, what about the role   of   exchange rates in the fiscal transmission

process? This was the subject of section 4, where it was shown that exchange
                                         25

rates do tend   to move during the adjustment process,    generally so as to

appreciate the currency of the fiscally expanding country. However, these
exchange rate movements do not contribute     a   very large part   of the   power of the

expenditure switching process. In particular, the comparisons between the

partial and the full-model results of exchange rate changes show that

macroeconomic repercussions, which tend to reduce absorption and inflation in

the appreciating countries and to increase them in the depreciating countries,
act to truncate the substantial direct effects of exchange rates on trade

flows.17



                                          BFERENCES

Blades, D. and D. Roberts (1987) "A Note on the New OECD Benchmark Purchasing
       Power Parities for 1985" OECD Economic Studies No. 9: Autumn 1987.

Bryant, R., D. Henderson, G. Hoitham, P. Hooper, S. Symansky, eds., (1988)
       Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent Economies.(Washington:
       Brookings Institution).

Bryant, R., G. Hoitham and P. Hooper, eds., (1988) External Deficits and the
       Dollar: The Pit and the Pendulum. (Washington: Brookings Institution).

Helkie, W.L. and P. Hooper (1988) "The U.S. Deficit in the 1980s: An Empirical
      Analysis'. Chapter Two in Bryant et al, eds. External Deficits and the
       Dollar: The Pit and the Pendulum.

Helliwell, J.F, J. Cockertine and R. Lafrance (May 1988) "Multicountry
       Modelling of Financial Markets"; Paper prepared for FRB Conference on

        17 In his comments on the
                                     paper, Gerry Holtham noted that none of the
three models surveyed for this conference involve model-consistent expectations
of future interest rates and exchange rates, and suggested that consistent
expectations, would be likely to increase the exchange-rate effects of fiscal
policy. This issue has been addressed in a subsequent paper (Helliwell,
Cockerline and Lafrance 1988), which compares the results of adaptive and
model-consistent expectations in a G7 version of MULTIMOD (Masson et al. 1988
describes the IMF's G3 model on which the G7 version is based.) Over the first
three years of U.S. fiscal expansion, the consistent expectations version does
show about four times as much dollar appreciation, on average, as the adaptive
expectations version, but the current account effects are only about 15%
greater, for the reasons discussed in the text.
                                      26

      Monetary Aggregates and Financial Sector Behaviour, May 26-27, 1988.

Masson, P., M. Dooley, R. Haas and S. Symansky (1988) "MULTIMOD:      A Multi-
      Region Econometric Model", IMF Working Paper 88-23, (Washington:
      International Monetary Fund).
 0.11     0.788           11.68          0.05             0.13        0.15          1.57                 Shock Fiscal
                                                                                                  U.S. of U.S. on Impact
 0.17     0.146           481.06         0.02             0.09        0.12          1.13        Shock Fiscal Japane..
                                                      .
                                                                                                      of Japan on Impact
                                                                                                          Impact Year Third
 0.11     0.312           14.21          0.03             0.04        0.18          1.81                 Shock Fiscal
                                                                                                  U.S. of U.S. on I.pact
 0.17     0.174           574.13         0.03             0.18        0.11          1.42        Shock Fiscal Japanese
                                                                                                       of Japan on Impact
                                                                                                          Impact Year First
                                          MC143
 0.61     0.404           16.40          0.05             0.09         0.35          0.91                     Shock Fiscal
                                                                                                   U.S.   of   U.S. on Impact
0.309     0.207           677.86         0.03             0.13        0.14          1.35        Shock Fiscal Japanea.
                                                                                                      of Japan on impact
                                                                                                       I.pact Year Third
 0.18      0.209           7.75           0.03              0.01       0.12          4.10                  Shock Fi.cal
                                                                                                   U.S. of U.S. on Impact
 0.22     0.133           403.29         0.02             0.05        0.12          1.00        Shock Fiscal Japan...
                                                                                                       of Japan on impact
                                           
                                           EPA
                                                                                                          Impact Year   First
  (1)        (i)
GNP Real   GNP Real        currency)       Gooda          Multiplier      Rate.)      Rat..)
Baseline   Baseline     loca2) of        Import to        Fiscal tie   Exchan3       Exchang.
   of         of        billions (in     Propensity       on Change    Exogenous    Exogenoua
Cent Per   Cent Per       Imports         Marginal           Rate        (with        (with
  a as       a as       Merchandise          the           Exchange      Goods      Multiplier
Balance    S Column         Real         on Change        of Impact    import to      Fiscal
Account                  in Change          Rat.                       Prop.n.ity
Current                                   Exchange                      Marginal
Real in                                  of Impact
 Change
   7          6              5               4                3            2            1
                      CNP) Baseline Real of Cent Per I to Equal Expenditures Govern.rnt in (Increase
                                 POLICIES FISCAL U.S. AND JAPANESE OF EFFECTS TRADE REAL
                                                         1 TABLE
                                                                 TABLE 1(Conr'd)

                                                         2                                  4
                                                                                                                                      Change
                                                                                      Impact of                                       In Real
                                                     Marginal                         Rachange                                        Cu Ftc or
                                                    Propensity                          Rare          Change in                       Account
                                  Fiscal             to Import        Impact of      Change on          Real           Coloan S       Balance
                                Multiplier             Conds          Exchange         the           Merchandise         as a
                                   (with                (with           Rate         Marginal          Imports         Per Cent      Per Cenr
                                 Exogenous           Exogenous        Change on     Propensity      (in billions          o1
                                 Exchange                            the Fiscal      to Import        of locak2        Baseline      Basel Inc
                                  Rates)
                                                    Exchan5
                                                    Rates)                             Goods        currencyl          Real CNP      Real CUP
                                                                     Multiplier
                                                                                                                          Ct)              (7)
First Year Impact
Impact on Japan of
 Japanese Fiscal Shock               1.15                0.12            0.00               0.00       425.96             0.138           0.19
Impact on U.S. of U.S.
 Fiscal Shock                        1.05                0.40            0.00               0.00        16.06             0.420           0.41

Third Year Impact
Impact on Japan of
 Japanese Fiscal Shock               1.15                0.17            0.10              0.04       728.53             0.221           0.33
Impact on U.S. of U.S.
 Fiscal Shock                        0.55                0.67             0.05          0.08           14.35             0.354           0.47



                                                                                                                                U.S. imports
                                              Average                                                 Japanese Imports            from Japan
   Japanese              U.S.                Japanese            Average U.S.         U.S. CMI'         from rhe U.S.             Relative to
 Fiscal Shock       Fiscal Shock            Propensity            Propensity        Relative to       Relative to Total           Total   U.i.
   (1980 8?)          (1982 B$)              to l.port             to Import        Japanese CMI'     Japanese Imports              Taports -

1987: 3086.70       1987:       38.24       1987:     0.09       1987:       0.10   1987:                       0.22
1980: 3304.00       1989:       40.54       1989:     0.09       1989:       0.08   1989:


(1)   Change in aerchandise Imports from baseline relative tn the change in real GM?.
(2)   In 1982 prices in the United States and 1980 prices in Japan.
(3)   Results based on fourth quarter 1987 observations from IMF direction of Trade.
(4)   CM? in Japan and the U.S. are compared uaing I'?? as calculated by the ORCU (see Blade and Roberts).
(5)   Based on first three quarters of 1987 (see TM?           of Trade)
                                                                 flirertot
                                                                                         2.8). X (0.21 X 3 Column   (3)
                                                                                           (0.22/2.8). X I Column   (2)
                                                                            1.    Table of 6 column from Obtained   (1)
                              0.354                                                 0.221                  Year Third
  O.208                       0.420                  0.O17                                                 Year First
  o.247                                                                            0.138
                                                       OECD
   O.169                      0.288                   0.011                         0.146                  Year Third
                              0.372                                                 0.174                  Year First
  O.219%                                            O.Ol4
                                                       MCM
    O.238                     0.404                                                 0.207                  Year Third
                                                     0.016
 O.123                        0.209                                                 0.133                  Year First
                                                    O.O1O
                                                       EPA
      (%)                      (1)                      (Z)                       (Z)
G.N.P. Japanese
                       (1 G.N.P. U.S.               G.N.P. U.S.              G.N.P. Japanese
     Japan!                Change!                   U.S., from           Change/(1 Import
  from Imports           Import      U.S.        Imports Japanese                  Japanese
 U.S. in Change                                      in Change
       4                        3                       2                             1
             terms) real (in                                     terms) real (in
 Expansion   Fiscal U.S. of  Impact                 Expansion   Fiscal Japanese    of Impact
                                        IMPORTS MERCHANDISE REAL BILATERAL AND
                                                TOTAL ON IMPACT FISCAL
                                                      2 TABLE
                                                                      TABLE 3


                                                     INDEX OF ASYMMETRIES IN THE EFFECTS
                              OF U.S.   AND JAPANESE FISCAL EXPANSION OH INDUCED REAL MERCHANDISE IMPORTS (I)

                                           1                   2                     3                       4              5
                                                                                                                         Index of
                                                          Index of               Index of               Index of         Asymmetry
                                                          Asymmetry            Asymmetry in           Asymmetry in      in Marginal
                                      Index of            in Trade          Sizes of U.S. and           ix fiscal
                                                  (2)                                        i4)
                                                                                                                       Propenslt
                                  Total Asymmetry         Patterns (3)    Japanese Economies         Multipiiersts)
                                                                                                                       to Import


                                                                                     EPA
First Year                               11.732               0.955                  7.840                 1.463           1.071
Third Year                               14.578               0.955                  7.840                 0.828          2.353



                                                                                    MCM
First Year                               16.023               0.955                  7.840                 1.427          1.500
Third Year                               14.803               0.955




                                                                                   OECD

First Year                               22.776               0.955                  7.840                0.913           3.333
Third Year                               12.015               0.955                 7.840                 0.571           2.810



(1) A value of I Indicates no asymmetry. A value greater than I indicates a greater ispart from the U.S.
(2) Column 4 of Table 2 / Column 2 of Table 2.
     The index of asysssetry in column I equals the product of columna 2
                                                                         through 5, (excluding rounding off errors).
(3)   0.21 /    0.22
(4)   2.8   /   1/2.8
(5) U.S.  Fiscal Multiplier with Endogenous Exchange Rate / Japanese Fiscal Multiplier.
(6) U.S. Marginal Propensity to Import with Eodogenous Exchange Rate / Japanese Marginal Propensity to Import.
                                              1989. in billion 851.62 and 1987 in billion $44.50 to equal expansion fiecal
  Nominal    1989. in billion $40.54 1982 and 1987 in billion $38.24 1982 to equal countries both in expansion fiscal Real          (1)
     4.20               2.81           1.30      2.68             2.55          6.40          3.01                   3 Year
     0.95               0.76           0.28      0.74             0.36          1.24          1.12                     cCar
                                                                                                       Policy Flecal Japanese
                                                                                      Exports
                                                                                    Merchandise
                                                                                  U.S. in Change
    20.10              3.10          17.00    10.84            0.94            26.4         14.48                          3 Year
    16.35              0.65          15.65    14.67           0.34           17.9         16.55                          i   near
                                                                                                            Policy   Fiscal       U.S.
                                                                                     Imports
                                                                                    Merchandise
                                                                                 U.S. in Change
                                                                                                                                  llr.1.LI
    4.62                0.15           4.02       3.1             0.40          4.44          2.70                      3    Year
                                                                                                                     1
    4.88                1.08           3.57      3.74             0.90          3.39          2.64                 1) Sear
                                                                                                        Policy Japanese((acal
                                                                                        Exports
                                                                                      Merchandise
                                                                                  U.S.   In Change
    26.53              12.85         14.94    14.65           6.03           11.96         11.71                          3   Year
    16.53              4.06          13.13    13.39           3.25           12.62         14.57                      Iesr
                                                                                                            Policy Fiscal U.S.
                                                                                     Imports
                                                                                    Merchandime
                                                                                 U.S. in Change
                                                                                                                                   N
    2.22                0.94           1.28      1.72             0.74          2.92         1.96                       3    Year
    0.61                0.30           0.30      0.78             0.55          0.93         0.69                    i Sear
                                                                                                        Policy Fiscal Japanese
                                                                                        Exports
                                                                                      Merchandise
                                                                                  U.S.   in Change
    20.58              8.12          12.46    14.82           3.91           14.78        16.40                     3 Year
    3.55               0.84           4.40     7.28            2.80           4.62         7.75                      i Tear
                                                                                                            Policy Fiscal U.S.
                                                                                       Imports
                                                                                      Merchandise
                                                                                  U.S.   in Change
Nom1naI                Nominal        Nominal      eai         nominal          5Oiflal       Real
                                                                                                                                   EPA
Account Current      Services Net       Balance Trade          Effects            Linkages Trade
   on Effects         on Effects       on Effecta Total     Trade of Terms          Principal
                                                             Approximate
                                                 Dollars) U.S. of (Billions
                                                 CURRENT U.S. THE ON EXPANSION FISCAL
                                        ACCOUNT'
                                                JAPANESE AND U.S. OF EFFECTS
                                                            4   TABLE
                                                                 TABLE 5

                                                      EFFECTS OF JAPANESE AND U.S.
                                       FISCAL EXPANSION ON TNE JAPANESE CURRENT ACCOUNT
                                                          (100 Billions of Yen)
                                      (1)                       (2)                      (3)                     (4)             (5)
                                                            Approximate                                   Effects on         Effects on
                                  Princisal               Terms of Trade     Total Effects on
                             Trade   Linkages                 Effects             Trade Balance          Net    Services   Current   Account
                           Real             sOmlnal           Nominal        Real              Nomlnai         Nomlnai         Noislnal
EPA
                          Change in Japanese
                             Merchandise
                                  lmporta
Japanese Fiscal
    Policy
  Tsar 1                                 1.35                                                  3.04           2.26            5.26
                            4.03                               0.00          4.80
  Year 3                    6.78         2.14                   0.47          8.71            5.48           5.17           10.60
                          Change in Japanese
                             Merchandise
                               Exports
U.S. Fiscal Folicy
  Tear i                    3.10              3.78             0.7               2.71           1.79            2.52            4.24
  Year 3                    8.02             8.21             14.36              6.15           4.10            6.46           10.39
Nun
                        Change in Japanese
                            Merchandise
                              Imports
Japanese Fiscal
    Policy
  Tear   1                  5.96         1.71                   1.25          7.43            4.92            1.92           7.11
  Year 3                    5.18         2.90                   1.46          6.69            5.27            2.04           8.02
                          Change in Japanese
                             Merchandise
                               Exports
U.S. Fiscal Policy
  Tear 1                     5.26            4.91              1.84              5.84           3.88            1.94            4.97
  Year 3                     5.43             5.70             1.48              5.77           6.06            4.94            9.10
utuL,
                          Change in Japanese
                             Merchandise
                               Imports
Japanese Fiscal
    Policy
  Tear i                    4.46              2.0              0.39          4.13             2.5            1.0            4.0
  Year 3                    7.69              3.5               1.13          9.47             6.0            1.5            4.0
                          Change    In Japanese
                             Merchandise
                                  Exports
0.1. Fiscal Policy
  Tear 1                    4.57              4.73             0.12              3.74           3.95            0.00            3.68
  Year 3                    4.90              5.75              0.15              3.26           4.50            1.75            6.00

(1) Real fiscal expanafon in both countries equal to 1980 130.87 hundted billion in 1987 and 1980 Y33.04 hundred billion in
1987. Nominal fiscal equal to Y33.91 hundted billion in 1987 and Y37.37 hundred billion lo 1989.
                                                      FIGURE 1
                  ROECO FISCAL EXPANSION            1985 RESULTS                    U.S. FISCAL EXPANSION
                 LEVEL OF REAL GNP: AVERAGE OF 11 MODELS


                                                            ';
                                                                          LEVEL OF REAL GNP: AVERAGE OF 12 MODELS




                                                             0.5-
 0.25                                                       0.25
                                                                  0-
0    25                                                   0.25 -
          5                                                 0.5
          1985       86          87    88      89     90           1985       86          87     88      89    90

                                                                          CONSUMER PRICE LEVEL %

 1   .75
     1.5-
 I .25-

0.75
 0.5
0.25
                                                               0
                             87       88      89     90           1985        86      87        88      89    90

                 SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE S POINTS                        SHORT-tERM INTEREST RATE S POINTS
      4                                                        4
 3.5                                                        3.5
      3                   u.s.        E_C9_                    3                   U.S.         ROECO
 2.5                                                        2.5
      2                                                       2
 15                                                         1.5-

                                                            0.5-
      1985          86       87       88      89     90        1985          86       87        88      89    90

      4
              VALUE OP U.S. DOLLAR S                                     VALUE OF U.S. DOLLAR    S
                                                              4
      3                                                       3
      2                                                       2




                                                             1


                                                             L
      1985          86      87        88      89     90       1985           86      87         88      89    90
                                                   bj(,LiK1
      U.S. CURRENT BALANCE EFFECTS OF U.S. FISCAL EXPANSION
      EPA; CURRENT BALANCE IN BILL SUB                              EPA; CURRENT BALANCE AB % OF GNP


      NN.EP8EPA8S
                                                       -02:

                                                                    TJPA85
  ;AR1                                     56              EAR1                                              6


      MOM: CURRENT BALANCE IN BILL         U.8.l                    MOM: CURRENT BALANCE A8 % OF NP


10
                   Q!L.                                0.25                    Mc1486        14C1485




-50


  0
      OECO: CURRENT BALANCE IN BILL

                   OECD   88     O(CD 85

                                                       0.25
                                                               -


                                                                -
                                                                    ___
                                                                    OECD: CURRENT BALANCE A8 S OF NP

                                                                                OECD   88     OECD   8


                                                        -0.5
:::
                                                        075
40

50                                                       1-
  YCAR1    2          3           4        5       6       YEAR1        2          3           4         5
      BROOKINBE AVERAGE EFFECTE                                     BROOKINGS AVERAGE EFFECTS
  0




          MEAN8S          1SD                         0.75-          I.IEAN          -iSD
40
          -1-155                                                       ISD

50                                                       1-
  YEAR1    2          3           4        5       6       YEAR1        2          3           4         5   6
                                    FIGURE 3
              JAPANESE CURRENT BALANCE EFFECTS OF FISCAL EXPANSIONS
              iOQC                     FISCAL: CURRENT BALANCE                    JAPANESE FISCAL: CUR SAL AS S OF UNP
     0


 5
                                                                  -0.2:


                                                                  0.75             EPA   88      OECO     88
                                                                                    UCN    88

     1897               88         89           90           92
                                                      91                  1987            88          89        90        91       92
              OOBYEN    JAPANESE FISCAL: REAL MET EXPORTS                        JAPANESE FISCAL: REAL NET EXPORTS AS S OP
         -
                                                                      0-




10



                                                                     75                         EPA   88        OCD 88         -
                                                                                                UCI   U
20
  1987                  88         89           90   91      92          19 37        88          89            90        91       92

             IOOBY     U.S. FISCAL: JAPANESE CURRENT BALANCE                      U.S. FISCAL: IBIS RESULTS AS           SOP GNP


                                                                  0.75-

                                                                   0.5-

                                                                  0.25-

                                                                     0-
  1987                 88          89           90   91     92        1987            88          89            90        91       92

         so u         PIECAL JAPANESE CURRENT SALANCE                           U.S. FISCAL:    III RESULTS AS S OP SNP
50                                                                   2

                             65        O(C085                     1.75               (PA 65
40                     EPA                                                                            O(CDJ5
                       UCU    85                                    1.5              UCUBS

                                                                  1 .25




                                                                  0.75
                                                                   0.5
                                                                  0.25
 YEAR1                  2          3            4    5       6       YEAR1            2           3             4         5        6
                                                                        FIGURE 4
                               OWN-COUNTRY EFFECTS OF FISCAL EXPANSION
             JAPAN: REAL GNP                                                                      JAPAN: REAL ABSORPTION
2.5-                                                                          2.5-
2.25-                          EPA8S
                               4CA455
                                           OECD88                            2.25-
   2-



                                                                             0.75-                                              N
0.75-
 0-5 -                                         N.            ..                  0   .       -    EPA
                                                                                                   uc 88
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         88           OECD8E          -
0.25-                                               ..                      0.25-
   0-                                                     .....                           U.      ______________________
      1987          88           89            90            91         92                1987           88           89            90       91   92

             JAPAN: GROSS PRIVATE SAVINGS AS % OF GNP                                             JAPAN: PRIVATE INVESTUENT AS S OP GNP
      1                                                                           0.5-

0.75
                               EPA
                               ICI
                                     58
                                      88
                                           OECO88
                                                                             0.25-
                                                                                          0-
                                                                                                     /\             EPA 88
                                                                                                                    ________
                                                                                                                    AJ!_
                                                                                                                                    OCD88




 0.5

0.25


      1987          88               89        90            91         92                1987           88           89            90       91   92


             U.B.    REAL GNP                                                                     U.S.: REAL ABSORPTION
    2.5                                                                       2.5
2.25                           EPA   88
                               UClA 88
                                               OECD88                        2.25             -



      2                                                                                   2
1 .75                                                                         1 .75           -



  1.5                                                                           1.5-
1 .25                                                                         1 .25           -




0.75                                                                         0.75
                                                                                                                           88       0EC088
    0.5                                                                       0.5                                   EPA
                                                                                                                    14CM   88
0.25                                                                         0.25-
      0
      1987          88               89        90            91         92                1987           88               89        90       91   92

             U.S.: GROSS PRIVATE SAVINGS AS S OP UHF                                              U.S.: INVESTMENT AS S OF QNP
                                                                              0.....
                                                                        -
                    EPA   88          OECDS5                       ,-
0.75                      a                                                   0.25                    EPA     88           OECD88




                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                      14CM     88

                                                                              0.00

0.2:                                                                         0.25
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                             0.50
      1987          88               89        90            91         92                1987           88               89        90       91   92
                                                     bIGLIRE 5
                JAPANESE FISCAL EXPANSION                 EPA            U.S. FISCAL EXPANSION
          z CURRENTBALANCEA3%OFNp                                    CURR!NTSALANCEA$%OFGNp
      1                                                       1

0.75                   -    ALP__                     0 75               t!&"_.     -
 0,5                                                        0.5
0.25                                                       0.25
                                                                      -- --




      1987


      1
                 88       89     90

             GOVT BALANCE AS S OF GNP
                                          91         92       1987


                                                              1
                                                                  TTT    88

                                                                     GOVT BALANCE
                                                                                 89          90

                                                                                     Al S OF GNP
                                                                                                    91     92



0.75                                                       0.75
 0.5                   US.       JAP__                      05
0.25                                                       0.25
      0                                                       0
0.25                                                     0.25



          _______________________________
      1987    88     89    90     91    92                    1987       88      89          90     91     92

             REAl. GNP EFFECTS or FISCAL EXPANSION                   REAL GNP EFFECTSOF FISCAL EXPANSION
 2.5                                                        2.5
2.25                                                       2.25
                       U.S.      JAP
 1.                                                        1.75




0.25                                                      0.25
      O                                                       0
      1987       88       89     90       91     92           1987       88      89          90     91     92

             UNEMPLOYMINT RATE S POINTS                              UNEMPLOYMENT RATE       S POINTS
  0.0 .___-_                                                0.0
                                                                              U.S.           AP__
0.1                                                      0.1




          ________________________                                _________________________
      1987       88       89     90       91     92           1987       88      89          90     91     92
                                                    FIGURE 6

                JAPANESE FISCAL EXPANSION               EPA             US. FISCAL EXPANSION



                                                                                                         7
             CONSUMER PRICE LEVEL S                                 CONSUMER PRICE LEVEL S

1   75                -               --               1   75




      1987       88      89     90            91   92        1987       88      89      90          91   92

             EXCHANGE RATES                                         SXCHANGE RATES
     4                                                       0-
     3                                                      1-
                      $/Y)4     U.S. IIIDEX                                  $/YEN     U.S. INDEX




    f221.
      1987       88      89     90            91

             SHORT-TEAM INTEREST RATES S POINTS
                                                   92        1987       88      89     90           91


                                                                    SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES S POINTS
                                                                                                         92




                      U.S.                                   3-

      2




      1987       88      89     90            91   92        1987       88      89     90           91   92

             LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE S POINTS                       LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE S POINTS

                                                            35               U.S.      JJPAN_

      3                                                      3
    2.5




      1987       88      89     90            91   92        1987       88      89     90           91   92
                                                                 FIGURE 7
                    JAPANESEFISCAL EXPANSION                     MCM                      U.8. FISCAL EXPANSION
                CURRENT BALANCE AS S OF GNP                                         CURRENT BALANCE AS S OF GNP
                                                                           1
 0.75-                         U.S.       lAP     -

                                                                                   -
                                                                    0.75               91__...
  0.5-                                                               0.5
 0.25-                                                                                   -
                                                                    0.25
    0
-0.25                                                             0.25
 0 . 5                                                           0 . 5
0.75                                                             0.75

         1987       88               89    90               92
                                                       91                  1987          88          89    90        91    92
                GOVT BALANCE AS S OF GNP                                           GOVT BALANCE AS S OF GNP
         1                                                                     -
 0.75                                                              0.75
  0.5-                        _____
                              U.S.        JAPAN                     0.5
 0.25-                                                             0.25
                                                                       0
0.25-                                                            0.25
 0.5-                                                             0 . 5
0.75-                                                            0. 75

       1987         88           89       90          91    9           1987            88           89   90      91      92

                REAL GNP EFFECTS OF FISCAL EXPANSION                               REAL GNP EFFECTS OF FISCAL EXPANSION
 2.5                                                                2.5
2.25                                                               2.25
    2                                                                  2
                              U.S.        JAPAN
1.75                                                               1.75-
 1.5                                                                1.5-
1.25-                    -.                                        1.25-
     I                                                                 1-
0.75-                                                              0.75
 0.5-                                                               0.5-
0.25-                                                              0.25-
    U.                                                                0-
     1987          88            89       90          91    92         1987             88       89       90      91      92

    0.        UNEMPLOYMENT NATE S POINTS                                           UNEMPLOYMENT RATE      S POINTS
                                                                     0
0.1-                                                             0.1                        _____
                                                                                              U.S.        JAPAN
0.2                                                              0.2
0.3                                                              0.3
0.4                                                              0.4
0.5                                                              0.5
0.6                                                              0.6
0.7                                                              0.7
0.8                                                              0.8
0.9                                                              0.9

    1987           88           89        90          91    92         1987            88        89       90      91      92
                                                     bIGURE 8

                JAPANESEFISCAL EXPANSION
                                                      MCM                   U.S. FISCAL EXPANSION
                                                                        CONSUMER PRICE LEVEL S
             CONSUMER PRICE LEVEL 5
  3
                       U.S.         JAPAN
2.5-
  2-




                                    90                         1987         88       89    90       91      92
      1987       88           89               91    92

                                                                        EXCHANGE RATES
             EXCHANGE RATES
  4-
  3-
                       4/YEN        U.S. HOE                                      s/YEN

  2                                                        2




                                                           4

                                                           5

 2                                                         6
                                     90              92        1987          88      89     90      91        92
      1987        88          89               91


                                                                         SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES % POINTS
              $HORT-TERU INTEREST RATES S POINTS                    x
   4-                                                          4-
 3.5-                                                      3.5-
      3.                _____
                        U.S.         .P38_                     3-
 2.5-                                                      2.5-
   2-                                                          2
                                                           1.5

                                                           0.5
                                                               0
                                     90              92          1987        88       89    90       91       92
       987        88          89                91

              LONG-TERM INTERIS1 RATE S POINTS                           LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE S POINTS


 3. 5                                                      3.5
      3
 2.5                                                       2.5
      2

 1.5

 0.5-                                                      0

                                                                   1987      88       89     90      91       92
       1987       88           89     90        91    92
                                                        t1(j1JKI      Y

             JAPANESE FISCAL EXPANSION                  OECD                   U.S FISCAL EXPANSION
           OURRENTBALANCEASSOFGNP                                         CURR!NTBALANCEAS%OPGNP
    1                                                            1

0.75                 L2_            AP__                      0.75
 0.5-                                                          0S
0.25-                                                         0.25
    0-                                                          0-
0.25-                                                       0.25
0.5-                                                         0.5-
0.75-                                                       0.75
   1                                                           1
    1987      88         89          90        91   92            1987        88     89       90      91     92

           GOVTBALANCSAS%OFGNP                                            GOVTIALANCEASSOFGNP
0.25                                                          0.25-
    0-
0.25-               iiL..._.                                0.25-




    1987


  2.5
              88

           REAL NP
                         89

                     EFFECTS
                                     90
                                           -




                                               91   92

                                  OF FISCAL EXPANSION
                                                                 1987


                                                               2.5
                                                                      -___    88     89       90      91     92

                                                                          REAL SNP EFFECTS OF FISCAL EXPANSION

 2.25-                                                        2.25

 1.-                                A_P




                                                              :
 1.25                                                         125


                                                                                       ---
                     -




                                     --
.01            .

                                     90             92                        88      89      90      91     92
    1987      88         89                    91                1987

           UNEMPLOYMENT RATE S POINTS                                     UNEMPLOYMENT RAT!   S POINTS




    1987       88        89          90        91       92        1987        88      89      90      91         92
                                                FIGURE 10
              JAPANESEFISCAL EXPANSION           OECD                   U.S. FISCAL EXPANSION
           CONSUMER PRICE LEVEL S                                  CONSUMER PRICE LEVEL S
 3-5                                                  3-
   3                US.       JAPAN

 2.5                                                  2.5
                                                           7
                                                      1.5

   S                                                  0.5
   0
0.5                                                 0.
    1987       88       89     90      91       92          1987       88      89          90      91   92

           EXCHANGE RATES                                          EXCHANGE RATES
                                                           4
                                                                    s/YEN     u.    lADE
   3-                $/TN     -_'89                        3

   2-                                                      2



   0-                                                      0

                                                       1

  2 -
   1987        88       89     90      91       92          1987       88      89          90      91   92


           8HORT-TERU INTEREST RATES S POINTS                      SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES S POINTS
   4-                                                      4
 3.5                                                  3-5
   3-                U.S.     JAPAN                        3
 2.5                                                  2.5
   2-                                                      2
 1.5-                                                 1.5

 0.5-                                                 0.5
   0-
    1987       88       89     90      91       92          1987       88      89          90      91   92

           LONG-TERII INTEREST RATE S POINTS                       LONG-TERM INTEREST RATE S POINTS

                                                                            U.S.           JAPAN
 3.5                                                  3.5
   3                                                       3
                                                      2.5
                                                           2
                                                      1.5

                                                      0.5
                                                           (1

    1987       88       89     90      91       92          1987       88      89          90      91   92
                                                         FI(LIRE   Ii
                     ROLE OF EXCHANGE RATES IN FISCAL TRANSMISSION
                JAPANESE FISCAL: S/YIN EXCIIANEE RATE                            U.S. FISOAL U.S. EXOHANISE RATE
    4                                                              2
    3
    2                                                              0
                                                                                   EPA 88            0EC088
                                                                                   IC888


                                                                 3
                               P    88   CD_98
  2                                                             4

  3                                                             5
     1987           88           89       90       91     92      1987                88              89      90             91     92

                JAPAN: MULTIPLIER 01FF. FLEX-FIX                                 U.S.: MULTIPLIER 01FF. FLEX-FIX
 0.5                                                            0.5-
                                                                                                   EPA 88     0ECD88
 0.4
                               EPA 88
                               11CM 85
                                          O(CDBS                0.4-                               11CM 88
                                                                0.3-
 0.3                                                            0.2-
 0.2                                                            0.1-
 0.1                                                            0.0-
 0.0                                                           0. 1
                                                               0. 2-
0. 1 -                                                        0. 3
0.2-                                                          0 . 4
                                                               0.5-
0 . 3-
        19 17       88              89        90   91     92           19   1788                      89      90             91     92




                                           ___
                  JAPAN: REAL NIT EXPORTS, FLEX-FIX                         II   U.S.: REAL HIT EXPORTS. FLEX-FIX
                                                                  10
                                                                                   EPA   55          0LCOSS

                                                                   S


                                                                   0


                                                                 5
                               EPA 88     OECOBE
   8                          8C1188

  10                                                           10
                                                                             7           88           89          90         91     92
    1987             88             89        90   91     92           191

                                                                                 U.S.: CURRENT SALANOL FLEX-FIX
          100JAPAN: CURRENT SALANGE. FLEX-FIX
     2                                                                                                                              
                    CPA   85          9.CD8
                                                                   3.                                                            __,
     0                                                                                CPA     5$        OCCDA.$    ...
                                                                       2
   1

   2

   3
                                                                  2
    .4.                                                           3
                                                                  4

                                                                       1987              88            89         90         91
        1987         88              89       90    91    92
                                                              bi(,Liki        L4

               PARTIAL VS FULL MODEL EFFECTS OF EXCHANGE RATES
             10% YEN OSPREC. PARTIAL; REAL NET EXPORTS                              10% YEN DEPREC. PULL; REAL NET EXPORTS
120                                                                120 -

100                                                                100-             EPA 88
                                                                                    ______          OECD88
                                                                                    14CM 38

80                                                                  80 -

  0
              /                                                     AU -

 40                                                                 40    -


                          EP14   88             88
                                           OECD 
                                           
 20                                                                 20 -

  0                                                                  0-
  1987            88         89            90        91       92      1987                   88     89             90   91    92

                                                                                 YEN DEPREC. FULL; CURRENT BALANCE
       008Y 10% YEN OEPREC. PARTIAL: CURRENT BALANCE
 70                                                                 70 - 0O8Y10'


               / -1-
                                                                                      EPA 88    0EC088
 60-                                                                60-

                  ---
                                                                                                  UCU 88

 50                                                                 50 -
 40                                                                 40-
 30                                                                 30 -
                                                                                    /
        PA88OECD88                                                  20
                                                                               ---------------------
                                                                          -
 20
        /                                                         10-
 10

  U.                                                                 0-
  1987            88         89            90        91       92      1987                   88         89         90   91    92


       1$   10% 5 DEPREC. PARTIAL: REAL NET EXPORTS                            8
                                                                                   18% 5 DEPREC. PULL; REAL NET EXPORTS
                                                                   80 -
             EPA   88       OCCO      88                          70-
                                                                                                  EPA 88       0EC088
 70                                                                                               14CU88
 60                                                                 60-
 50                                                                50 -
 40                                                                 40-                           
                                                                    30-                  -
 30
 20
 10

  1987             88        89            90        91       92      1987                   88         89         90   91    92

            10% 5 DEPREC. PARTIAL: GUHREHT BALANCE                                 10%        DEPREC. PULL: CURRENT BALANCE
 70
       80
                                                                    70 - 88
 60                                                                60    -

                  EPA88          0EC088
                                   
 50                                                                                                      OECD 88
                                                                                         EPA 88          
                                                                    40-                  uC1488
                                                                    30 -
                                                                    20    -


                                                                    10


                                                                   10

  1987             88        89            90        91       92      1987                   88         89         90   91    92
