NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING BIASES IN SMOKING CESSATION:
EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT
Frank J. Chaloupka IV
Matthew R. Levy
Justin S. White
Working Paper 26522
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26522

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2019

We thank Hunt Allcott, Jing Li, David Powell, Justin Sydnor, Josh Tasoff, Dmitry Taubinsky,
and Severine Toussaert for helpful feedback, as well as audience members at the Behavioral
Economics & Health Symposium at UPenn (2017), the ASHEcon meeting in Atlanta (2018), the
TCORS Economics Working Group (2018), the ESA World Meeting in Vancouver (2019), the
SITE Summer Workshop at Stanford (2019), and the Annual Health Economics Conference in
San Francisco (2019). This research was funded by the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse
under grant number P50-DA036128. This trial was registered in the AEA RCT Registry under
AEARCTR-0002106. Special thanks go to Elissa Resnick and project managers at Nielsen
Healthcare and SSI, notably Deanne Lowery, for research support. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Corresponding authors: Levy and White.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Frank J. Chaloupka IV, Matthew R. Levy, and Justin S. White. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Biases in Smoking Cessation: Evidence from a Field Experiment
Frank J. Chaloupka IV, Matthew R. Levy, and Justin S. White
NBER Working Paper No. 26522
December 2019
JEL No. C93,D91,I12
ABSTRACT
We conduct a randomized field experiment to quantify biases that affect consumers of addictive
goods: present-biased preferences, naïve beliefs regarding present bias, and projection-biased
beliefs over future abstinence. These biases reflect departures from the neoclassical benchmark
needed to accommodate intertemporal and state-dependent prediction errors and have important
theoretical and policy ramifications. Our experiment employs a new approach for remote
monitoring to ensure truthful reporting of behavior and valuations, and a novel identification of
subjects’ biases based on willingness to pay for future abstinence incentives that serve as partial
commitment devices. We find that cigarette smokers overestimate their likelihood of future
abstinence by more than 100%, consistent with partially-naïve present-biased preferences. We
estimate that on average smokers are present biased and only partially aware of their present bias,
with substantial heterogeneity and a positive correlation between the two at the individual level.
Smokers mispredict the effects of an abstinence intervention. Ex ante smokers anticipate no effect
of the intervention on their future abstinence and ex post fail to recognize the intervention’s
positive effect. Our estimates highlight that smokers suffer from a constellation of biases: under
their own long-run preferences, smokers’ choices lead to a private welfare loss of $400 per week.
Frank J. Chaloupka IV
University of Illinois at Chicago
Department of Economics (m/c 144)
College of Liberal Arts and Sciences
601 S. Morgan Street, Room 713
Chicago, IL 60607-7121
and NBER
fjc@uic.edu

Justin S. White
University of California, San Francisco
Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies
3333 California Street, Box 0936
San Francisco, CA 94118
Justin.White@ucsf.edu

Matthew R. Levy
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
and Political Science
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
m.r.levy@lse.ac.uk

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0002106

1

Introduction

Tobacco use is a high-stakes behavior with important health and financial consequences.
About one in five deaths in the U.S. is attributable to tobacco use, and smokers lose roughly a
decade of life expectancy (Fenelon and Preston, 2012; Jha et al., 2013). Premature morbidity
and mortality attributable to smoking impose major costs to individual smokers and society.
According to one comprehensive assessment, the private cost of smoking is $33 per pack,
and the social cost is $40 per pack (Sloan et al., 2006).1 Scaling up, this is a national social
cost over the life cycles of U.S. smokers of more than $200 billion.
Smoking also poses theoretical and empirical challenges for both neoclassical and
behavioral economic theory. It is a complex behavior, with meaningful implications for
both intertemporal choice (immediate consumption and delayed health consequences) and
state-dependent preferences (both long-term addiction and short-term cravings). Becker
and Murphy’s (1988) model of rational addiction has had a deep and lasting impact on
researchers and policy makers. However, Gruber and Kőszegi (2001) among others have
shown that observed smoking patterns may be consistent not only with rational addiction
but also with an alternative model of agents with time-inconsistent preferences.2 The
multiplicity of interpretations from the same data has consequences for intuitions, welfare
calculations, and policy prescriptions. Behavioral model selection becomes especially
important—and complicated—for applications such as smoking in which multiple
departures from rationality are possible or likely. In this paper, we consider three of the
most commonly cited departures from rationality that have been tied to smoking:
present-biased preferences, naïve beliefs regarding present bias, and projection-biased
beliefs. Present-biased smokers over-weight the immediate pleasure derived from satisfying
a craving or avoiding withdrawal symptoms at the expense of longer-term health and
financial considerations. Naïve smokers are not fully aware of the extent of their present
bias. Projection-biased smokers mispredict how they will feel about smoking after their
addiction or craving state changes. We show that all three are important drivers of
smoking decisions.
To better understand the behavioral biases in smoking decisions, we undertook an
individual-level, randomized field experiment. Over 12 weeks, subjects from 16 large
metropolitan areas in the U.S. (N = 397) reported their smoking status weekly, and a
1
The estimate of social costs includes a countervailing fiscal externality of premature mortality to Social
Security.
2
Specifically, Gruber and Kőszegi (2001) focus on an empirical prediction that rational smokers will
exhibit forward-looking behavior with respect to future cigarette prices (Becker et al., 1991; Chaloupka,
1991).

2

random subset verified their smoking status using a saliva test each week. We used a novel
lottery-based design for remote monitoring to ensure strict incentive-compatibility at all
stages of the experiment, including incentivizing accurate reports of smoking status.3 We
offered abstinence incentives to all subjects during randomly selected weeks of Months 1
and 3, which enables us to estimate the net cost of abstinence under subjects’ (biased)
preferences. Crucially, we elicited subjects’ valuations of these future abstinence incentives
at multiple time points and for varying incentive levels. We identify present bias and
naïveté from a comparison of subjects’ valuations of future abstinence incentives and their
subsequent abstinence behavior in response to the abstinence incentives. In Month 2, we
offered an abstinence intervention to a random subset of subjects (“treated” subjects),
designed to encourage them to exit an addicted state. We identify the treatment effect
from the difference-in-differences in behavior between treated and control subjects before
and after the Month-2 intervention.
We identify projection bias from the
difference-in-differences in valuations between treated and control subjects before and after
the Month-2 intervention. We adopt a pre-specified analysis plan to estimate reduced-form
and structural estimates.
In the reduced-form estimation, we find that subjects are wildly over-optimistic about
future abstinence—by nearly 40 percentage points, overall. They further mispredict the
expected effect of the Month-2 abstinence intervention on their subsequent willingness to
stay abstinent. Surprisingly, we find that treated subjects’ beliefs become more pessimistic
following the intervention month despite their actual probability of abstinence increasing.
By combining subjects’ valuations of abstinence incentives—which provide imperfect
commitment to their future selves—with their subsequent abstinence behavior, our
experimental design allows us to structurally estimate subjects’ preferences and biases
while minimizing the need for arbitrary assumptions.4 The structural estimates indicate
that smokers in our sample have a severe degree of present bias regarding their smoking
behavior: an average short-run discount factor β = 0.67, substantially below the
time-consistent benchmark of 1, and with substantial heterogeneity between subjects.
While this implies a large departure from time-consistency, it is in line with existing
estimates.5 Moreover, subjects are only partially aware of their present bias, with
self-control beliefs β̃ = 0.85 on average. Although this is below the “fully naive” level of
In other words, subjects were incentivized to accurately report their smoking status.
This approach follows a recent literature which notes that while a discrete choice for commitment is
consistent with standard economic models of discrete choice, it is possible to use the willingness-to-pay for
incentives to estimate present-biased preferences (Acland and Levy, 2015; Carerra et al., 2019).
5
For example, Paserman (2008) finds β ∈ [0.40, 0.48] for low- to medium-wage job-seekers; Bai et al.
(2017) finds a mean β of 0.37 among villagers seeking health care in India; and Laibson (1997) uses an
estimate of β = 0.6.
3
4

3

β̃ = 1, it is nevertheless above their actual short-run discount parameter for 92% of
subjects. Our structural estimates confirm that even this degree of naïveté will induce
substantial over-optimism about abstinence behavior, as we observe in the reduced-form
results. Moreover, we find a near-linear relationship between individuals’ degree of present
bias and their beliefs, such that the partial naïveté in our sample of smokers is
well-approximated by the relationship β̃ = 0.11 + 1.11β. This relationship is itself a novel
finding and is not imposed either by the structural model or theory (if, for example, the
cognitive traits relating to a low β were associated with the metacognitive traits associated
with a high β̃).
Regarding the state-dependent prediction errors, we find that a simple model of projection
bias does not account for the patterns in the data. Our structural model confirms that the
Month-2 abstinence intervention led to a lasting increase in the relative benefit of abstinence,
which we estimate to be equivalent in utility terms to 0.56 utils. We find that subjects’ endof-Month-1 valuations of the intervention are consistent with a treatment effect of only 0.13
utils on average, which would correspond to a degree of projection bias of α = 0.77 and
not significantly different from 1. In other words, we fail to reject that subjects completely
project their long-run (pre-treatment) addiction onto how they expect to feel in a future
(post-treatment) unaddicted state. However, subjects’ end-of-Month-2 valuations—after the
treatment has had its effect—are consistent with a (statistically insignificantly) negative
effect of −0.08 utils, or a degree of projection bias of 1.15. Moreover, we can reject that the
ex-ante and ex-post valuations embed the same predicted treatment effect at p = 0.08. This
suggests that smokers’ decisions are subject to a double-hit of pessimism. The intervention
is effective at increasing Month-3 abstinence, yet before the intervention they believe it will
have no effect, and after the intervention they believe it has made things worse.
Finally, we are able to use the structural estimates to conduct a welfare analysis using
subjects’ own preferences. We find that, under subjects’ own long-run preferences, the private
welfare loss of continued smoking is on average approximately $400 per week. This figure
incorporates the effect of abstinence on lowered future addiction, and could not have been
estimated without our Month-2 intervention.
We focus on present bias and projection bias for four main reasons. First, they compose
the minimal set of departures from the neoclassical benchmark that are needed to
accommodate intertemporal and state-dependent prediction errors. Second, these biases
are both potentially important for assessing the welfare consequences of addictive goods,
and empirical work has not quantified the extent of these biases for welfare calculations.
Third, any estimate of projection bias based on predictions would be contaminated by
present bias, and mis-specified if researchers failed to account for naïve beliefs about
4

present bias. This is a notable reason why field-based estimates of projection bias are so
rare.
We leverage our identification strategy over present bias to estimate the
state-dependent prediction error as well, filling an important gap in the literature. Finally,
the implications of these models for actual behavior are highly ambiguous, and depending
on modeling assumptions can lead to vastly different conclusions about counterfactual
predictions, welfare, and optimal policy.6
Present bias has long been believed to be a driver of smokers’ decisions (Schelling, 1980;
Gruber and Kőszegi, 2001). According to this view, addicted smokers will seek to avoid the
immediate disutility of quitting by continually revising their plans to quit. Several lines of
evidence have been marshaled in support of the link between present bias and tobacco
consumption, including smokers’ use of commitment devices and high time discounting
rates.7 Present bias may be especially harmful for agents who are not fully aware of their
future self-control problems. Such naïve individuals can delay following through on
preferred actions today in expectation of performing the action tomorrow (O’Donoghue
and Rabin, 1999). Smokers’ widespread regret about having started to smoke and low
follow-through rates on quit attempts may be indicative that they suffer from some degree
of naïveté, or over-optimism (Fong et al., 2004; Hughes et al., 2004). In other health
domains such as physical activity, the evidence for naïveté or sophistication has often been
mixed (DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2006; Acland and Levy, 2015; Royer et al., 2015).
Smokers may suffer two general forms of projection bias, one involving a long-term
transition away from being addicted and one involving short-term fluctuations in craving.8
In a “hot” addicted state, smokers may fail to predict how their preferences will change
once they exit into a “cold” unaddicted state. In particular, they may underestimate the
benefits of quitting and their subsequent willingness to stay abstinent. On the other hand,
smokers in a “cold” low-craving state may fail to anticipate their behavior in a “hot”
6
For example, smokers may be pessimistic about future self-control if they are sophisticated, in which case
they would not quit in anticipation of failed future attempts. Smokers may be overly optimistic about future
self-control if they are naïve, in which case they do not quit in anticipation of successful future attempts.
Smokers may be pessimistic about the benefits of quitting if they project addiction. Smokers may be overly
optimistic about future consumption if they project satiation.
7
Several studies have noted smokers’ use of commitment devices as an indicator of their degree of present
bias. Wertenbroch (1998) shows that some smokers impose self-rationing on themselves by purchasing smaller
quantities of cigarettes (e.g., packs instead of cartons) in order to avoid consuming more than prefer ex ante.
Gruber and Mullainathan (2005) finds that likely smokers have higher subjective ratings of happiness after
the passage of tobacco control legislation, which the authors interpret as support for the notion that the laws
act as a commitment device for smokers. More direct evidence comes from Giné et al. (2010), in which 10%
of smokers agree to take up a commitment contract for smoking cessation. Smoking is also associated with
high discount rates for monetary rewards (Chabris et al., 2008; Khwaja et al., 2007; Bickel et al., 1999).
8
Loewenstein (2005) refers to these general forms as the hot-to-cold empathy gap and cold-to-hot empathy
gap.

5

high-craving state and thereby overestimate their future willingness to abstain. Projection
bias therefore fails to deliver a clear prediction without further information about the
relevant state. Studies have provided evidence on the projection bias of heroin addicts,
hungry workers at snack time, and even catalogue shoppers (Badger et al., 2007; Read and
Van Leeuwen, 1998; Conlin et al., 2007). For smokers, a cold-to-hot empathy gap has been
demonstrated with regard to very short-term craving (Sayette et al., 2008), but it remains
unclear whether the short-term craving or longer-term addiction is the relevant state for
the cessation decision.
Behavioral economists have shown increasing interest in structural estimation of
behavioral parameters as a way to gain traction on otherwise underspecified problems
(DellaVigna, 2018). Structural modeling holds the potential to go beyond simple treatment
effect estimates to address a number of thorny issues, such as why lasting behavior change
(especially around habits) is so difficult to achieve, what are the welfare effects of
behavioral interventions, and what mistake is being corrected in behavioral interventions.
Answers to these questions are critical for behavioral economists and policymakers to
develop and test more effective interventions.
While structural estimation has a number of advantages over reduced-form estimation,
it also carries important limitations. Structural methods often rely on weak identification
strategies and assumptions that have hidden or complicated implications for interpretation.
Chetty (2009) has advocated sufficient statistics as a middle ground between structural and
reduced-form methods. DellaVigna (2018) has suggested that an alternate approach involves
leveraging experimental variation for structural model identification. While experimental
economics has a long tradition of employing these methods, only relatively recently have
behavioral economists designed field experiments with structural estimation in mind (some
early examples being Chetty et al. (2009) and DellaVigna et al. (2012)).
A key benefit of estimating structural parameters for both utility and behavioral biases
is that we can estimate the welfare effects of smokers’ biases under their own preferences.
This avoids any need to impose external judgments about the costs and benefits of smokers’
decisions. We estimate that the private welfare loss of continuing to smoke is $414 per week,
under subjects’ long-run preferences (absent present bias) in an unaddicted state (absent
projection bias). Smokers choose to continue smoking in most weeks, however, because of the
two biases. Present bias lowers the discounted value of quitting by $2,635 (by discounting the
long-run benefits of abstinence by 1−β). Projection bias lowers the value of quitting by $390
(i.e., the difference between anticipated and actual utility from the abstinence intervention).
If one divides the welfare loss proportionally over the average number of cigarettes smoked
at baseline, it corresponds to a private welfare loss of $80 per pack.
6

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the experimental
design and data. Section 3 presents our descriptive and reduced-form results. Section 4
describes our conceptual model incorporating present bias and projection bias. Section 5
presents our structural estimates. Section 6 concludes.

2

Experimental Design

To understand beliefs and preferences in smoking decisions, we conducted a longitudinal
experiment over 12 weeks (Figure 1). Subjects completed short weekly surveys and three
longer online surveys at baseline, at the end of Month 1, and at the end of Month 2. During
each of the three longer sessions, we elicited subjects’ willingness to pay for abstinence
incentives in future weeks. We then implemented a novel incentive-compatible methodology
(described below) to remotely verify actual smoking behavior, in which we collected selfreports about subjects’ smoking status on a weekly basis and biochemically verified a random
subset of subjects each week. We also offered abstinence incentives during certain weeks. By
using lottery-based incentives, we ensured that any abstinence incentive was confirmed by
biochemical verification. Random variation in the timing and amount of incentives enabled
us to compare both the predicted versus actual probability of abstinence (an indication of
dynamic inconsistency) and the changes in predictions for subjects who are in different states
of craving and addiction (an indication of projection bias).

2.1

Recruitment and Eligibility

We recruited 397 smokers from a web-based subject pool maintained by Nielsen Healthcare
and its partners. Nielsen invited individuals from 16 large metropolitan areas in the U.S.9
Eligibility criteria included smoking cigarettes at least 20 of the prior 30 days, being age 21
or older, residing in one of the 16 metropolitan areas, having access to a smartphone or tablet
camera, and agreeing to receive in-person visits from a study enumerator.10 Furthermore, to
qualify for the study, each person had to verify that they were a current smoker using a saliva
Metro areas correspond to Nielsen’s designated market areas (DMAs) that share a common media
market. Metro areas were selected for inclusion in the study to ensure geographic coverage and based on
Nielsen data of where likely smokers lived. Included DMAs were: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland,
Dallas-Forth Worth, Denver, Detroit, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, Orlando, Philadelphia,
Phoenix, Seattle, and Tampa-St. Petersburg. Study zip codes are mapped in Figure A.1.
10
We excluded pregnant women, individuals who intended to relocate to another metropolitan area within
the next three months, and individuals who were not willing to provide saliva samples for testing cotinine
levels.
9

7

test of cotinine, a metabolite of nicotine.11 We mailed two test saliva kits to all individuals
who were deemed eligible, one kit for qualification and one for the experiment.12 Subjects
had seven days after enrollment to upload photographic documentation of a positive salivary
cotinine test in order to demonstrate their smoking status and fully qualify for the study.
This also provided a photograph of each subject’s face that we used to verify their identity
during each subsequent instance of verification.
Subjects were eligible to receive multiple types of incentives throughout the study. For
the purposes of identification, there are four main types of incentive: 1) incentives to verify
smoking status, 2) payments offered during elicitation sessions to ascertain valuations of
future abstinence incentives, 3) actual abstinence incentives offered during the trial to
measure actual willingness to abstain, and 4) abstinence incentives during the Month-2
intervention to encourage a change in addiction state. We describe each incentive type and
the associated procedures below.13

2.2

Verification of Smoking Status

A key challenge for remote data collection is maintaining incentive-compatibility, i.e., an
incentive to provide accurate reports of smoking status and valuations. Subjects might be
especially likely to misreport their smoking behavior during weeks when they are paid for
abstinence. Repeated in-person testing can mitigate this risk, but also imposes substantial
burden on subjects—likely leading to a highly selected sample through non-random
attrition—and is often prohibitively expensive. We use a novel approach to measure
smoking status remotely while maintaining strict incentive-compatibility for all reports and
valuations.
In each weekly survey, we asked each subject whether they had smoked during the prior 7
days (a measure known as 7-day point-prevalence abstinence). In order to ensure that truthtelling was strictly incentive-compatible, we implemented a pair of “truth-telling” lotteries in
each week. The first lottery awarded $50 to one person per week if the selected person’s saliva
test matched their self-report, regardless of whether the person had smoked during the prior
week. The second lottery, drawn among self-reported abstainers, awarded a $100 payment
We used the AlereTM iScreen R OFD test kit for salivary cotinine. The test involves simple collection
and testing procedures, and produces qualitative results within 10 minutes, with reliable remote detection
at cotinine levels of 30 ng/mL (Moore et al., 2018).
12
This ensured that all subjects always had an available saliva test kit in their possession. If a subject
used their second test kit later in the experiment, a replacement was immediately sent via two-day mail.
13
In addition to the study incentives described below, subjects received $5 per week (up to $60 total) for
completing a weekly survey of self-reported smoking status, $15 each for completing the surveys at the end
of Months 1 and 2, and entry into an end-of-study lottery among those who complied with all aspects of the
trial. The lottery consisted of five $100 prizes and one $1,000 grand prize.
11

8

to one person per week if the selected person both reported abstinence and tested negative
for smoking in a saliva test. Thus, the first lottery gave subjects an incentive to report their
smoking status accurately, and the second lottery broke the indifference to make it preferable
to be (and to report being) abstinent. Note that this implies that any subject who believed
our testing procedures could be gamed had a strict incentive to self-report abstinence during
all weeks. However, we find that 98% of subjects reported smoking in at least one weekly
survey, suggesting that they believed smoking could be detected. Overall, we observe low
self-reported abstinence rates; only 10% of control subjects reported abstaining in at least
one week. Moreover, each week we audited 3% of subjects who were not selected for that
week’s lotteries to provide a saliva test in order to monitor the accuracy of this procedure.
The saliva testing procedure itself followed two stages. In the first stage, all selected
subjects were informed at the end of the weekly survey to complete a self-administered
saliva test within 12 hours. In the second stage, a random subset of these subjects (one per
metro area per week) was asked to complete a second round of saliva testing within 48 hours
during an in-person visit from a study field worker. If selected for an in-person test, the
subject had to test negative for cotinine during both rounds of testing in order to receive
any smokefree-contingent incentives. This second stage was used to validate subjects’ selftesting, and, moreover, was made salient to discourage any attempts at deception in the first
place. Subjects received a non-contingent $20 payment for each self-administered test and
each in-person test completed.14 A replacement kit was sent by two-day mail to all subjects
who were selected for a test.
The testing procedure at both stages involved using a smartphone app to upload a series
of three geocoded photographs: one photograph of the person’s face while swabbing a cheek
with the test sponge, one photograph of the test result window, and one photograph of
the window blacked out with a pen to prevent reuse (Figure A.3). A similar approach has
been adopted with success in other smoking cessation trials (Ramo et al., 2018). This was
the same procedure as the qualification testing, which ensured that all subjects were able
to complete the test. In assessing the weekly test results, we further verified the person’s
identity by comparing their face to the the face shown in the photograph from the initial
screening test.

2.3

Abstinence Incentives in Months 1 and 3

We offered abstinence incentives to subjects in Months 1 and 3, in order to measure their
actual willingness to pay for abstinence incentives. Specifically, each subject was eligible
14
DellaVigna et al. (2016) estimated that the cost of a home visit from a door-to-door fund-raiser is $10.
Our visits are arguably more intrusive, so we increased the compensation accordingly.

9

for a smokefree-contingent payment during one randomly selected week of Month 1 and one
randomly selected week of Month 3. The selected weeks were drawn from among the target
weeks about which a valuation had been provided during the baseline elicitation session.
The payment amounts, selected at random, varied from $10 to $400.15 Each payment was
conditioned on self-reported 7-day abstinence at the end of the target week, verified within
12 hours by saliva test according to the verification procedures outlined above.
Although our main focus will be on the incentives in Month 3, we included the Month-1
incentives in order to familiarize subjects with the study procedures and to establish trust
that the incentives would be paid as described in the surveys.16 Moreover, although the
great majority of subjects had reported previous quit attempts during the baseline survey,
the Month-1 incentives also ensured that all subjects had experienced trying to abstain from
smoking in return for monetary incentives.

2.4

Abstinence Incentives During Month-2 Treatment

In Month 2, we offered weekly abstinence incentives to subjects randomly assigned to the
treatment group in order to induce them to abstain, thereby creating an exogenous reduction
in their level of addiction relative to the remaining subjects.17 Projection bias is predicated
on the existence of a state change, and we use the changes in abstinence valuations across
states to draw inferences about biased beliefs regarding abstinence.
As part of the end-of-Month-1 survey, we randomly assigned subjects to the control
group or treated group in a 1:2 ratio. Assignment was performed using a rerandomization
approach that balanced on several covariates, including baseline cigarette consumption and
quit intentions (Morgan and Rubin, 2012, 2015).18 Control subjects had no intervention
during Month 2. Treated subjects were paid for each week they abstained during Month 2.
They were entered into a weekly drawing with a 25% chance of winning $100 and a 75%
chance of winning $20. Thus, they were guaranteed at least $80 and eligible for up to $400
in exchange for abstaining during the entire treatment month. Abstinence was self-reported,
subsequently verified by saliva test. Alongside the payments, we referred treated subjects to
Possible payment amounts (probabilities) were: $10 (25%), $25 (25%), $50 (33%), $100 (6%), $150
(4%), $200 (2%), $300 (2%), and $400 (2%). Each subject was assigned to one “small” payment ≤ $25 and
one “large” payment > $25.
16
All study payments were deposited in the subjects’ existing account with Nielsen.
17
A duration of four weeks was expected to be sufficiently long to induce a state change among most
smokers, based on known relapse patterns over time (Hughes et al., 2004).
18
Balancing covariates were: metropolitan area, income categories (< $20,000, $20,000-29,999, $30,00039,999, $40,000-49,999, $50,000-59,999, $60,000-74,999, $75,000-99,999, ≥ $100, 000, decline to answer),
average cigarettes per day, number of the last 30 days with electronic cigarette use (0, ≤ 10, 10-20, >20),
and an indicator for plans to quit smoking within 6 months. Covariates were reported during the screening
or baseline survey. Among the 1,000 iterations, we implemented the one with the maximum joint p-value.
15

10

web-based smoking cessation support.19

2.5

Eliciting Valuations

We elicited valuations of future abstinence incentives during three sessions (baseline, end-ofMonth-1, and end-of-Month-2) as part of an incentivized choice experiment. At times, we
refer to the valuations as “incentivized predictions” of future abstinence. In each session,
subjects made sequential binary choices in a “staircase” or “unfolding brackets” format.
Each choice was between a smokefree-contingent payment p or a non-contingent payment
q ∈ [0.1p, 1.1p] during a future target week of the trial. A series of 3-4 choices identified a
unique indifference point among the 12 outcome “rows” that represents the person’s valuation
of abstaining during that target week (Figure 3). The starting point in the staircase was
randomized during each iteration to mitigate anchoring effects. In each staircase, there was a
different random draw of p for a different randomly selected week. The respondent completed
four staircases per elicitation session: at baseline, each subject was randomly assigned two
target weeks in Month 1 and two in Month 3; in the other elicitation sessions, target weeks
included all four weeks of Month 3.20 The ordering of staircases was randomized to be either
chronological or reverse-chronological in order to account for possible order effects.
We used a random lottery incentive system for incentive-compatibility. In each elicitation,
we randomly selected one subject × week × row, and we gave the winning subject the
(implied) choice from that row during the future target week.
We also elicited unincentivized predictions about future smoking behavior. At the end
of each staircase, subjects were asked to predict directly how likely (in 5% increments) they
would be to abstain in exchange for a payment p during the future target week. The
unincentivized elicitation incorporates the predicted behavioral response to the contingent
payment, but not the utility consequences of the payment.
These unincentivized
predictions can therefore be directly interpreted as predictions about the probability of
abstinence conditional on receipt of payment p, and moreover we compare them against
subjects’ valuations to provide reduced-form evidence on the extent to which subjects
valued being incentivized to abstain. We will not use them in our structural estimation,
however, as truth-telling is not strictly incentive-compatible and indeed it is natural to
Subjects were referred to Smokefree.gov, a national service sponsored by the National Cancer Institute
that provides cessation support via internet, text message, mobile app, instant message, and phone, and to
the BecomeAnEx Program (becomeanex.org), a vibrant online social community sponsored by the Truth
Initiative and the Mayo Clinic that provides cessation support via text and email. Both resources are free to
use. Research shows that Smokefree.gov can promote long-term smoking abstinence (Bricker et al., 2017).
20
Values of p ∈ {$10, $25, $50, $100, $150, $200, $300, $400} were drawn in each elicitation session to assign
each subject two “small” values ≤ $100 and two “large” values > $100.
19

11

suspect that the unincentivized predictions may be subject to a social desirability bias or
experimenter demand effects.

3
3.1

Results
Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 contains baseline characteristics of the sample. Relative to a nationally representative
sample of U.S. adult cigarette smokers, our sample contained fewer men (34% in sample
vs. 55%), a more compressed age distribution (e.g., 20% vs. 28% age >55), and more
highly educated (25% vs. 55% with high school degree or less) and higher income (47% vs.
69% income < $50,000) subjects (Kasza et al., 2017). These differences are not surprising,
however, as our sample is conditional on smartphone usage and willingness to participate in
an online panel. Nevertheless, some caution must be exercised if applying the study results
to the population of smokers as a whole. Demographic and smoking-related characteristics
were well balanced across treatment groups. The p-value from a global F -test of balance by
group is 0.74.
We first present an overview of the data on abstinence predictions and abstinence
behavior. Figure 4 characterizes subjects’ incentivized and unincentivized abstinence
predictions by incentive level.21 The significant positive slope for both types of predictions
is reassuring, and confirms that subjects believe they will be more likely to abstain at
larger incentive levels. The downward revision in predictions between the baseline and
Month-1, and again between Month-1 and Month-2, elicitation sessions implies that
subjects became more pessimistic about their ability to abstain as the trial progressed. For
example, perfect compliance would require a payment of approximately $1,000 according to
the baseline unincentivized predictions, but $1,800 according to the Month-2 predictions.
Finally, we note that the abstinence supply curve is significantly steeper for the
unincentivized predictions than the incentivized predictions in all three sessions (p < 0.01
for each), highlighting that the incentivized predictions incorporate the utility
consequences of abstinence, namely the disutility of effort involved in abstaining.
We next turn to comparing abstinence predictions with actual abstinence behavior in the
absence of incentives. Figure 5 contrasts smoking behavior to predictions about behavior by
Throughout this section, we will refer to subjects’ valuations of Month-3 incentives, divided by the
incentive level, as their “incentivized predictions.” This is approximately equal to their perceived probability
of abstinence, but also includes subjects’ perceived utility resulting from the effect of the incentive on
their abstinence probability. This second effect will be used in our structural estimation, particularly
Equation (10).
21

12

week and by treatment group. For each study week, we plot the average of subjects’ baseline
abstinence predictions about that target week as well as the average abstinence rate observed
during that week.22 We also plot the average end-of-Month-1 and end-of-Month-2 predictions
about target weeks during Month 3. Subjects are severely over-optimistic about their ability
to abstain, and this naïveté generally persists even after they have had experience with the
study procedures during Month 1. Whereas unincentivized predictions of future abstinence
start off around 50-60% at baseline, they remain above 35% when elicited at the end of
Month 2. In contrast, observed abstinence never exceeds 20% for a given week. The time
series for treated and control groups are broadly similar in Month 1. However, the abstinence
rate of the treated group starts to climb over the course of Month 2, reflecting the treatment
effect, and the treatment effect persists and even grows in Month 3, indicating that there was
a shift in addiction state among some treated subjects leading to their continued abstinence.
Relative to the control group, the treated group exhibits more pessimistic beliefs during the
Month-2 elicitation than the Month-1 elicitation. This double-difference, formally tested
below, would provide prima facie evidence of projection bias, as it would imply that treated
subjects had projected their beliefs about the benefits of quitting from their addicted state
onto a future in which they were no longer addicted.
Finally, we examine abstinence behavior versus predictions by incentive level and
treatment group in Figure 6. As suggested by the time series, predictions of abstinence are
far higher at every incentive level than observed abstinence behavior. Greater pessimism at
the end of Month 2 relative to the end of Month 1 is also apparent for treated subjects at
all incentive levels. The abstinence supply curve is somewhat flatter for observed behavior,
although data on the behavioral response to incentives over $50 are sparse (see
footnote 15).

3.2
3.2.1

Reduced-Form Estimates
Evidence on Addiction

We begin by testing the effect of our Month-2 intervention on the treated group. In Table 2,
we test whether the Month-2 intervention leads to a continued increase in smoking abstinence
during Month 3 in the treated versus control group. This would indicate that treated subjects
are made relatively less addicted by their higher abstinence following the treatment month.
We regress an indicator of weekly smoking abstinence on an indicator for treatment status,
an indicator for month, and the interaction effect of these two. The treatment effect is
Figure 5 plots subjects’ unincentivized predictions for ease of interpretation. Incentivized predictions
are shown in Figure A.4 and are qualitatively similar.
22

13

the coefficient on the interaction term, analyzed on an intent-to-treat basis. If a subject
did not report their smoking status during a weekly survey, we assume that they did not
abstain during that week.23 The model includes week and individual fixed effects, clustering
standard errors by individual.
In column 1 of Table 2, we restrict the sample to Months 1 and 3, as the simplest test
for a treatment effect is to compare pre-treatment and post-treatment outcomes based solely
on experimental randomization. We find that abstinence increases in the treated group by
5.8 percentage points in Month 3 relative to the control group (p = 0.02), although in fact
abstinence in both groups increased relative to Month 1. In column 2, we include Month-2
data as well. This has no effect on the estimated treatment effect given the inclusion of month
indicators, but allows us to examine behavior during the Month-2 intervention. We find that
abstinence increased in Month 2 for both groups by 10.5 points. Somewhat surprisingly,
the interaction term on T reated × M onth 2 is not statistically significant, implying that we
cannot reject a null effect of the $100 Month-2 incentives on the treated group’s Month-2
behavior. A likely explanation of this comes from examining the time series in Figure 5; it
shows a clear upward trend of abstinence for the treated group during Month-2. Although
the overall average during the month is not significantly different, this would be consistent
with treated subjects taking multiple weeks, and potentially repeated quit attempts, before
successfully abstaining. This would also explain the surprising finding that the estimated
Month-3 treatment effect is larger than the estimated Month-2 effect, although the difference
is not statistically significant.24
Finally, in columns 3 and 4, we test whether the treatment effect varies by incentive level,
interacting it with the treatment × month indicators. We find that the response of treated
subjects during Month 3 is marginally increased by 3.8 points (p = 0.09) for each additional
$100, using all available data. The main effect, however, is a 6.5-point relative increase in the
probability of treated subjects abstaining during Month 3 in the absence of any incentives.
Taken together, these results show that the intervention exogenously increased the likelihood
that treated subjects exit an addicted state relative to controls.
3.2.2

Evidence on Overoptimism

We next turn to reduced-form evidence that smokers are naïve, i.e., overly optimistic,
regarding their future smoking behavior. We test the hypothesis that the observed
behavioral response to incentives (actual willingness to accept to abstain) does not match
The analysis is robust to dropping these week × subject observations, or to dropping all subjects who
fail to answer at least one weekly survey.
24
Our pre-analysis plan did not cover within-Month-2 behavior or comparing Month-2 and Month-3
behavior, and we therefore leave a fuller investigation of these results to future work.
23

14

their stated predictions of willingness to accept. To perform the test, we restructure our
data set to stack observed abstinence behavior on top of the abstinence predictions to
create a long data set of 7,185 observations. We regress an indicator of weekly smoking
abstinence on an indicator equal to 1 for observed abstinence and 0 for incentivized
abstinence predictions. The coefficient on the Behavior dummy identifies the difference
between abstinence predictions and abstinence behavior, and the coefficient on the
Behavior × Incentive interaction identifies how this difference changes with the incentive
level.
The results of this regression are presented in Table 3. Overall, subjects are highly
over-optimistic about future abstinence. In columns 1 and 2, we restrict attention to the
control group to avoid any possible confounds from treated subjects’ extra incentives during
Month 2. Column 1 estimates the average difference between abstinence predictions and
behavior across all weeks and all incentive levels. We find that subjects overestimate the
probability of abstinence by 42.9 percentage points relative to their observed abstinence
behavior (p < 0.001). In column 2, we introduce a covariate for incentive level and interact
it with Behavior to determine whether the prediction error changes with incentive level. We
find that over-optimism grows by 5.0 points for each additional $100 (p = 0.001). These
effect sizes are attenuated slightly when we also include treated subjects in the regressions
in columns 3 and 4, but predictions remain far above behavior. Across all subjects and all
weeks, column 4 indicates an average overestimation of abstinence of 28.6 points without
incentives (p < 0.001) plus an additional 4.2 points per $100 incentive (p < 0.001).
This systematic pattern of misprediction is highly suggestive that subjects are violating
rational expectations about their future smoking behavior. More specifically, subjects are
acting consistently with a form of present bias in which subjects have at least partial
naïveté about their ability to overcome short-run withdrawal costs, leading them to be
overly optimistic about their likelihood of abstaining. Existing evidence of smokers’ use of
commitment devices and near-universal regret about having started to smoke support the
interpretation of partial naiveté (Giné et al., 2010; Wertenbroch, 1998; Gruber and
Mullainathan, 2005; Fong et al., 2004). However, it is impossible to separate the degree of
present bias from the perceived costs and benefits of abstinence just from these
reduced-form results. In Section 5, we will be able to separately identify both the degree of
present bias and the extent of naïveté.
3.2.3

Evidence on Projection

Next, we assess whether smokers predict the habit effect found in Section 3.2.1. In other
words, we ask whether smokers mispredict the effect of the Month-2 abstinence intervention
15

on their subsequent willingness to stay abstinent. To address this question, we test whether
treated subjects revise their abstinence predictions following the end of the treatment month
(Month 2), compared with the control group. Doing so would mean that they had failed to
fully predict the effect that habit formation has on their smoking behavior. We would expect
that, because the treatment raised the actual probability of abstinence, treated subjects may
revise their predictions upward if they did not fully predict its effect.
We implement this test using a difference-in-differences estimator of predictions before
and after the treatment month for control and treated subjects in Table 4. We regress
subjects’ abstinence predictions on indicators for the baseline and end-of-Month 2 elicitation
sessions, interacted with assignment to the treated group, adjusting for week and individual
fixed effects. The omitted category is therefore the end-of-Month-1 elicitation session, and
thus the coefficients represent differences relative to this session. Columns 1 and 3 use
subjects’ unincentivized predictions as the dependent variable, while subjects’ incentivized
predictions (normalized valuations) are used in columns 2 and 4.
We first confirm the pattern from Figure 4, that subjects’ baseline predictions were
significantly higher than their later predictions. In column 1 we find that subjects’ baseline
predictions were on average 10.1 percentage points higher than their end-of-Month-1
predictions (p < 0.001). This is not surprising given the lack of familiarity with the
abstinence incentives, and was the motivation for including the Month-1 abstinence
incentives in the experimental design. When accounting for different incentive levels in
column 3, we find that treated subjects were 7.5 points less over-optimistic than control
subjects at baseline for weeks with no incentive, but that this is counterbalanced by an
increased prediction of their response to incentives of 1.7 points per $100. Thus, while
there is no difference on average between treated subjects and controls at baseline, it is
possible that treated subjects believed they would grow more responsive to the
incentives—factoring in the removal of their Month-2 incentive.
The key test, however, is the difference-in-differences between treated and control
subjects in the end-of-Month-1 and end-of-Month-2 surveys. We find in column 1 that
treated subjects revised their predictions downwards by 4.9 percentage points. This is
confirmed in column 3, where we moreover find that this downward revision is comparable
across all incentive levels. Given that the treatment itself actually increases the probability
of Month-3 abstinence, this is a somewhat surprising result. One possible interpretation
would be that treated subjects are now in a nicotine-deprived state of withdrawal, and are
projecting those cravings onto their Month-3 utility. Alternatively, they may have been
overly optimistic about their probability of abstinence during Month 2, and are now
rationally predicting their behavior conditional on having not abstained during the prior
16

month. Note that the former interpretation implies that the revised predictions are too
pessimistic, and the latter that they are correct (relative to control subjects, given that
both groups are present-biased). The reduced-form difference-in-differences cannot separate
these alternatives, but we will be able to directly estimate treated subjects’ beliefs about
the treatment effect in Section 5.
An alternative hypothesis that could explain a downward revision in predictions would be
if treated subjects learned about their self-control problems during Month 2 and thus became
relatively more sophisticated.25 Although the existing evidence for such learning is quite thin
and, in theory, precluded by the degenerate β̃ beliefs of the O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001)
model, it is nevertheless worth considering. Indeed, the 10-point drop in predictions for both
treated and control groups between the baseline and end-of-Month-1 elicitation reported in
Table 4 suggests that some form of learning is quite natural in this context. As we will show
in Section 5, however, the difference between subjects’ unincentivized predictions and their
normalized valuations reveals their demand for commitment. This demand for commitment
is increasing in p but at a decreasing rate as β̃ increases. We can thus test for learning
about β̃ by running a triple difference-in-differences between treated and control subjects,
unincentivized predictions vs normalized valuations, during the end-of-Month-1 and the endof-Month-2 surveys. The coefficient on the triple-interaction term is 0.011 with a p-value of
0.696, indicating that we find no evidence of increased sophistication.
3.2.4

Evidence on Heterogeneity

Finally, we investigate possible dimensions of heterogeneity in over-optimism focusing on prespecified baseline characteristics that fit into three categories: demographics (age, gender,
household income, and education), addiction-related behavior (cigarettes per day, nicotine
dependence, quit plans, and present bias in a hypothetical choice task), and other health
behaviors (alcohol use, sunscreen use, and tendency to overeat). We selected the set of
covariates to match those used in the structural analysis.26 We dichotomize the continuous
variables at their median and code agreement with the Likert-scale questions as 1. It is
plausible to expect that more heavily addicted subjects, as revealed either by a higher nicotine
dependence score or no plans to quit smoking, may be less accurate in their predictions.
Other research has suggested that demographic and economic covariates may also be related
to biases, although we make no causal claims about these relationships. Finally, the unrelated
We thank Justin Sydnor for this hypothesis.
The structural model incorporates the most comprehensive set of covariates for which the model would
converge. Two potential covariates were excluded as a result: regret about having started smoking due to
a lack of variation (86% of subjects express regret) and dual use of e-cigarettes due to its heavy skew (only
26% used any e-cigarettes).
25
26

17

health behaviors may be associated either with the same behavioral biases as are potentially
relevant for smoking, or may also reveal differential health attitudes overall.
As in the regressions in Table 3 for measuring over-optimism, we use a long data set
that stacks behavior and predictions in order to test for heterogeneity. We regress a weekly
indicator for abstinence on an indicator equal to 1 for Behavior and equal to 0 for end-ofMonth-1 or end-of-Month-2 predictions, an indicator for the “high” value of the heterogeneity
dimension, and the interaction. Thus the High group indicator identifies group differences
in predictions, and the Behavior × High group interaction identifies group differences in
over-optimism. All models include individual random effects.
In Table 5, we show the results for heterogeneity in over-optimism. We find no differences
in either behavior or overoptimism across age, gender, income, or education dimensions. In
contrast, we find that more nicotine-dependent are unsurprisingly less likely to abstain,
but, more importantly, also over-predict abstinence by 8 percentage points compared with
less-dependent smokers (p = 0.004). Subjects planning to quit smoking within a year are
18 points more likely to abstain, and in fact are 11 points less over-optimistic about their
abstinence. Finally, we see that regular sunscreen users are also more likely to abstain —
possibly due to relatively greater health consciousness — but are no more over-optimistic
than non-sunscreen-users. We emphasize that these bivariate regressions should not be
interpreted as causal, nor do they account for the correlations among the covariates. However,
they provide suggestive evidence for heterogeneity among our subjects that we return to in
our structural estimation.

4

Conceptual Framework

To identify the specific policy parameters of cost and bias, we combine the information
from the reduced-form tests in Section 3 with a structural analysis. We adopt a structural
model that allows for three departures from a standard neoclassical model: present-biased
preferences, naïveté regarding one’s degree of present bias, and projection-biased beliefs.
Consider a decision-maker who may choose whether to abstain from smoking during a
given week and earn p, or continue smoking. We normalize the utility of continued smoking
to zero. If the decision-maker abstains, they suffer an immediate disutility (withdrawal)
of c. They also obtain long-run benefits b, which would represent the continuation value
of having abstained in a full dynamic problem. A key element of our approach is that
we do not need to estimate that dynamic model, as the experimental variation in Month3 incentives, the Month-2 treatment, and subjects’ valuations of the Month-3 incentives
provide sufficient identification. We can therefore be agnostic about this continuation value
18

and instead estimate it directly as the “reduced-form” parameter b. We model b as arising
in the subsequent period (week), implicitly incorporating any long-run discounting over
a stream of benefits. Moreover, b reflects the decision-maker’s perceived benefits, which
may differ from the true benefits (e.g., change in mortality risk × discounted value of life)
either because of information about these benefits or because they mis-perceive their future
behavior. When using b in welfare analysis, therefore, we are considering the benefits of
abstinence as perceived by our sample of smokers.
We further assume that the agent’s utility is quasi-linear in money, at least over the range
of incentives we provide. Although in principle it would be possible to allow for curvature in
the utility from money, any meaningful departure from linearity over the range used in our
estimation would soon run afoul of the calibration arguments in Rabin (2000). We therefore
assume a constant marginal utility of γ ∈ [0, ∞) for simplicity. Our experimental design
will identify the utility of money off the abstinence incentives, and therefore in theory this
utility could be non-parametrically identified over the [$0, $400] range of Month-3 incentives.
In practice, we did not design the experiment with this goal and therefore lack sufficient
variation in our sample to do so.27 The limits to quasi-linearity in the identification of
time preferences are well known in the experimental literature (e.g., Andersen et al., 2008;
Andreoni and Sprenger, 2012), though usually misspecification is a concern in elicitation
approaches involving money now versus money later. Moreover, the assumption of linear
utility over the range of incentives will not lead to falsely rejecting the null of time-consistency
(β = 1) in our setting.28
We assume that c is uncertain and distributed according to some differentiable F (·) with
mean µc . The cost is realized in the period in which the agent decided whether to abstain. As
is standard, we assume that the agent knows the distribution F (·). In general, it is impossible
to disentangle biased beliefs about the future distribution of costs from biased beliefs about
how one will respond to those costs, e.g., naïveté about discounting. Indeed, there is often
an equivalence between the models. We therefore make the standard assumption that the
departure from rational expectations is through mistaken beliefs about future discounting.
In particular, we consider an agent who may be present-biased, which we capture using
the quasi-hyperbolic discounting model of Laibson (1997) and O’Donoghue and Rabin (1999).
The agent is characterized by a short-run discount factor β ∈ [0, 1], a long-run discount factor
27
In particular, an alternative design in which each subject was offered multiple Month-3 incentives
and where the upper limit on these incentives was greatly increased would be needed, and would prove
prohibitively expensive to achieve this limited generalization. In our robustness checks however, we do
estimate an alternative model with CRRA utility over money and obtain qualitatively similar results for the
remaining structural parameters.
28
Indeed, we show in Appendix C that the substantive assumption on utility is that it is additively
separable in money and smoking.

19

δ ∈ [0, 1], and a degenerate belief β̃ ∈ [β, 1] about future selves’ impatience.29 The agent’s
utility from smoking abstinence at price p is:
βδb + γp − c

(1)

and the agent believes a future self will obtain utility from abstinence at price p equal to:
β̃δb + γp − c.

(2)

We model the effect of the month-long abstinence intervention as an additive shock to the cost
of smoking, η (or, equivalently and perhaps more intuitively, a positive shock to the utility
of abstinence – that is, the habit effect induced by the month-long abstinence intervention).
If the effect of the intervention is to lower the subject’s degree of addiction, then we expect
this shock to be positive. If instead subjects experience increased craving, then the shock
will enter negatively. Treated subjects following the intervention will receive utility from
abstinence equal to:
η + βδb + γp − c.
(3)
Finally, if subjects experience simple projection bias as in Loewenstein et al. (2003), then
they will under-estimate the effect of the abstinence intervention on their future preferences,
and therefore on their future behavior. In general, if a projection-biased agent of degree α is
currently in state s0 , they will mis-perceive utility of being in state s1 as being ũ(x, s1 ; s0 ) =
αu(x, s0 ) + (1 − α)u(x, s1 ). If the effect of the intervention is additive, then an agent with
projection bias of degree α believes that a future (post-intervention) self will only benefit
from a (1 − α)η shock rather than the full η. Rather than imposing this functional form
on our subjects’ state-dependent prediction error, we will instead estimate their pre- and
post-intervention beliefs over their target-week utility as η̃1 and η̃2 , respectively. That is,
a subject in the treated group at the end of Month 1 perceives their Month-3 utility from
abstinence as:
η̃1 + β̃δb + γp − c.
(4)
and a subject in the treated group at the end of Month 2 perceives their Month-3 utility
from abstinence as:
η̃2 + β̃δb + γp − c.
(5)
If subjects exhibit simple projection bias, then the end-of-Month-1 perception identifies
The restriction that β̃ lies between the true β (full sophistication) and 1 (full naïveté) is the typical
constraint imposed in theoretical analyses of present bias. We will not impose this restriction in our structural
estimation, but will indeed find that it holds for 80% of our subjects’ estimated parameters.
29

20

the degree of their bias, as η̃1 = (1 − α)η. Having been through the treatment, subjects’
end-of-Month-2 perceptions should not be distorted due to projection bias and we would
predict η̃2 = η. Because we estimate η, η̃1 , and η̃2 separately, we will be able to test this
prediction in the data.
The above framework allows stochasticity in subjects’ behavior, but does not yet allow
them to make errors in the valuation task.
In order to admit variation in
observably-equivalent subjects’ valuations, we will assume that they “tremble” around their
true valuation (or, equivalently, receive a shock to the utility of receiving the incentive),
and that this is drawn from a one-parameter distribution G(·|σ).
Finally, as an experimental design choice, we will assume that δ is known and, in general,
will impose δ = 1. We emphasize that our experimental design could be extended to identify
δ by varying the week in which incentives are received,30 but did not consider doing so to be
worthwhile in our particular context. First, as a theoretical standpoint, it is unlikely that
there is significant long-run discounting over the course of a week, and thus we would not
expect to find δ to be far from one. Indeed, any noticeable discounting over this horizon
would yield implausible predictions once compounded over a reasonable horizon, which was
in fact one of the motivations for the quasi-hyperbolic model in the first place.31 Second,
given our limited sample and the high cost of collecting additional data, it was deemed
impractical to randomize over an additional dimension. We check the robustness of our
results to a range of δ < 1, however, and find qualitatively similar results.
The key parameters to identify in our structural exercise are therefore
θ = {c, b, γ, β, β̃, η, η̃1 , η̃2 , σ}. The limitations of discrete choice models, in particular, in
identifying the level of utility as well as the discount factor(s), are well-known. These
limitations have been highlighted recently in the literature on present-biased preferences by
Carerra et al. (2019), who demonstrate that stochastic choice explains much of the demand
for commitment contracts and recommend using demand for linear incentives as in Acland
and Levy (2015). Our approach here is similar, using willingness to pay for Month-3
abstinence incentives.

4.1

Abstinence Behavior

We make standard parametric assumptions on the error structure of the model in order to
identify the utility and discounting parameters. For the discrete choice of whether to abstain
in a given week, we assume that the cost shocks for subject i in week t can be decomposed
In particular, rather than paying the Month-3 “non-contingent” payments in the same week as an
abstinence choice, one could randomize whether they were paid in that week or the following week.
31
E.g., a weekly δ = 0.98 would imply an annual discount rate of 186%.
30

21

into deterministic and stochastic components: cit = µc + εit . We further assume that ε is
distributed i.i.d. logistic, which yields the familiar logit formulation of choice probabilities
in terms of the deterministic utility parameters. For a control subject, this is:
P rcontrol (abstain|p, θ) =

exp(βδb + γp − µc )
1 + exp(βδb + γp − µc )

(6)

Inspecting equation (6) reveals how γ is identified directly from the Month-3 abstinence
incentives. Given that these incentives are randomly assigned, it is possible to estimate γ
by estimating the slope of the probability of abstinence as the incentive increases using a
logit model. However, it also reveals why this approach would be insufficient to disentangle
the cost and benefit of abstinence from discounting, as the intercept of this regression yields
only βδb − µc . This intercept is usually interpreted as the consumption value of continued
smoking, and it is clear that if β < 1 then it will over-state the value under an agent’s
long-run preferences.
In principle, our assumption that ε is distributed according to a logit distribution could
be relaxed. Existing results provide conditions under which the shock distribution can be
non-parametrically identified in binary and discrete choice models (Matzkin, 1993). It is
advantageous, however, to have the closed-form solution to equation (6) and, moreover,
our statistical power is increased by assuming a functional form. Our results are robust to
alternative functional forms, for example, the probit probability model.
Treated subjects’ abstinence behavior in Month 3 can be used to identify the treatment
effect η. It is straightforward to extend equation (6) to find that treated subjects’ probability
of abstinence is given by:
P rtreated (abstain|p, θ) =

exp(βδb + η + γp − µc )
1 + exp(βδb + η + γp − µc )

(7)

As in the reduced-form analysis, the difference between control and treated subjects in
Month 3 reveals the effect of the treatment, and therefore equations (6) and (7) identify η.

4.2

Valuations

The key innovation in our identification of β̃, c and b is subjects’ valuations of the Month-3
incentives. From the point of view of a subject during Month 1 or Month 2, the Month-3
incentives serve as partial commitment devices for their Month-3 selves. As the size of the
incentive increases, so too does its effect on Month-3 behavior. If a subject perceives their
future self as being dynamically inconsistent, then this behavioral response will be perceived
as valuable by the earlier self who believes their future self is too likely to continue smoking.
22

If a subject perceives their future self as being dynamically consistent (e.g., is fully naïve),
then this behavioral effect is perceived as an inefficient distortion of a previously optimal
policy.
Formally, a subject in the control group perceives that their Month-3 self will receive
utility from abstinence according to equation (2), and will therefore abstain for all realizations
of c ≤ β̃δb+γp if holding the incentive, and for c ≤ β̃δb without the incentive. Their expected
utility, from the point of view of the earlier self, will therefore be:
U (p|θ) = βδ

Z

β̃δb+γp−µc

−∞

(δb + γp − µc − ε)dF (ε)

(8)

with the incentive and
U (0|θ) = βδ

Z

β̃δb−µc

−∞

(δb − µc − ε)dF (ε)

(9)

without the incentive. Their valuation V (p|θ) is given by U (p|θ) = U (0|θ) + βδγV (p|θ),
which, by combining with (8) and (9), yields our key equation:32
Vit (p|θ) = pF (β̃δb + γp − µc ) + γ −1

Z

β̃δb+γp−µc

β̃δb−µc

(δb − µc − ε)dF (ε)

(10)

Equation (10) has an intuitive interpretation. From the point of view of the earlier self,
the value of the incentive can be decomposed into two terms. The first term represents
the expected cash value of the incentive, incorporating the expected behavioral response of
the future self. That is simply the incentive amount p times the perceived probability of
abstinence when facing that incentive. The second term is the value of the commitment
provided by the incentive, as it changes the realizations of c for which the future self is
expected to abstain. Note that if β̃ = 1, i.e., the agent is either time-consistent or naïve,
then this term must be (weakly) negative, and the incentives impose a cost on the agent. If
β̃ < 1, however, then this term may turn positive as the incentive is perceived to mitigate
the self-control problems of the future self.
By varying p, it is possible to identify the perceived costs and benefits of smoking. A
noteworthy special case is when β̃ = 1 (that is, the subject is either time-consistent or naïve).
As p grows small, the second term is on the order of p2 and therefore goes to zero faster than
the first term, which is linear in p, and thus the valuation reveals the subject’s perceived
probability of abstinence without any incentive, F (β̃δb − µc ). As p grows large, the subject
32
Recall that the non-contingent payment in the valuation task is also received during Month 3, and hence
must be discounted by βδ. It must also be multiplied by γ to translate a dollar amount into utils.

23

will expect to abstain with certainty when facing the incentive, rendering the first term equal
to p. The second term integrates the commitment value from the known β̃δb − µc to infinity.
In general, we can write ∂V /∂p = pF (·) + (1 − β̃)f (·). Taking the second derivative with
respect to p generates an additional moment, which uniquely determines the discounting.
We formally establish identification in Appendix C.
Extending equation (10) to treated subjects is quite straightforward, as η̃1 and η̃2 enter
additively in all terms with a µc . Thus a treated subject’s valuations when elicited in the
end-of-Month-1 survey are given by:
Vit (p|θ) = pF (β̃δb + γp − µc + η̃1 ) + γ

−1

Z

β̃δb+γp−µc +η̃1

β̃δb−µc +η̂1

(δb − µc − ε)dF (ε)

(11)

and a treated subject’s valuations when elicited in the end-of-Month-2 survey are given by:
Vit (p|θ) = pF (β̃δb + γp − µc + η̃2 ) + γ

−1

Z

β̃δb+γp−µc +η̃2

β̃δb−µc +η̂2

(δb − µc − ε)dF (ε).

(12)

Finally, we assume that the shocks to subjects’ valuations are drawn with mean zero and
variance σ 2 . Given (11) and (12), subjects’ responses are thus distributed according to:
1
(Vit (p|θ) − v)2
P r(Valuation = v|p, θ) = √
exp −
2σ 2
2πσ 2

!

(13)

The combined likelihood of a subject’s abstinence behavior and valuations is then the
product of the contributions of the discrete abstinence behaviors and the continuous
predictions in equations (6) and (13).

4.3

Heterogeneity

As is often the case in maximum likelihood estimation, our structural model is capable of
admitting heterogeneity in the parameters based on an individual’s observable
characteristics Xi . In particular, we can allow any parameter j ∈ θ to enter the model
flexibly as a combination Xi0 ϕj for some new meta-parameter ϕj . In our estimation, we
include individual characteristics from the baseline survey plausibly related to the
structural parameters, namely: age, income, gender, education, baseline nicotine
dependence, baseline cigarette consumption, baseline quit intentions, alcohol consumption,
regular sunscreen use, and tendency to overeat. As described in Section 3.2.4, the first four
are typical demographic and economic covariates in the literature, the next three are
plausibly related to the degree of addiction, and the final three represent health behaviors

24

in other domains. We also include a measure of present bias based on a typical
money-now-money-later task conducted at baseline.33 By incorporating these covariates in
this manner, our structural model assumes that they affect smoking choices only through
their effect on the parameters of θ.
In practice, the practical constraints of our experimental design mean that we lack
sufficient variation conditional on Xi , namely within-subject variation, to identify
heterogeneity across all parameters. In particular, as each subject received only one
incentive level during Month 3 as well as, for treated subjects, the $100 Month-2 incentives,
it is not possible to estimate heterogeneity based on the abstinence behavior discussed in
Section 4.1. However, as we were able to quickly obtain a large number of valuations for
each subject over a range of potential incentive levels, we are very well powered to estimate
heterogeneity based on the valuation tasks, namely in the present bias parameters β and β̃
and in the predicted habit values η̃1 and η̃2 . We therefore limit the role of heterogeneity to
these four parameters, which are also the parameters most likely to be of general interest.
We allow all covariates to explain variation in these parameters, with the exception of the
money-task measure of present bias, which we use as an instrument to separate β and β̃
from the other parts of the utility function.
It is also worth noting that in principle, truly individual-level estimates (i.e., allowing
for unobservable variation) are possible within our experimental design and identification
strategy. Again the main practical constraint will come from having enough within-subject
variation in the Month-3 incentives in order to estimate an individual-level abstinence model.
Although that proved impractical in the current smoking experiment, there is no reason in
principle that it could not be incorporated into the experimental design in other contexts
more practically.

5

Structural Estimation

We estimate the structural parameters using a maximum likelihood procedure, as described
in Section 4. We include abstinence behavior in Months 2 and 3, as the interpretation
of abstinence in Month 1 could be contaminated by subjects’ experimentation or lack of
familiarity with the incentive structure and verification technology. We include valuations
for Month-3 incentives, made both in the end-of-Month-1 survey and end-of-Month-2 survey.
For treated subjects during Month 2, we include the $100 weekly abstinence incentive they
Subjects were asked the following two questions: “Imagine that you have a choice between receiving $80
guaranteed today, or $100 guaranteed in 1 month? Which would you prefer?” and “Imagine that you have
a choice between receiving $80 guaranteed in 6 months, or $100 guaranteed in 7 months? Which would you
prefer?”
33

25

received.
The results are shown in Table 6, and confirm the pattern of findings discussed in
Section 3. Indeed, the purpose of the structural estimation is to be able to map the
reduced-form evidence into utility terms in order to make precise statements about
subjects’ biases and welfare. Panel A of Table 6 presents the main structural parameters;
Panel B presents the covariates that predict heterogeneity in the present bias, naïveté, and
projection bias parameters; and Panel C presents additional significance tests based on the
estimates from Panel A.

5.1

Utility Parameters

The first, and perhaps most striking, finding on utility is just how insensitive the smokers
in our sample are to financial incentives. We estimate γ = 0.0011, or that our maximum
incentive of $400 equates to roughly 0.44 utils. Although this confirms the findings in
Table 3, it would imply, for instance, that a smoker with the $400 incentive, who was
otherwise indifferent between smoking and abstinence, would have a roughly 61% chance of
abstinence. This reflects the limited effects of financial incentives on smoking abstinence.
We next estimate the immediate disutility and long-run benefits of abstinence in util
terms, and given γ, translate them into dollar terms under the assumption of risk neutrality.
While this assumption is defensible over the range of $0 to $400 incentives, if our subjects are
risk averse over larger stakes then our dollar estimates will be lower bounds — and given our
low estimated value of γ, this is likely to be the case. We estimate the immediate disutility
of abstinence to be 8.88 utils, equivalent to about $8,100 per week. Although this is large, it
is not outside the scope of previous estimates and is to be expected if large cash incentives
do not lead to high abstinence rates. The long-run benefit of abstinence is estimated to be
similar, at 8.78 utils or about $8,000 per week. Both estimates are individually significant,
but, importantly, we fail to reject equality of the two parameters at p = 0.92.
We can also compute how likely subjects would be to continue to smoke under the
counterfactual of no present bias. This is a similar exercise to asking whether they would
want to continue to smoke if offered a perfect commitment device, although the perceived
value of commitment depends on beliefs about future behavior (for example, if β̃ = 1 then
a smoker would always prefer the option value of being allowed to smoke on some
occasions). Under our estimates, the probability of abstinence — in a week in which the
subject remained fully addicted — would be 48% if subjects chose under their own
long-run preferences.
We note that our estimate of the perceived long-run benefits is in some ways a

26

reduced-form parameter. It includes both the direct benefits of that weeks’ decision and
the impact on future behavior of a week of abstinence, and therefore the benefits of any
continued abstinence. This multiplier may be more important than the direct effect, and
our strategy does not seek to disentangle them. It also incorporates any long-run
discounting performed on these direct and indirect effects through δ. Although we have
fixed δ = 1 in our estimation because of the weekly frequency of our data, it is reasonable
to believe that there is meaningful discounting over the long-term horizon a smoker uses to
evaluate b. Our estimated b takes this discounting as a given, using only the present value
of these benefits, and therefore does not impose δ = 1 when computing this present value
over the long run.

5.2

Treatment Effect and Predictions

The preceding section considered the preferences of a fully addicted subject. In this section,
we turn to the effect of our Month-2 abstinence intervention as well as treated subjects’
ex-ante and ex-post beliefs about its effect. We estimate that on average, a subject in the
treated group underwent a shift in their post-treatment utility of abstinence of η = 0.555,
corresponding to $505 in dollar terms under the maintained assumption of risk neutrality.
Note that this corresponds to the average change in the treated group, and is likely to
underestimate the impact of a month of successful abstinence. However, as even unsuccessful
quit attempts may lower the disutility of future abstinence, we do not attempt to parcel out
the effect across successful and unsuccessful Month-2 abstainers.
This estimated treatment effect is large, both in terms of its welfare consequences but
also relative to its cost. In a neoclassical model, it would be surprising that an intervention
costing at most 4 × $100 = $400 could be utility-equivalent to $505. If subjects are presentbiased, however, it is natural that the structure of incentives would affect their impact.
Importantly, there is a difference between an incentive allocated across four weeks and one
allocated as a single lump sum. In particular, we found some reduced-form evidence that the
probability of abstinence was increasing for treated subjects over the course of the treatment
month. Having sustained incentives could help overcome their dynamic inconsistency during
this month, and thus lead to an outsized effect during Month 3.
In contrast to the large actual effect of the treatment, we estimate that treated subjects’
ex-ante beliefs about the magnitude of the habit effect were statistically indistinguishable
from zero: 0.126 utils, or $115. Moreover, this is also substantially less than the $400 cost
of the incentives, although we cannot reject that it is equal to the actual treatment effect
(p = 0.14). In principle, we may wish to decompose the difference between the estimates

27

η = 0.555 and η̃1 = 0.126 into two components. First, actual and predicted compliance
may differ; and second, the actual and predicted effect conditional on compliance may differ.
Given that we show in the next section that subjects are naïve about their self-control
problems, the first part of this decomposition would lead them to overestimate compliance
and therefore also overestimate the effect of the treatment. Given that we find subjects
underestimate the treatment effect, we instead focus on the latter effect. Viewed through
the lens of simple projection bias, we can estimate an ex-ante projection parameter αM 1 by
solving (1 − αM 1 )η = 0.126, to obtain αM 1 = 0.773. This implies that subjects are projecting
their addicted state onto predictions of future utility following abstinence, deviating from
a rational forecast of α = 0. Our parameter estimate is comparable to, though somewhat
higher than, estimates elsewhere in the literature; for example, Conlin et al. (2007) find
α = 0.499 for projection over consumption utility, as measured by the probability of returning
cold-weather clothes (winter jackets) purchased in mail-order catalogs.
Next, we turn to treated subjects’ ex-post beliefs about the habit value and find that,
whereas the actual treatment effect was significantly positive, subjects’ post-treatment
predictions are in fact consistent with a negative treatment effect of −0.084 utils, or −$76.
This result is not consistent with most forms of projection bias and most states, which
would either require subjects to hold correct beliefs at this point (since the treatment has
been realized) or at most under-estimate the magnitude of the treatment but not reverse
its sign. Instead we find that subjects’ beliefs are more incorrect having been through the
treatment than before. Although the point estimate itself is not significantly different from
0, we reject the null hypothesis that mean post-treatment beliefs are equal to mean
pre-treatment beliefs at p = 0.08. We also reject the null that post-treatment beliefs are
correct at p = 0.035.
Mapped into the simple projection bias framework, these post-treatment beliefs would
imply a value of αM 3 = 1.15. However, this would violate the conditions of Loewenstein et al.
(2003), both that post-treatment beliefs should be correct and, even if they are incorrect, that
α ∈ [0, 1]. One could attempt to explain this pattern by a model in which subjects project
their short-run cravings, given that they are possibly at the maximum level of craving at
the end of the treatment. However, this interpretation merely pushes matters back one
layer, since for the treatment to have had a positive effect on Month-3 abstinence there must
also be a more persistent state for it to operate through. It is possible that the state is
multi-dimensional, of course, but such an interpretation would pose significant challenges to
a normative analysis.
Figure 7 estimates the joint distribution of η̃1 and η̃2 in our sample, as well as their
marginal distributions. Pre- and post-treatment habit beliefs have a strong positive
28

association at the individual level. The relationship is approximated by η̃2 = 0.21 + 1.00η̃1 ,
with R2 = 0.81. In other words, there is uniform downward shift of 0.2 utils following the
cessation intervention. Some subjects believe the habit effect is negative ex ante and learn
it is more negative ex post, while others believe the habit effect is positive and learn it is
less positive.
In Panel B of Table 6, we examine the observable characteristics that are related to η̃1
and η̃2 . We find that older smokers have higher (more accurate) predictions of the ex-ante
and ex-post habit value by 0.042 and 0.030 per additional decade, respectively. Sunscreen
use is also associated with increases in η̃1 and η̃2 .

5.3

Discount Parameters

We estimate the average subject’s present bias is β = 0.670.34 We reject time-consistent
preferences of β = 1 (p < 0.001). The distribution across subjects is shown in Figure 8, and
reveals substantial hetereogeneity with an interquartile range of 0.15. Our estimated average
degree of present bias is severe, but not extreme relative to other estimates in the literature
(DellaVigna, 2009). Remarkably, 100% of subjects in our data are present biased, with an
estimated β < 1.
Turning to beliefs, we estimate that our subjects are on average “partially sophisticated,”
with β̃ = 0.851 for the average subject. That is, although they appear aware that their
future selves will be present-biased, their actual degree of present bias is so great that even
β̃ is significantly over-optimistic. We estimate that 80% of subjects are somewhat naïve
about their present bias, with β̃ < 1. We reject that β̃ = 1 (p < 0.001) and β̃ = β (p =
0.01), indicating that neither fully sophisticated nor fully naive preferences are a sufficient
description of our subjects. Moreover, even a modest degree of over-optimism about β
translates into a high degree of over-optimism about the probability of abstinence, as in
Figure 6. Our estimates imply that an average subject believes they are more than twice
as likely to abstain from smoking without additional incentives than they actually are —
a perceived probability of 20% vs. an actual probability of 5%. Note that this perceived
probability is estimated from the structural model and uses only subjects’ valuations of the
incentives and their actual behavior. In contrast, the unincentivized predictions obtained
from subjects were higher still at roughly 40% probability of abstinence. This suggests
that there is a substantial upward bias in the unincentivized predictions, for example due to
social desirability bias or experimenter demand effects, which can be avoided in the structural
approach.
34
Given that we estimate a linear model of heterogeneity, this represents both the mean predicted β as
well as the β at the mean value of the covariates.

29

Given the general interest in quasi-hyperbolic discounting and naïveté and the novelty of
our joint identification on these parameters, we utilize our sample to estimate heterogeneity in
β and β̃. We present the joint distribution of β and β̃ in our sample, as well as their marginal
distributions, in Figure 8. It is worth noting that our linear model in no way restricts these
parameters to lie on the unit square, and yet this is the case for most subjects. This contrasts
with many existing results in the literature that find a large fraction of future-biased subjects
and raise concerns about measurement error (see, e.g., Ashraf et al. (2006); Augenblick et
al. (2015)).
The most striking pattern in Figure 8 is the near-linear relationship between β and
β̃. Indeed, the two variables are well approximated by a simple regression line of β̃ =
0.11 + 1.11β, indicated by the solid line in the figure, with R2 = 0.46. There is no reason
theoretically why this should be the case, as for instance it would be possible to have β̃ = 1
independently of β, or for there to be a non-monotonic relationship if the cognitive skills
related to a low β are related to the metacognitive skills related to a high β̃. There is also
no reason empirically that the structural estimation would impose a linear relationship, as
the two parameters enter the model separately. An important caveat is that our estimator
may not give a consistent estimate of the true joint distribution of β and β̃. That said, we
find in Panel B of Table 6 that observable characteristics are related in very similar ways to
β and β̃.
Finally, we note that the covariates in Panel B of Table 6 should not be considered as
being causally related to β and β̃, nor should they be expected to generalize to the general
population. On the first point, whereas age is (mostly) exogenous, outcomes such as alcohol
consumption and sunscreen use depend on an individual’s degree of present bias. Indeed,
it is reassuring to see that many of these are related to present bias in the expected way.
For example, we estimate that, ceteris paribus, someone who regularly uses sunscreen would
be expected to have a β 0.08 higher than someone who does not. This is a large difference,
and suggests a simple “behavioral marker” which can be used in a reduced-form analysis to
identify present-biased individuals (similar to the income-tax filing decision in Martinez et
al. (2017)). This should be taken with some caution, however, as these relationships are only
estimated on our sample of smokers and there may be substantial selection into smoking in
the first place. For example, we find that male smokers ceteris paribus have a β 0.13 higher
than female smokers, but given gender differences in smoking rates this pattern may not be
representative of the population as whole.

30

5.4

Comparing measures of naïveté

Thus far, we have examined present bias and projection bias separately. However, we can
also leverage individual-level variation in the parameters to explore an open question about
whether naïve present-biased beliefs and projection-biased beliefs are associated. To do so,
we re-parameterize β̃ as a linear combination of its smallest and largest possible values,
β̂ = (1 − ω) · β + ω · 1. Using this formulation, ω = 0 corresponds to full sophistication, and
ω = 1 corresponds to fully naïve beliefs. Thus, ω is a measure of naïveté independent of the
underlying level of time-inconsistency.
In an exploratory analysis, we estimate a bivariate regression of ω and αM 1 . We find
a strong positive association, approximated by ω = 0.46 + 0.29αM 1 , with R2 = 0.15. This
novel finding suggests that naïveté regarding present bias can place a person at increased
risk of naïveté regarding projection, and merits further attention.

5.5

Welfare calculations

In this section, we apply our structural estimates to welfare calculations regarding the costs
and benefits of continuing to smoke. We focus on welfare under three scenarios: 1) presentbiased preferences in an addicted state, 2) long-run preferences in an addicted state, and 3)
long-run preferences in an unaddicted state. The latter scenario is our best estimate of the
welfare effects of smoking, accounting for subjects’ biases.
We start by calculating welfare from the perspective of a present-biased smoker in an
addicted state, who heavily discounts the future benefits of abstinence. On average,
continued smoking for a present-biased smoker generates welfare of µc − βb = 2.83 utils,
equivalent to a welfare gain of (µc − βb)/γ = $2, 726 per week. Under this scenario, it is
not surprising that the vast majority of smokers continue to smoke from one week to the
next. In fact, this mean utility would predict a 95% probability of smoking in a given week.
Next, we calculate the welfare effects of continued smoking under current smokers’ own
long-run preferences in an addicted state—that is, under a counterfactual of no present bias.
This entails omitting β from the welfare calculus. In that case, on average choosing to smoke
generates welfare of µc − b = 0.01 utils, equivalent to a welfare gain of (µc − b)/γ = $91 per
week. This suggests that, using the consumption utility of the agent in the addicted state
but their long-run time preferences, continued smoking is approximately welfare-neutral.
In contrast to the above results, we find a large private welfare loss when we consider
the long-run preferences of a person in an unaddicted state. On average, subjects’ choices
to continue to smoke generates welfare of µc − b − η = 0.45 utils, equivalent to a private
welfare loss of (µc − b − η)/γ = $414 per week. This figure is likely a lower bound, as our
31

experimentally identified η is the effect of at most one month of abstinence and therefore is
likely to underestimate the long-run adaptation. To interpret this as an “internality” cost
per pack, one may further assume that (µc − b − η) is linear in the number of cigarettes
smoked within a week.35 In this case, on average subjects incur a private welfare loss from
smoking of $80 per pack of cigarettes consumed, under their own long-run preferences in an
unaddicted state. This estimate is plausible when compared with existing estimates in the
smoking literature.36
We can decompose the private welfare loss from continued smoking into the amounts
attributable to present bias and projection bias. Present bias lowers the value of quitting
by $2,635 per week ((1 − β)b/γ), because the long-run benefit of abstinence is subject to
additional discounting by a relatively low β. Projection bias lowers the value of quitting by
$390 per week ((η − η̃1 )/γ), because of the wedge between the actual and perceived habit
value.

6

Discussion

It is widely believed that behavioral biases inhibit the ability of consumers to abstain from
addictive goods. Our paper sheds light on this important question, and the results of our
field experiment indicate that, on average: (1) smokers are severely present-biased regarding
future smoking abstinence; (2) smokers are only partially aware of their problems with
present bias; and (3) smokers hold mistaken beliefs that underestimate the value of an
abstinence intervention both before and after it has taken place. These three departures
from a standard economic model conspire to impose a large private welfare loss on smokers
in our sample. Whereas most smokers in our sample would stop smoking in the absence
of these departures under their own long-run preferences and in the absence of addiction,
present bias and projection bias lead most smokers to continue to smoke in most weeks.
The smoking literature has traditionally focused on the externalities that smokers impose
on non-smokers, for example, through secondhand smoke and publicly financed medical
care (e.g., Manning et al., 1989). Gruber and Kőszegi (2001) expand this focus to develop
This is a convenient, but implausible assumption. Although medically it is plausible to assume b is
linear in consumption, c is likely to exhibit concavity (e.g., a two-pack-a-day smoker may not suffer twice
as much withdrawal as a pack-a-day smoker). Our research design allows this to be estimated in principle,
but given the limited variation in baseline consumption and limited sample size it is impractical with the
current data.
36
Viscusi and Hersch (2008) estimated that the mortality cost of smoking is $222 per pack for men and
$94 for women in 2006 dollars. Our estimates should correspond to the mortality cost plus the morbidity
cost less the immediate consumption value. If the morbidity cost and immediate consumption value are of
similar size, then our per-pack estimate would be highly plausible.
35

32

a model that allows for “internalities” that smokers impose on themselves. They further
show that observed patterns of smoking are consistent not only with a rational addiction
model but also with their calibrated model that introduces a modest degree of present bias
(with full sophistication). We advance this literature by quantifying smoking internalities
based on present-biased preferences and naïve and projection-biased beliefs. Our study has
particular relevance to ongoing debates about the proper way to account for internalities
in welfare calculations (Allcott and Sunstein, 2015). Recent cost-benefit analyses in the
smoking literature have relied on reduced-form evidence that distinguishes less informed
or less addicted smokers compared with a “rational benchmark,” in order to incorporate
internality costs that offset the lost consumer surplus from tobacco control policies (Cutler
et al., 2015; Jin et al., 2015; Levy et al., 2018).
Our experimental identification of preferences and beliefs is aided by a methodological
innovation. A common challenge for field studies has been the time, expense, and resources
involved in remotely varying behavior. While self-reported behavior may be reliably assessed
under certain circumstances (Gorber et al., 2009), it is likely to be distorted when incentives
for behavior change are offered. We overcome this challenge by combining remote biochemical
verification of smoking status with lotteries that encourage truth-telling and occasional inperson audits from field personnel. This procedure represents a notable advance over existing
remote verification technologies. Moreover, our study contributes to a growing literature
that leverages experimental designs to estimate structural models of behavioral parameters
(DellaVigna, 2018). We provide a novel identification of present bias based on valuations of
partial commitment devices, which we hope future work may build upon.37
Our findings suggest that policies need to be designed to take into account the confluence
of biases that affect consumers of addictive goods. The welfare improvement of a tax is
governed by the share of smokers that quit successfully in response. Those smokers who
fail to quit might be left worse off by their failed commitment. Given the muted response
to even the largest incentives in our study, tobacco taxation may be a second-best policy
option for “behavioral” smokers — with the important caveats that our findings speak only
to smoking cessation and not to smoking initiation, and taxes may be treated differently
than the abstinence incentives we provided. We leave the calculation of the optimal tax
rate, which balances the welfare of those who succeed and those who fail, for future work.
An alternative to taxes would be a smoking ban. A ban on the sale of cigarettes has
been proposed many times in the public health literature (e.g., Proctor, 2013), but is often
criticized for restricting personal freedom (Schmidt, 2016). Typical analyses of the welfare
In particular, settings which permit greater within-subject variation in actual incentives received would
expand the extent of heterogeneity that may be estimated.
37

33

effects of bans would start by examining the lost consumer surplus as revealed by the demand
curve. This overstates the true lost surplus, however, as it includes consumers’ present bias
and fails to include their adaptation in the event of cessation. Our results indicate that
accounting for both biases not only reduces the lost consumer surplus, but in fact leads to
a gain in welfare for current smokers of $414 on average. Of course, a ban eliminates the
flexibility of consumers to smoke in response to utility shocks, but standard results from
discrete choice models indicate that even accounting for the reduced flexibility, a smoking
ban would on average increase smokers’ welfare by at least $353 per week.38 Unfortunately,
however, our estimates of naiveté and projection bias also imply that some smokers would
mis-perceive a ban as reducing welfare.
Our findings also may expand the range of recommended policy options to include
libertarian paternalistic interventions. For example, as a way to overcome present bias, one
might consider asking smokers to commit to an order of their week’s supply of cigarettes in
advance, in line with evidence that some smokers use self-rationing to avoid over-indulging
(Wertenbroch, 1998). Regardless of intervention, one might expect from our findings that
midway through a quit attempt a person may project the negative withdrawal symptoms
on future abstinence. One counter-measure would be to use an escalating incentive
schedule, as adopted in some smoking cessation trials (e.g., Higgins et al., 2014), to
overcome the drag imposed by smokers’ pessimistic beliefs about the value of future
abstinence. In general, it is clear that a greater understanding of the specific nature of the
underlying behavioral biases allows policy responses to be better tailored to the problems
they seek to address.

References
Acland, Dan and Matthew R Levy, “Naiveté, projection bias, and habit formation in gym
attendance,” Management Science, 2015, 61 (1), 146–160.
Allcott, Hunt and Cass R. Sunstein, “Regulating Internalities,” Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management, 2015, 34 (3), 698–705.
Andersen, Steffen, Glenn W. Harrison, Morten I Lau, and E. Elisabet Rustrom,
“Eliciting Risk and Time Preference,” Econometrica, May 2008, 76 (3), 583–618.
Note that the change in surplus is at least as large as the change that would occur if smokers were
choosing optimally (according to their long-run preferences) in the absence of a ban. Following Rust (1984),
the expected
P utility with i.i.d. extreme value shocks is given by the familiar log-sum formula: E[maxi ui +
εi ] = ln( i exp(ui ))] = ln(1 + exp(b − c)) = 0.6445 utils. Restricting choice but accounting for a single shock
yields expected utility b − c + η + E[ε] = 0.4549 + 0.5772 = 1.032 utils. Dividing by γ to yield a dollar figure,
the difference in utility is $353. An alternative lower bound would be to evaluate that no-ban surplus under
unaddicted preferences, i.e., including η. This alternative yields a $78 weekly increase in surplus from a ban.
38

34

Andreoni, James and Charles Sprenger, “Risk Preferences are Not Time Preferences,”
American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (7), 3357–3376.
Ashraf, Nava, Dean Karlan, and Wesley Yin, “Tying Odysseus to the Mast: Evidence from
a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006,
121 (2), 635–672.
Augenblick, Ned, Muriel Niederle, and Charles Sprenger, “Working over time: Dynamic
inconsistency in real effort tasks,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130 (3), 1067–1115.
Badger, Gary J, Warren K Bickel, Louis A Giordano, Eric A Jacobs, George
Loewenstein, and Lisa Marsch, “Altered states: The impact of immediate craving on the
valuation of current and future opioids,” Journal of Health Economics, 2007, 26 (5), 865–876.
Bai, Liang, Benjamin Handel, Edward Miguel, and Gautam Rao, “Self-Control and
Demand for Preventive Health: Evidence from Hypertension in India,” Working Paper 23727,
National Bureau of Economic Research August 2017.
Becker, Gary and Kevin Murphy, “A theory of rational addiction,” The Journal of Political
Economy, Aug 1988, 96 (4), 675–700.
Becker, Gary S, Michael Grossman, and Kevin M Murphy, “Rational addiction and the
effect of price on consumption,” The American Economic Review, 1991, 81 (2), 237–241.
Bickel, Warren K, Amy L Odum, and Gregory J Madden, “Impulsivity and cigarette
smoking: delay discounting in current, never, and ex-smokers,” Psychopharmacology, 1999, 146
(4), 447–454.
Bricker, Jonathan B, Kristin E Mull, Jennifer B McClure, Noreen L Watson, and
Jaimee L Heffner, “Improving Quit Rates of Web-Delivered Interventions for Smoking
Cessation: Full Scale Randomized Trial of WebQuit. org versus Smokefree. gov,” Addiction,
2017.
Carerra, Maria, Heather Royer, Mark Stehr, Justin Sydnor, and Dmitry Taubinsky,
“How are preferences for commitment revealed?,” August 2019. Mimeo.
Chabris, Christopher F, David Laibson, Carrie L Morris, Jonathon P Schuldt, and
Dmitry Taubinsky, “Individual laboratory-measured discount rates predict field behavior,”
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 2008, 37 (2-3), 237.
Chaloupka, Frank, “Rational addictive behavior and cigarette smoking,” Journal of political
Economy, 1991, 99 (4), 722–742.
Chetty, Raj, “Sufficient statistics for welfare analysis: A bridge between structural and reducedform methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 451–488.
, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft, “Salience and taxation: Theory and evidence,” American
economic review, 2009, 99 (4), 1145–77.
Conlin, Michael, Ted O’Donoghue, and Timothy Vogelsang, “Projection Bias in Catalog
Orders,” The American Economic Review, September 2007, 97 (4), 1217–1249.

35

Cutler, David M., Amber Jessup, Donald Kenkel, and Martha A. Starr, “Valuing
Regulations Affecting Addictive or Habitual Goods,” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis, 6 2015,
6, 247–280.
DellaVigna, Stefano, “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of
Economic Literature, June 2009, 47 (2), 315–372.
, “Structural Behavioral Economics,” in B. Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David
Laibson, eds., Handbook of Behavioral Economics, Vol. Volume 1, North-Holland, 2018, chapter
Chapter 7, pp. 613–723.
and Ulrike Malmendier, “Paying Not To Go To The Gym,” The American Economic Review,
June 2006, 96 (3), 694–719.
, John A List, Ulrike Malmendier, and Gautam Rao, “Estimating social preferences and
gift exchange at work,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2016.
, John List, and Ulrike Malmendier, “Testing for Altruism and Social Pressure in Charitable
Giving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 1–56.
Fenelon, Andrew and Samuel H Preston, “Estimating smoking-attributable mortality in the
United States,” Demography, 2012, 49 (3), 797–818.
Fong, Geoffrey T, David Hammond, Fritz L Laux, Mark P Zanna, K Michael
Cummings, Ron Borland, and Hana Ross, “The near-universal experience of regret among
smokers in four countries: findings from the International Tobacco Control Policy Evaluation
Survey,” Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 2004, 6 (Suppl_3), S341–S351.
Giné, Xavier, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman, “Put your money where your butt is: a
commitment contract for smoking cessation,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
2010, 2 (4), 213–35.
Gorber, Sarah Connor, Sean Schofield-Hurwitz, Jill Hardt, Geneviève Levasseur,
and Mark Tremblay, “The accuracy of self-reported smoking: A systematic review of the
relationship between self-reported and cotinine-assessed smoking status,” Nicotine & Tobacco
Research, 2009, 11 (1), 12–24.
Gruber, Jonathan and Botond Kőszegi, “Is addiction “rational”? Theory and evidence,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1261–1303.
Gruber, Jonathan H. and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers
Happier?,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 2005, 5 (1).
Higgins, Stephen T, Yukiko Washio, Alexa A Lopez, Sarah H Heil, Laura J Solomon,
Mary Ellen Lynch, Jennifer D Hanson, Tara M Higgins, Joan M Skelly, Ryan Redner
et al., “Examining two different schedules of financial incentives for smoking cessation among
pregnant women,” Preventive Medicine, 2014, 68, 51–57.
Hughes, John R., Josue Keely, and Shelly Naud, “Shape of the relapse curve and long-term
abstinence among untreated smokers,” Addiction, 2004, 99 (1), 29–38.

36

Jha, Prabhat, Chinthanie Ramasundarahettige, Victoria Landsman, Brian Rostron,
Michael Thun, Robert N Anderson, Tim McAfee, and Richard Peto, “21st-century
hazards of smoking and benefits of cessation in the United States,” New England Journal of
Medicine, 2013, 368 (4), 341–350.
Jin, Lawrence, Don Kenkel, Feng Liu, and Hua Wang, “Retrospective and Prospective
Benefit-Cost Analyses of US Anti-Smoking Policies 1,” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis, 2015,
6 (1), 154–186.
Kasza, Karin A, Bridget K Ambrose, Kevin P Conway, Nicolette Borek, Kristie
Taylor, Maciej L Goniewicz, K Michael Cummings, Eva Sharma, Jennifer L Pearson,
Victoria R Green et al., “Tobacco-product use by adults and youths in the United States in
2013 and 2014,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2017, 376 (4), 342–353.
Khwaja, Ahmed, Dan Silverman, and Frank Sloan, “Time preference, time discounting, and
smoking decisions,” Journal of Health Economics, 2007, 26 (5), 927–949.
Laibson, David, “Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1997, 112 (2), 443–478.
Levy, Helen G., Edward C. Norton, and Jeffrey A. Smith, “Tobacco regulation and costbenefit analysis: How should we value foregone consumer surplus?,” American Journal of Health
Economics, 2018, 4 (1), 1–25.
Loewenstein, George, “Projection bias in medical decision making,” Medical Decision Making,
2005, 25 (1), 96–105.
, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin, “Projection bias in predicting future utility,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1209–1248.
Manning, Willard G, Emmett B Keeler, Joseph P Newhouse, Elizabeth M Sloss, and
Jeffrey Wasserman, “The taxes of sin: Do smokers and drinkers pay their way?,” JAMA,
1989, 261 (11), 1604–1609.
Martinez, Seung-Keun, Stephan Meier, and Charles Sprenger, “Procrastination in the
Field: Evidence from Tax Filing,” October 2017. Unpublished working paper.
Matzkin, Rosa, “Nonparametric identification and estimation of polychotomous choice models,”
Journal of Econometrics, 1993, 58 (1), 137–168.
Moore, Matthew R, Michael J Mason, Aaron R Brown, Claudia M Garcia, Ashlie D
Seibers, and Chelsea J Stephens, “Remote biochemical verification of tobacco use: Reducing
costs and improving methodological rigor with mailed oral cotinine swabs,” Addictive Behaviors,
2018, 87, 151–154.
Morgan, Kari Lock and Donald B Rubin, “Rerandomization to improve covariate balance in
experiments,” The Annals of Statistics, 2012, 40 (2), 1263–1282.
and

, “Rerandomization to balance tiers of covariates,” Journal of the American Statistical

Association, 2015, 110 (512), 1412–1421.

37

O’Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin, “Doing it now or later,” American Economic Review,
1999, 89 (1), 103–124.
and

, “Choice and Procrastination,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116, 121–

160.
Paserman, M. Daniele, “Job Search and Hyperbolic Discounting: Structural Estimation and
Policy Evaluation,” The Economic Journal, August 2008, 118 (531), 1418–1452.
Proctor, Robert N., “Why ban the sale of cigarettes? The case for abolition,” Tobacco Control,
2013, 22 (Suppl 1), i27–i30.
Rabin, Matthew, “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem,”
Econometrica, September 2000, 68 (5), 1281–1292.
Ramo, Danielle E., Johannes Thrul, Kevin L. Delucchi, Sharon Hall, Pamela M. Ling,
Alina Belohlavek, and Judith J. Prochaska, “A randomized controlled evaluation of the
tobacco status project, a Facebook intervention for young adults,” Addiction, 2018, 113 (9),
1683–1695.
Read, Daniel and Barbara Van Leeuwen, “Predicting hunger: The effects of appetite and
delay on choice,” Organizational behavior and human decision processes, 1998, 76 (2), 189–205.
Royer, Heather, Mark Stehr, and Justin Sydnor, “Incentives, Commitments, and Habit
Formation in Exercise: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Workers at a Fortune-500
Company,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2015, 7 (3), 51–84.
Sayette, Michael A., George Loewenstein, Kasey M. Griffin, and Jessica J. Black,
“Exploring the Cold-to-Hot Empathy Gap in Smokers,” Pychological Science, 2008, 19 (9), 926–
932.
Schelling, Thomas C., “The intimate contest for self-command,” The Public Interest, 1980, 60,
94–118.
Schmidt, Andreas T., “Withdrawing Versus Withholding Freedoms: Nudging and the Case of
Tobacco Control,” The American Journal of Bioethics, 2016, 16 (7), 3–14. PMID: 27292838.
Sloan, Frank, Jan Ostermann, Christopher Conover, Donald H Taylor Jr, and Gabriel
Picone, “The Price of Smoking,” Technical Report, The MIT Press 2006.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Joni Hersch, “The mortality cost to smokers,” Journal of Health
Economics, 2008, 27 (4), 943–958.
Wertenbroch, Klaus, “Consumption self-control by rationing purchase quantities of virtue and
vice,” Marketing Science, 1998, 17 (4), 317–337.

38

7

Figures
Figure 1: Experimental Design

1 week with
abstinence incentive
per person

Base
0

Intervention for
1 week with
treated group:
Weekly incentive, abstinence incentive
per person
web support

Month 1
1

Baseline
elicitation of
valuations of
future smoking
in target weeks
in M1/M3

2

3

Month 2
4

5

6

End-of-M1
elicitation of
valuations of
future smoking
in target weeks
in M3

7

Month 3
8

9

10

11

12

End-of-M2
elicitation of
valuations of
future smoking
in target weeks
in M3

Note: During one week of Month 1 and one week of Month 3, each subject was eligible for one abstinence
incentive payment. Month 2 is the treatment month.

39

Figure 2: Saliva testing
Photo 1: swabbing

Photo 2: test result

Photo 3: blacked-out window

Note: Subjects uploaded a series of three photos as part of the saliva testing procedures.

40

Figure 3: “Staircase” for Eliciting Valuations

Q3:
P contingent or
P non-contingent
Q1:
P contingent or
0.8P non-contingent

50%
A

Q1 = A

Q3 = A

Q3 = B

Q0 = B
Q1 = B
Q0 = B
Q2 = A

Q4:
P contingent or
0.6P non-contingent

Q0

Q0 = A
Q1 = B
50%
B
Q2:
P contingent or
0.4P non-contingent

Q5 = A

Q5 = B
Q0 = A
Q2 = A

Q2 = B

Q6:
P contingent or
1.1P non-contingent

Q6 = A

Q7:
P contingent or
0.9P non-contingent

Q7 = A

Q8:
P contingent or
0.7P non-contingent

Q8 = A

Q6 = B

Q7 = B

[1.1, ∞)

[1.0, 1.1)
[0.9, 1.0)

[0.8, 0.9)
[0.1, 0.2)

Q8 = B

[0.0, 0.1)
[0.9, 1.0)

Q9:
P contingent or
0.5P non-contingent

Q9 = A
Q9 = B
[0.8, 0.9)

Q5:
P contingent or
0.2P non-contingent

Q6 = A
Q6 = B

Q10:
P contingent or
0.3P non-contingent

Q10 = A

Q11:
P contingent or
0.1P non-contingent

Q11 = A

Q10 = B

Q11 = B

[0.3, 0.4)
[0.2, 0.3)
[0.1, 0.2)

[0.0, 0.1)

Note: The staircase moves left to right and sorts a person’s predicted willingness to accept to abstain into
12 outcome “rows” displayed in far right. The starting point is randomized in question Q0. In questions
Q1-Q11, a person chooses between a smokefree-contingent payment worth p (option A) and a non-contingent
payment (option B). The target week and payment amount p were randomized for each of the four staircases
completed during each elicitation session.

41

Figure 4: Abstinence Predictions By Incentive Level
A. Baseline

Prediction

0.8

0.8

B. End of Month 1

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3
0

100 200 300 400

C. End of Month 2

0.3
0

100 200 300 400

0

100 200 300 400

Incentive
Unincentivized

Incentivized

Note: This figure shows the average abstinence prediction (unincentivized) or normalized value (incentivized)
by incentive level and elicitation session. The left panel is from the baseline survey; the middle is from the
end-of-Month-1 survey; and the right is from the end-of-Month-2 survey. The normalized value for the
incentivized task is the incentive valuation divided by the incentive level.

42

Figure 5: Abstinence Behavior and Predictions by Week and Treatment Group
Control

Treated

0.6

Proportion abstain

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

Week
Baseline prediction

M1 prediction

M2 prediction

Behavior

Note: This figure shows the average abstinence behavior or average predictions from each survey
(unincentivized), by study week and treatment group. Weeks in which a subject was eligible for a smokefreecontingent payment are included. The left panel is for the control group, and the right is for the treated
group.

43

Figure 6: Abstinence Behavior and Predictions By Incentive Level and Treatment Group
Control

Proportion abstain

0.8

Treated

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0
0

100

200

300

400

0

100

200

300

400

Incentive level
Baseline prediction

M1 prediction

M2 prediction

Behavior

Note: This figure shows the average abstinence behavior or normalized value (incentivized) by incentive level
and treatment group. The left panel is for the control group, and the right is for the treated group. The
normalized value for the incentivized task is the incentive valuation divided by the incentive level.

44

Figure 7: Distribution of η̃1 and η̃2

0.13

2.0
1.5

0.5
0.0

-0.08

Eta-tilde 2

1.0

0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

Eta-tilde 1

1.0

1.5

2.0

Note: This figure shows the sample distribution of ex-ante predicted treatment effects (η̃1 ) and ex-post (η̃2 )
as estimated by the structural model in Section 5. The main figure plots the joint distribution, with the
solid line representing a bivariate regression and the dotted line indicating the 45◦ line. The top and right
sub-figures plot the marginal distributions of η̃1 and η̃2 , respectively.

45

Figure 8: Distribution of β and β̃

0.67

1.4
1.2

0.85

Beta-tilde

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Beta

1.0

1.2

1.4

Note: This figure shows the sample distribution of discount factors (β) and beliefs (β̃) as estimated by the
structural model in Section 5. The main figure plots the joint distribution, with the solid line representing
a bivariate regression and the dotted line indicating the 45◦ line. The top and right sub-figures plot the
marginal distributions of β and β̃, respectively.

46

8

Tables
Table 1: Baseline Characteristics

All

Control

Treatment

p-value of diff.

28.8

36.2

0.16

28.8
27.3
26.5
17.4
70.5

21.1
27.2
30.9
20.8
77.0

0.17
0.98
0.34
0.55
0.09

28.8
18.2
37.9
15.2
0.0

22.6
23.0
35.5
18.1
0.8

0.29
0.24
0.60
0.36
0.17

26.5
45.5
19.7
8.3

24.9
40.0
23.4
11.7

0.76
0.38
0.30
0.20

14.7
56.4
33.2

14.5
58.3
30.3

14.7
55.5
34.7

0.88
0.54
0.31

74.1
17.9
8.1

70.5
18.2
11.4

75.8
17.7
6.4

0.28
0.90
0.15

397

132

265

Demographics
Male (%)
33.8
Age (%)
21-34
23.7
35-44
27.2
45-54
29.5
≥ 55
19.6
White (%)
74.8
Household income (%)
< $30,000
24.7
$30,000 - $49,999
21.4
$50,000 - $99,999
36.3
≥ $100,000
17.1
Decline to report
0.5
Education (%)
High school degree or less
25.4
Some college or associate’s degree 41.8
College degree
22.2
Some graduate school
10.6
Smoking characteristics
Mean cigarettes per day
Nicotine dependent (%)
Planning to quit < 6 months (%)
E-cigarette use (%)
0 days
1-15 days
16-30 days
N
p-value from joint F -test

0.89

Notes: p-values are reported from Wald tests on the equality of means of treatment and control groups for
each variable.

47

Table 2: Smoking Abstinence by Treatment and Incentives

Month 3
Treated × Month 3

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.122***

0.122***

0.119***

0.120***

(0.024)

(0.024)

(0.024)

(0.024)

0.058**

0.058**

0.066**

0.065**

(0.026)

(0.026)

(0.027)

(0.027)

Month 2
Treated × Month 2

0.105***

0.046

(0.021)

(0.028)

0.035

0.017

(0.022)

(0.043)

Incentive
Treated × Incentive
Month 3 × Incentive
Treated × Month 3 × Incentive
Constant
2

R
Number of observations
Number of clusters
Week FE
Individual FE

0.046*

-0.042

(0.027)

(0.030)

0.023

-0.043

(0.042)

(0.047)

-0.040

0.103***

(0.029)

(0.021)

-0.046

0.038*

(0.046)

(0.022)

0.018

0.018

0.018

0.018

(0.012)

(0.013)

(0.012)

(0.013)

0.06
3,176
397
Yes
Yes

0.05
4,764
397
Yes
Yes

0.07
3,176
397
Yes
Yes

0.05
4,764
397
Yes
Yes

* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator of weekly smoking abstinence. Incentives are scaled in $100s.
Models 1 and 3 are restricted to data from Months 1 and 3 only. Standard errors are clustered at the person
level.

48

Table 3: Predictions vs. Behavior

Behavior

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.429***

-0.314***

-0.388***

-0.286***

(0.026)

(0.028)

(0.015)

(0.015)

Incentive
Behavior × Incentive
Constant
2

R
N
Individual FE

0.076***

0.068***

(0.009)

(0.004)

-0.050***

-0.040***

(0.014)

(0.013)

0.533***

0.415***

0.520***

0.415***

(0.020)

(0.023)

(0.010)

(0.011)

0.39
2,024
Yes

0.42
2,024
Yes

0.36
7,185
Yes

0.39
7,185
Yes

* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator of weekly smoking abstinence. Incentives are scaled in
$100s. The data are stacked with observed behavior on top of predictions. “Behavior” equals 1 for observed
abstinence and 0 for incentivized abstinence predictions. Models 1 and 2 restrict to subjects in the Control
group, and Models 3 and 4 include all subjects’ predictions.

49

Table 4: Difference-in-Differences of Predictions

Unincentivized Incentivized
predictions
predictions
(1)
(2)
Baseline predictions
End-of-M2 predictions
Baseline predictions × Treated
End-of-M2 predictions × Treated

0.177***

0.130***

0.193***

(0.022)

(0.030)

(0.027)

(0.037)

0.005

0.001

-0.001

0.015

(0.018)

(0.021)

(0.026)

(0.029)

-0.044

-0.065*

-0.075**

-0.088**

(0.028)

(0.036)

(0.034)

(0.043)

-0.049**

-0.030

-0.062*

-0.032

(0.023)

(0.028)

(0.032)

(0.035)

-0.016

-0.011

(0.011)

(0.011)

-0.018**

-0.010

Baseline predictions × Incentive
End-of-M2 predictions × Incentive
Baseline predictions × Treated × Incentive
End-of-M2 predictions × Treated × Incentive

2

R
N
Week FE
Individual FE

Incentivized
predictions
(4)

0.101***

Treated × Incentive

Constant

Unincentivized
predictions
(3)

(0.009)

(0.012)

0.004

-0.009

(0.009)

(0.012)

0.017*

0.013

(0.010)

(0.014)

0.007

0.001

(0.011)

(0.013)

0.504***

0.359***

0.409***

0.297***

(0.015)

(0.019)

(0.016)

(0.020)

0.03
4,009
Yes
Yes

0.07
4,011
Yes
Yes

0.20
4,009
Yes
Yes

0.11
4,011
Yes
Yes

* p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01
Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator of predicted weekly smoking abstinence. Models 1 and 3
use unincentivized predictions, and Models 2 and 4 use incentivized (implied) predictions. Models 3 and 4
include interactions with the incentive level, scaled in $100s. Standard errors are clustered at the person
level.

50

51

-0.401***
(0.021)
-0.045
(0.031)
0.020
(0.030)
0.536***
(0.021)
0.25
7,185
397

-0.395***
(0.018)
0.051
(0.034)
0.012
(0.033)
0.496***
(0.019)
0.26
7,185
397

-0.377***
(0.020)
-0.020
(0.032)
-0.029
(0.030)
0.523***
(0.021)
0.25
7,161
395

-0.383***
(0.017)
0.024
(0.036)
-0.030
(0.035)
0.507***
(0.018)
0.25
7,185
397

Education
(4)
-0.419***
(0.024)
-0.096***
(0.031)
0.048
(0.030)
0.572***
(0.024)
0.26
7,185
397

Cigarettes
per day
(5)
-0.437***
(0.020)
-0.094***
(0.031)
0.084***
(0.029)
0.565***
(0.022)
0.26
7,185
397

-0.329***
(0.021)
0.176***
(0.031)
-0.111***
(0.029)
0.415***
(0.024)
0.28
7,185
397

Addiction-related
Nicotine
Quit
dependence
plans
(6)
(7)
-0.405***
(0.019)
-0.046
(0.033)
0.041
(0.031)
0.530***
(0.020)
0.25
7,185
397

Present
bias
(8)

-0.391***
(0.022)
0.064**
(0.032)
0.002
(0.030)
0.476***
(0.024)
0.26
7,185
397

-0.370***
(0.024)
0.049
(0.032)
-0.035
(0.031)
0.485***
(0.026)
0.25
7,185
397

Health behaviors
Sunscreen
use
Overeats
(10)
(11)
-0.396***
(0.015)
-0.045
(0.066)
0.079
(0.067)
0.516***
(0.016)
0.25
7,185
397

Alcohol
use
(9)

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator of weekly smoking abstinence. The data are stacked with observed behavior on top of predictions.
“Behavior” equals 1 for observed abstinence and 0 for incentivized abstinence predictions. The “high” value of each dimension of heterogeneity, each
measured at baseline, is listed at the top of each column. All models include individual random effects. Age, household income, and alcohol use are
dichotomized at the median. Education equals 1 if the person has at least some college or an associate’s degree. Cigarettes per day is split at ≥ 10.
Nicotine dependence is split at Fagerström scores ≥ 4. Quit plans equals 1 if plans to quit within one year. Present bias, based on a hypothetical
monetary choice task, equals 1 if prefers larger immediate payment and smaller later payment. Sunscreen use equals 1 if regularly uses sunscreen
when outdoors. Overeats equals 1 if regularly eats an amount of food later regretted.

R2
Number of observations
Number of clusters

Constant

Behavior × High group

High group

Behavior

Age
(1)

Demographics
Household
Male
income
(2)
(3)

Table 5: Heterogeneity in Overoptimism

Table 6: Structural Estimates
Description

Panel A: Structural Parameters
Parameter Estimate

Weekly disutility of abstinence
Discounted long-run benefit of abstinence
Utils per dollar
Scale parameter
Habit value
Perceived habit value in Month 1
Perceived habit vaue in Month 3
Present bias (mean)
Degree of naïvete (mean)

µc
b
γ
σ
η
η̃1
η̃2
β̄
β̃¯

8.883∗∗∗

8.783∗∗∗

0.001
0.105∗∗∗
0.555∗∗∗
0.126
−0.084
0.670∗∗∗
0.851∗∗∗

95% CI
[8.336, 9.253]
[8.443, 9.311]
[−0.001, 0.003]
[0.082, 0.110]
[0.150, 0.969]
[−0.353, 0.680]
[−0.545, 0.502]
[0.542, 0.730]
[0.644, 1.013]

Panel B: Heterogeneity
Covariate
Constant
Age (decades)
Ln(Income)
Nicotine dependence
Cigarettes
Male
Education
Quit plans
Alcohol use
Sunscreen use
Overeats
Present bias (money)

Test
b − µc
b − µc + η
β̃¯ − β̄
η − η̃¯1
η − η̃¯2
η̃¯1 − η̃¯2
(b − µc + η)/γ

β

β̃

η̃1

η̃2

0.678∗

1.432∗∗∗

−1.091

0.036

[−0.076, 1.281]

[0.491, 2.923]

[−7.646, 3.210]

−0.011∗∗∗

0.042∗∗∗

[−6.519, 4.340]

−0.002
[−0.006, 0.001]

[−0.019, −0.005]

[0.013, 0.086]

[0.002, 0.076]

[−0.033, 0.073]

[−0.123, 0.111]

[−0.482, 0.585]

[−0.572, 0.480]

0.017

0.005

0.017

0.030∗∗

−0.049

−0.000

−0.002

−0.127

−0.137

[−0.021, 0.025]

[−0.059, 0.064]

[−0.433, 0.152]

[−0.399, 0.127]
[−0.061, 0.093]

−0.006∗∗

−0.006

0.011

[−0.014, −0.000]

[−0.024, 0.009]

[−0.061, 0.093]

−0.011

0.405

[0.046, 0.200]

[−0.056, 0.298]

[−0.514, 1.178]

−0.004

0.035

[−0.918, 0.802]

−0.172

−0.348

[−0.047, 0.046]

[−0.094, 0.153]

[−0.651, 0.344]

[−0.777, 0.150]

−0.029∗∗

−0.037∗

−0.110

−0.104

[−0.060, −0.004]

[−0.090, 0.000]

[−0.343, 0.190]

[−0.302, 0.210]

[−0.031, 0.024]

[−0.046, 0.024]

[−0.161, 0.219]

−0.087

0.664∗

[−0.104, 0.238]

[0.002, 0.163]

[−0.272, 0.098]

[−0.123, 1.451]

[0.123, 1.723]

[−0.064, 0.099]

[−0.179, 0.188]

[−0.625, 1.025]

[−0.583, 0.987]

0.126∗∗∗

0.010

0.080∗∗
0.014

0.126

0.008

0.042

−0.008

−0.054

[−0.090, 0.062]

[−0.160, 0.037]

0.028

0.021

0.008

0.034

0.956∗∗
0.049

Panel C: Additional Tests
Value
-0.100
0.455
0.180
0.429
0.639
0.210
413.922

p-value
0.916
0.156
0.014
0.136
0.036
0.084
0.344

Notes: Structural estimates are based on a maximum likelihood procedure described in Section 5. Panel A
reports the main structural parameters, including the means of β and β̃, denoted by β̄ and β̃¯. Panel B
reports the observed covariates of β, β̃, η̃1 , and η̃2 . Panel C reports additional tests of linear combinations
52
of parameters in Panel A.

Appendix A

Additional Results
Figure A.1: Zip Codes from Target DMAs

Seattle
Detroit
Boston
Denver
Chicago

New York City

Cleveland

Philadelphia
Los Angeles

Phoenix

Dallas-Ft. Worth
Atlanta
Orlando
Houston

TampaSt. Petersburg
Miami

Note: This map shows targeted zip codes in blue (N = 8,820), along with the name of the targeted DMAs,
and subjects’ zip codes as red dots.

53

Figure A.2: Sample Elicitation Choice

Note: This is an example of one of binary choices presented to subjects during the beliefs elicitation. In this
case, p = $150 and the non-contingent payment is 0.4p.

54

Figure A.3: Sample Smokefree-Contingent Certificate

$100

Reward Certificate

$100

This certificate entitles the holder to

$100
if you do not smoke any cigarettes during the week
of
Monday, Mar 21 through Sunday, Mar 28.
$100

$100

Note: In smokefree-contingent weeks, subjects were presented within the survey with a downloadable
certificate that detailed the terms of payment.

55

Figure A.4: Abstinence Behavior and Incentivized Predictions by Week and Treatment
Group
Control

Treated

0.7

Proportion abstain

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

Week
Baseline prediction

M1 prediction

M2 prediction

Behavior

Note: This figure shows the average abstinence behavior or average predictions from each survey
(incentivized), by study week and treatment group. Weeks in which a subject was eligible for a smokefreecontingent payment are included. The left panel is for the control group, and the right is for the treated
group.

56

Appendix B

Experimental Elicitation Instructions

The instructions for eliciting valuations of abstinence during the baseline session are provided
starting on the next page. Programming notes (PNs) are included in caps and brackets.
In the instructions, the valuation exercise is referred to as the “smoking choice exercise,”
the smokefree-contingent payment as the “no-smoking payment,” and the non-contingent
payment as the “unrestricted payment.”
The instructions for the end-of-Month-1 and end-of-Month-2 elicitation sessions followed
identical procedures to the ones below.

57

Baseline Elicitation Instructions
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS - BASELINE
Q460 On the following screens you will answer 12-16 similar questions about different weeks
and different payment amounts. Each question is a decision between a payment for not
smoking during a given week (a no-smoking payment) or an unrestricted payment regardless of
your smoking that week.
At the end of this survey, we will randomly select just one person. In addition, we will randomly
select just one week and one question to determine the no-smoking vs. unrestricted payment
preference. The selected person will actually receive his or her chosen payment option during
the given week. You should therefore answer these questions truthfully, so that you are
awarded your preferred option if you are selected. The no-smoking payment would depend on
the results of a saliva test to confirm that you did not smoke that week.
Here is an example question:
[PN: INSERT IMAGE EXAMPLE BELOW]

EXAMPLE

Which do you prefer?
•
•

If someone chooses the first option, he/she prefers a payment of $50 that depends on not
smoking during Week 2 to an unrestricted payment of $10 regardless of whether he/she
smoked that week.
If someone chooses the second option, he/she prefers the unrestricted payment of $10 to the
payment of $50 that depends on not smoking.

Both payments would be made at the same time—for example, at the end of Week 2. Please
consider one week from this coming Monday to be the start of Week 1.
[PN: LOOP THROUGH Q465-Q501 FOUR TIMES. IN EACH LOOP, RESPONDENT WILL BE ASKED
ABOUT A DIFFERENT RANDOMLY SELECTED VALUE FOR $P AND A DIFFERENT RANDOMLY
SELECTED WEEK. USE Q465 FOR RANDOMLY SELECTED VALUES. USE Q467 AND Q467a FOR
RANDOMLY SELECTED WEEKS. THE ORDERING OF THE FOUR LOOPS SHOULD BE RANDOMZED
TO BE EITHER IN CHRONOLOGICAL OR REVERSE-CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER. FOR EXAMPLE, IF
THE SELECTED WEEKS IN Q467a ARE 1, 3, 9, AND 11, THEN THE DISPLAY ORDER OF THE LOOPS

WOULD BE WEEKS 1, 3, 9, 11 (CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER) OR WEEKS 11, 9, 3, 1 (REVERSE
CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER.)]
[PN: IN EACH LOOP OF Q470-Q494, RESPONDENT ANSWERS 3-4 QUESTIONS BASED ON AN
ALGORITHM. THERE ARE TWO STARTING POINTS FOR THE ALGORITHM, 40% OF $P OR 80% OF
$P. USE Q468 TO DETERMINE THE STARTING POINT FOR THE LOOP.]
[PN: TRACK THE ORDER OF THE SCREENS SHOWN.]
[PN: FOR ALL THE PERCENT VALUES SHOWN IN Q470-Q501, CALCULATE AND DISPLAY VALUE
OF $P.]
[PN: Q465-Q501 ARE MANDATORY.]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE
Q465 $P.00 INSERTS FOR Q470-Q501 – DO NOT DISPLAY [ALLOW 2 DECIMAL VALUES FOR P
VALUE CALCULATED]
[PN: RANDOMLY SELECT USING LOW READS FOUR AMOUNTS BELOW, TWO OF THOSE LISTED
IN 1 THRU 4 AND TWO LISTED IN 5 THRU 8. THESE WILL BE INSERTED INTO Q470-Q501.]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

$10
$25
$50
$100
$150
$200
$300
$400

BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS - BASELINE
Q467 WEEK X INSERTS FOR Q470-Q501 – DO NOT DISPLAY
[PN: RANDOMLY SELECT USING LOW READS FOUR WEEKS BELOW, TWO OF THOSE LISTED IN 1
THRU 4 AND TWO LISTED IN 5 THRU 8. THESE WILL BE INSERTED INTO Q470-Q501.]
2
3
4
9
10
11
12

Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12

BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS - BASELINE
Q467a [DATE INSERTS FOR Q470-Q501 – DO NOT DISPLAY]
[PN: THIS IS A PLACEHOLDER FOR THE DATES TO INSERT INTO Q470-Q501, CURRENTLY LISTED
IN THOSE QUESTIONS AS [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY].]
2
3
4
9
10
11
12

When Q467/2 = March 27, 2017 - April 2, 2017
When Q467/3 = April 3, 2017 - April 9, 2017
When Q467/4 = April 10, 2017 - April 16, 2017
When Q467/9 = May 15, 2017 - May 21, 2017
When Q467/10 = May 22, 2017 - May 28, 2017
When Q467/11 = May 29, 2017 - June 4, 2017
When Q467/12 = June 5, 2017 - June 11, 2017

BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS - BASELINE
Q468 STARTING POINT FOR ALOGRITHM – DO NOT DISPLAY
[PN: RANDOMLY SELECT A RESPONSE FOR EACH RESPONDENT BASED ON LOW READS.]
[PN: A NEW STARTING POINT SHOULD BE RANDOMLY SELECTED FOR EACH LOOP FOR ANY
GIVEN RESPONDENT.]
1
2

80%
40%

[PN: FOR Q470-Q501, IT’D BE IDEAL IF WE COULD INCLUDE A CALENDAR AT THE TOP OF THE
SCREEN THAT SHOWED THE MONTH WHEN THE SURVEY IS TAKING PLACE THROUGH THE
MONTH IN WHICH WEEK X FALLS IN ORDER FOR RESPONDENTS TO HAVE A CLEAR IDEA OF
WHICH DATES ARE BEING REFERRED TO.]
[PN: FOR THE DATES OF WEEK X SHOWN IN Q470-Q501, USE THE MONDAY AFTER THE
BASELINE SURVEY DATE AS THE START OF WEEK 1, AND MOVE FORWARD FROM THERE. WEEKS
RUN FROM MONDAY TO SUNDAY.]
BASE: STARTING POINT AT 80% - BASELINE (Q468/1)
Q470
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q478]

2

[80% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q476]

BASE: STARTING POINT AT 40% - BASELINE (Q468/2)
Q472
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: GO TO
Q474]
2
[40% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q482]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q472/1)
Q474
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q478]
2
[80% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q480]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q470/2)
Q476
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q480]
2
[40% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q482]

BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q470/1 OR Q474/1)
Q478
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q484]
2
[100% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q486]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q474/2 OR Q476/1)
Q480
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q488]
2
[60% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q490]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q472/2 OR Q476/2)
Q482
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q492]
2
[20% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q494]

BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q478/1)
Q484
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q496]
2
[110% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q496]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q478/2)
Q486
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q496]
2
[90% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q496]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q480/1)
Q488
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q496]
2
[70% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q496]

BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q480/2)
Q490
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q496]
2
[50% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q496]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q482/1)
Q492
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q496]
2
[30% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q496]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE (Q482/2)
Q494
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Which do you prefer?
1
[$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X] (No-smoking payment) [PN: SKIP TO
Q496]
2
[10% OF $P.00], regardless of whether you smoked during Week [X] (Unrestricted
payment) [PN: SKIP TO Q496]

BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS - BASELINE
Q496 ASSIGN A PREDICTION RANGE BASED ON Q470-Q494 (DOES NOT APPEAR ON SCREEN)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

0.0 – 0.1
0.1 – 0.2
0.2 – 0.3
0.3 – 0.4
0.4 – 0.5
0.5 – 0.6
0.6 – 0.7
0.7 – 0.8
0.8 – 0.9
0.9 – 1.0
1.0 – 1.1
> 1.1

[PN: IF Q494/2]
[PN: IF Q494/1]
[PN: IF Q492/2]
[PN: IF Q492/1]
[PN: IF Q490/2]
[PN: IF Q490/1]
[PN: IF Q488/2]
[PN: IF Q488/1]
[PN: IF Q486/2]
[PN: IF Q486/1]
[PN: IF Q484/2]
[PN: IF Q484/1]

[PN: hPValPipe: Due to suggested change to Q500 below, we can remove calculation for 1%.]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS - BASELINE
Q500
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
How much of an unrestricted payment would you need to prefer the unrestricted payment over
a no-smoking payment of [$P.00] that depends on not smoking in Week [X]?
[RANGE: 0-900]
$|__|__|__|
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS – BASELINE
Q501
WEEK [X]: [MONTH DD] – [MONTH DD, YYYY]
This screen asks you about Week [X], which refers to [INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY] THROUGH
[INSERT: MONTH DD, YYYY]. Assume all payments below will be made at the end of Week [X].
Imagine that you have just received:
A payment of [$P.00] if you have not smoked during Week [X].

On a scale between 0% (no chance) and 100% (complete certainty], how likely do you think it is
that you would not smoke during Week [X] if you received this payment? Assume that you have
to complete a saliva test to confirm that you are smoke-free.
[PN: INSERT SLIDER WITH 5% INCREMENTS AND 0% AND 100% AS END ANCHORS.]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS
Q565 RANDOM USERID SELECTION FOR Q460 DRAWING
[PN: SELECT ONE USERID – QUOTA OF 1.]
BASE: ALL QUALIFIED RESPONDENTS - BASELINE
Q568 SUBJECT THE WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING / SMOKING CHOICE EXERCISE – DO NOT
DISPLAY
PROGRAMMING NOTE:

1. IF THE RESPONDENT USERID IS SELECTED IN Q565, CODE AS 2 (YES).
2. IF THE RESPONDENT USERID IS NOT SELECTED IN Q565, CODE AS 1 (NO).

1
2

No
Yes

BASE: WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING - BASELINE (Q568/2)
Q570 WINNING WEEK FOR Q460 DRAWING / SMOKING CHOICE EXERCISE – DO NOT DISPLAY
[PN: FILL IN THE RESPONSES BELOW WITH THE FOUR SELECTED WEEKS IN Q467. RANDOMLY
CHOOSE ONE WEEK FROM AMONG THE FOUR.]
2
3
4
9
10
11
12

Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12

BASE: WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING - BASELINE (Q568/2)
Q572 WINNING “ROW” FOR Q460 DRAWING / SMOKING CHOICE EXERCISE – DO NOT DISPLAY
[PN: RANDOMLY CHOOSE A NUMBER FROM 1-12.]
1
2
3

0.1
0.2
0.3

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2

BASE: WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING - BASELINE (Q568/2)
Q573 PAYOFF FROM NO-SMOKING PAYMENT IN WINNING WEEK (Q570) – DO NOT DISPLAY
[PN: FOR THE WEEK SELECTED IN Q570, SELECT THE CORRESPONDING $P INSERT (Q465) FROM
THE SAME LOOP.]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

$10.00
$25.00
$50.00
$100.00
$150.00
$200.00
$300.00
$400.00

BASE: WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING - BASELINE (Q568/2)
Q574 PAYOFF FROM UNRESTRICTED PAYMENT IN WINNING WEEK (Q570) – DO NOT DISPLAY
[PN: LET THE RESPONSE BELOW BE THE VALUE IN Q572 MULTIPLIED BY THE VALUE IN Q573.
FOR EXAMPLE, LET Q573 BE 100.00. IF Q572/1, THEN ENTER 10.00 = 0.1*100.00. IF Q572/12,
THEN ENTER 120.00 = 1.2*100.00. INCLUDE TWO DECIMAL PLACES.]
[RANGE: 1-480]
$|__|__|__|.|__|__|
BASE: WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING - BASELINE (Q568/2)
Q575 PAYOFF FROM Q460 DRAWING / SMOKING CHOICE EXERCISE – DO NOT DISPLAY
[PN: IF THE RESPONSE CODE IN Q572 ≥ THE RESPONSE CODE IN Q496, SELECT 2 =
UNRESTRICTED PAYMENT; IF THE RESPONSE CODE IN Q572 < THE RESPONSE CODE IN Q496,
SELECT 1 = NO SMOKING PAYMENT. FOR EXAMPLE, IF Q572/4 AND Q496/3, SELECT 2 BELOW.
1
2

[PAYOFF FROM NO-SMOKING PAYMENT (Q573)]
[PAYOFF FROM UNRESTRICTED PAYMENT (Q574)]

BASE: WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING - BASELINE (Q568/2)
Q580 PAYOFF FROM Q460 DRAWING / SMOKING CHOICE EXERCISE – DO NOT DISPLAY
PROGRAMMING NOTE: FOR WINNER, Q568/2, STORE THE RESPONDENTS FINAL OPTION
SELECTED FROM Q460 DRAWING
1
PROGRAMMING NOTE: INSERT PREDICTION RANGE (Q496)
2
PROGRAMMING NOTE: INSERT FINAL OPTION SELECTED (Q572)
3
PROGRAMMING NOTE: INSERT FINAL OPTION SELECTED, NO-SMOKING PAYMENT
VALUE (Q573)
4
PROGRAMMING NOTE: INSERT FINAL OPTION SELECTED, UNRESTRICTED PAYMENT
VALUE (Q574)
BASE: WINNER OF Q460 DRAWING - BASELINE (Q568/2)
Q585 [IF Q575/1, THEN DISPLAY THE FOLLOWING TEXT AND GRAPHIC:] Congratulations! You
were selected to win an electronic gift card worth [INSERT VALUE FROM Q573] if you do NOT
smoke during Week [INSERT: NUMBER FROM Q570] of the study. We will remind you of this
prize during the prior week.
[PN: FOR CERTIFICATE BELOW, REPLACE $P WITH AMOUNT IN Q573. THE DATES SHOULD
MATCH THE START AND END DATE FOR THE WEEK LISTED IN Q570, WHERE THE START AND
END DATES ARE DEFINED FOR THAT LOOP OF Q460.]
$P

Reward Certificate

$P

This certificate entitles the holder to

$P
if you do NOT smoke any cigarettes during the week
of
XXXday, MMM DD through XXXday, MMM DD.
$P

$P

[IF Q575/2, THEN DISPLAY THE FOLLOWING TEXT AND GRAPHIC:] Congratulations! You were
selected to win an electronic gift card worth [INSERT VALUE FROM Q574] at the end of Week
[INSERT: NUMBER FROM Q570].
[PN: FOR CERTIFICATE BELOW, REPLACE $P WITH AMOUNT IN Q574. THE DATES SHOULD
MATCH THE START AND END DATE FOR THE WEEK LISTED IN Q570, WHERE THE START AND
END DATES ARE DEFINED FOR THAT LOOP OF Q460.]

$P

Reward Certificate

$P

This certificate entitles the holder to

$P
at the end of the week
of
XXXday, MMM DD through XXXday, MMM DD.
$P

$P

[PN: PLEASE SETUP EACH CERTIFICATE TO INCLUDE A PRINT ICON AS A POPUP FOR THE
RESPONDENT TO PRINT THE ONLINE CERTIFICATE FOR THEIR RECORDS. INCLUDE ROLL-OVER
TEXT ON EACH HYPERLINK THAT STATES “Click here to view, print, and/or save the Certificate”.]
[PN: SETUP PRINT OPTION AS NON-MANDATORY]

Appendix C

Proof of Identification

Assumption 1 (Utility) The utilities from smoking choices are given by:
u(abstain|p, control) = βδb + v(p) − µc − εit

(14)

u(abstain|p, treated) = u(abstain|p, control) + η

(15)

u(smoke|p) = −εs,t

(16)

where v(0) = 0 and v 0 (·) > 0.
Assumption 2 (Discrete shocks) The shocks εi,t are distributed i.i.d. according to a
standard type-I extreme value distribution F (·).
We begin by noting that the difference of two standard type-I extreme value distributions
is logistic, as assumed in the text. Under assumption 2, it is possible to write the probability
of abstinence as the ratio of exponentiated utilities as in equation 6. The mean abstinence
rate in the absence of incentives immediately identifies (βδb−µc ). Moreover, v(p) is identified
from the slope of this logit regression, and thus v −1 (·). Finally, comparing treated and control
subjects in month 3 identifies η given the linearity assumption in Assumption 1.
If β̃ = 1, then as p → 0 the second term of equation (10) goes to zero faster than the
first term. Sending p to zero thus identifies F (β̃δb − µc ), which can be inverted to recover
β̃δb − µc .
If β̃ < 1, then (10) induces a first-order “commitment value” at all incentive levels. We
instead consider how this changes at high values of p. Taking the derivative with respect to
p yields:
dV
= F (χ(p)) + φf (χ(p))
dp

(17)

where χ(p) = β̃δb + v(p) − µc and φ = (1 − β̃)δb. This derivative implies a locus of (φ, χ)
pairs consistent with the observed response to changes in p, in particular:
"

∂V /∂p − F (χ)
φ=
f (χ)

#

(18)

Note that φ is not a function of p. We may therefore evaluate ∂V /∂p at some other point
p . Note that χ(p0 ) = χ(p) + (v(p0 ) − v(p)) ≡ χ(p) + ∆, which is known from the discrete
choice. Differencing equation (18) at these two points, and making the above substitution
yields:
∂V /∂p − F (χ) ∂V /∂p0 − F (χ + ∆)
−
=0
(19)
f (χ)
f (χ + ∆)
0

70

Taking the derivative, and substituting in equation (17) yields:
f 0 (χ + ∆) f 0 (χ)
−
<0
φ
f (χ + ∆)
f (χ)
#

"

(20)

where the inequality is guaranteed as φ > 0 and f 0 /f is a strictly decreasing function given
assumption 2. Equation (20) is thus a monotone function of x, which admits at most one
solution. Thus there is a unique value χ(p) = β̃δb+v(p)−µc consistent with the data. Given
that v(p) is known from the discrete choice, this identifies β̃δb − µc .
Finally, evaluate equation (10) as p → ∞. The probability of abstinence goes to one,
leaving just the second term. However, this is an integral from the known β̃δb − µc to
infinity of δb − µc − ε. This is an invertible function of (δb − µc ), which is therefore identified.
Equation (17) then identifies a unique value for φ = (1 − β̃)δb.

71

