NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GEOGRAPHY OF PRESCRIPTION PHARMACEUTICALS SUPPLIED TO THE U.S.:
LEVELS, TRENDS AND IMPLICATIONS
Neriman Beste Kaygisiz
Yashna Shivdasani
Rena M. Conti
Ernst R. Berndt
Working Paper 26524
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26524

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2019

Ms. Conti acknowledges research support from the Commonwealth Fund and the American
Cancer Society. Mr. Berndt acknowledges research support from the National Institutes of
Health, National Institute on Aging, Grant R01AG043560 to the National Bureau of Economic
Research. We have benefited from discussions on FDA regulatory and user fee payment file
matters with Dr. Andreas Schick and Qiyu Liu of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, from
access to manufacturing facility geographic data provided by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, and from data sources identified by Dr. Chris Stomberg of National Economic
Research Associates. Any opinions and findings expressed here are those of the authors, are not
necessarily those of the institutions with whom they are affiliated, the research sponsors, nor of
the individuals and institutions providing us information, nor of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2019 by Neriman Beste Kaygisiz, Yashna Shivdasani, Rena M. Conti, and Ernst R. Berndt. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Geography of Prescription Pharmaceuticals Supplied to the U.S.: Levels, Trends and
Implications
Neriman Beste Kaygisiz, Yashna Shivdasani, Rena M. Conti, and Ernst R. Berndt
NBER Working Paper No. 26524
December 2019
JEL No. F61,I18,K23,L51,L65
ABSTRACT
Prescription pharmaceuticals are frequently used consumer products, whose manufacturing
location is commonly held as a trade secret by firms and U.S. regulatory agencies. Here we use
previously non-publicly available data to describe levels and trends in the manufacturing
locations of the most commonly used prescription pharmaceuticals, off-patent generic drugs,
intended to be consumed by Americans. We find that the base ingredients required for the
manufacturing of these prescription drugs are overwhelmingly and increasingly manufactured in
non-domestic locations, specifically India and China. The manufacturing of finished prescription
drugs for the American market is equally split between domestic and foreign locations, but is
increasingly foreign as well. The growing American reliance on non-domestic manufacturing of
prescription drugs is important for stakeholders to appreciate given current quality and pricing
concerns involving these products and their potential susceptibility to interruptions in supply. We
discuss implications of these levels and trends for current domestic and international policy
discussions.
Neriman Beste Kaygisiz
Wellesley College
Unit:4725
21 Wellesley College Road
Wellesley, Mass 02481
nkaygisi@wellesley.edu
Yashna Shivdasani
Wellesley College
Unit 6121,
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
yshivdas@wellesley.edu

Rena M. Conti
Boston University
Questrom School of Business
Department of Markets, Public Policy and Law
595 Commonwealth Ave
Boston, MA 02215
rconti@bu.edu
Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-533
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu

I.

INTRODUCTION

This paper documents the geography of manufacturing among a very commonly used
product by American consumers, ‘off-patent’ generic prescription drugs. Our empirical focus on
this product is highly relevant and salient for a number of reasons. The U.S. is the world’s
largest pharmaceutical drug market; Nearly 70 percent of Americans are on at least one
prescription drug, and more than half take two. 1 U.S. demand for generic drugs has grown
substantially in the last few decades, reflecting in part the accumulated track record of safety,
efficacy and relatively low prices. More than 90% of pharmaceutical drug prescriptions in the
U.S. are currently dispensed as generic drugs. 2
In recent years, the geographic sources of prescription drugs consumed by Americans
have also become prominent in the popular press and public policy discussions. 3, 4 While the
U.S. is a world leader in developing and marketing ‘on-patent’ branded prescription drugs,
numerous reports have suggested increasingly the manufacturing of generic drugs intended for

1

https://www.consumerreports.org/prescription-drugs/too-many-meds-americas-love-affair-with-prescriptionmedication/
2 IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, Medicine Use and Spending in the U.S.: A Review of 2017 and Outlook
to 2022, Parsippany, NJ, April 2018, p, 14. Available online at https://www.iqvia.com/institute/reports....
3 https://www.cbsnews.com/news/worse-than-you-think-10-things-you-dont-know-about-glaxos-750m-paxilsettlement/
4 For one account focusing on drug quality and safety controversies, see Katherine Eban, Bottle of Lies: The Inside
Story of the Generic Drug Boom, New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 2019. Concerns over the US Food and Drug
Administration’s track record in inspecting foreign manufacturing sites led the US Congress in 2012 in part to pass
the Generic Drug User Fee Act legislation. For discussion, see Ernst R. Berndt, Rena M. Conti and Stephen J.
Murphy, “The generic drug user fee amendments: an economic perspective”, Journal of Law and the Biosciences,
lsy002, https:doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsy002, published 11 April 2018. For a discussion of drug shortage issues, see
Christopher Stomberg, “Drug Shortages, Pricing and Regulatory Activity”, ch. 10 in Ana Aizcorbe, Colin Baker,
Ernst R. Berndt and David M. Cutler, eds., Measuring and Modeling Health Care Costs, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018, pp. 323-348; and Rena M. Conti and Ernst R.
Berndt, “Specialty Drug Prices and Utilization After Loss of US Patent Exclusivity, 2001-2007”, ch. 9 in Aizcorbe,
Baker, Berndt and Cutler [2018], op. cit., pp. 273-321.

3

U.S. consumption is occurring abroad, particularly in China and India.

5, 6

Vulnerabilities in the

supply of drugs, including generics, has been linked to drug quality and safety concerns, and
notably geography-based concerns including weather-related events impacting domestic
production and controversies involving international trade provisions among foreign
manufacturers. 7 Very high prices and price spikes have also been noted among specific generic
prescription drugs in the U.S., which may be related to supply or quality concerns. 8 Quality
concerns and potential supply interruptions are surprising in part because in order to be sold in
the U.S. market, prescription drugs must meet or exceed very stringent regulatory standards for
safety, purity and efficacy set by the U.S. authority in charge of regulating these products, the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). 9
This paper builds on previous research that distinguished U.S. from non-U.S.
manufacturing sources of generic prescription drugs between 2013 and 2017, based on
previously non-public data provided us by the FDA. 10 Here, we report updated findings through

5

Rena M. Conti and Ernst R. Berndt, “Four Facts Concerning Competition in U.S. Generic Prescription Drug
Markets”, International Journal of the Economics of Business, August 2019. DOI:
10.1080/13571516.2019.1654324; Ernst R. Berndt and Murray L. Aitken, “Brand Loyalty, Generic Entry and Price
Competition in Pharmaceuticals in the Quarter Century after the 1984 Waxman-Hatch Legislation”, International
Journal of the Economics of Business, 2011, 18(2): 177-201.
6 Ernst R. Berndt, Rena M. Conti and Stephen J. Murphy [2018], op. cit. Jasdeep Singh, Mohit Jain and Pratyush
Goel, US Generics Market – Evolution of Indian Players, IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science, February 2019.
Available online from www.IQVIA.com; Kyle Blankenship, “As API production consolidates abroad, U.S.
regulators face safety concerns at home”, Fierce Pharma, August 29, 2019. Available online at
https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/half-fda-warnings-letters-last-year-were-seng-to-in...
7 For one account focusing on drug quality and safety controversies, see Katherine Eban [2019], op. cit. Concerns
over the US Food and Drug Administration’s track record in inspecting foreign manufacturing sites led the US
Congress in 2012 in part to pass the Generic Drug User Fee Act legislation. For discussion, see Ernst R. Berndt,
Rena M. Conti and Stephen J. Murphy [2018], op. cit. For a discussion of drug shortage issues, see Christopher
Stomberg [2018], op. cit.; and Rena M. Conti and Ernst R. Berndt, [2018], op. cit.,
8 Conti RM, Nguyen KH, Rosenthal MB. “Generic prescription drug price increases: which products will be affected
by proposed anti-gouging legislation?” J Pharm Policy Pract. 2018 Nov 21;11:29.
9 https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-information-consumers/protecting-americas-health-through-human-drugs
10 Berndt, Conti and Murphy [2018], op. cit.

4

2019 and more regionally disaggregated geographies (various non-U.S. countries and global
regions, and 19 regions within the U.S.) based on new data provided to us by the FDA.
To place these manufacturing geography levels and trends into context, we first briefly
describe the existing international trade theoretical literature that underpins rationales for why
regions and countries specialize in the manufacturing of certain products for domestic
consumption, and then specialize further by expanding into export markets. This involves a
review of the relevant economic literature on comparative advantage, and on economies of scale
and scope - longstanding economic rationales motivating firms’ choice of manufacturing
geography.

Moreover, the economic literature explains that firms’ manufacturing geography

opportunities arise in large part endogenously and reflect historical choices made by firms and
public policy makers, including the use of tools such as rules promoting public safety, tax
provisions, tariffs, trade policy and even human capital investments.

Given this, we provide a

brief summary of the relevant regulatory provisions for the manufacture and sale of prescription
drugs in the U.S. and an historical account of private and public sector policies adopted in four
geographies – Puerto Rico, India, China, and Ireland – that are particularly important to the U.S.
generic drug market; an Appendix provides a more detailed historical narrative and references.
With this as background, we present our updated and geographically disaggregated global and
U.S. domestic findings. In the final section, we discuss implications of the geography of generic
drug manufacturing for current domestic and international policy developments.
II.

PLANT LOCATION, SCALE ECONOMIES AND THE BASICS OF
ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY

What economists observe in numerous industries is that regions and countries (hereafter,
regions) specialize in what they produce for domestic consumption and export, creating patterns
5

of economic geography. 11 These factors should be viewed as acting in a complementary fashion
with regulatory, tax and industrial policy.
II.A

Specialization, Trade and Comparative Advantage: It Pays to be Different

Holding all else equal, it is widely thought there are two primary reasons for why some
regions specialize in manufacturing and exporting certain products. First, regions differ in the
relative abundance of resources (water, forests, climate, minerals, supply of skilled and unskilled
labor) and/or in their production technology (the intensity with which they utilize various factors
of production in the production of different goods), and then specialize in the things they do
relatively well. According to the classic Heckscher-Ohlin theory of comparative advantage,
trade between regions is based in large part on differences among regions, with regions tending
to produce relatively more of and export goods that are intensive in the factors with which they
are abundantly endowed. 12 However, in terms of predicting a country’s content of international
trade, empirical evidence is mixed on the Hecksher-Ohlin model. As a leading textbook states,
while “the Heckscher-Ohlin model does a good job of predicting the pattern of trade between
developed and developing countries”, 13 its heavy reliance on differences between regions as the
primary reason underpinning interregional trade limits its usefulness in understanding current
trade patterns among regions.

11

Although there are numerous textbooks on international economics and trade, here we rely primarily on one
widely used international trade textbook, Paul R. Krugman, Maurice Obstfeld and Marc J. Melitz, International
Trade: Theory and Policy, Eleventh Edition, New York: Pearson Education, Inc., 2018, especially chapters 3-8 and
11.
12 For an extended discussion of the Heckscher-Ohlin framework, see Krugman, Obstfeld and Melitz [2018], op. cit.,
especially chapter 5, “Resources and Trade: The Heckscher-Ohlin Model”, pp. 87-122.
13 Krugman, Obstfeld and Melitz [2018], op. cit., p. 115.

6

A second reason why countries specialize in production and trade owes to economies of
scale (also called increasing returns) that make it advantageous for a region to specialize in the
production of only a limited range of goods and services. 14 Economies of scale are said to occur
when the industry’s cost per unit falls as industry output increases; with fixed input prices, if
quantities of all inputs double and output quantity more than doubles, cost per unit of industry
output will decline manifesting economies of scale. Economists have theorized and observed
that the particular type of scale economies impacts the size distribution of firms: Whether the
industry size distribution of firms in a region is dominated by a small number of large firms or a
large number of small firms depends in part on whether scale economies are primarily internal
or external. In turn, the type of scale economies has important implications for industrial
strategy and public policy on how best to locate and concentrate or agglomerate manufacturing
plants.
II.B

Specialization, Trade, and External Scale Economies

External economies of scale occur when the cost per unit depends on the overall size of
the industry but not necessarily on the size of any one firm. An industry where economies of
scale are purely external will typically consist of many small firms and often be very
competitive; there will be no intrinsic advantages to larger firms. The analysis of external
economies was originated by the British economist Alfred Marshall who was struck by the

14

This discussion that follows is based in large part on chapters 7, “External Economies of Scale and the
International Location of Production”, and chapter 8, “Firms in the Global Economy: Export Decisions,
Outsourcing”, in Krugman, Obstfeld and Melitz [2018], op. cit., pp. 151-169 and 170-213, respectively.

7

phenomenon of “industrial districts” or what today we might call “clusters” – geographical
industry concentrations that could not easily be explained by natural resources. 15
Marshall argued there are three main reasons why a geographic concentration of firms
may be more efficient than an individual isolated firm: (i) the ability of a cluster of firms to
support specialized suppliers. When there are a large number of firms, the regional
agglomeration of specialized firms may provide a sufficiently viable and sustainable market for
critical specialized equipment suppliers; (ii) a geographically concentrated industry allows labor
pooling for workers with highly specialized skills. A pooled labor market provides advantages
both to producers (who can locate, hire and train specialized workers) and to workers (who do
not have to worry about becoming unemployed). Both workers and employers are better off if
all are near each other; and (iii) a geographically concentrated industry helps foster informal
knowledge spillovers that often are most prevalent when an industry is concentrated in a fairly
small area, so that employees of different companies mix socially and talk freely about technical
issues. Note that with each of these three sources of external scale economies, as industry size
increases, the costs of available inputs decline, providing firm clusters with competitive cost
advantages.
But this raises a more fundamental issue: from where did these external economies
originally emanate? The answer is usually historical accident. Something gives a specific
location an advantage in a particular industry, and this advantage gets “locked in” by external

15

Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, 1890. Reprinted London: Macmillan 1920 (8th edition). For a more
contemporary discussion, see Michael E. Porter, The Competitive Advantage of Nations, New York: The Free Press,
1990, pp. 154-157.

8

economies of scale even after the circumstances that created the initial advantage are no longer
relevant. 16
II.C

Specialization, Trade and Internal Scale Economies

Internal scale economies can be analyzed in terms of three often overlapping categories:17
(i) product-specific internal scale economies associated with the volume of any single product
made and sold; (ii) plant-specific scale and scope economies associated with the total outputs
(possibly encompassing many products) of an entire plant or plant complex; and (iii) multi-plant
economies associated with a firm’s operation of multiple facilities in the same or different
geographies.
Product-specific economies of scale derive in large part from specialization and the
division of labor. A particularly important source of internal scale economies in the
manufacturing of pharmaceuticals is the prominent role of vats, barrels and stainless steel
reactors – containers holding solids and liquids used in the manufacturing processes of
chemically synthesized small molecules, and in the fermentation of vaccines and biologics.
Internal economies of scale at the product- and plant-specific level can be attained by expanding

16

Consider, for example, the Chinese town of Qiaotou, that produces 60% of the world’s buttons and a large
proportion of its zippers. The industry’s origins lie in historical accident, but have been amplified by external scale
economies. “In 1980, three brothers spotted some discarded buttons in the street, retrieved and sold them, and then
realized there was money to be made in the button business…The town’s button and zipper production is carried out
by hundreds of small, family-owned firms. Yet there are clearly advantages to each of these small producers in
operating in close proximity to the others.” Krugman, Obstfeld and Melitz [2018], op. cit., p. 161. While China’s
role in the 1980s and 1990s as a huge exporter of labor-intensive products surely reflected in part the forces of
comparative advantage, many of these labor-intensive goods were produced by highly localized industries that
benefited strongly from external economies of scale.
17 The discussion that follows is based in large part on F. M. Scherer and David Ross, Industrial Market Structure
and Economic Performance, third edition [1990], chapter 4, “The Determinants of Market Structure: Economies of
Scale”, pp. 97-151.

9

the physical size of individual processing units. 18 Moreover, since the crew needed to operate a
large processing unit or machine is often little or no larger than what is required for a unit of
smaller capacity, labor costs per unit fall sharply with scale-up. These relationships can operate
at the product, plant and multi-plant level and thereby underpins internal economies of scale at
various levels of aggregation.
An additional advantage of multi-plant size comes from what is commonly called “the
economies of massed reserves”. A plant large enough to use only one specialized machine may
need to hold another machine in reserve if it seeks to hedge against occasional breakdowns in
order to sustain production. 19 Moreover, the number of repair and maintenance staff a company
must employ to maintain a desired level of service in the event of a random breakdown rises less
than proportionately with the number of machines in operation, other things equal. Notably,
these massed reserve economies can also be realized when unit shutdowns are predictable, or
routinely required by insurers or regulators such as the FDA to meet current Good
Manufacturing Practice (cGMP) standards (see below for more details). More generally, since
every plant must carry some overhead, within limits cost savings can be realized by specializing
overhead functions and spreading overhead over a larger volume. As Scherer and Ross note, “A
large plant can have one or more specialized cost accountants, production schedulers, stock

18

From basic geometry it is known that the area of a sphere or cylinder (e.g., boilers or reactors) varies as the twothirds power of volume, implying that the surface area increases less rapidly than the potential volume, generating
product- and possibly plant-specific internal economies of scale. In the engineering literature this is known as the
“two-thirds” or “six-tenths” rule, and it implies a rule of thumb that construction costs should increase by only 6067% as output or capacity output doubles. For empirical support, see, for example, John Haldi and David Whitcomb,
“Economies of Scale in Industrial Plants”, Journal of Political Economy, August 1967, 75(5):373-385. This
intuition is often applied by engineers in estimating the cost of constructing new process equipment, such as that for
bulk powders and active pharmaceutical ingredient processes.
19 For a large plant with numerous machines, a single extra machine may provide almost the same degree of
protection at much lower cost relative to total capacity carrying costs, provided the machine is fungible across
products.

10

keepers, nurses, plant guards, and so on. A small plant must often double up such functions,
with possible skill losses”. 20
Product- and plant-specific internal economies of scale may also interact in synergistic
ways, particularly for multiproduct plants. When there are shared manufacturing inputs, such as
boilers, pipes, and stainless steel reactors, manufacturing multiple products at a given plant can
yield cost savings relative to manufacturing the various products in stand-alone plants; these cost
savings are called economies of scope, and derive both from specialized equipment (e.g.,
machines making and filling syringes for various injectable drugs, making various oral solid
drugs with tablet presses, providing sterile and aseptic storage areas for temporary inventory of
goods in process) or from specialized labor (equipment operators, sterile manufacturing
supervisors). Scope economies also occur frequently outside manufacturing in other functions
integral to the firm. For example, a company’s regulatory affairs specialist can liaise with a
single regulatory body regarding a number of products simultaneously. These characteristics of
equipment and labor contribute to internal scope economies.
Finally, whether scale and scope economies are external or internal, their cost-reducing
impacts can be augmented if manufacturing benefits from learning curves – situations in which
unit costs decline as cumulative experience grows along with cumulative output. 21 These
learning curve impacts may sustain the specialization and trade clusters originally formed by
historical accidents.

20

Scherer and Ross [1990], op. cit., p. 100.
For a discussion of manufacturing learning curves and their differences from scale economies, see, for example,
Robert S. Pindyck and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, Microeconomics, 8th edition, New York: Pearson Education Inc., 2013,
pp. 261-265; and “Costs, Learning Curves and Scale Economies: From Simple to Multiple Regression”, chapter 3 in
Ernst R. Berndt, The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company, 1991, pp. 60-101.
21

11

II.D

Are There Limits to Scale and Scope Economies?

While scale economies result in lower unit costs and incentivize the manufacturing of
greater output, to benefit from these cost-reducing scale economies, firms must be able to sell the
increased output, which in turn may require firms to reach out to more distant customers, thereby
increasing transportation and delivery costs and possibly offsetting scale-related manufacturing
cost reductions. In the present context, transportation and delivery costs even over long
distances are likely to be relatively negligible for chemically synthesized small molecule
powders or solid generic drugs since they are light, solid, lack bulk and are mostly nonperishable. But distribution and transportation costs could be more important for more bulky
injectable, liquid and non-oral drugs, and be quite significant for large molecules and
temperature and light sensitive physician-administered injectable vaccines and biologic
medicines, making it more attractive to locate plants near customers. 22
Do other limits to scale and scope economies exist? The economic literature has
generally concluded that in nearly all manufacturing and distribution operations, the realization
of scale and scope economies is ultimately subject to diminishing returns. As a result, many
industrial organization economists believe that the long-run average costs of industrial firms
initially fall with increasing outputs due to economies of scale and scope, then are reasonably
constant over a wide range of outputs as firms decentralize and implement other organizational

22

“Specialty Drugs, Pharmacies: A Growing Trend”, in Employee Benefit Plan Review, November 2001, 56(5):2224.

12

changes, but ultimately increase with outputs as inevitable managerial diseconomies of scale
emerge. 23
II.E

Implications of Scale and Scope Economies for Industry Strategy and Public
Policy

For most consumer products, the existence of and prospects for realization of scale and
scope economies has important implications for industry strategy, as well as for public policy
toward industry.
For example, generally, economists believe firms face incentives to invest in capacity
expansion when there are scale economies, for such investment will reduce unit costs and enable
them to price competitively, assuming they can sell their expanded capacity output. Firms may
also pursue rapid market share at lower current profits when they expect to realize learning curve
benefits in the future.

Public authorities may therefore protect domestic industries currently

experiencing competitive challenges, subsidizing “infant industry” firms with favorable tax
treatment and/or protecting them with tariffs, adopting import substitution policies in the hope
that as a result imports will be reduced, exports will be increased, and prospects for domestic
employment and a viable domestic manufacturing industry will be enhanced. 24
Similarly, recognizing that because of historical accident certain geographical regions
have nascent clusters of firms that are manufacturing biopharmaceutical products, public

23

On this, see, for example, Scherer and Ross [1990], op. cit., “What Checks the Realization of Scale Economies”,
pp. 102-106. The emergence of digitization-related manufacturing and distribution general purpose technologies,
however, may have considerably expanded the region over which external and internal scale and scope economies
are operative. But the role of digitization technologies is likely less prevalent in the biopharmaceutical than in the
software, medical device and diagnostic industries.
24 For a discussion of various international trade public policies, see Part 2, “International Trade Policy” in
Krugman, Obstfeld and Melitz [2018], op. cit., chapters 9-12.

13

authorities may seek to create environments conducive to generating external scale economies,
such as providing job skill training and other educational opportunities, establishing tax-free
manufacturing zones to attract further biopharmaceutical investments, and incentivizing
complementary industries to locate nearby (e.g., chemical, boiler and vat equipment suppliers,
providers of inventory storage facilities, and process engineering consulting firms).
For prescription drugs, where the safety, purity and efficacy of the product is not
immediately discernable by consumers or payers and therefore must be assured by
manufacturers, public policy in the form of regulation on the conduct of firms likely plays an
even more prominent role in the geography of manufacturing these products. As we describe in
some detail below, the onus on pharmaceutical companies to ensure the quality of prescription
drugs intended for sale in the U.S. market likely places additional incentives on firms to identify
economies of scale and scope related to satisfying these requirements. It might also guide U.S.
policies to prefer the sourcing of drug products from some locations over others. For example, to
the extent selling costs to other geographic jurisdictions are affected by import restrictions,
tariffs, fees and regulatory submission requirements, the increased selling, distribution and
transportation costs may offset declines in unit production costs from external or internal scale
economies or from learning curves, and thereby constrain interregional trade.
III.

INDUSTRY AND PUBLIC POLICIES INCENTIVIZING PHARMACEUTICAL
MANUFACTURING IN FIVE GEOGRAPHIES

III.A

THE U.S. REGULATORY PROCESS TO MARKET GENERIC
PHARMACEUTICALS

14

In the U.S., only prescription drugs and their base ingredients that are manufactured in
accordance with basic quality manufacturing standards can be legally marketed by manufacturers
whether domestic or internationally based. U.S. Federal law, as codified by regulations of the
FDA, oversees the production and sale of prescription drugs in the U.S. These rules mandate that
drugs to be sold in the U.S. must meet legal requirements for safety, and that they have the
quality, purity, identity and strength that they are represented to possess. These rules are the
result of longstanding efforts by the government and private parties to protect the American
public from the consumption of potentially harmful substances. 25, 26
Manufacturing drugs typically involves several actions; all of these activities are
regulated when the product is destined for U.S. sales and consumption. An initial set of steps
involves making essential biochemical ingredients (“raw”, “bulk” or “starting materials”), and
creating “intermediates”. In a second step, these bulk or intermediate materials are combined
into a form that is biologically active but not readily consumable by patients (active
pharmaceutical ingredients, or “APIs”). 27 In the final step, the API is converted into consumable

25

See https://www.fda.gov/media/73549/download
The FDA explains the rationale for its central focus on protecting consumers from drugs that do not meet these
standards on its webpage, titled “Promoting safe and effective drugs for 100 years’, as follows: “At the turn of the
20th century there were no federal regulations to protect the public from dangerous drugs. ‘It was a menacing
market.’….’Products …were at minimum, useless remedies that picked the pocket of the user, but they could also be
downright harmful.’” See https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/histories-product-regulation/promoting-safe-effectivedrugs-100-years
27 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration defines active pharmaceutical ingredient as “Any substance or mixture of
substances intended to be used in the manufacture of a drug (medicinal) product and that, when used in the
production of a drug, becomes an active ingredient of the drug product. Such substances are intended to furnish
pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease
or to affect the structure or function of the body”. See U.S. FDA Drug Definitions, available online at
https://www.registrarcorp.com/fda-drugs/definitions/.
26

15

formulations (final dosage forms, “FDFs”, e.g., tablets, capsules, ointments, also called “drug
products”). 28
To gain approval to market a new molecular entity in the U.S., the sponsor applicant must
file a New Drug Application (“NDA”), a dossier containing extensive clinical trial evidence of
safety and efficacy and documentation of compliance with Current Good Manufacturing Practice
(cGMP) regulations, and obtain approval of the NDA from the FDA. 29 cGMP regulations for
drugs contain minimum requirements for the methods, facilities, and controls used in
manufacturing, processing, and packing of a drug product. 30 The regulations make sure that a
product is safe for use, and that it has the ingredients and strength it claims to have. The
approval process for new and generic drug marketing applications includes a review of the
manufacturer's compliance with the cGMPs. FDA assessors and inspectors determine whether
the firm has the necessary facilities, equipment, and ability to manufacture the drug it intends to
market.
The requirements to obtain approval to market a generic drug in the U.S. are considerably
less onerous than for an NDA. In particular, the generic sponsor’s Abbreviated New Drug

28

Pursuant to 21 USCS § 379g (4), [Title 21. Food and Drugs; Chapter 9. Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act;
General Authority; Fees; Fees Relating to Drugs] the term “final dosage form” means, “with respect to a
prescription drug product, a finished dosage form which is approved for administration to a patient without
substantial further manufacturing (such as capsules, tablets, or lyophilized products before reconstitution”. See
Final Dosage Form Law and Legal Definition, available online at https://definitions.uslegal.com/f/final-dosageform/.
29

FDA's portion of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) is in Title 21, which interprets the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act and related statutes, including the Public Health Service Act. The pharmaceutical or
drug quality-related regulations appear in several parts of Title 21, including sections in parts 1-99, 200-299,
300-499, 600-799, and 800-1299. 21 CFR Part 314 and Part 600 entails the application and licensing submission
requirements for new and generic drug applicants; 21 CFR Part 210 entails current Good Manufacturing
Practice in Manufacturing Processing, packing, or Holding of Drugs; 21 CFR Part 211 entails current Good
Manufacturing Practice for Finished Pharmaceuticals.
30

https://www.fda.gov/drugs/pharmaceutical-quality-resources/current-good-manufacturing-practice-cgmpregulations

16

Application (ANDA) need not duplicate the clinical trial evidence regarding safety and efficacy,
but instead needs only to provide evidence regarding its pharmaceutical and bioequivalence to
the reference drug, as well as manufacturing in conformity with cGMP requirements. This
requires the ANDA API or FDF sponsor to submit details regarding the chemistry,
manufacturing and controls of a drug component. Components of a drug include the API or drug
substance, excipients, and packaging material. When contained in a separate document, such
information is called a Drug Master File (“DMF”). 31 There is no legal or regulatory
requirement to file a DMF. Information usually contained in a DMF can instead be provided in
an NDA or ANDA.
Generic pharmaceutical companies can manufacture their bulk, API and/or FDF in-house,
transfer it to a company affiliate, or outsource it to domestic or ex-U.S. facility contractors.
After having obtained approval from the appropriate national health authorities, foreign generic
companies can export API or FDF to a U.S. affiliate company, contract to sell API/FDF to
generic companies in other countries, or can use their API or FDF for domestic sales of their own
drug product. Traditionally, Europe-based API companies have focused on selling to branded
companies in the U.S. and Western European markets because of the Europeans’ proven
capabilities to manufacture products meeting high quality standards. 32
However, the industry trade press has noted that a changing trend is that far East Asian
API companies are becoming major suppliers to the generic industry manufacturing drugs

31

The information discussed in this paragraph and in the next paragraph is taken in large part from a 44-slide
Powerpoint presentation by Arthur B. Shaw, Ph.D., FDA DMF Expert, FDA Small Business Office Webinar, Feb.
11, 2013, Drug Master Files Under GDUFA: DMF Basics,
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/.../ucm339118.
32 Priyanka Bajpai, “The Changing API Industry”, BioSpectrum Asia Edition, 17 December 2018, page 3. Available
online at https://www.biospectrumasia.com/opinion/33/12303/the-changing-api-industry.html.

17

intended for consumption in Western markets. 33 Based in part on the concern that foreign
manufacturing sites were not being inspected as frequently and as thoroughly as U.S. API and
FDF manufacturing sites, in 2012 Congress passed the Generic Drug User Fee Act (GDUFA)
legislation, authorizing the FDA to collect application and annual fees from ANDA applicants
and ANDA holders. The FDA committed that it would use some of the GDUFA user fee
revenues to inspect foreign sites on a similar schedule to that of domestic sites. 34
Based on data recently made public by the FDA, our prior research has documented that
between 2013 and 2017, the vast majority (almost 90%) of sites manufacturing API for
pharmaceutical products intended for domestic U.S. consumption were located outside the U.S.,
and that a smaller majority (about 60%) of FDF manufacturing sites were foreign, with both API
and FDF facilities becoming increasingly foreign over time. 35,

36

By 2017, the number of

domestic FDF facilities was about two and one-half times larger than the number of domestic
API facilities. However, between 2013 and 2017, the total number of manufacturing facilities
(domestic plus foreign) registered to supply API and FDF to the U.S. market fell, with the U.S.
shedding about 21-22% of FDF and API facilities, foreign suppliers reducing their number of
API facilities approximately half that much (about 10%) and cutting their number of FDF
facilities by a much smaller proportion, about 3%. The larger proportionate reduction in API
than FDF facilities, both domestic and foreign, may be the result of firms’ attempting to capture
scale and scope economies by increasing plant capacity, and for U.S. firms, exploiting
comparative advantages by outsourcing generic drug manufacturing to foreign API and FDF
suppliers. The results of this work suggests the domestic manufacturing of off-patent
33

Ibid., p. 4.
For further discussion, see Ernst R. Berndt, Rena M. Conti and Stephen J. Murphy [2018], op. cit.
35 Ibid., p. 16.
36 Ernst R. Berndt, Rena M. Conti and Stephen J. Murphy [2018], op. cit.
34

18

prescription drugs includes primarily FDF rather than API activities, and that the growing vast
majority of API generic drug manufacturing intended for U.S. consumption is now occurring
abroad. 37
In addition to mainland U.S., four regions - Puerto Rico, India, China and Ireland - have
played historically or are playing currently important roles in the manufacturing of generic
prescription drugs destined for U.S. consumption. In the remainder of this section, we briefly
summarize particularly important public policies and industrial strategies historically adopted in
these four currently prominent biopharmaceutical manufacturing geographies; more detailed
narratives and references are presented in an Appendix. In all of these regions, historical
industry strategy and public policy developments are likely associated with their prominence in
the U.S. generic drug market. Interestingly, many of these roles appear malleable to changes in
tax and industrial policy.
III.B Puerto Rico
For most of the late twentieth century, Puerto Rico was one of the major sources for the
mainland U.S. pharmaceutical market, but since then Puerto Rico’s role as pharmaceutical
supplier to the U.S. has diminished.
Puerto Rico’s role in the U.S. pharmaceutical market can be traced to targeted policies. In
1976, the U.S. Congress created special tax provisions to incentivize firms to locate
manufacturing plants and bring medium to high-skilled jobs to Puerto Rico and other U.S.
possessions. Also known as the Possession Tax Credit, Section 936, 38 this legislation
incentivized the location of pharmaceutical manufacturing in Puerto Rico by granting U.S.-based

37
38

Ibid., p. 18 of 67.
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/936

19

corporations a tax exemption on income earned in Puerto Rico. Subsidiaries of branded and
generic companies could develop a drug in their U.S. research and development facilities,
transfer the patent or proprietary technical knowledge to their wholly owned subsidiaries
operating in Puerto Rico, and claim the income from the drugs as tax-free income. Many
branded pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and medical device companies opened manufacturing
plants in Puerto Rico. Generic pharmaceutical companies also located manufacturing plants in
Puerto Rico.
Congress voted to phase out Section 936 in 1996, citing excessive cost and the very
limited number of U.S. companies that received the tax break. In 2006, the phase-out was
completed, resulting in plant closures and declining employment, and imposing an allegedly
disproportionate tax burden on domestic Puerto Rican companies. Subsequently, the island’s
economy was damaged by passage of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Job Act of 2017, since it targeted
income from “intangible” assets such as pharmaceuticals and medical devices, on which Puerto
Rico has been heavily reliant.

The Puerto Rican economy, including its pharmaceutical

manufacturing industry, was then dealt a further blow in 2017 when the island was hit by the
devastating Hurricane Maria.
III.C India
After gaining Independence in 1947, India pursued the goals of attaining national selfsufficiency in pharmaceutical manufacturing and providing its large population with access to
low-priced medicines. Specifically, India pursued replacing product patent protection with
process patent protection. A byproduct of this national import substitution policy was that India’s
scientific and technology-trained labor force learned how to reverse engineer imported patented
medicines, a skill that became a unique comparative advantage.
20

In an attempt to exploit further scale and scope economies by specializing in the export of
pharmaceuticals, in 1995 India applied for membership in the World Trade Organization. To do
so, in 2005 India needed to comply with the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights, which in turn required India to reintroduce intellectual property protection for
product patents, and recognize both process and product patents for 20 years after issue, with
some qualifications.
In the years that followed, India’s fragmented pharmaceutical manufacturing industry has
bIndia’s export-oriented manufacturers have become more selective in launching FDF products
abroad, focusing more on high margin specialized pharmaceuticals and biologics, and less on
high volume but low margin small molecule oral solid medicines.
III.D China
As a legacy of China’s pre-reform command economy, in the 1970s and 1980s numerous
state-owned enterprises produced tablet dosage forms and distributed them to hospitals, their
primary consumer. Governments or rural collectives took control of all funds, spent them, but
had little incentive to monitor manufactured pharmaceuticals for safety and quality. Potential
external and internal economies of scale and scope were not achieved. Most Chinese
manufacturers were not capable of supplying pharmaceuticals to Western regulated markets,
choosing instead to focus on the immense local patient populations. Many manufacturers relied
on the repetitive production of low value-added bulk pharmaceuticals and imitation drugs and
struggled to survive. In 2004, the Chinese State Food and Drug Administration (“SFDA”) began
an initiative to close down pharmaceutical manufacturers not able to comply with China’s
increasingly stringent current Good Manufacturing Practices requirements for products intended
for domestic consumption.

21

Attracted by China’s comparative advantages in lower costs of manufacturing intermediate chemical goods, lower investment costs, shorter lead times and access to the immense
Asian talent pool, in the last decade foreign pharmaceutical manufacturers have invested in the
Chinese pharmaceutical industry. These investments were initially limited to the outsourcing of
old products and commodity base ingredients involving less sophisticated chemistry. The
Chinese bulk drugs market has evolved rapidly over the years, and today it is large and
diversified with about 7,000 base ingredient manufacturers.
Also plaguing Chinese manufacturing of pharmaceutical products are major issues in
intellectual property rights protection enforcement. This has resulted in a low level of market
protection for domestic branded drugs and allowed established foreign generics and off-patent
brands to dominate the domestic market. It is estimated that 80% of counterfeit products in
China are consumed in rural areas. Moreover, although China officially seeks to move up the
value chain from manufacturing bulk chemicals and intermediate products to producing and
exporting finished drugs, the relatively hefty facility and application fees associated with the
2013 implementation of the U.S.’ Generic Drug User Fee Act may be sufficiently prohibitive to
limit the number of Chinese companies focusing on pursuing the finished drug U.S. market,
instead preferring to invest in the rapidly growing and less regulated domestic Chinese market. 39
III.E. Ireland
Similar in some respects to Puerto Rico in previous eras but unlike India and China, in
Ireland public policies have primarily used corporate tax provisions to incentivize foreign firms
to establish their nominal headquarters in Ireland, even if the multinational firms’ de facto
operations are managed abroad. Outside Ireland, these tax policies are said to incentivize tax

39

Shannon Bennett, “China’s growing presence in the global supply chain”, Chemistry Today, January/February
2012, 30(1), p. 1 of 3.

22

inversions. U.S.-controlled firms represent almost all foreign firms in Ireland. Academic
research has ranked Ireland as the world’s largest tax haven, even larger than the entire
Caribbean tax haven system. However, beginning in 2017 and continuing thereafter, U.S. and
U.K. tax policy countermeasures to stem the flow of Irish tax inversions may have the effect of
mitigating the locating of drug manufacturing in Ireland. 40
The ways by which Irish tax authorities define the base income and profits on which
corporate taxes are assessed (called the base erosion and profit sharing – “BEPS” tools) involve
how depreciation on intangible assets such as intellectual property (“IP”) is treated, and likely
indirectly affect incentives for pharmaceutical firms to locate their manufacturing to Ireland.
Ireland’s main BEPS tools use IP to effect the profit shift from higher-tax jurisdictions to Ireland
via royalty payment schemes. To avoid paying Irish corporate taxes on these shifted profits, the
BEP tools either transfer the profits to traditional tax havens having explicit 0% corporate tax
rates (with Ireland having bilateral tax treaties with more than 70 countries) via royalty payment
schemes, or use intangible capital allowance schemes to write-off the profits against Irish tax.
Not surprisingly, most U.S. multinationals in Ireland operate in the two largest Irish industries
where IP plays a prominent role --- technology (including software) and the life sciences.
Whereas Ireland’s nominal “headline” corporate tax rate is 12.5%, Irelands BEPS tools reduce
Irish tax liabilities to an effective tax rate of 0% to 2.5%, depending on which BEPS tool is used.
By comparison, the average 2001-2006 effective corporate tax rate on pharmaceuticals in the
U.S. was 31.5%.

40

Wikipedia, “Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland”, last updated June 17, 2019, p. 1, 12,13,25-29 of 55.
Available online at
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Corporation_tax_in_the_Republic_of_Ireland

23

The indirect effect of BEPS tools on incentivizing drug manufacturing in Ireland arises
through the tools’ emphasis on job creation (either of Irish employees or of foreign employees to
Ireland). To be eligible to utilize the Irish BEPS tools and their effective tax rates of 0% to
2.5%, multinationals must meet conditions that document and prove a nexus between the IP and
the BEPS tools they implement, such as carrying out a “relevant trade” on the IP in Ireland (e.g.,
manufacturing a patented products), and documenting the level of Irish employment engaged in
the “relevant activities” on the IP. Pharmaceutical companies such as Actavis, Allergan, Endo,
Pfizer, Mallinckrodt, Perrigo, Alkermes, Shire and Horizon either succeeded or at least attempted
to engage in corporate tax inversions. According to one source, since 2008 the pharmaceutical
industry has invested close to €10 billion in manufacturing and research and development in
Ireland.
With these public policies and industry strategies as background, we now move on to a
discussion of our research findings regarding the changing geography of pharmaceuticals
intended for consumption in the U.S., beginning with a brief summary of old and new data
sources.
V.

NEW DATA FROM THE U.S. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

The data underlying our previous research on the changing U.S. and ex-U.S. shares of
API and FDF manufacturing sites for drugs intended for U.S. consumption was based on data
supplied to the FDA by manufacturers through the FDA’s self-identification program, and then
published as site counts by the FDA. The identities of the sites were not available, and the only
brovided to the FDA by manufacturers, but derive from a different related data source, the list of
firms participating in the FDA’s Generic Drug User Fee Act (“GDUFA”) program. 41 FDA

41

These two data sources are discussed in Berndt, Conti and Murphy [2018], op. cit.

24

officials have informed us that the count and identity of manufacturing sites in the two data
sources do not always agree. Since the GDUFA list is accompanied by manufacturers’ actual
GDUFA payments, for purposes of identifying the location of generic drug API and FDF
manufacturing facilities, we consider it more reliable than the voluntary self-identification list. 42
The new data extend our previous research in two directions. First, whereas our earlier
research covered the first five fiscal years of the initial Generic Drug User Fee Program (denoted
GDUFA-I) covering fiscal years 2013-2017, the new data add the first two years of the renewed
user fee program (denoted GDUFA-II), 2018 and 2019, and also provide an alternative count of
API and FDF sites during the 2013-2017 GDUFA-I era. Second, in the data used in our previous
research, we only had information on the counts of API and FDF manufacturing sites U.S. and
ex-U.S., but had no information on its address. The new data list both the name of the
organization remitting the GDUFA fees to the FDA (fees that differ depending on whether it is
an API or FDF site), and the detailed address of the manufacturing site (but not necessarily the
address of organization remitting the user fee). However, the data do not disclose what molecule
formulations are manufactured at the API or FDF site, nor their volumes or value. In addition,
no information is available concerning the corporate ownership of the API or FDF site, or the
ANDA or DMF number under which API or FDF manufacturing is approved for that site.
In terms of geography, we combine data from various countries in the FDA data base into
three global regions: (i) the Americas – U.S., Canada, Mexico, Argentina and Other Americas;
(ii) Europe – France, Germany, Italy, Great Britain, Ireland, Rest of Eastern Europe and Rest of
Western Europe; and (iii) Asia and Rest of World – India, China, Israel, Taiwan and Rest of

42

We are indebted to Andreas Schick and Qiyu Liu from the FDA for making this data available to us in Excel files.

25

World. For each of these three global regions, we also provide site counts annually for each of
the component countries. For the U.S., we utilize the FDA’s definition of 19 regions, with the
states/districts/territories in each FDA region following FDA conventions. The states included in
each of the 19 FDA U.S. regions are listed in notes to Tables 3 and 4. 43 We also combine the 19
FDA regions into four aggregated domestic geographic areas: Southeast (ATL, FLA, NOL,
SJN), Other East (BLT, NWE, NWJ, NYK, PHI), Central (CHI, CIN, DAL, DET, KAN, MIN),
FDF manufacturing sites, comparing and updating findings based on the new FDA data with
those published in our prior research. Next, we disaggregate the ex-U.S. data geographically into
three global regions and their component countries. Then, we disaggregate the U.S. domestic
data into the 19 FDA regions and four geographic areas. Finally, we discuss limitations and
caveats to our FDA data and analyses. Most notably, the results we present here are simply
counts of sites, and do not weight by quantities produced at these sites. We do not have data on
quantities of the drugs produced at these sites and as far as we are aware the FDA does not have
quantity data. 44
VI.A

U.S. and ex-U.S. Generic Drug Manufacturing Site Counts: Comparisons With
and Updates to Previous Research

In Table 1 we report the number and share of API manufacturing facilities by global
region, annually 2013 through 2019, as recorded in the FDA’s GDUFA facility payments files.

43

The FDA defines its regions as follows: ATL (Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina); BLT (Maryland,
District of Columbia); CHI (Illinois); CIN (Kentucky, Ohio); DAL (Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas); DEN (Colorado,
New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming); DET (Indiana, Michigan); FLA (Florida); KAN (Iowa, Kansas, Missouri,
Nebraska); LOS (Arizona, Southern California); MIN (Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin); NWE
(Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont); NWJ (New Jersey); NOL
(Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee); NYK (New York); PHI (Delaware, Pennsylvania); SAN (Northern
California, Hawaii, Nevada); SJN (Puerto Rico, US Virgin Islands); SEA (Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon,
Washington). The list of states covered by each of the 19 FDA US regions is taken from https://www.fda.gov/aboutfda/contact-ora/ora-district-directors.
44 https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-shortages/report-drug-shortages-root-causes-and-potential-solutions

26

In Table 2 we report the corresponding regional number and share of global FDF manufacturing
facility sites. Our previously reported research was based instead on voluntary self-identification
program files. Comparisons of number of U.S. and ex-U.S. manufacturing facilities in the
overlapping 2013-2017 years reveals that the number of API and FDF sites in Tables 1 and 2
below is generally slightly greater than those reported in Table 2 of our previously published
research, although time trends are similar. 45 Apparently the FDA can identify more sites using
data on actual payment of mandated GDUFA fees than by relying on its voluntary selfidentification programs.
For API sites, as seen in the bottom rows of the left panel of columns in Table 1, over the
2013-2019 time period the number of U.S. API facilities has been falling in all years except
2014; by 2019 at 118 the number of API sites is about 10% smaller than the 131 sites in 2013.
The total number of ex-U.S. API sites has also been falling in all years except 2014, from 792 in
2013 to 762 in 2019 – a decline of about 4%, smaller than for the number of U.S. API sites. 46
Globally, the decline in the number of facilities producing API intended for the U.S. market has
declined by just under 5%. As seen in the corresponding bottom rows of the right panel of Table
1, the U.S. share of global API sites has fallen very slightly from 14.19% in 2013 to 13.41% in
2019, while the ex-U.S. share has grown correspondingly.
Trends in the global location of FDF manufacturing differ considerably from those for
API, as seen in the bottom rows of in the left panel of Table 2. Specifically, although vacillating
slightly between adjacent years, the number of U.S. FDF facilities has remained unchanged at

45

See Table 2 on page 17 of 67 in Berndt, Conti and Murphy [2018], op. cit.
The anomalous 2014 increase in U.S. and ex-U.S. API sites could reflect that fact that the FDA changed its
ANDA filing specifications from requiring single exhibit batch stability data to three exhibit stability data, effective
for all ANDA filings after July 2014, thereby creating a temporary pre-July 2014 surge. See IQVIA Institute for
Human Data Science, U.S. Generics Market -- Evolution of Indian Players, February 2019, p. 4.

46

27

288 between 2013 and 2019, while the number of ex-U.S. FDF facility sites increased about 12%
from 386 in 2013 to 433 in 2019. Thus, as seen in the bottom rows of the right panel in Table 2,
the U.S. share of global FDF facilities fell from 42.73% in 2013 to 39.94% in 2019, whereas the
ex-U.S. share increased from 57.27% to 60.06%. While the U.S. share of global FDF facility
sites is about three times larger than the U.S. share of API facility sites (about 42% vs. 14%), the
U.S. FDF share has been falling more rapidly than the U.S. API share.
In summary, for both API and FDF, the majority of sites manufacturing pharmaceuticals
intended for the U.S. market are sourced ex-U.S. Prescription pharmaceuticals are generally not
manufactured in America, although the U.S. share is larger for FDF than API sites. These 20132019 U.S. and ex-U.S. trends essentially continue the 2013-2017 trends reported in our previous
research.
VI.B. Decomposition of ex-U.S. Generic Manufacturing Sites into National and Global
Regional Location Counts
Entirely new research findings presented in Tables 1 and 2 concern the national and
regional composition of global API and FDF manufacturing facilities. As seen in Table 1, over
the entire 2013-2019 time frame, both India and China had more API sites than did the U.S.;
while the U.S. averaged about 125 API sites (about 14% of all global API sites), India averaged
almost twice that (238, about 26%) and China about 30% more than the U.S. (164, about 18% of
global total).
In terms of trends, the number of API sites in India was relatively stable 2013-2017, then
increased slightly in 2018 and 2019. The number of API sites in China grew 2013-2016, peaked
in 2016, and then fell substantially.

India appears to have specialized in API manufacturing

more than China, although both countries extensively export API to the U.S. When summed
28

over India and China, between 2013 and 2019 their combined share of global API sites increased
from 42.37% to 45.12%. In comparison, U.S. dependence on API imports from sites in other
countries with whom international trade negotiations are currently or could soon be underway -Great Britain, Ireland, Canada and Mexico – are very modest relative to India and China.
The number and shares of FDF sites in India and China relative to those in the U.S. are
very different from API facilities (see Table 2). Although growing in numbers and shares over
time, FDF sites in India averaged about 150 (21%) over the 2013-2019 time period, slightly
more than half those in the U.S., the latter remaining constant at just under 290 (about 40% of
global). While the Chinese share of global API sites was falling from 19% in 2016 to 17% in
2019, the Chinese share of global FDF sites was smaller but increasing steadily, from five to
eight percent between 2013 and 2019. India’s portfolio of API and FDF sites is larger and more
balanced than that of China, but the smaller FDF share in China is growing very rapidly. China
appears to be moving into higher- valued FDF production, and away from the more commoditylike API manufacturing. India is also increasing its number of FDF sites, with its API site
numbers reflecting stability. As the share of FDF sites is increasing in India and China, it is
falling in the U.S., but is stable in Europe.
For both API and FDF, the three countries with the largest number of facility sites are the
U.S., India and China. Several countries that together comprise the rest of Western Europe have
the fourth largest number of both API and FDF sites at about 90 (10%) and 50 (7%),
respectively. The fifth largest API country is Italy (70, just under 8%) while the fifth largest
FDF nation is Germany (about 23, 4% of global). In terms of the British Isles, Great Britain
(comprised of England, Scotland and Wales) has about twice as many API sites as Ireland (15 vs.
7), and a slightly greater number of FDF sites (8 vs. 6), with neither displaying a clear trend over

29

time. There are twice as many FDF sites in Canada as API facilities, while the number of FDF
sites in Mexico is very small (three or four). Very few FDF sites in the Brexit-related countries
(Great Britain and Ireland) export to the U.S. – between five and seven sites.
In summary, currently a substantial share of API and FDF sites in India and China are
sources for generic drugs intended for U.S. consumption. By comparison, the number of API
and FDF sites in Canada and Mexico, and in the Brexit-related countries - Great Britain and
Ireland - is rather limited.
VI.C Evidence on the Location of Domestic Manufacturing Sites
The number and share of domestic API facilities, annually 2013-2019, by FDA region are
reported in Table 3, while the corresponding number and regional shares of domestic FDF totals
are presented in Table 4.
In terms of sheer size, throughout the 2013 – 2019 time period, the Central region had the
largest number of API sites, while the West region had the smallest number (Table 3). By 2019,
at 59, the eastern half of the country (Southeast plus Other East) had exactly the same number of
API facilities as did the western half of the U.S. (Central plus West). For FDF facilities (Table
4), at about 60% the eastern half of the country (Southeast plus Other East) dominates the
western half (Central plus West). Among FDFs, the Other East region had the largest number of
facilities, while the West had the smallest number.
The burden of the 2013-2019 decline in the total number of U.S. API sites (the first panel
in Table 3) was borne entirely by two regions – the Central region that lost ten sites, and the
Southeast region that lost nine. Within the Central region, the local “losers” were DAL
(Arkansas, Oklahoma and Texas) who lost four sites, DET (Indiana, Michigan) losing three sites,
MIN (Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota and Wisconsin) losing two sites, and KAN (Iowa,
30

Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska) who lost one API site. There were no “winners” within the
Central region.
Local API “losers” within the Southeast region included SJN (Puerto Rico and the U.S.
Virgin Islands) that declined sharply from six API sites in 2013 to only one in 2019, NOL
(Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi and Tennessee) who lost four sites (from nine to five), and
ATL (Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina) who remained the largest local region within
Southeast but lost one API facility – declining from 15 in 2013 to 14 in 2019. FLA (Florida) was
the lone “winner” in the Southeast region, increasing from zero API sites in 2013 to one in 2019.
Notably, while the API “losers” were for the most part regions of the U.S. experiencing the
fastest overall population growth, they were also those most subject to supply interruptions from
severe weather storms. Perhaps not surprisingly given our discussion of law changes above,
Puerto Rico is also noted to be a loser of manufacturing sites.
The U.S. total number of FDF sites at 288 was unchanged between 2013 and 2019, but
this masked a changing domestic production composition (Table 4). As with the number of
APIs, the Southeast region was the largest “loser” in number of FDF sites, falling 12% from 66
FDF sites in 2013 to 58 facilities in 2019. Within the Southeast, FLA (Florida) took the largest
hit, falling from 19 to ten sites between 2013 and 2019, while NOL (Alabama, Louisiana,
Mississippi and Tennessee) declined from nine to six. ATL (Georgia, North Carolina and South
Carolina) retained its position as the largest local region within the Southeast, increasing the
number of FDF sites from 29 to 31 in 2013-2019. Defying the expected impacts of the repeal of
the pharmaceutical friendly Section 936 tax provision, in the SJN region (Puerto Rico plus the
U.S. Virgin Islands) the number of FDF sites actually increased, from nine in 2013 to eleven in
2019, but only after falling from a peak of fifteen in 2016.

31

The three other large U.S. regions (Other East, Central and West) offset declines in the
number of FDF facilities in the Southeast, with the Central region increasing in number from 70
to 74 FDF sites, the West from 36 to 39 FDF facilities, and the most populous Other East region
increasing by but one facility, from 116 to 117 between 2013 and 2019, albeit experiencing both
increases and decreases in adjacent years during the 2013-2019 time frame. Within the Central
region, the FDF “winners” were KAN (Iowa, Kansas, Missouri and Nebraska) who increased
from nine to twelve facilities, and MIN (Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota and Wisconsin)
from five to eight sites. Within the West region, the largest local FDF “winner” was DEN
(Colorado, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming) that increased from eleven to fourteen facility
sites. The most populous local region within the West – LOS (Arizona and Southern California)
actually lost one FDF site, falling from 24 in 2013 to 23 in 2019.
In summary, declines in API and FDF site numbers have been disproportionately large in
weather storm-sensitive and “Rust belt” states, and in the case of FDF sites, perhaps surprisingly
small in Puerto Rico. Specifically, the number of API manufacturing facilities operating in the
U.S. has been declining since 2013, with the decrease being particularly evident in the weather
sensitive Southeast (Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands, and Georgia, North Carolina and
South Carolina), the “Rust Belt” states (Indiana, Michigan) and weather sensitive (Arkansas,
Oklahoma and Texas) portions of the Central region. Although it is the Southeast that has also
borne the greatest loss of FDF facilities, within the Southeast it is FLA (Florida) and not SJN
(Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands) that has experienced the brunt of the loss in FDF
manufacturing activities. Other regions of the U.S. (Central, West and Other East) have
increased their number of active FDF manufacturing facilities. Moreover, the manufacturing

32

trajectories of API in the U.S. differ considerably from those for FDF, with the former in
aggregate decline and the latter in aggregate being relatively stable.
VI.D. Limitations to FDA Data and Caveats to our Analyses
There are a number of important limitations to the research reported here. Among the
data limitations, it is particularly important to recognize that while we utilize annual 2013-2019
FDA data on the number of API and FDF manufacturing sites by geography, we have no
information regarding the volumes or dollar values of pharmaceuticals produced at those sites,
the identities of molecules produced, the formulation types manufactured at the sites (oral,
injectable/infusible or other), or corporate ownership relationships among the sites. Moreover,
since our annual data begin in 2013, we are unable to examine perhaps much larger trend
changes in the geography of pharmaceutical manufacturing that predate 2013. 47 Our data
emanate from the Generic Drug User Fee payment files at the FDA, and are therefore confined to
the manufacturing of prescription pharmaceutical generic drugs intended for consumption in the
U.S. We do not have information on the manufacturing location of branded, non-generic drugs,
nor on over-the-counter non-prescription formulations.
In addition to these data limitations, while our findings document changing trends in the
location of API and FDF manufacturing facilities based on data newly available from the FDA,

47

Substantial changes in the ex-US geographic sources of imported active pharmaceutical ingredients appear to have
occurred in the three years prior to 2013, the beginning of our study period. For example, a 2011 survey conducted
by the US Department of Commerce of domestic pharmaceutical manufacturers and their reliance on non-US
suppliers of active pharmaceutical ingredients concluded that in 2010 the top five countries supplying the US were
Italy, India, Germany, China and France (actually, Puerto Rico was first, with the study considering Puerto Rico as
being “outside the United States”); within the continental US, pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities were
concentrated in California, New York, North Carolina and Ohio. See U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
Industry and Security, Office of Technology Evaluation, Reliance on Foreign Sourcing in the Healthcare and Public
Health (HPH) Sector: Pharmaceuticals, Medical Devices and Surgical Equipment, Washington DC, December
2011, pages 5, 23 and 35 of 107. Available online at
https://www.hida.org/App_Themes/Member/docs/GA/Industry-Issues/Emergency-Pandemic/Dept-CommerceStudy_Healthcare-Foreign-Sourcing.pdf.

33

these data are unable to inform reasons and factors underlying those trends. In Section III above
we have summarized historical industry strategy and public policy developments in four
prominent manufacturing geographies that likely are associated with these trends; in the
Appendix to this manuscript we present a more detailed narrative of these developments, and
provide references. Future work meriting a high priority would empirically investigate the
levels and trends we describe in the results and link them more directly to the effects of firms
aiming to capture internal scale and scope economies in manufacturing, gains from tax rules,
attempts to reduce GDUFA-related user fees, and/or a number of other factors such as more
intense monitoring of compliance with cGMP standards by various regulatory authorities
discussed in Section III briefly and in more depth in the Appendix.
VII.

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AND IMPLICATIONS

The goal of this research has been to document the changing geography of generic drug
manufacturing between 2013 and 2019 among those pharmaceuticals intended to be consumed in
the U.S.
What we find is that even in an era where the number of generic drug prescriptions
dispensed in the U.S. grew by about 15%, 48 the global total number of API sites fell by about
5% and the global total of FDF sites increased by just over 5%. This suggests that generic
manufacturing plant sites have been expanding their capacities and achieving scale economies.
Moreover, API intended for the U.S. market is overwhelmingly manufactured ex-U.S.
The ex-U.S. share has been relatively stable at about 87%, with the ex-US API sources
dominated by India (about 26% of global) and China (18%). When summed over India and
China, their combined share increased from about 42% to 45%. Meanwhile, API shares for the

48

IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science [2018], op. cit., pp. 10-14.

34

4th and 5th ranked countries – Italy and Germany -- fell slightly to about 8% and 4%,
respectively.
In terms of FDF production, unlike for API the U.S. is still the largest supply source
(averaging about 41% of global sites), India is second (growing to about 21%), while China is
third (with share growing from 5% to 8%). As the share of global FDF sites has increased in
India and China, it fell slightly in the U.S., but was stable in Europe where Germany and Italy
have a combined share of about 6%.
Within the U.S., the total number of API sites declined by about 10% between 2013 and
2019, with the decline borne entirely by two FDA regions – the Central region that lost ten sites
(four in DAL and three in DET) and the Southeast region that lost nine (with five being in SJN
and four in NOL). Thus, API “losers” in the U.S. were regions vulnerable to supply
interruptions from severe weather and the “Rust Belt” states.
Although the total number of FDF sites in the U.S. was unchanged between 2013 and
2019, the Southeast region lost the most share, particularly FLA and NOL, even as the Carolinas
and George experienced a slight increase, and SJN vacillated, growing in 2013-2016, but then
falling to 2019 after Hurricane Maria.
Because of the U.S.’ substantial reliance on imported API and FDF from India and
China, current bilateral international trade negotiations with either of them and between them
could have a material impact on domestic prices of generic drugs. 49 By comparison, the very

49

Subhadip Sircar and Shruti Srivastata, “India Increases Tariffs on U.S. Goods as Trade War Heats Up”,
Bloomberg News, June 16, 2019. Available online at https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-06-16/
india-imposes-tariffs-on-u-s-goods-as-global-trade-war-heats-up; Yanzhong Huang, “U.S. Dependence on
Pharmaceutical Products from China”, Council on Foreign Relations Blog Post, August 14, 2019. Available
online at https://www.cfr.org/blog/us-dependence-pharmaceutical-products-china. “China’s new drug law may
open door for Indian generic medicines: Report”, The Economic Times, August 27, 2019. Available online at
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/healthcare/biotech/pharmaceuticals/chinas-new-drug-law-mayopen-door-for-indian-generic-medicines-report/articleshow/70864639.cms

35

limited imports from the UK, Ireland, Mexico and Canada suggest that the Brexit and U.S.Mexico-Canada trade negotiations will have at most modest impacts on domestic generic drug
prices. 50 Military engagements could also impact domestic availability of generic drugs, but
currently few Russian and Mideastern sites import API and FDF into the U.S., although U.S.
dependence on Chinese manufacturing of antibiotics is substantial. 51 Global climate change
patterns and severe weather events such as flooding could potentially affect pharmaceutical
supplies. Within the U.S. we find there has been a substantial reduction in the number of API
and FDF sites in severe weather vulnerable regions such as the Southeast and Central U.S.
The implications of our research regarding the U.S.’ dependence and potential
vulnerability to foreign pharmaceutical supplies highlights a significant data limitation of this
research, a limitation that has also been exposed as the FDA has sought to deal with drug
shortages over the last decade: We simply do not know, as one researcher stated, “Who Makes
This Drug?”52 Because of the increasingly common industry practice of outsourcing
manufacturing to contract manufacturing organizations and the failure of firms promptly to
notify the FDA or the public of product quality issues and product discontinuation, according to
this researcher,
“Even FDA can’t easily determine whether a drug is made by the ANDA sponsor or a
contract manufacturer…FDA maintains records that identify which manufacturers are
producing generic drugs for the US market. However, these data aren’t maintained in a
format that makes it possible for the agency to quickly distinguish between ANDA
holders and contract manufacturers of fill and finish products or base ingredients. These
records aren’t available for public scrutiny….The agency generally treats non-public
business relationships as confidential commercial or financial information, exempting it
from public disclosure.”53
50

Eric Palmer, “PCI Pharma Services takes steps to prepare for Brexit”, FiercePharma, August 28, 2019. Available
online at https://www.fiercepharma.com/manufacturing/pci-pharma-services-takes-steps-to-prepare-...
51 Huang [2019], op. cit.
52 Rena M. Conti, “Who Makes This Drug?”, The Cancer Letter, 40(1), January 3, 2014. Available from
www.cancerletter.com.
53 Ibid., pp. 3-4 of 14.

36

Although the API and FDF manufacturing site data made available to us by the FDA
identify the address of the site and the organization paying the Generic Drug User Fee, no
information is available identifying the products actually manufactured at the site nor their
volumes. As the FDA’s Drug Shortage Task Force simply stated, “FDA’s data do not capture
how much of a drug is produced at each manufacturing facility.”

54

Even the FDA data revealing

results of FDA manufacturing site inspections “does not list the products being made at the
facilities”. 55 According to the FDA, “…the pharmaceutical industry regards the location of their
manufacturing facilities as confidential commercial information and claim that keeping this
information private is a matter of supply security, e.g. to prevent theft or diversion attempts.”56
Moreover, many generic drugs whose ANDA has been FDA approved are not marketed.
For example, as the FDA acknowledged in its Task Force study of Drug Shortages,
“FDA analysis shows that as of June 2019, for all generic drugs with approved
applications, 39 percent were observed to be marketed, and the remaining 61 percent
were approved but not marketed.”57
The phenomenon of FDA-approved generic drugs not actually being marketed is
occurring even for the FDA’s prioritized “first generics” – those drugs approved by the FDA as
the first competitor to a brand that has lost marketing exclusivity, and considered by the FDA to
be a public health priority bringing new competition and savings.

A 2019 study published by

the Association for Accessible Medicines – the U.S.’ generic drug trade association – concluded

54

U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Drug Shortages: Root Causes and Potential Solutions – A Report by the
Drug Shortages Task Force, October 2019, p. 118, footnote 19.
55 Ibid., p. 28, footnote 18.
56 Ibid., p. 45
57 Ibid., pp. 31-32. Notably, these non-marketed data “exclude products for which all applications are listed in the
discontinued section of Orange Book, as they have effectively left the market and are no longer available.” (footnote
29, p. 32).

37

that “…fewer than half of the first generics approved by FDA since 2016 are commercially
available to patients”. 58
In summary, while we believe this research contributes substantively to our
understanding of where in the globe generic drug API and FDF manufacturing facilities are
located and how that is changing, a major gap in our knowledge meriting high research priority
awaits data availability linking site locations to products actually being manufactured, and their
volumes. We leave it to future empirical work to further empirically investigate the associative
and causal relationships between country-specific policies and drug manufacturing location.
Another illuminating empirical exercise would be to undertake a similar descriptive examination
of drug manufacturing among products destined for European Union consumption.

58

Access Denied: Why New Generics Are Not Reaching America’s Seniors, Association for Accessible Medicines,
2019.

38

Table 1 - Number and Share of FDA API Facility Sites by Global Region, Annually, 2013-2019

Global Regions

2013

Number of API Facilities by Global Regions
2014
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

2013

2014

Americas
USA
CAN
MEX
ARG
Other
Sub-total

131
15
11
5
5
167

137
16
12
5
5
175

124
16
10
5
5
160

123
17
11
4
5
160

116
16
13
5
6
156

120
17
12
5
6
160

118
13
10
5
5
151

14.19
1.63
1.19
0.54
0.54
18.09

14.44
1.69
1.26
0.53
0.53
18.44

13.38
1.73
1.08
0.54
0.54
17.26

13.47
1.86
1.2
0.44
0.55
17.52

29
37

30
40

28
38
68

26
37
67

24
36
67

26
34
70

16

14

3.14
4.01
7.91
1.73
0.65
3.58
10.29
31.31

3.16
4.21
7.48
1.69
0.63
3.06
10.64
30.87

3.02
4.1
7.34
1.73
0.76
3.67
9.92
30.53

Europe
FRA
GER
ITA

Share of API Facilities by Global Regions
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

12.89
1.78
1.44
0.56
0.67
17.33

13.26
1.88
1.33
0.55
0.66
17.68

13.41
1.48
1.14
0.57
0.57
17.16

2.85
4.05
7.34
1.75
0.77
3.61
9.86
30.23

2.67
4
7.44
1.56
0.78
3.44
9.89
29.78

2.87
3.76
7.73
1.55
0.55
3.31
10.17
29.94

2.61
3.75
7.5
1.7
0.8
3.3
10.34
30

73

71

16
6
29
101
293

16

14

7

7

7

5

Rest - Eastern
Rest - Western
Sub-total

16
6
33
95
289

34
92
283

33
90
276

31
89
268

30
92
271

23
33
66
15
7
29
91
264

Asia Rest - World
IND
CHN
ISR
TWN
Rest - World
Sub-total

232
159
19
7
50
467

238
167
18
8
50
481

235
170
18
8
53
484

231
174
16
8
48
477

238
169
15
8
46
476

244
159
8
15
48
474

249
148
7
16
45
465

25.14
17.23
2.06
0.76
5.42
50.6

25.08
17.6
1.9
0.84
5.27
50.68

25.35
18.34
1.94
0.86
5.72
52.21

25.3
19.06
1.75
0.88
5.26
52.25

26.44
18.78
1.67
0.89
5.11
52.89

26.96
17.57
0.88
1.66
5.3
52.38

28.3
16.82
0.8
1.82
5.11
52.84

Total US
Total Ex-US
Total Global

131
792
923

137
812
949

124
803
927

123
790
913

116
784
900

120
785
905

118
762
880

14.19
85.81
100

14.44
85.56
100

13.38
86.62
100

13.47
86.53
100

12.89
87.11
100

13.26
86.74
100

13.41
86.59
100

GBR
IRL

Data Source: We are indebted to Dr. Andreas Schick and Qiyu Liu at the US Food and Drug Administration for making this data available to us in Excel files.

Table 2- Number and Share of FDA FDF Facility Sites by Global Region, Annually, 2013-2019

Global Regions

2013

Number of FDF Facilities by Global Regions
2014
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

2013

Share of FDF Facilities by Global Regions
2014
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

Americas
USA
CAN
MEX
ARG
Other
Sub-total

288
34
4
3
4
333

283
30
3
3
4
323

285
30
3
3
4
325

278
31
4
3
3
319

288
30
4
3
2
327

305
30
4
3
2
344

288
23
3
2
2
318

42.73
5.04
0.59
0.45
0.59
49.41

40.84
4.33
0.43
0.43
0.58
46.61

40.03
4.21
0.42
0.42
0.56
45.65

39.6
4.42
0.57
0.43
0.43
45.44

40.51
4.22
0.56
0.42
0.28
45.99

41.44
4.08
0.54
0.41
0.27
46.74

39.94
3.19
0.42
0.28
0.28
44.11

Rest - Eastern
Rest - Western
Sub-total

9
25
22
8
6
19
40
129

12
28
24
10
5
21
42
142

12
31
22
6
7
21
45
144

15
29
21
8
5
19
45
142

12
28
22
7
4
16
49
138

11
23
22
7
4
17
50
134

12
23
22
5
5
18
51
136

1.34
3.71
3.26
1.19
0.89
2.82
5.93
19.14

1.73
4.04
3.46
1.44
0.72
3.03
6.06
20.49

1.69
4.35
3.09
0.84
0.98
2.95
6.32
20.22

2.14
4.13
2.99
1.14
0.71
2.71
6.41
20.23

1.69
3.94
3.09
0.98
0.56
2.25
6.89
19.41

1.49
3.13
2.99
0.95
0.54
2.31
6.79
18.21

1.66
3.19
3.05
0.69
0.69
2.5
7.07
18.86

Asia Rest - World
IND
CHN
ISR
TWN
Rest - World
Sub-total

136
36
7
11
22
212

141
43
6
14
24
228

153
43
7
15
25
243

149
51
7
14
20
241

156
51
7
15
17
246

160
54
7
18
19
258

163
59
18
20
267

20.18
5.34
1.04
1.63
3.26
31.45

20.35
6.2
0.87
2.02
3.46
32.9

21.49
6.04
0.98
2.11
3.51
34.13

21.23
7.26
1
1.99
2.85
34.33

21.94
7.17
0.98
2.11
2.39
34.6

21.74
7.34
0.95
2.45
2.58
35.05

22.61
8.18
0.97
2.5
2.77
37.03

Total US
Total Ex-US
Total Global

288
386
674

283
410
693

285
427
712

278
424
702

288
423
711

305
431
736

288
433
721

42.73
57.27
100

40.84
59.16
100

40.03
59.97
100

39.6
60.4
100

40.51
59.49
100

41.44
58.56
100

39.94
60.06
100

Europe
FRA
GER
ITA
GBR
IRL

7

Data Source: We are indebted to Dr. Andreas Schick and Qiyu Liu at the US Food and Drug Administration for making this data available to us in Excel files.

Table 3 - Number and Share of FDA API Facility Sites by US FDA Region Annually, 2013-2019

FDA Regions

2013

Number of API Facilities by Domestic Region
2014
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

2013

Share of API Facilities by Domestic Region
2014
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

Southeast
ATL
FLA
NOL
SJN
Sub-total

15
0
9
6
30

17
0
10
5
32

15
0
9
5
29

14
1
8
4
27

15
1
8
2
26

15
1
7
3
26

14
1
5
1
21

11.45
0
6.87
4.58
22.9

12.41
0
7.3
3.65
23.36

12.1
0
7.26
4.03
23.39

11.38
0.81
6.5
3.25
21.94

12.93
0.86
6.9
1.72
22.41

12.5
0.83
5.83
2.5
21.66

11.86
0.85
4.24
0.85
17.8

Other East
BLT
NWE
NWJ
NYK
PHI
Sub-total

2
6
11
5
10
34

2
6
14
6
12
40

2
4
15
5
12
38

1
4
13
5
10
33

1
4
12
5
11
33

1
4
12
7
11
35

1
4
12
8
13
38

1.53
4.58
8.4
3.82
7.63
25.96

1.46
4.38
10.22
4.38
8.76
29.2

1.61
3.23
12.1
4.03
9.68
30.65

0.81
3.25
10.57
4.07
8.13
26.83

0.86
3.45
10.34
4.31
9.48
28.44

0.83
3.33
10
5.83
9.17
29.16

0.85
3.39
10.17
6.78
11.02
32.21

Central
CHI
CIN
DAL
DET
KAN
MIN
Sub-total

10
10
7
9
13
8
57

13
10
6
6
11
7
53

10
10
5
5
10
6
46

11
9
5
6
11
6
48

11
8
4
5
11
6
45

11
10
4
5
12
6
48

10
10
3
6
12
6
47

7.63
7.63
5.34
6.87
9.92
6.11
43.5

9.49
7.3
4.38
4.38
8.03
5.11
38.69

8.06
8.06
4.03
4.03
8.06
4.84
37.08

8.94
7.32
4.07
4.88
8.94
4.88
39.03

9.48
6.9
3.45
4.31
9.48
5.17
38.79

9.17
8.33
3.33
4.17
10
5
40

8.47
8.47
2.54
5.08
10.17
5.08
39.81

West
DEN
LOS
SAN
SEA
Sub-total

4
6
0
0
10

4
7
0
1
12

4
7
0
0
11

6
8
0
1
15

5
7
0
0
12

4
7
0
0
11

4
8
0
0
12

3.05
4.58
0
0
7.63

2.92
5.11
0
0.73
8.76

3.23
5.65
0
0
8.88

4.88
6.5
0
0.81
12.19

4.31
6.03
0
0
10.34

3.33
5.83
0
0
9.16

3.39
6.78
0
0
10.17

131
6.89

137
7.21

124
6.53

123
6.47

116
6.11

120
6.32

118
6.21

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

Total Domestic
Domestic Mean Per Region

Data Source: We are indebted to Dr. Andreas Schick and Qiyu Liu at the US Food and Drug Administration for making this data available to us in Excel files.
Notes: The states/districts/territories in each FDA region are as follows: ATL (Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina); BLT (Maryland, District of Columbia);
CHI (Illinois); CIN (Kentucky, Ohio); DAL (Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas); DEN (Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming); DET (Indiana, Michigan); FLA (Florida); KAN
(Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska); LOS (Arizona, Southern California); MIN (Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin); NWE (Connecticut, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont); NWJ (New Jersey); NOL (Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee); NYK (New York); PHI (Delaware,
Pennsylvania); SAN (Northern California, Hawaii, Nevada); SJN (Puerto Rico, US Virgin Islands); SEA (Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington). Data Source:
The list of states covered by each of the 19 FDA US regions is taken from https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/contact-ora/ora-district-directors.

Table 4 - Number and Share of FDF Facility Sites by US FDA Region Annually, 2013-2019

FDA Regions

2013

Number Of FDF Facilities by Domestic Region
2014
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

2013

Share of FDF Facilities by Domestic Region
2014
2015
2016
2017

2018

2019

Southeast
ATL
FLA
NOL
SJN
Sub-total

29
19
9
9
66

29
17
9
9
64

30
18
6
10
64

31
17
8
15
71

27
17
7
11
62

35
17
7
10
69

31
10
6
11
58

10.07
6.6
3.13
3.13
22.93

10.25
6.01
3.18
3.18
22.62

10.53
6.32
2.11
3.51
22.47

11.15
6.12
2.88
5.4
25.55

9.38
5.9
2.43
3.82
21.53

11.48
5.57
2.3
3.28
22.63

10.76
3.47
2.08
3.82
20.13

Other East
BLT
NWE
NWJ
NYK
PHI
Sub-total

8
12
42
36
18
116

9
10
42
35
18
114

10
10
42
33
18
113

9
10
42
30
14
105

9
11
47
32
20
119

9
12
46
37
20
124

9
9
44
38
17
117

2.78
4.17
14.58
12.5
6.25
40.28

3.18
3.53
14.84
12.37
6.36
40.28

3.51
3.51
14.74
11.58
6.32
39.66

3.24
3.6
15.11
10.79
5.04
37.78

3.13
3.82
16.32
11.11
6.94
41.32

2.95
3.93
15.08
12.13
6.56
40.65

3.13
3.13
15.28
13.19
5.9
40.63

Central
CHI
CIN
DAL
DET
KAN
MIN
Sub-total

15
14
12
15
9
5
70

13
14
12
17
8
6
70

13
14
12
16
9
7
71

11
13
11
16
9
7
67

11
13
12
15
9
7
67

12
13
13
15
11
8
72

14
15
10
15
12
8
74

5.21
4.86
4.17
5.21
3.13
1.74
24.32

4.59
4.95
4.24
6.01
2.83
2.12
24.74

4.56
4.91
4.21
5.61
3.16
2.46
24.91

3.96
4.68
3.96
5.76
3.24
2.52
24.12

3.82
4.51
4.17
5.21
3.13
2.43
23.27

3.93
4.26
4.26
4.92
3.61
2.62
23.6

4.86
5.21
3.47
5.21
4.17
2.78
25.7

West
DEN
LOS
SAN
SEA
Sub-total

11
24
0
1
36

12
22
0
1
35

13
22
0
2
37

14
20
0
1
35

14
24
0
2
40

13
25
0
2
40

14
23
0
2
39

3.82
8.33
0
0.35
12.5

4.24
7.77
0
0.35
12.36

4.56
7.72
0
0.7
12.98

5.04
7.19
0
0.36
12.59

4.86
8.33
0
0.69
13.88

4.26
8.2
0
0.66
13.12

4.86
7.99
0
0.69
13.54

288
15.16

283
14.89

285
15

278
14.63

288
15.16

305
16.05

288
15.16

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

100
5.26

Total Domestic
Domestic Mean Per Region

Data Source: We are indebted to Dr. Andreas Schick and Qiyu Liu at the US Food and Drug Administration for making this data available to us in Excel files.
Notes: The states/districts/territories in each FDA region are as follows: ATL (Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina); BLT (Maryland, District of Columbia);
CHI (Illinois); CIN (Kentucky, Ohio); DAL (Arkansas, Oklahoma, Texas); DEN (Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming); DET (Indiana, Michigan); FLA (Florida);
KAN (Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska); LOS (Arizona, Southern California); MIN (Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin); NWE (Connecticut,
Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont); NWJ (New Jersey); NOL (Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee); NYK (New York); PHI
(Delaware, Pennsylvania); SAN (Northern California, Hawaii, Nevada); SJN (Puerto Rico, US Virgin Islands); SEA (Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington).
Data Source: The list of states covered by each of the 19 FDA US regions is taken from https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/contact-ora/ora-district-directors.

Appendix:

Industry Strategy and Public Policy in Four Prominent Pharmaceutical
Manufacturing Geographies

A. Puerto Rico
The U.S. acquired Puerto Rico from Spain in 1898 in the aftermath of the SpanishAmerican War. Even after the 1952 federal ratification of the Puerto Rican constitution giving
the island a “Commonwealth” label and allowing it limited autonomy to deal with local affairs,
the island was still legally considered a territory and therefore under the ultimate control of the
U.S. Congress. 59
Unlike the evolution of the pharmaceutical industry as a conscious targeted national
policy tool to substitute away from costly imported drugs and to provide low-cost drugs to its
very large populations, as was the case in India and China, in the case of Puerto Rico the U.S.
Congress passed legislation incentivizing manufacturing employment in its Puerto Rico territory.
Special tax breaks for the island began in its earliest days as a way to subsidize the sugar
industry, and then in the mid-20th century as a way to bring low-wage manufacturing to Puerto
Rico, often at the expense of local business and the Puerto Rican consumer. A 1901 U.S.
Supreme Court ruling allowed for implementation of non-uniform tax laws in territories like
Puerto Rico, enabling Congress to treat the island as a foreign entity for purposes of taxation. 60
One particular tax provision, called Section 936, incentivized the location of
pharmaceutical manufacturing in Puerto Rico by granting U.S.-based corporations a tax
exemption on income earned in Puerto Rico. Subsidiaries of branded and generic companies
would develop a drug in their U.S. R&D facilities, transfer the patent or proprietary technical
59

Manuel Madrid, “How the Tax Cut Sacks Puerto Rico”, American Prospect, June 28, 2018, p. 2 of 9. Available
online at https://prospect.org/article/how-tax-cut-sacks-puerto-rico.
60 Ibid., p. 3 of 9.

39

knowledge to their wholly owned subsidiaries operating in Puerto Rico, and claim the income
from the drug sales as tax-free income. 61 Many branded pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and
medical device companies opened manufacturing plants in Puerto Rico. Generic pharmaceutical
companies such as Teva, Ivax and Watson also located manufacturing plants in Puerto Rico
following passage of the Section 936 legislation. 62
President Clinton signed a repeal of the Section 936 provisions in 1996, and over the next
ten years it was gradually phased out, eliminated entirely at the end of 2005, resulting in plant
closures and declining employment, 63 and imposing an allegedly disproportionate tax burden on
domestic Puerto Rican companies. 64
The U.S. Tax Cuts and Job Act of 2017 targeted placing a tax on foreign firms owned by
U.S. investors. Its implementation penalized tax “inversions”, and is alleged to have had a
disproportionate negative impact on Puerto Rico, since it targeted income from “intangible”
assets such as pharmaceuticals and medical devices, on which Puerto Rico has been heavily
reliant. 65 The Puerto Rican economy was then dealt a further blow in 2017 when hit by the
devastating Hurricane Maria. 66

61

“The End of Section 936”, Puerto Rico Report, posted August 29, 2016. Available online at
https://www.puertoricoreport.com. f
62 “Puerto Rico’s Pharmaceutical Industry ‘Terminally Ill’,” November 19, 2007, pp. 2 and 3 o 4. Available online
at https://www.manufacturing.net/news//2007/11/puerto-ricos-pharmaceutical-industry-terminally...
63 “The End of Section 936” [2016], op. cit., p. 2.
64 “Puerto Rico’s Pharmaceutical Industry ‘Terminally Ill’”,[2007] op. cit., pp.1,4 of 8. Also see Scott Greenberg
and Gavin Ekins, “Tax Policy Helped Create Puerto Rico’s Fiscal Crisis”, The Tax Foundation, June 30, 2015, pp.
1-4 of 5. Available online at https://taxfoundation.org/tax-policy-helped-create-puerto-rico-s-fiscal-crisis/.
65 Manuel Madrid [2018], op. cit., p. 4 of 9.
66 For a description of the effects of the September 2017 Hurricane Maria on pharmaceutical operations in Puerto
Rico, see Department of Homeland Security, Threats to Pharmaceutical Supply Chains: The Public-Private Analytic
Exchange Program, Research Findings, July 2018. Available online at
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/2018_AEP_Threats_to_Pharmaceutical_Supply_Chains.pdf.

40

Until the phase-out of Section 936 in 2005, Puerto Rican API and FDF manufacturing
sites were a major supplier to the mainland U.S. pharmaceutical market, but since then Puerto
Rico’s role as an API and FDF supplier to the U.S. mainland has gradually declined. 67
B. INDIA
At the time it gained Independence in 1947, India recognized product patents. Its
pharmaceutical market was dominated by multinational firms controlling between 80 and 90
percent of the market, primarily by importing bulk drugs from abroad and having their Indian
subsidiaries manufacture and sell the formulations. 68 Pharmaceutical prices were high, and
much of India’s large population lacked access to low-priced medicines. 69
In the decades that followed, India embarked on a policy of incentivizing domestic
production of low-price pharmaceuticals to substitute against costly imports. Manufacturing
competence gradually emerged as a comparative advantage, facilitated in part by the Patent Act
of 1970 that replaced product with process patents, enabling the country to develop a skilled
labor force experienced in reverse engineering. As long as the manufacturing process of a drug
differed from that of the patented product, India patent law and regulatory policies allowed
Indian manufacturers to sell pharmaceuticals domestically at a fraction of their cost in the West.
Gradually by the 1980s India became self-sufficient in pharmaceutical manufacturing, exploiting
its comparative advantage built largely on learning how to reverse engineer drugs.

67

“Puerto Rico’s Pharmaceutical Industry ‘Terminally Ill’,”[2007], op. cit.. Nonetheless, citing a November 6, 2017
US Food and Drug Administration press release, a 2018 Department of Homeland Security study claimed
“According to the FDA, Puerto Rico produces 40 billion dollars-worth of pharmaceutical products yearly, more than
any other US state or foreign country, by value”. See Department of Homeland Security [2018], op. cit., p. 4 of 18.
68 William Greene, “The Emergence of India’s Pharmaceutical Industry and Implications for the U.S. Generic Drug
Market”, Washington DC: U.S. International Trade Commission, Office of Economics Working Paper No. 2007-05A, May 2007, p. 2 of 36.
69 Chiranjib Neogi, Atsuko Kamiike, Takahiro Sato, “Identification of Factors Behind Performance of
Pharmaceutical Industries in India”, Kobe, Japan: Kobe University, Research Institute for Economics and Business
Administration, Discussion Paper DP2012-23, September 28, 2012.

41

However, the lack of intellectual property protection for product patents limited India’s
ability to expand globally and to achieve external and internal economies of scale. So in 1995
India sought to become a member country of the World Trade Organization (“WTO”). To do so,
it had to agree to comply with the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (“TRIPS”), which in turn required India to amend its Patent Act of 1970. The Patent Act
amendments took effect in 2005, forcing India to reintroduce pharmaceutical product patents,
and also to assure intellectual property protection for both product and process patents for 20
years from date of issue, with some qualifications. 70
In the years that followed, India nurtured and exploited further its comparative
advantages – its lower production and research costs, its large pool of low cost technical and
scientifically trained personnel (including those experienced in reverse engineering), and the
large number of FDA-certified manufacturing plants located in India. Tax policies fostered the
growth of geographic manufacturing clusters through Special Enterprise Zone provisions,
thereby achieving external scale economies. 71

Price controls were introduced, and fierce

competition between thousands of small and medium-size firms resulted in a decline in the
number of small, inefficient firms that either exited the market or were acquired by larger Indian
or foreign firms seeking to take advantage of internal scale economies, thereby becoming
competitive with large multinational companies. Many Indian companies repurposed themselves
as contract manufacturers, producing bulk and intermediate products, APIs for new chemical
entities, or APIs or FDFs for generic drugs in cooperation with foreign multinational companies.
In 2016, about 35% of the APIs manufactured in India were exported to the US, UK or Japan. In

70

Neogi, Kamiike, and Sato [2012], op. cit., pp. 4-5 of 35.
Gulshan Akhtar, “Indian Pharmaceutical Industry: An Overview”, IOSR Journal of Humanities and Social
Science, July-August 2013, 13(3):55,63.

71

42

turn, approximately 32% of domestic consumption of APIs were imported, with China alone
accounting for 57-60% of the APIs by rupees imported by India. 72
The global role of Indian generic drug companies in the U.S. market has changed
dramatically in the last few years. One observer has described the changing industry
environment as follows:
“Starting from around late 2018 to early 2019, traditional generics bigwigs Teva, Mylan,
Novartis’ Sandoz, Amneal and Endo have lost out to a group of six competitors that
include Indian drugmakers Aurobindo Pharma, Lupin, Dr. Reddy’s, Sun Pharma, Cipla
and Canada’s Apotex in terms of weekly total prescriptions… …Amid increased pricing
pressure and competition in the generic arena, higher-margin complex generics and
biosimilars have lately been put at the top of the growth agenda at Teva, Mylan and
Sandoz, the top 3 U.S. generics players by total prescriptions in 2017. The old idea of
‘first in, last out’ or just waiting out lower-priced competitors until they give up and exit
has died…Companies are no longer trying to drive as much volume as possible, but
rather are focused on the margin of those sales…’Old guard’ firms are filing as many
U.S. generic applications as before, but they’re being more careful about which ones
they launch….Companies these days don’t always choose to launch generics even though
they are receiving approvals at a similar or greater pace.”73
C.

CHINA

As with India, the current state of the Chinese pharmaceutical industry reflects in large
part the impacts of its history as a command rather than market-driven economy. State-owned
Chinese companies produced tablet dosage forms and distributed them to hospitals, the primary
consumer of pharmaceuticals. Governments or rural collective economic organizations took
control of all funds earned by hospitals and clinics, and spent them. Because they had no

72

Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM India) and RNCOS Business Consulting
Services, Indian API Market Outlook 2022, 2017, Figures 1-1 and 1-2, pages 1 and 2. In volume terms, of its
imported API in 2018, India imported 80% from China. Deepak Patel, “Pharma Sector: 80 percent APIs via
Chinese imports despite similar making costs”, Indian Express, June 19, 2018. Available online at
https://indianexpress.com/article/business/business-others/pharma-sector-80-per-cent-apis-via-chinese-importsdespite-similar-making-costs-5222951/.
73 Angus Liu, “”’Old guard’ generics players yield U.S. lead to Indian up-and-comers: analyst”, Fierce Pharma,
April 18, 2019. Available online at https://www.fiercepharma.com/pharma/generics-old-guard-pack-y ields-u-sscripts-lead-to-..., pp. 2, 3, and 5 of 5.

43

motivation to pursue profits, these institutions simply followed the orders of the government
without pursuing strong independent interests. The need to exert tight control over the quality
and safety of medicines in hospitals and clinics was not urgent. Counterfeiting was not a
problem, because the state enterprises had no incentive to produce them. With no counterfeit
drugs, there was little if any motivation to monitor the safety and quality of drugs. 74
Thus, when China entered the post-reform era in the 1970s and 1980s, the highly
fragmented Chinese pharmaceutical industry faced many new challenges. Potential external and
internal scale economies had not been exploited.

Domestic companies had largely been

government owned, and fraught with overproduction and losses. Even today, most Chinese
companies – even joint ventures – compete with each other for the same generics. As of 2011,
more than 80% of the manufacturers in China were either not capable of supplying to Western
regulated pharmaceutical markets or had chosen instead to focus on the local patient
population. 75 As a result, currently most manufacturers rely on the repetitive production of low
value-added bulk pharmaceuticals and imitation drugs. Many are struggling for survival; more
than 32% recorded losses in 1999, according to the Pharmaceutical Department of National
Development and Reform Commission. 76 Moreover, since 2004 the State Food and Drug
Administration (“SFDA”) has been closing down manufacturers that do not meet China’s
increasingly stringent Good Manufacturing Practices standards for products intended for
domestic consumption, resulting in slowdowns in domestic production of API, but possibly

74

Haona Li, He Sun, and Frances J. Richmond, “The Historical Evolution of China’s Drug Regulatory System”,
Discussion Paper, University of Southern California, International Center for Regulatory Science, August 2014.
Available online at https://regulatory.usc.edu/files/2014/08/Evolution_China_Reg_system_2014.pdf.
75 Shannon Bennett, “China’s growing presence in the global supply chain”, Chemistry Today, January/February
2012, 30(1), p. 1 of 3.
76 Wikipedia, “Pharmaceutical industry in China”, last edited on 7 May 2019, pp. 1,3, 4, 6 of 22. Available online at
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pharmaceutical_ industry-in-China&old id=895942969.

44

providing incentives for consolidation and achievement of scale and scope economies by
domestic or foreign companies. 77
These characteristics of the Chinese pharmaceutical market have led foreign investors in
China to phase in their outsourcing efforts gradually. Attracted by China’s comparative
advantages in lower costs of manufacturing chemical and intermediate goods, lower investment
costs, shorter lead times and access to the immense Asian talent pool, in the last decade foreign
investors have initially limited outsourcing to old products and commodity APIs involving less
sophisticated chemistry.

78

The bulk drugs market has evolved rapidly over the years, and today

it is large and diversified with about 7,000 API manufacturers. 79 As of 2018, the Chinese API
market is the second largest API market in the entire Pacific region, second only to Japan. 80 But
FDF products from China are still relatively rare in developed countries.
Moreover, China faces a major issue with intellectual property rights protection, which
has resulted in a low level of market protection for domestic branded drugs, allowing established
foreign generics and off-patent brands to dominate the domestic market. 81 It is estimated that
80% of counterfeit products in China are consumed in rural areas, providing an opening for
foreign pharmaceutical companies to develop the market in rural areas. 82

77

Wikipedia [2019], op. cit., pp. 1 and 4 of 22.
Kirsty Barnes, “China to play starring role in AstraZeneca API outsourcing”, InPharmaTechnologist, August 5,
2007, pp. 1-2. Available online at https://www.in-pharmatechnologist.com /Article/2007/07/05/ China-to-playstarring-role-i…
79 Deepak Patel, “Pharma Sector: 80 percent APIs via Chinese imports despite similar making costs”, Indian
Express, June 19, 2018. Available online at https://indianexpress.com/article/business/business-others/pharmasector-80-per-cent-apis-via-chinese-imports-despite-similar-making-costs-5222951/, p. 6 of 10.
80 Business Wire, “2018 Market for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) in China”, Dublin, October 2, 2018.
Available online at https://www.businesswire.com/.../2018-Market-Active-Pharmaceutical-Ingredients-API...
81 Ibid.
82 Wikipedia [2019], op. cit., pp. 1 and 4 of 22.
78

45

Although China seeks to move up the value chain from manufacturing bulk,
intermediate and APIs to producing and exporting FDFs, the facility and application fees
associated with the 2013 implementation of the US’ Generic Drug User Fee act may be
sufficiently prohibitive to limit the number of Chinese companies focusing on pursuing the US’
FDF market, instead preferring to invest in the rapidly growing Chinese FDF market. 83
D.

IRELAND

Unlike the import substitution public policies in India and China that sought directly to
nurture a pharmaceutical manufacturing sector that could produce low-priced pharmaceuticals
for their very large populations, and then have focused on exploiting potential internal and
external scale and scope economies in developing a pharmaceutical export market, in Ireland tax
policies have provided multinational companies incentives to locate their headquarters in Ireland,
even if the companies’ de facto operations are managed abroad. These tax policies are typically
called tax inversions by tax authorities outside Ireland.
The ways by which Irish tax authorities define the base income and profits on which
corporate taxes are assessed (called the base erosion and profit sharing – “BEPS” – tools),
involve how depreciation on intangible assets such as intellectual property (“IP”) are taken into
account, and likely affects incentives for foreign firms to locate their API and FDF
manufacturing or other facilities in Ireland. Irish authorities levy tax assessments based on a
worldwide income base, rather than a territorial one based on income earned on operations in
Ireland. Hence, Ireland’s public policies are less directly but nevertheless indirectly supportive
of firms’ locating their API and FDF manufacturing facilities in Ireland. However, beginning in
2017 and continuing thereafter, US and UK tax policy countermeasures to stem the flow of Irish

83

Shannon Bennett [2012], op. cit., p. 1 of 3.

46

corporate tax inversions may be mitigating these direct and indirect impacts on the location of
API and FDF manufacturing facilities in Ireland.

84

The taxing of foreign, particularly American, firms plays a disproportionate role in the
Ireland economy.

In 2016-2017, foreign firms paid 80% of Irish corporate tax, employed 25%

of the Irish labor force (because of relatively high wages, they paid 50% of the Irish salary tax),
and created 57% of Irish non-farm value-added. U.S.-controlled firms represent almost all
foreign firms in Ireland, in 2017 comprised 25 of the top Irish firms, and 70% of the revenue of
the top 50 Irish firms. By 2018, Ireland had received the most U.S. corporate tax inversions in
history, with Apple accounting for one-fifth of Irish GDP. Academic research has ranked Ireland
as the world’s largest tax haven, even larger than the entire Caribbean tax haven system.

85

Ireland’s main BEPS tools use IP to effect the profit shift from higher-tax jurisdictions to
Ireland via royalty payment schemes. To avoid paying Irish corporation tax on these shifted
profits, the BEPS tools either transfer the profits to traditional tax havens having explicit 0%
corporate tax rates (with Ireland having bilateral tax treaties with more than 70 countries) via
royalty payment schemes, or use intangible capital allowance schemes to write-off the profits
against Irish tax. Ireland describes its IP-based BEPS tools as being part of the “knowledge
economy”; however, U.S.-based tax academics describe Ireland’s IP as “the leading taxavoidance vehicle in the world”. Not surprisingly, most U.S. multinationals in Ireland operate in
the two largest Irish industries, namely, technology companies (including software) and life
sciences. 86

84

Wikipedia, “Corporation tax in the Republic of Ireland”, last updated June 17, 2019, p. 12,13, and 25-29 of 55.
Available online at
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Corporation_tax_in_the_Republic_of_Ireland
85 Wikipedia [2019], op. cit., p. 1 of 55.
86 Ibid, pp. 1, 3, 12 of 55.hh

47

Whereas Ireland’s nominal “headline” corporate tax rate is 12.5%, Ireland’s BEPS tools
reduce tax liabilities to an effective tax rate of 0% to 2.5%, depending on which BEPS tool is
used. 87 By comparison, the average 2001-2006 effective corporate tax rate on pharmaceuticals
in the US was estimated at 31.5%. 88
The favorable tax regime in Ireland has created incentives for American companies with
substantial IP assets to engage in corporate tax inversions – strategies in which a foreign
multinational corporation acquires or merges with an Irish-based company, and then shifts its
legal place of incorporation to Ireland to avail itself of Ireland’s favorable corporate tax regime.
Moreover, Ireland’s corporate tax code has a holding company regime that enables the foreign
multinational’s new Irish-based legal headquarters to gain full Irish tax-relief on Irish
withholding taxes and payment of dividends from Ireland. Not surprisingly, almost all tax
inversions to Ireland have come from the U.S., and to a lesser extent, the UK. Pharmaceutical
companies such as Actavis, Allergan, Endo, Pfizer, Mallinckrodt, Perrigo, Alkermes, Shire and
Horizon either succeeded or at least attempted to engage in corporate tax inversions. 89
Although the Irish tax provisions and implementation of BEPS tools have focused
primarily on headquarter location issues, they have also impacted the location of API and FDF
biopharmaceutical manufacturing activities. Indeed, Ireland’s corporate BEPS tools emphasize
job creation (either of Irish employees or of foreign employees to Ireland). 90 To be eligible to
utilize the Irish BEPS tools and their effective tax rates of 0% to 2.5%, multinationals have been

87

Ibid., p. 11 of 55.
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Pharma 2020: Taxing times ahead. Which path will you take?, Pricewaterhouse
Coopers, Pharmaceuticals and Life Sciences, not dated, Figure 4, p. 6. Available at www.pwc.com/phaarma2020.
89 Wikipedia [2019], op. cit., pp. 21-25 of 55.
90 Notably, these incentives are augmented by an Irish immigration policy that admits foreign workers much more
easily than currently does the US, and likely the UK if in fact the UK carries out its Brexit plans. For discussion, see
Shawn Pogatchnik and Heather Long, “Despite Trump’s ire, Ireland expects to avoid any pain from U.S. tax
overhaul”, Washington Post, December 13, 2017, p. 2 of 5. Available at
www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/trumps-tax-plan-see...
88

48

required to meet conditions that document and prove a nexus between the IP and the BEPS tools
they implement, such as carrying out a “relevant trade” on the IP in Ireland (e.g., manufacturing
patented products), and documenting the level of Irish employment engaged in the “relevant
activities” on the IP. 91 According to one source, since 2008 the pharmaceutical industry has
invested close to €10 billion in manufacturing and R&D sites in Ireland. 92

91

Wikipedia [2019], op. cit., p. 8 of 55.
Bernard Mallee, “Protecting Innovation in pharma is in Ireland’s interests”. Irish Times, July 27, 2018, p. 1 of 2.
Available online at https://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/protecting-innovation-in-phaerma-is-in-Ireland-s-interests1.3577483.
92

49

