                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 FACTOR MARKET BARRIERS ARE TRADE BARRIERS:
                         GAINS FROM TRADE IN 1992




                              Richard   Baldwin




                          Working Paper No. 2656




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1988




I gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions of Alberto
Ciovannini, Jagdish Bhagwati, Rich Lyons, Ron Findlay, Aaron Tornell, Paul
Krugman and Mike Gavin. This research is part of NBER's research program  in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #2656
                                                     July 1988


                      FACTOR MARKET BARRIERS ARE TRADE BARRIERS:
                               GAINS FROM TRADE IN 1992


                                            ABSTRACT


         The European Community's economic integration by 1992              is   predicted to have large
economic benefits. According to     traditional trade theory, the gains will come         only   with

permanent resource migration and significant factor price changes (since in principle all trade
barriers have already been removed). Yet, it seems unlikely that the 1992 reforms will be

completed, if they do indeed result in factor movements large enough to substantially alter
factor rewards.
       This paper presents a more optimistic view. It argues that factor market integration
can result in economic gains, even without capital and labor migration. The basic argument

is   simple. For some types of goods,    it is cheaper to conduct trade on an        intra—firm basis,

rather than    an inter—firm basis (for instance roughly half of US imports are intra—firm,

Hellemner   [1981]). In such industries, any factor market barrier      that raises the cost of foreign
control of local firms also raises the   cost   of intra—firm   trade. Consequently,removing such


barriers can   lead to gains from trade. The 1.0. trade literature points out that intra—firrn
trade requires   direct foreign control which     need   not involve direct foreign investment


(Helpman and Krugman [19851). Therefore, 1992 can logically lead to gains from additional
intra—firm trade, with   little additional capital    or labor migration.




                                                      Richard Baldwin
                                                      Columbia University         Business School
                                                      New York, NY 10027
I. Introduction

      The approach of 1992, the target date for the European Community's much touted

economic integration, has elicited a number of rather extravagant claims on the part of
                                                                              The move, they
pan—Europeanistsconcerning the benefits of a single European market.'
assert, will result in higher productivity, more efficient allocation of resources, higher living
standards and enhanced export competitiveness.
        In the context of traditional trade theory, these claims appear exaggerated.       In

principle, all trade barriers have already been removed between the European Community
                                                                — at least among the
(EC) nations, and factor prices are already approximately equal
original six member countries. With no tariffs and equal facior prices, the Heckshcerhiin
model predicts that factor market liberalization should have no effect. Indeed this is one of
the principle lessons of the model. Trade in goods    is   a substitute for trade in factors.

      Recognizing, however, that there are wage differenceswithin the newly expanded EC,
we should expect efficiencygains from the 1992 program. Yet according to traditional trade

theory (as extended by the Mundell—Jones factor mobility model), these gains will come only
with rather massive, and permanent, labor migration from the mw wage "southern" members,
and capital outflow from the northern members. Moreover, if the liberalization is to lead
firms to choose a more efficient internationalallocation of resources, it must necessarily alter
factor prices.
        While such international resource migration would undoubtedly result in the predicted
economic benefits, it seems unlikely that this is what policy makers have in mind, Indeed it is

doubtful that the reforms would be completed if they result in factor movements large enough
to significantly alter factor rewards. Thus an analyst using the traditional framework should
be   rather pessimistic about the outcome of the   1992 program. In     that framework, economic

gains come only with politically difficult factor migration.
       This paper presents a more optimistic view. It argues that factor market integration
can result in the economic gains discussed above, even without capital and labor migration.
The basic argument is simple. For some types of goods, international vertical integratation is
essential to efficient international trade. That is to say, for such goods   it is cheaper to
conduct trade on an intra—firm basis, rather than an inter—firm basis. In such industries,
those factor market harriers which raise the cost of foreign control of local assets have the
effect of raising the cost of trade. Consequently, removing such barriers can lead to gains

from trade. The industrial organization literaturestresses that the key aspect of vertical

integration is control, not investment. Therefore, while the removal of such barriers may
increase international vertical integration,   it need not involve international capital mobility
(see for instance Helpman and Krugman [1985]).
        As noted by Bhagwati [1982],     the point that barriers to capital mobility may act as
non—tariff barriers arose in the debate over "invisible" Japanese trade barriers. While

Bhagwati [1982] is skeptical of the validity of this contention, he examines the welfare effects
of freer capital mobility   when capital mobility reduces implicit protection.   In particular he
demonstrates that this aspect of capital flows implies that   a country can gain from capital
exports (even when they are by themselves directly unprofitable) due to the welfare gain from
freer trade in goods engendered by the capital exports.
        The present paper differs from Bhagwati [1982] in three respects. We focus on
international vertical control rather than limitingourselves to foreign direct investment. We

explicitly model the manner in which factor market barriers are barriers to trade. Lastly, our

analysis is done in the context of an intra—industry trade model (Krugman [19791), rather
than the standard factor abundance trade model as in l3hagwati.
        The rest of the paper is divided into five parts. The second section examines the

general proposition that some factor market barriers are barriers to trade. Section three lays
out an explicit, single firm example to formalize the symmetry between trade barriers and
factor market barriers. The next section presents a simple general equilibrium trade model
and derives the equilibrium with factor market barriers. The fourth section studies the

comparative statics of removing the factor market barriers. The last section contains      a
summary and concluding remarks.
                                                   3

II.   gie Factor Market Barriers Act as Barriers to Trade

         In this section we consider a   general model of a domestic firm which exports   a product
to a foreign country. We assume that manufacture of the good is concentrated in the home

country (due, for example, to factor prices difference, technology differences, or economy of
scales). Sale of the good to foreign consumers requires more than just physical manufacture.
We assume that in order to sell the product, additional services must be provided. These

services are intended to represent "support"or "consumer" services such as maintenence and

repair services, as well as marketing and distribution costs. As such, we assume that the
provision of these services must take place in the foreign country. We refer to these services
as downstream services.    This necessity of downstream services limits the types    of goods to

which our argument applies.
         We assume that the firm has the option of organizing its exports via international
vertical ntegiation or arm's—lengthtrading. In the first case the home firm which
manufactures the good is unrelated to the foreign firm which provides the downstream

services. In the second, the two firms are under a common direction (here we arbitrarily
assume that it is the home firm that controls the foreign). The first case is inter—firm trade,

the second is intra—firm trade.
         Next we address the nature of the factor market barriers which may act as trade
barriers. Virtually all industrial economies have a multitude of barriers to factor market

integration. The employment of foreign managers and skilled workers (even by foreign firms)
is typically subject to a plethoraof red—tape requirements, bureaucratic delays and/or

taxation (if not outright prohibition).    If these workers are important to the efficient control
and operation of foreign affiliates, then such labor market barriers raise the cost of exporting.

Similarly, the control and ownership of assets by foreign companies usually faces a whole
array of restrictions and costly regulat ions.
         International differences in laws concerning patents, licensing, franchising and other
forms of vertical constraint can similarly inhibit international vertical integration. Also in
                                                   4
this category of barriers to trade—related MNC activity are national anti—trust, and merger

and acquisition   policies which discriminate against foreigners.
        There are probably interesting insights to be gained from explicitly modeling the
manner in which each of these barriers raises the costs of foreign control of local firms.
However to make our general point as clearly as possible, we simply assume that the net effect
of these barriers is to raise   the cost of providing the downstream services       when the local firm

is controlled by a foreign firm. In particular, we consider two categories of these cost raising

harriers: those which raise the marginal cost of providing downstream services when the

foreign firm is controlled by    a home firm, and those which raise the fixed cost of controlling a
foreign firm from the home country.
        We presume that vertical integrationoccurs when the sum of profits of the two firms

operating independently,     fl, is less than the sum of profits when the firms are under a
common direction, l1'I. We can write this as the vertical integration contraint:


(1)                          fivi> 11al where
                             = argmax         +               st. y= f(x,z)
                   Fl
                     al=    argmax    I
                                      L
                                          [TM[x]    zD[y]],

                                           lxii + argmax   r    Eyii,   s.t. y = f(x,z)
                             x                      y


where      and     are the profits of the manufacturer and downstream firms, a and            y are the

choice variables of the two firms, and f is the production function describing the
transformation of the manufactured good into a saleable final good (a represents all other

inputs).
        The next section presents an explicit model in which (1) holds due to the well known
K—C—A quasi—rent        motive for vertical integration. Any one of many other vertical

integration motives could have been used. Blair and Kaserman [1983] describe five basic
vertical integration motives: K—C—A's quasi—rent,incomplete contracts, sequential market

power, implicit insurance and transactioncosts.
                                                        5
              We are now ready to consider the two categories of barriers, Given that the vertical

integration constraint holds, the total cost of selling to the foreign country                    is:


                                                            *                      *
(2)                           C[yl   = ( c[y] + F ) + ( c ['1('+i3) + F (1+A) )


where 3 and A represent the cost—raising effect of the first and second category of barriers,
          $              *                  .
      c       [y, F and F are the cost functions and     fixed costs associated with manufacturing and

the downstream services respectively.
              We turn first to the barriers represented by 3.          /3 raises   the marginal cost of exporting.

This follows from differentiation of (2) with respect to y.                /3   will thereforereducetrade in any

model where the firm's sales are decreasing in marginal costs. This                     is   a property of sales in
models employing a broad class of technologies and market structures(the section three model

provides an example). In such models, the barriers reduce the volume of trade by increasing
the marginal cost of trade.
              Barriers which raise the fixed cost of controlling a home firm from abroad are also

trade barriers, assuming only that the market structureis such that price of the final good is
positively related to average costs. For example allowing free entry and ignoring the integer
constraint, we have that price equals average cost, in equilibrium. Since this category of
barriers raises average costs,       it raises prices and so leads to less trade.
                                          A. Caveats and Discussion
              The main result depends crucially on three points: (i) downstream services must be

located in the foreign country, (ii) the vertical integration constraint must hold, and (iii) the
factor market barriers must raise the cost of providing the downstream service.
              The first caveat that should be mentioned         is   that the result can only      be expected to

hold for certain types of goods. For many types of goods , the marketingand distribution can
he efficiently performed by firms that are unrelatedto the manufacturer. Inexpensive

apparel, processed foods and certain consumer electronics are some examples of such goods.
For these types of goods the barriers inhibit MNCs but do not inhibit trade since the
                                                  6

downstream service can be efficiently provided by locally owned firms which is not subject to
the barrier.
       Also for some types of products, there is no need to provide downstream services.

Again, for such products the symmetry of factor market barriers and trade barriers would
breakdown. Since in these industries MNC activity      is   not essential to trade, barriers to

MNCs need not affect trade.
       We assumed that the factor market barriers could be translated into a cost raising

effect. Absolute quantitativerestrictions would probably lead to similar results but more

complicated analytics. In the case of the Leontief relationship between manufacturing and
downstream services, a quantitativerestriction on foreign ownership of downstream assets

implies a quantitative restriction on imports. In which case they obviously constitutebarriers
to trade. Nonetheless, in general the effects of quantative restriction on trade are quite
sensitive to assumptions on market structure and strategic choice variables (Krishna[1985]).
       It is conceivable that a high enough /3 or A would make arm's—lengthtrading less
costly than vertical integration. For such high levels of /3 or   A,    the downstreamservives
would be provided by unrelated, local firms. Small changes in          /3   and   A   would therefore not

affect trade. What   this argues is that since vertical integration is only one possible
organizational form, there is an upper bound to the trade—inhibitingeffects of $ and               A.


Nonetheless, complete removal of /3 and   A   would have the   trade effects similar to those           of

tariff reductions.


III. An Explicit Single Firm Examvle


       The model we employ combines elements of the headquarter services model of MNCs

(Helpman and Krugman [1985]) and the beachhead or sunk cost model (Baldwin [1986]). A
number of highly special assumptions are made in order to focus attention on the essential
economics of the problem.

       Consider a firm producing a differentiated product for sale to two identical countries.
                                                    7
Physical manufacture of the good is subject to increasing returns and so is concentrated in one

country (which we call the home country without loss of generality). The economies of scale
take the form     of the standard fixed—cost—plus—constant—marginal—-cost variety. Production

of the final good, however, requires more than just physical manufacture. We assume           that in
order to sell the product to either market, the firm must also incur additional costs. These

costs represent the downstream services discussed in the previous section.
         To provide these downstream services, the firm must control assets that are completely

distinct from those involved in physical manufacturing. We make two important assumptions
on the   nature of these downstream assets. First, due to the differentiated nature      of the good,

the downstream assets are firm—specific. In other words the physical and human capital

necessary     to provide the services is particular to the good and is therefore sunk.   Second, since
the assets are aimed at providing services to consumers, they must be located in the same

country as the consumers. Thus the firm must aquire these assets in both the home and
loreign country if it wishes to sell to both markets, Photocopiers, farm machinery and
automobiles are some examples of products that require in-country servicing and distribution
facilities.

         To keep things simple, we assume that production of the final good requires a fixed
coeficient combination of manufacturing and downstream services. Lastly, we assume that
the provision of the consumer services is subject to constant returns.
                                    A. Vertical Integration Motive

         As has been stressed in the 1.0.   trade literature, any model of   MNC activity must

answer two questions: 1) Why does production of the final good involve assets in more than
one country? and 2) Why are        the assets (which are located in different countries) owned by
the same firm instead of by two unrelated firms?
         In this model the nature   of the product answers the first question.   The production   of

the final good requires two types of assets: those involved in the provision of consumer

services, and those involved in physical manufacturing. Due to scale economies in
manufacturing assets are located in a only one country. Due to the nature of consumer
                                                    8

services, distribution and repair facilities must be located in both countries.
         The answer to the second question comes from the nature of the assets.           In particular it

is   due to the specificity of the downstream assets. As Klein, Crawford and Alchia.n [1982]

originally showed, the specificity of assets creates quasi—rents. Quasi—rentsimply that
arm's—length trade in the manufactured good and the downstream service is an organizational
form that    is   inferior (i.e., more costly) to vertical integratation. Helpman and Krugman

[1985] apply the Klein—Crawford—Alchian (K—C—A) logic to explain the vertical integratation
of internationally disperse assets, i.e., the existence of MNCs.

         The basic    K—C—Aidea is quite simple. The specificity of the assets implies that they
are sunk. Once they are sunk, they create rent ( K—C—A call this quasi-rent since it is only

rent ex post, not ex ante). Dispute over the division of this rent and strategies undertaken in

anticipation of this dispute lead to inefficencieswhich can be avoided by internalizing the
rent—division problem.Of course vertical integration need not occur if one is willing to make
the extreme assumption that the firms can costlessly write complete and credible contracts.
We suppose that such contractsare not available.
         Next we     turn to the factor market barriers. As in the previous section, we assume that
the net affect     of these barriers is to raise the home firm's cost of providing the downstream
services in the foreign market. Moreover, we assume        that the barriers   raise   the marginal costs
of doing so.      Thus the marginal cost of providing the downstream    services is d in    the home

country and d(1+fi) in tbe foreign country (since in the foreign country the assets are
controlled by the home firm). We interprete flas the shadow price of factor market barriers.
         In most industrialized countries, factor market   barriers are not intended to      raise

government revenue. To model this we assume that the fi represents "frictional" barriers.
That is to say, the barriers do nothing but raise the cost of foreign control of local assets.

Assuming that         results in some government revenue would not alter any of the results in this

partial equilibrium analysis.
                 B. Some Barriers to Factor Market Integration Trade Barriers
         We are now ready to examine the problem of the firm and derive our main result. The
                                                         9

firm has a monopoly in the market for its own differentiated product. To facilitate the

comparison of factor market barriers and standard trade barriers, we assume that the value of
exports (when it crosses the border) is subject to an ad valorum tariff of r percent. Thus the
marginal cost of exporting must include the tariff. The firm chooses domestic price and
export price subject to demand functions in order to maximize profits. Thus:


(3)                max       px+px—cx+c(1+T)x—dxd(1+/3)xF


where F is the fixed cost of manufacturing, c           is   the marginal cost of manufacturing, x is

domestic sales and x   ts   export sales. The first order conditions (we assume that the demand
functions are such that interior solutions occur) are:



(Ia)                                   px'[p]   +x =             (c   + d)x'[p]


(4b)                                   +        =                      +
                                                                           d(1+3)]x[p*1

These equations together with the two identical demand functions determine the trade volume
and price as well as home sales and price. Simply re—arranging the first order conditions we

get:


(5a)                                   p   =        —                      + d)
                                                             f(X))(c


                                               1
(5b)                          Ps = (
                                       1   —
                                                        , )(c(1+r) + d(1+))
                                               1/f(x )

                                                             *
where we allow the demand elasticities,            and            to be a function   of the level of sales. Sales

are simply:
(6a)                              x =            - 1[e(x) + d)]
                            *     r
(6b)                       x = xj(          1
                                                   ; )(c(1+r)   + d(1+3))
                                        —
                                            1/(x

       Equations (5b) and (6b) demonstrate our main result. The shadow price of factor
market barriers affect trade in the same way tariffs do. That is to say, in this model factor

market barriers act as trade barriers. In particular      rand 3 both affect the marginal cost of
exporting. Of course, r falls only on the value of the product that crosses the border, while
ta.lls only on the value added in—country. As      a result, increases in rand j3 will haveidentical
trade effectsonly if c=d. This can be seen by inspection of (5b) and (6b).
       To reiterate, when MNC activity      is   essential to international trade, barriers to the
MNC activity constitute barriers to trade.


IV. A Two Country—TwoIndustry Model


       The model combines elements of the model in the previous section with the
                                                                                 Krugman
{1980j model of trade. Specifically we consider two identical countries which have no explicit
trade barriers between them but which do have factor market barriers of the type discussed in
the previous section.

       Again to streamline the algebra, we make a number of highly special assumptions. We
suppose that labor is the only fixed factor of production and there are only two industries.
The first (the x sector) consists of Spence—Dixit-—Stiglitz differentiated products.2 These
goods are produced according to the technology outlined in the previous section, namely
increasing returns in physical production and constant returns in downstream services. The
market structure is assumed to be Chamberlain monopolistic competition with price as the

strategic variable. The other industry produces a homogeneous good (referred to as A)
subject to constant return to scale and perfect competition. We employ the convenient fiction
                                                             11
 of a representative consumer (in each country) who is endowed with                     t/2 units of labor.
          Tastes in each country are defined by the utility function:


 (7)                                      U   = ((E X)l/O)a(A)(la)


 where 2 is the set of x varieties produced. Taking the labor as the numeraire, the world

 demand functions arising from utility maximization in both countries are:


 (8)                                               A     = p (I—a)t
and

(9a)                     x.   =                        at, for a typical home variety,

and
                                      * —e
                         *
(9b)                         =                      at, for a typical imported variety,
                                     p.
                              iEc)


where    f is the set of varieties that are actually produced.
         The elasticity of demand for a single variety               of x is an important parameter in the

model.   With each monopolistic competitor taking all other prices as given, the exact demand
elasticity for variety k with respect to its price is:



                                                                    p1—0
(10)                                      =   0   + (1—9)(                     ).
                                                                    p.
                                                             iEf2


In a symmetric equilibrium this is 0 +                       , where     m is the total number of varieties sold.
Following Helpman and Krugman [19851, we assume that there are many varieties so firms
ignore the second term and act as if          e   = 0.
                                                12

                                       A.The "A" Industry
       Production of a unit uf the A   good requires "a" units of labor in physical manufacture.
                                                                               if the downstream
Additionally it requires downstream services that involve 'b" units of labor
services are provided by locally owned firms, and b(1+fl) units of labor if they are provided by
a firm that is controlled from abroad. As in the previous section, 8 is the shadow price of the
frictional regulations and restrictions on international control of human and physical assets.
       Since   the A good is a homogeneousproduct, there    is   no rent—division problem to

motivate vertical integration. That is, since the downstream assets can service any A
manufacturer's output, the owners are not open to ex post exploitation by any single
manufacturer.
       Given this technology, perfect competition implies that there is no MNC activity in
the A good (so the downstream services are provided by local firms that are unrelated to the

manufactures) and its price is:


(11)                                        pa=a+b.

Given (11), the demand function implies world output of A is (1—a)t/(a+b). Consequently

(1—a)t units of the world labor endowment are employed in the production of A. Given the
symmetry of the two countries, there need be no trade in A.
                                        B. The x Industry

       rrhe problem of a typical firm in industry x is similar to the one described in the

previous section. It chooses domestic and export prices to maximize profits, and thus its first
                                                       r
order conditions are identical to (4a) and (4b), with = ft. That is, the price of each

imported variety   of x is given by (4b). The price of each domestically produced variety is
given by (4a). Using the demand functions, local and export sales (for both home and foreign
firms) are respectively:
                                                             13

I   1.aj                      x•   = lfn)I               1                1—1/c a
                                                                           c + d
                                               1   + (1+)1_
and
                          *
i   I')L\                Xi   = k'Ifl)'.
                                   ,                 1

                                                             +   1
                                                                     A
                                                                         1 —   1/c
                                                                           + d(1+1)   a

where 1+          (
                      c+ d(1+)         ), so   that is the percent by which the factor market barriers
increase the marginal cost of export versus local sales. By symmetry (lOa) and (lOb) describe

the domestic and export sales of a typical firm in each country.
            To close the model we must determine the equilibrium number of varieties of x

produced in each country, n. Assuming free entry into the x industry and ignoring the integer
constraint, firms in each country enter up to the point where profits are zero. To calculate
the level of profits leaving out      fixed costs, we rewrite (4a) and (4b) as, p(1—1/e)=(c+d),
    *
p 1—1/c)=(c+d)(1+i). Adding and rearranging these equations, we get:


                       [p —(c+d)]x     + [p*—(c+d)(1+4)]x= (lfc)(px + p**
                                                                        x ).



This shows that at the maximium, operatingprofits are a fraction of revenue (the fraction

depends only on the perceived demand elasticity). Given the symmetry of all x firms,           it must
bethat the revenue of a typical x firm is one 2n—th (where n is the number of firms) of the
world wide expenditure on x. World expenditure is on x is a in this model, so   r
F    = (l/c)(oEj2n). Clearly then n is given by:

(13)



            To be certain that the model is closed by (13), we must address the issue of the

possibility of revenue associated with the factor market barriers. Here our assumption that
represents 'frictional' regulations and restrictions (and thus does not give rise to any
government revenue) becomes important. If fidid lead to government revenue, all results
would go through       as long as the revenue was returned in a lump—sum fashion to consumers.
                                                 14

          Waira& law implies that total world labor demand equals E.
                                 C. Description of the Equilibrium
       In summary we have Krugman—type intra—industrytrade in the x industry, but no
                                                                                 *
trade in A. By symmetry, trade is balanced and the imports of each country are nx Total
domestic sales of x by local firms is nx. Simple manipulation of (5a), (5b), (6a) and (6b)

implies   that the domestic share of total x industry sales in each country is equal to:


(14)                               flX     =(
                                 npx + npx              1   + (1+) 1 e

Note that this share is greater than 1/2 and increasing in (and thus       )   since 9 > 1.   A

convenient measure of import penetration is simply (1—oP).
          In additionto intra—industry trade, there is two—way MNC activity in the same
industry. In other words there is intra—industryforeign direct investment (IIFDI) in the x
industry. Given the Leontief combination of manufacturing and downstream services in the x
industry, the share of downstream firms controlled by foreign firms is also given by (1—o).
          this model we can be completely agnostic about the issue of the international
          In

mobility of factors. The symmetry and lack of trade barriers implies that MNC activity need
not involve the physical movement of labor. Our vertical integration motive merely requires
that the manufacturing and downstream service assets        be controlled by a single firm.

          To focus as sharply as possible on the difference between this model and the

Mundell—Jones model, we make        an extreme assumption. We assume that (as in the
                                                                                   assets is
Helpman—Krugman[1985] headquarter services MNC model) foreign control of local
possible without any physical migration of labor. In other words, MNC activity involves only
direct foreign control, not investment, Nonetheless, we could have assumed that some

migration of labor is necessary to MNC activity without changing any of the analytics or
results. All such migration would be two-waymigration. That is, there would be no net

migration.
                                                       15

V. The Comparative Statics of RemovinE Factor Market Barriers



          Given the equilibrium conditions derived in the previous section, it      is easy   to study the
comparative statics of removing the factor market barriers. The key is to note that if j3 =           0

then $ =      0,   and the model becomes completely symmetric. In the x sector, the domestic and

export prices become the same. Nothing changes in the A sector since nothing depended on /3
in that sector.
          In general, the complete removal of discriminatory government policies need not imply

that     equals zero, Foreign control of local assets may be more expensive than local control
due to differences in language, culture and social institutions. However, to simplify the

analytics we study the comparative static effects of changing /3 from a positive number to
zero. It is important to note that what we are comparing are two equilibria, not the move
from one equilibrium to another. The presence of beachhead—type sunk costs implies

hysteresis in trade (Baldwin [19861). Thus removing 3 may have effects that differ from those
predicted by comparative statics (more on this in the conclusion).
                                             A. Positive Effects
         To evaluate the positive effects of factor market liberalization,     we examine     the
equilibrium condition in section III for          = 0. By inspection of equations (8) and (11), there
is   no change in the output, price or trade pattern of A. There are, however, many changes in
the x industry. These are:
                                       *
         1)   the export price of x, p , falls,

         2)   the domestic price of x,   p, is unchanged,

         3) there is no change in the equilibrium number of firms, n.
Points 1, 2 and 3 can be      seen by inspection of (5a), (5b), (6a),   (6b) and (13). Also,
         4)   the volume (nx*) of exports(which equals imports by symmetry) rises,
         5)   the volume of local x sales by domestic firms (nx) falls.
Equations (2a) and (2b) together with point 3 above, imply points 4 and 5. Also,
         6) our measure of import penetration (1—u) rises to 1/2,
                                                         16
                                      **
        7) the value of exports (np   x    )   rises.

Point 6 is obvious in equation (14). To see point 7, we multiply equation (9b) by                    p,   and use
               ** =                             0-1-1
(5b) to get: p x      (t/n)(1 + (1+4,)             )       Inspection of this expression demonstrates

point 7. Next,
                                               *
       8) total output per firm (x + x ) rises,

       9) measured labor productivity (output per worker) rises.
Point 8 is easy to show. Recall that optimal revenue is 1/c times operating profits. With free
entry, operating profits must equal F. Thus rearranging the zero—profit condition produces:
                          *
F   = F/f —(c+d)(x + x     (1+4,)). Clearly then the typical            firm's total output must      be higher

when 4, = 0 than when4, > 0. Point 9 follows directly from point 8 together with the fixed
cost nature of the scale economies.
        Next we examine the effects that setting 4, =           0 has   on factor migration and MNC
activity. Here there are two basic points:

        10) the liberalization need not involve labor migration, and

        11) the degree of two-way MNC activity increases.

The tenth point is obvious from the symmetry of the two countries and our assumption that
control need involve no labor movement. The eleventh point follows directly from point 6. If

(1—q) of all local sales are made by foreign firms, then (1—a) of the downstream service

facilities must be controlled by foreigners (recall           1—c   = 1/2 with   4, = 0,   but is less than 1/2
with 4,> 0).
        Points 1 —9 state that the 1992 program could logically increase productivity, export

performance. and allow neater economies of scale without causing any factor migration.
                                               B. Welfare Effects
       The major result   of section II is that         a factor market barrier,    fi, acts   like a trade
barrier. In general, the welfare effect of removing trade barriers is ambiguous. Consumers

benefit through lower prices. However, due to Brander and Spencer [1981] reasoning, the loss
in profits to domestic firms may more than outweigh the gains to consumers. Moreover, in

general the liberalization may entail the exit of some firms, reducing the number of varieties
                                                     17

 available. In this paper, however, we have made assumptions that have the effect of removing
 these ambiguities.

             Specifically, our assumption of free entry and abstraction from the integer constraint
 removes the possibility of rents. The choice of the Cobb—Douglas upper—tier utility function
 and constant perceived elasticityimplies that the total number of available varieties is

 unaffected by the liberalization. Consequently, in this paper mutual removal of factor market
 barriers improves welfare in both countries. Furthermore, it does so without any factor

migration. This statement follows from the fact that removing /3 does not change the output
of A nor the number of varieties but does result in higher x industryoutput (point 8). Clearly

then the utility of the representative consumer in each county is increased.


VI. Summary        and Concluding Remarks


       The principle result of this paper is that for some types of products, barriers to foreign
control of local facilities represent barriers to trade. Consequently, removal of factor market

harriers which boost the cost of foreign control of home firms can result in gains from trade:

higher productivity, more efficient allocation of resources, higher living standardsand
enhanced export competitiveness. At least in principle, these gains can be realized without

any factor migration.

       The results in this paperraise two additional interesting issues. First is the issue of
how large the effects are likely to be in practice. While this sort of empirical work is crucial,

it   is   unlikely to be straightforward. Mon—marginal changes togetherwith imperfect
competition and economies of scale, make empirical work difficult. The computable general
equilibrium modelling (see Harris and Cox [1982]) methodology would appear to be the most
promising approach.
            The second issue is that   of dynamics. Comparative   statics provides a reasonable guess
as to where the liberalization     will eventually take the EC. However, for policy—making     the
adjustment path is often as important as the eventual goal. Recent work on trade adjustment
                                                18

suggests that the presence of in—country sunk costs imply non—standard dynamics.
Specifically in the presence of such costs, trade flows and prices are subject to hysteresis (see
Baldwin [1986 and 1988), Baldwin and Krugman [1988], Dixit [1978a and 1987bJ). Again the

Harris—Cox simulation approach may prove to be the only way to get a handle on the

dynamics of adjustment.
 F000UCJES

 1.   For example,      see an interview with France's Minister for Industry, Alain

 Madelin, New York Times, page DI, March            1'.,   1988.




 2.   Spence [1976), Dixit and Stiglitz         [1977).




 FEJ€7CS
 Baldwin,    Richard,      'Hysteresis in Trade," MIT mimeo, July 1986.

 _______      "Hysteresis     in Import Prices: The Beachhead          Effect",   American

       Economic Review, forthcoming, NBEP Working Paper, 1988.

_______      and Vrugman, Paul,         'Persistent Trade Effects of Large Exchange Rate

         Shocks,   NBER Working Paper 2017, September 1986, revised March 1988.

 Bhagwati,   Jagdish.      "Structural Adjustment     and International Factor Mobility:

       Some Issues," Columbia University Discussion Paper 163, 1982.

 Blair, P. and Kaserman,        0. Law and Economics       of Vertical Integration and

       Control, Academic Press, New York, 1983.

 Brander,    Jim, and Spencer, Barabara,        "Tariffs and the Extraction of Foreign

       Monopoly Rents under Potential Entry", Canadian Journal of Economics,

       371—89,     1981.

Dixit, Avinash,      "Hysteresis,       Import Penetration,    and Exchange Rate

       Pass—Through,"       Princeton    mimeo, November,     l987b.

______    "Entry   and Exit Decisions of Firms under Fluctuating

       Real Exchange Rates," Princeton mimeo, October,                 1987a.

______ and Stiglitz, J. "Monopolistic Competition and Dptimum Product

       Diversity," American Economic Reveiw 67. 297—308.                1977.

 Harris, R. and Cox, 0. Trade, Industrial Policy, and Canadian Manufacturing

       Ontario Economic Council,          Toronto, Canada,    1982.
Helleiner,      S., Intra—firm   Trade and the Developing     Countries1     St. Martin's

     Press, NV, 1981.

Helmman, E. and Krugman, P., Market Structure            and Foreign Trade, MIT Press,

     Cambridge,      MA, 1985.

Krishna, Kala, "Trade Restrictions as Facilitating            Practices,"        NBER Working

     Paper, 1546.

krugman, Paul,      "Scale Economies,      Product Differentiation,       and the Pattern of

     Trade," American Economic Pevies 70           ,   950-959,   1980.

Jones, P., "lnternatonal Capital Movements              and the Theory of Tariffs",

     Quarterly      Journal of Economics 81. 395—410,        1967.

Nundell, P. "International        Trade and Factor Mobility," American Ecomomics

     Review. 47. 321-335,        1957.

Klein. 2., Crawford, P. and Alchian, A., "Vertical                Integration.    Appropriable

     Rents, and the Competitive          Contracting Process," Journal of Law ard

     Economics 21, 297—326,        1982.

Spence,   NI.   "Product Selection,      Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic       Competition,"

     Review of Economic Studies 43. 217—236, 1976.
