                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PRIVATE COST INFORMATION
                      P10 THE MULTINATIONAL ENTERPRISE




                                Kyle Bagwell

                             Robert W. Staiger




                           Working Paper No. 2657




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1988




This paper has benefitted from the comments of Thomas Prusa, Michael Riordan,
and members of the Internationsl Seminar at Harvard University. This
research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                            NEER Working Paper #2657
                                            July 1988


                              PRIVATE COST INFORMATION
                          AND THE MULTINATIONAL ENTERPRISE


                                      ABSTRACT



        This paper   explores the informational role of   plant location

decisions for the multinational enterprise. When information about

costs is incomplete, the location of a plant will be chpsen not only for

its   impact on actual production costs, but also for Its impact on the
perception   of costs as held by foreign rivals. We show that the latter

consideration, which can arise only in the presence of asymmetric

information about costs, may lead to a decision to multinationaliZe even

though actual production costs are higher as a result. As such, the

informational role of plant location decisions is a potentially

important element in understanding the behavior of the multinational

firm.




Kyle Bagwell                                Robert W. Staiger
Department of Economics                     Department of Economics
Northwestern University                     Stanford University
Evanston, IL 60208                          Stanford, CA 94305
                              I. Introduction


      The multinational firm is generally thought to arise as a result

of three ingredients.!" A firm must first possess an ownershi2 advantage

(patent, expertise, etc.) which   it   wishes to exploit in foreign

markets. Second, locational considerations (tariffs, transport costs,

etc.) must dictate that supplying foreign markets is best achieved with

foreign production. Finally, the firm must choose internalization over

an arms—length transaction (e.g., open its own plant abroad rather than

licensing its technology).

      Ethier (1986) has argued that the internalization decision Is the

least well—understood of these three ingredients, and that the decision

between internalization and arms—length transactions is largely an issue

of the international economics of information. As such, to understand

the internalization decision, one must analyze the exchange of

information between agents.

      We argue in this paper that the analysis of information exchange

between agents is also important in understanding the location decision.

In particular, when there exists strategic interaction between the firms

of different countries serving a foreign market, the transmission of

information about production costs becomes crucial../ If the location of

production facilities in the foreign market can serve to directly inform

rival firms of an entrant's production costs, or if the decision to

locate production facilities there sig         the   costs of the entrant,

then multinationalization can arise as a way of transmitting cost

information to foreign rivals. Consequently, in the presence of
                                   —2—



asymmetric information about costs, the role of locational

considerations takes on a new dimension. In this paper, we explore this

new dimension of the foreign locational decision.

      Specifically we show that, when cost informaLion is incomplete

among rival firms for a foreign market, the choice of plant location

will potentially have two effects on a firm's profits:   it will effect

the firm's actual production costs to the extent that factor-price

differentials exist between countries, and it may effect the perception

of the firm's production costs as held by rival firms. While the former

effect leads plants to locate where actual costs are lowest, the latter

effect need not. Taking the two effects together, a firm may be led to

multinationalize even though its actual costs of serving the foreign

market are higher as a result. Such multinational equilibria, which

arise solely as a result of incomplete information about costs, are the

focus of this paper.

      We are certainly not the first to point out the informational

dimensions of a firm's location decision. This idea was central to the

notion of a product cycle as developed by Vernon (966). Vernon argued,

for example, that in the early stages of supplying a new market,

         the need for swift and effective communication on the part of

      the producer with consumers, suppliers, and even competitors is

      especially high at this stage. This is a corollary of the fact

      that a considerable amount of uncertainty remains regarding the

      ultimate dimensions of the market, the efforts of rivals to

      preempt that market, the specifications of the inputs needed for
                                     —3—




     production,   and the specifications of the products likely to be

     most successful in the effort. (p. 195)

Vernon concludes that such informational demands are one reason why a

firm would wish to locate in the market it is about to serve. However,

the relationship between location and communication is not analyzed: it

is simply taken as given that locational proximity and effective

communication go hand in hand. The work that we present below can be

viewed as an attempt to formalize one aspect of the relationship between

location and information exchange.

      The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II lays

out the general model and derives necessary and sufficient conditions

for multinationalization to take place solely as a result of the desire

to transmit cost information to foreign rivals. Section III then

explores several specific cases in which the general conditions derived

in section II are met. Section IV concludes.


                   II. The Game and General Properties


      Our ideas are most easily expressed in a general setting. We

therefore provide in this section a characterization of the game in

terms of general reduced—form profit functions. tn later sections, we

evaluate these functions under specific assumptions about demand and

cost conditions.

      Consider two countries, one (the foreign country) with a new

market for a good in which the entry decisions of N-i foreign firms

 (labeled j—1,2,...,N-i) are just being made, and the other (the home
                                    —Li—




country)   with a single established domestic firm (labeled N) who

serves the home market and is currently considering entry into the

foreign market as well. For simplicity, we assume constant cost

technologies, that entry is prohibited in the domestic market, and that

there exists a prohibitive tariff on imports of the good into the home

country as well, so that the domestic firm can make its entry decision

into the foreign market without regard to the domestic market.

      With regard to the (new) foreign market, all relevant demand

information is assumed to be common knowledge to the N firms. In

addition, all relevant information concerning the production costs of

the N-i    foreign firms is assumed to be common knowledge among all N

firms. For simplicity, we assume that variable costs of the N—i

foreign firms are identical, and that they take the form of a wage w*

times a unit labor requirement e.      However, the domestic firm has

production costs which, at least initially, are known to it alone. The

source of this one—sided informational asymmetry can be either firm

specific or country-specific../ We consider each case in turn.

      In the case of firm-specific one—sided asymmetric information, we

assume that prevailing wages at home and abroad differ but are common

knowledge to all N firms, that the domestic wage w is less than the

foreign wage w*, and that the N-i foreign firms use a commonly known

technology m.     However, the domestic firm has available to it a new

technology with unit labor requirements 0 known to it alone.       The

domestic firm must now decide whether to "stay" (produce its export good

domestically, facing the commonly known (low) domestic wage w) or to
                                    —5—



"go" (open a plant abroad and operate its technology in the presence of

the commonly known (high) foreign wage w*.).! The latter option

corresponds to the choice of multinationalization. Once the domestic

firm has made its (observable) location decision, the N firms engage

in Cournot quantity competition for the foreign market, with the

sequence of play represented graphically in Figure 1 ../

      In   the case of country—specific one-sided asymmetric information,

we assume that all N firms employ the same commonly known technology

o, and that the N-i foreign firms face a wage w that is assumed to

be common knowledge to all N firms. However, the domestic firm alone

knows the wage of labor in the home country, w. It must now decide

whether to produce its export good in the domestic plant or to

multinationalize and open a new plant in the foreign country. If the

domestic firm decides to "stay" in the domestic country, then it retains

some private information about its labor costs, wo,        through its

private knowledge about w. But, if the firm chooses to "go" and build

a foreign plant, the N firms all face the commonly known foreign

wage w, and their unit labor costs w*cz        are then common knowledge

and identical. In the latter case, we allow for the possibility that a

portion of any plant—specific fixed costs of operating a foreign plant,

e.g., accounting, are carried out by the home operations, and thus

reflect in part the domestic wage w: however, since these are fixed

costs, they will affect directly the multinational's profits but not its

strategic interaction with rival firms.
                                    —6—




      Thus, by staying home, the domestic firm pays the domestic wage

and faces foreign rivals that are not completely informed about that

wage, while by going to the foreign country, the domestic firm faces the

well—known foreign wage: the location choice in this case is a choice

of information structure for the ensuing oligopolistic rivalry. As

before, once the domestic firm has made its (observable) location

choice, the N firms engage in Cournot quantity competition for the

foreign market. The sequence of play is represented graphically in

Figure   1.

      Notice that in both the firm—specific and the country—specific

case, the domestic firm's choice of location is important in two

respects. First, the choice determines the firm's actual costs.

Second, foreign firms may (rationally) use the location decision of the

domestic firm as a signal of its cost type, as certain cost types may be

more willing to stay than others. Since the output choices of the N-

1   foreign firms depend on their expectation of the domestic firm's

output selection, and since the domestic firm's output selection depends

on its costs, the quantity of output of foreign firms depends on their

perception of the domestic firm's costs. Thus, in making its choice of

location, the domestic firm must also consider the affect that its

location decision would have on its perceived production costs.

         We now give a formal representation of the general game. The

first player to move is "nature," who chooses the unknown cost parameter

(0 in the firm-specific case and w in the country-specific case). It

is commonly known among all players that nature chooses a high cost
                                     —7—




parameter with probability 6H       (0,1) and a low cost parameter with

probability 1H•         The domestic firm is then privately Informed about

the realized cost parameter, and chooses a plant location. Letting

c   {L,H} and z        (S,G} represent, respectively, the set of possible

cost parameters (L ' low, H high) and the set of possible plant

locations (S        stay, C     go) for the domestic firm, we represent the

domestic firm's location strategy as a mapping Z: C           Z.

      Consider first the firm—specific case. After observing the

domestic firm's location choice, foreign firms must posit some belief

about the domestic firm's type. Let b(z)[0,i] represent the

probability with which the N—i foreign firms believe the domestic firm

to have high unit labor requirements after observing the firm's location

decision z. We then define JIN(w(z)®ulb(z)) —      FN(i,z),        with i—H

or L, w(z—S)        w, w(z—G) w, and FN(i,zS) — 0,       as the total

profit to the domestic firm if its technology is actually of type i

but it is perceived to have high unit labor requirements with

probability b(z) when its location decision is Z..Y Finally, define

r13(b(z),z) —   F   as the expected total profit to foreign firm

j—i,...,N—1 when the domestic firm's location choice is z and its

unit labor requirements are perceived to be high with probability

b(z). nN(eiIb) — FN(i,z)             and 1I(b(z),z) —   F     thus summarize

the payoffs associated with the firm-specific one-sided incomplete

information Cournot game In which the high cost technology is believed

to occur with probability b(z).
                                     —8—




        Consider alternatively the country—specific case. If the doniestic

firm chooses to go, then all N firms have medium (M) costs, and the

firms play a complete information Cournot game. We let         represent

the variable profits to the jth firm in this game, with j=i,2          N.


Set-up costs in the foreign country for foreign firms j=i ,2,. .. ,N—i

and for the domestic firm N facing domestic wages of type i will be

denoted by F3 and FN(i), i        H,L, respectively.

        If instead the domestic firm chooses to stay, then the foreign

firms must posit some telief about the domestic firm's type. Let

b   EO,i] represent the probability with which the N—i foreign firms

believe the domestic firm to face high wages after observing that the

firm has decided to stay. We can then define iiN(w1Ob), where

i = H    or L, to be the total profit to the domestic firm when it pro-

duces domestically, actually faces a wage of type i, and is perceived

to face a high wage with probability b (the decision to stay elimin-

ates the need for additional plant—specific set—up costs). Likewise, we

can define 113(b)    to be the expected variable profit to foreign firms

j=1,2,...,N—1 facing a domestically-located Nth firm that is thought to

pay the high wage with probability b. nN(w1Ib) and       113(b) — F3   thus

summarize the payoffs associated with the country-specific one-sided

incomplete information Cournot game in which high wages are believed to

occur with probability b.

        We look for a sequential equilibrium (Kreps—Wilson (1982)). In

the present game, a sequential equilibrium is simply a combination of

strategies and beliefs such that 1) strategies are sequentially
                                                            —9—



rational, in that each player's strategy maximizes his expected payoff,

given his beliefs and the strategies of his opponents, and 2) beliefs

are Bayes—consistent, in that they agree with Bayes' Rule along the

equilibrium path (i.e., for events that occur with positive probabilitY

in, the equilibrium). The application of sequential rationality to                                   the

quantity games is implicit in the definitions of the profit functions

above.1" The domestic firm's                      location        strategy is sequentially rational,

if, given the structure of beliefs, the firm with cost parameter i

chooses the location corresponding to the maximum of the set

                         -
                             FN(i,zQ),            IIN(wGilb(z_Sfl} in the firm-specific case,

and [tI —       FN(i),       frN(wzIb)} in the country—specific case.

For example, if N(LIb) and flN(wHopb) exceed 11 — FN(L)                                        and

     — FN(H), respectively, then sequential rationality requires z(L)
ri
z(H) — S       in the country-specific game. Finally, Bayes—consistency is

met if and only if the following conditions hold:


Firm-Specific Case

        (1) If z(L) — z(H)            —       k,           then b(z—k) —        for   k —   {S,G}.
        (ii) If z(L) * z(H)               —       S,        then b(z—S) —   1   and b(z—G) — 0.

        (iii) If z(H) * z(L.)                 —       S,     then b(z—S) — 0     and b(z—G) —        1




Country-Specific Case

        (1)       If z(L) — z(H)              —       5,     then b —

        (ii)      If z(L) *         z(H)          —    S,     then b • 1.

        (iii) If z(H) * z(L)                  •       5,     then b — 0.
                                           -10-




In case 1), pooling occurs in that the location choice provides no

information about cost type. Bayesian updating then requires the poste-

rior belier (b) to equal the prior belief                       By contrast, in

cases ii) and iii), location choices separate firm types. Here,

Bayesian updating requires foreign firms to correctly guess the domestic

firm's type. Observe finally that b               is unrestricted when z(L) =

z(H)    G in the country-specific case, for in this case the S choice

is a zero probability event ("off the equilibrium path") and so Bayes'

Rule can not be applied. Likewise, in the firm—specific case, b(z=G) is

unrestricted when z(L) = z(H) = S, and b(zS) is unrestricted when

z(L)    z(H) =    0.   We discuss these possibilities in rore detail below.

       Having defined a sequential equilibrium for our game, we now place

assumptions on the profit functions and then explore the nature of

equilibrium behavior. We consider each case in turn.


                                Firm—Specific Case


Assumptions

       (1)                     is strictly decreasing in b for all

                I c{L,H}, b c[O,fl, z c(S,G}.

       (II) flN)0L > TtN(w(z)Øb) for all
                  c [0,1], z c {S,G}.

       (•jjj)    llN(ei)   > IIN( *ehIb)    —
                                                FN(i,z_G) > 0
                 for all b c[0,1] and I E[L,H}.

       (Iv) 113(b,z) -     F   is nonnegative for all

                  c[O,1], j c(1,2,...,N-1}, z E{S,G}.
                                     —11—



      The interpretation of assumptions (1) through (lv) is as

follows. Assumption (i) says that the domestic firm earns higher

profits the more likely it is held by rival firms to have low unit labor

requirement3 (regardless of its actual technology). Assumption (ii)

represents the actual savings associated with low unib labor

requirements. Assumption (iii) says that, given any belief b,       both

firm types would rather locate at home than abroad, but that profits are

positive at either location. In particular, with complete information,

neither firm type would choose to rnultinatinalile. Finally (iv)
                                                                        As
guarantees that each of the foreign firms earn nonnegative profits.

we will show, these assumptions are consistent with Courr.ot competition

under the assumption that w > w.

      According to assumption (iii), full information would have neither

firm type multinationalize in the firm—specific case. We focus in     the


firm—specific case on multinational equilibria in which, as a result of

the firm—specific informational asymmetry, one or both firm types go.

The first theorem concerns the case In which the domestic firm chooses

 to multlxiationaliZe regardless of its type. We call such equilibria

 pooling multinational equilibria.


 Theorem 1   A pooling multinational equilibrium exists If and only if


       flN(w*Gi16) -   FN(i,z,.G) > flN(wGIIl) i-H,L.
                                         — 2—




Proof: Suppose first that an equilibrium exists with z(L) =                    z(H)   =

G.   Then Bayes-consistency requires that b(z—G) H Therefore,
flN(W*oi) - FN(i,z=G) > HN( 0( S)) > 11N(0i11)                     is necessary for

i=H and L, since otherwise z(i) = S                  would be selected for i=H

or L instead. Going the other way, suppose

flM(w*G1l)
                 - FN(i,zG)   > rrN(wohJl),   i=H,L.        Put z(L)     z(H) =   G       and

b(z=S)      1.    Then, since rIN(w*ehI6H) -         FN(i,z_G) > llN(w®l) for
i—H and L, the location choice is sequentially rational.

                                                                                 Q..D.

         The pooling multinational equilibrium constructed in the proof of

Theorem 1 is supported by the pessimistic belief that if the domestic

firm is observed to stay then it must have high unit labor

requirements. Our equilibrium concept imposes no restrictions on

b(z—S) when equilibrium has z(L)              z(H)     0,    i.e., in the pooling

multinational equilibrium, but it is nonetheless important to ask

whether b(zS)         1   is a plausible belief specification in this case.

This belief specification would be plausible if the high unit labor

requirement firm were thought to be more likely to deviate from the

pooling multinational equilibrium than the low unit labor requirement

firm. But in fact given the prior belief                    both have an incentive to

deviate and stay In the domestic country. Hence, there is a strong

sense In which the "credible" belief is              b(z—S) —           But   pooling

multinational equilibria will not exist if b(z—S) —                      since
                                                                  5H'
llN(wOiI) > rIN(w*ehlH)
                              -   FN(I,z_G)   for I c {L,H} according to

assumption (iii).
                                            —13—




       With the above argument in mind, we follow Grossman and Perry

(1986) and refer to pooling equilibria that are immune to such logic as

credible pooling multinational equilibria. The next theorem is then

immediate.


Theorem 2: Credible pooling multinational equilibria do not exist.


       We turn next to separating equilibria. The following theorem

states conditions under which separating multinational equilibria exist

with z(H)         z(L) = G.


Theorem 3: A separating multinational equilibrium exists with

z(H) *   z(L) =    G   if and only if nt(woHIi) > GN(w*OHI0)_FN(H,G) and




Proof: Suppose a separating equilibrium exists with z(H) *                   z(L)   G.


Then IIN(wGHIl) > HN(w*OHIO) _FN(H,G) since otherwise H would deviate

and go, while rIl(w*GO)_FN(L,G) > fiN(0L11) since otherwise L would

deviate and stay. Going the other way, suppose that

IIN(W8HI1) > IIN(w*eHIo) — FN(H,G)          and

IIN(w*eLIo) —     FN(L,G)   ) flN(weLll).         Then the location choice

z(H)   * z(L)   — G    is sequentially rational, given the Bayesian beliefs
that   must follow.                                                      Q.E.D.

         When the conditions of Theorem 3 are satisfied, the domestic

firm's decision of whether to export to the foreign market or to

multinationalize depends on whether its technology has high or low unit

labor requirements. In particular, even though both firm types will
                                       —114—




have lower actual costs if the good is produced domestically and

exported to the foreign market, a firm with low unit labor requirements

may choose to locate production in the high wage foreign market in order

to signal to its rivals that its unit labor requirements are indeed

low.1"

         Finally, we define a notion of undominated equilibria and give

conditions under which the separating equilibrium is unique within this

class. A locational choice z is said to be dominated for a firm of

type i if the firm makes less with the choice of z under the best of

situations (b(z) — 0)      than it makes with the alternative choice z'

under the worst of conditions (b(z')            1).        Clearly, a dominated

strategy will never be played. As Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) and

Milgrom and Roberts (1986) have argued, it seems therefore reasonable to

require that foreign firms never believe that a dominated strategy had

been played. Equilibria which satisfy this plausibility restriction on

beliefs are then referred to as undominated equilibria. With this

definition in place, we now give conditions under which "going" is

dominated for the high unit labor requirement firm and profitable to the

low unit requirement firm if b(z-G) =          0.     The unique undominated

equilibrium must then be the separating multinational equilibrium.


Theorem II:     Suppose that jiwe'll) > 11N *0H10) - FN(H,G)              and that

flN(w*0L10) -    FN(L,G) > ffN(wOI).     Then there exists an unique

undominated equilibrium, in which z(H) *            z(L)   —   0:   that is, the

unique undominated equilibrium is the separating multinational

equilibrium.
                                          —15—




Proof: We show first that z(H) *              z(L)   —   0   in any undominated

equilibrium. Observe that z(H)                G is dominated for I, since

IIN(WOHI1) > rrN(w*oHIo) -   FN(H,G).          Thus, z(H)         S and b(z-G)        0


must be true In an undominated equilibrium. Now, z(L) — z(H)                      S is

then impossible, since HN(w*GL!O) - FN(L,O) > flN(wOH5H).                    It must

therefore be that z(L) *         z(H)    S.        Next, we complete the proof by

noting   that the separating multinational equilibria is in fact

undominated and (by Theorem 3)          does   exist under the conditions of

Theorem 14.                                                                  Q.E.D.


      The first condition of Theorem 14 is more likely to be met the

greater is the foreign—domestic wage differential and the greater is

      The second condition is more likely to hold the smaller the wage

differential and the smaller is                      Intuitively, then, the separating

multinational equilibrium should be the unique undominated equilibrium

provided that the efficiency differential is large but that the wage

differential is not too extreme. This intuition is borne out in the

linear demand example we explore in the following section.


                                 Country—Specific Case

         Assumptions

         (I)   rIN(wbolb)   is   strictly decreasing in b, for all

               I £EL,H}, b c[O,1J.

         (ii) ON(wLalb) > flN(wHajt) for all b cO,i].

         (iii) N(LQ) > 11N — FN(L)             >         FN(H) > 0N(H11) > 0.
                                             —16—




          (iv)         — F3   and 113(b) — F3     are non negative for all

                     b c[O,1 and j1,2,...,N—1.


The assumptions are simple to interpret. By (i), the domestic firm

earns higher profits when it locates domestically the more likely it is

held by rival firms to face low domestic wages (regardless of the actual

domestic wage). Assumption (ii) represents the actual savings

associated with a low wage while (iii) ensures that complete information

variable profits are always greater than fiked costs for the domestic

firm, and that with complete information and facing a high (low) wage at

home the domestic firm would choose (not) to multinationalize.

Finally, (iv) guarantees that foreign firms make non-negative profit.

As we will see, these assumptions are consistent with Cournot

competition when wH > w* > L.

          Given assumption (iii), complete information would have the

domestic firm export if it faces the low wage at home and

multinationalize if the home wage is high. Our primary interest in the

country—specific case is on equilibria in which multinationalization

occurs, regardless of the domestic wage; that is, we wish to focus on

equilibria in which z(L)              z(H) — G.     We refer to such equilibria as

multinational equilibria.


Theorem 5: A multinational equilibrium exists if and only if
 N   —    N.
         F (i)   >
                      Ni
                     II (w I1), I —   H,L.
                                         —17—




Proof: Suppose first that an equilibrium exists in which z(L)               z(H)     G.


Then fl —    F1(i)    > flN(WlaIb) > flN(w1ll) is necessary for I • H        and L,

lest z(i) — S        be selected for I      H or L instead. Going the other
                                                                                 G
way, suppose fl —      FN(i)   > r!N(wbsJl), i   H,L.   Put z(L)     z(H)

and t — 1.      Then, since 11 —      FN(i) > flN(W1,l) for i      H and L,

the location choices are sequentially rational.                             Q.E.D.


       As in the pooling multinational equilibrium of Theorem 1, the

multinational equilibrium constructed in the proof of Theorem 5 is sup-

ported by the pessimistic belief that if the domestic firm stays then it

faces high wages. Our equilibrium concept imposes no restrictions on b

In multinational equilibria, and it is thus important to ask whether b =             1




is a plausible belief specification. In one case it certainly is not.

Specifically, suppose that fl —         FN(i) > rIN(w1Il) for i — H,L,       and

   -   FN(H) > jN(w}oIO); that is, suppose that a multinational equilib-

rium exists and that facing high domestic wages, the domestic firm would

rather go than stay, even if in staying It faced the "best" beliefs

(b =   0).   In this case, z(H) — S       is dominated by z(H) — G       in the

presence of high domestic wages. Since riN(wIO) > fl - FN(L)                by

assumption (Iii), there are beliefs which might make z(L) —          S     the

optimal choice for the domestic firm when It faces low domestic wages.

Thus, since staying is dominated by going for the domestic firm when

domestic wages are high but not when they are low, the only reasonable

belief is b —    0.      But this belief could not support the multinational

equilibrium, as it would induce the domestic firm to stay if it faced

low domestic wages. When II - FN(H) > JIN(wlO), multinational
                                    —18—




equilibria and thus implausible equilibria. Referring again to

multinational equilibria that are immune to such logic as undomiriated

multinational equilibria, we now have the following theorem.


Theorem 6: An undominated multinational equilibrium exists if and only

if flN(Hj) >       -   FN(H) > IIN(wHajl) and    -   FN(L)   >



      In words, multinationalization is plausible in the country—

specific case if and only if the domestic firm does better when it

stays, actually faces high wages, and is perceived to face a low wage

than when it multinatjonalizes; and does better when it

multinationalizes than when it stays and is thought to face high wages,

regardless of its actual wage. Thus, multinationalization seems most

likely in the country-specific case when perceived costs have a greater

affect on profits than do actual costs. One would thus expect

multinationalization to occur if foreign output is very sensitive to

perceived domestic costs.

      The multinational equilibrium is inefficient, relative to a com-

plete information setting, in that it entails too much multinationaliza

tion. Specifically, the domestic firm builds a foreign plant even if

the foreign wage is higher than the domestic wage. When the choice of

location is a potential signal, it is simply not true that firms neces-

sarily locate production facilities where costs are lowest. Notice

however, that when the domestic wage is high, the domestic firm does

receive an actual cost savings by rnultinationalizing.
                                                 —19—




       We now give conditions under which the multinational equilibrium

is unique.


                                        —   FN(L) > flN(L11) and
Theorem 7: Suppose that

IIN(WHOIO) > riM - FN(H)       > flN(H1) Then, in any equilibrium, z(L)

z(H)     C; that is, every equilibrium is a multinational equilibrium.

Moreover, the multinational equilibrium exists and is undominated.


Proof: Existence and dominance arguments follow directly from Theorem

6. We prove here that every equilibrium is a multinational

equilibria. The proof is by contradiction. Consider first the

possibility that z(L) — z(H)                 S. Then b              and so the domestic

firm facing domestic wages of type i earns r11'(w1oIH).                           But

   —   FN(H) > rrN(wHoIH), so z(H)                    S is not sequentially rational.

Consider second z(L) * z(H) = S.                  Then b       1. This is contradictory,

however, since rt - FN(H) > flN(WHo) >                                     Finally,

consider z(H) *         z(L)   — S.    Then b • 0.            But z(H) —   G    is then

                           NH
suboptimal, since n (w I0) >
                                             N   -    N
                                                     F (H).    Tne only remaining case

is z(L) • z(H)      •    0.                                                           Q.E.D.



        Notice that flN(H1) < ri - FN(H)                       certainly holds by

assumption (iii)                  Is near one and, In general, is more likely to

hold the higher is                Thus, if the domestic wage is likely to be high

                          < ri —      FN(H)),        and if perceptual cost effects are
 (I.e., r1N(wImaaH

 strong (i.e., 11N(H10) > rI - FN(H)                     and fl — FN(L)     >


 then the undominated multinational equilibrium is the unique

 equilibrium.
                                              —20—




         Before concluding this section, we briefly discuss the            possibility
of other equilibria in the country—specific case. There exist

equilibria in which the domestic firm stays regardless of the domestic

wage type (z(L) = z(H)             S) if and only if

                > It —   FN(i)   I =   H,L.   (The proof is straightforward.)

Thus,              is   small, it may be that too little multinationalization

occurs, relative to complete information choices. There may also exist

efficient equilibria, that is, equilibria in which z(H) *                 z(L)       S.

Efficient equilibria are easily shown to exist if and only if

rI —    F(H)    > flI(wHaO).       Finally,   It is interesting to know that

completely inefficient equilibria —             that   is, equilibria in which

z(H) *   z(L)      G - can never exist, since the existence of such an

equilibrium would require ON(wHO1l) > rt                F(H)    which would violate

assumption (iii). Thus, the multinational equilibrium upon which we

focus above is the only equilibrium possibility with z(L)                  G.



                                   III. Illustrations

Firm—Specific Case

         We con8ider a market in which demand Is linear, and where there

                                                                                 -
are no fixed oomts. Let foreign demand be represented as q

where     i, > 0, q Is the quantity of goods demanded in the foreign

market, and P is the foreign market price. There are N —                   1    foreign

firms, and a foreign firm that produces q units of output incurs a

total cost of wmq..              The single domestic firm incurs a total cost of

w(z)oHq (w(z)oLq) if It makes the location choice z and has

technology 0H (0L)               Assume w > w and           >    >
                                                           —21-



       To find the Cournot quantities for this game of incomplete

information, we perform the following maximizations:

             I - (N—1)qf(b,z) - L
(1)    MAX   ___________
             _____________________ — w(z)O L                         L

        L



               1 - (N-1)q(b,z) - H
(2)    MAX     ___________ - w(z)0H
             ( ______________________
                                                                    H
         H



             I —       (N—2)qf(b,z)             - qf   -                   -
(3)                                                         (1-b)q(b,z)        bq(b,z)
       MAX                                                                                 — w*)qf
        qf                                             B




Notice that each firm (arid firm type) is on its respective reaction

curve. Foreign firms act as it they are playing against an opponent

whose optimal quantity is (1-b)q(b,z) +
                                                                    bq(b,z).
       Letting 3                 tO         (1-b)O ,         Cournot quantities can be

represented as



        L              21 + 8[2(N_1)w*cz -                  w(z)((N_1)Ob   +   (N+l)OL)]
(1)                                                                               -
       q(b,z)                                              2(N+1)



        H              21 + B[2(N_1)w*c                -
                                                            w(z)((Nl)Ob    +   (N+l)OH)]
       (bPz) •                                         2(N+1)


                       1 —       3[2w       —   w(z)ObJ
(6'/
       qb,z)       —
                                      N+1



Profits are then given by



(7)    IIN(()eLIb)           •
(8)        flN(0H1)

(9)        fl(b,z)          qf(b,zfl2, j.1,2,...,N-1


Provided that equilibrium quantities are positive, it is straightforward

to verify that the four assumptions placed on profit functions for the

firm-specific case             all hold. Note, moreover, that a large value of Y

ensures positive quantities.

           We now employ Theorem 11              to   find the conditions under which every

undominated equilibrium is a separating multinational equilibrium. The

first condition is nN(woHji) > IIN(W*OHI0)                          Calculations give



            Nf wG   H         1 2I + B2(N_1)w* —             2Nwe!2
\OJ   .,
           II
                                        2(N+1)


           N *      H         1        21 +   E2(N_1)w*    — (N—i )w*OL —   w*oH(N+i)   2
(ii) II (w 0 0)                    {
                                                        2(N+i)

Thus, the first condition of Theorem 14                     will   be met if and only if


                              2N
(12)           > £
           w
                        (N—i) — + (N+1)


For any                 >    > 0, condition (12) will hold if the differential

between w and w is sufficiently large. Notice that condition (12)

is independent of 1.

           The second condition of Theorme 4 is IIN(w*®L!O) > flN(QL1)

Arguing        as above, we find that this condition holds if and only if
                                            —23—


                            -   1)   + 2N

(13)           c
       w               2N



 Notice that (13) is more likely to hold the smaller is the difference

between w* and w. Also, observe that (13) too is independent of 1,

so positive quantities can be assured independent of (12) and (13).

           Figure 2 illustrates the inequalities (12) and (13). The size

(and existence) of the shaded region, which gives values of the foreign

and domestic wage for which both inequalities (12) and (13) hold, is

determined directly by the relative magnitudes of the slopes of the two

lines in figure 2, which are given by the quantities on the right hand

side of (12) and (13). While (12) and (13) will be satisfied under a

broad range of parameter values, a sufficient condition for the

existence of a range of foreign and domestic wage levels which satisfy

simultaneously conditions (12) and (13) is that either                  be

sufficiently close to one or that                  be sufficiently close to zero.
                                   0
Hence, the separating multinational equilibrium will be the unique

undominated equilibrium of the firm—specific game for a range of foreign

and domestic wages if (but not only if) either the efficiency

differential between L and H is large enough or the (prior)

probability that the domestic firm is inefficient is close enough to

one.

       We now summarize with the following theorem.


Theorem 8 When demand is linear and fixed costs are absent, there

exists a set of parameter values under which the unique undomthated

equilibrium of the firm—specific game is the separating multinational

equilibrium. A sufficient condition for a range of foreign and domestic
wages to exist which yield the separating multinational equilibrium

uniquely is that either the efficiency differential between L and H

is large enough or the prior probability that the domestic firm is

inefficient is close enough to one.


Country—Specific Case

      We consider first a market in which demand is linear, and where

there are no fixed costs. Our initial result is negative:

under these conditions, TIM(wLojl) > TIN(wHo1O)        and so an undominated

multinational equilibrium does not exist in the country-specific case.

      Consider again the simple linear market in which foreign demand is

represented as q —    i—P,        where 1,B > 0, q      is the quantity of goods

demanded in the foreign market, and P is the foreign market price.

There are N—i foreign firms, and a foreign firm that produces q

units of output incurs a tojal cost of w*c*qf.                 The single

domestic firm incurs a total cost of cMq0 if it produces                units of

output in a foreign plant. If, however, the domestic firm produces

    units of output in a domestic plant, then its total cost is

                                      if the domestic wage is high (low).
           cHq (wLaq CLq)
Assume that a > 0 and that             > w* > wL > 0     so that     > cM > CL >

      To derive the various profit expressions, we consider a Cournot

game of incomplete information in which the domestic firm stays and is

thought to face high wages with probability b. The resulting Cournot

quantities, q(b), q(b), and q(b), can then be found by performing

the following maximizations:



(114) Max (
              —
                  (N—1)q(b)
                              —
                                  q     L L
                                      — C ) q
                                                D
       L
                                                        —25—



                    —                 —     H
                I       (N—1)q,(b)
(15)   Max (
          H                    8
                                                —H
                                                    C)         H




                I -                   -         -
                        (N-2)q(b)         qf        q(b)(1-b)             q(b)      N
(16) Max
                                                                                  -C)qf


Notice that each firm (and firm type) is on its respective reaction

curve. Foreign firms act as if they are playing against an opponent

whose optimal quantity is q(b)(i-b) +q(b)b.

       Letting C               tC +   (1—b)C        ,    it    is easy to represent the Cournot

quantities:



(17) q(b) -
                    21 + 8E2(N_l)CM - (N_l)Cb                      -
                                                                       cLN+1]
                                                                            .
                                 2(N+1)




(18)
                        21   + B[2(N_1)CM       -
                                                    (N_l)Cb            - cHN+1]
       q(b)                                 2(N+1)




(19) q(b)
                         -
                             8[20M    cbi



Profits   are   then given by

(20) 11N(L1) —


(21) IIN(WHel)          =
                             1/8(q(b))2

(22) Jji() - i/B(q(b))2 j=12..N-1

Finally, fl, j—i,2,...,N can easily be computed
                                               -26—




(23) fl 1/[ 3cM2 j1,2,...,N.


Provided that equilibrium quantities are positive, as they will surely

be for large       '',    it   is straightforward to verify that the four

assumptions on profit functions made above all hold for this example.

The country—specific theorems of the previous section therefore apply.
                                                 N L               N H           It is
         We are thus left to compare            TI (w mjl) and    TI (w o10).

straightforward to show that               >          is true if and only if

                         Thus, when demand is linear and fixed costs are absent,
q(1) > q(O).
a low wage domestic firm thought to face high wages produces more than a

high wage domestic firm thought to face low wages: artual cost effects

outweigh perceived cost effects. It is nowimmediate that

11N   (wLoIl)     rIwHclto).       With fixed costs set to zero by assumption,

Theorem 6 then tells us that an undominated multinational equilibrium

can    never    exist. We thus have the following negative result.


Theorem 9: When demand is linear and fixed costs are absent, an

ndominated multinational equilibrium never exists in the country—

specific case.


         Figure 3    illustrates     the result of Theorem 9 for the case        of
N—2. The slopes of the (linear) foreign and domestic reaction curves
are —1/2 and —2, respectively, reflecting the assumption of linear
demand. The foreign reaction curve is labeled MM. The domestic
reaction curve when the domestic           firm faces high (low)      wages is
labeled I-IH (LL). If the domestic firm faces a low wage but is thought
by the foreign firm to face a high wage, then the foreign firm chooses
                                   -27—



q(i) and te best domestic response is q(1).          Alternatively, if the

domestic firm faces a high wage but is thought by the foreign firm to

face a low wage, then the foreign firm scales back its quantity choice

to qf(), and the best reaponse of the domestic firm ia q(O).         In

the general iinear demand case, q(1) -
                                          q   (0)-            > o.      In

the case illustrated in Figure 3 with N2, q(1)-q(O) _L (OH_CL)               > 0.

Thus, 0N(L11) > 0N(H10)
      Evidently, when demand is linear and fixed costs are absent,

foreign perceptions of domestic costs are not sufficiently important in

the determination of domestic profits to overcome the direct cost

effects of locating in the medium wage foreign county when actual

domestic wages are low. This rules out the possiblity of undorninated

multinational equilibria with z(L) — z(H)     G in this case. However,

the introduction of plant—specific fixed costs (incurred by the domestic

firm only under multinationalization) and of transport costs (incurred

by the domestic firm only if it exports) allows parameters to be found

under which the multinational equilibrium exists and is the unique

equilibrium. The role of transport costs is to reduce nN(w5ll)

sufficiently 50 that the first condition of Theorem 7 holds

(rr- FN(L) > rtt(wLoJl)), while the role of plant—specific fixed costs

is to reduce rt— FN(H)    sufficiently so that the second condition of

Theorem 7 holds (11N(H10) > r1FN(H) > flN(H1)

      in particular, in the presence of transport costs t per unit

exported from the domestic to the foreign market, the Cournot profits

from exporting become
                                                 —28—



                      1   21 + B(2(N_l)CM - (N l)(cb+t) -                        (N+l)(CL+t)3]2
(2) (wLmb) =                               2(N+1)


                                                                            -
                      i21 +       [2(Nl)OM        -       (Nl)(C5+t)             (N+l)(OH+t)]32
(25) fl(wNmIb)                                    2[N+11


With plant-specific fixed costs FN(H) (FN(L)) incurred by the                                    high
wage (low wage) domestic firm only if it multinationaliZes,                                 profits when

multinationalizatiOn is chosen are given by


                                 -
                           1          6cM 2 -
(26)
          —   FN(L)                              FN(L)



                           1   ,r_BCM 2 —
(27) fl - FN(H)                           FN(H)



The conditions of Theorem 7 lead us to calculate



                               21 +   B[2(N_l)(CM          - 0L    H    -       2(CH+Nt)]   2
 (28) jt(wO)                                          2(N+1)


                                                      M       cL   0H            2cH+Nt -
                          1 21
                                  +   8[2(N1)(             ----)-                               2(N_1)5H(CCL)]2
 (29)   Jt(w'mdH)                                              2(N+1)


                                                  M       —
                                                                   C1   — 2(C+Nt)]
                          1 21
                                 +    [2(N—1)(C               ——
 (30) fl(wLall)                                 2(N+1)



 Under the assumption that                      and            are symmetric with respect to

 cM, so that

        ct=cM_ (wL=w*_)
                      S


        cH=cM+                 (wH=w*+)
                                      S
                                                     —29—




(28) through (30) can be simplified to yield

                          -       s(cH÷Nt)2
(31) 11(H10) 1Y

                              -   s(CH+Nt)       -
                                                      5(N-1)       (CH_CL)
(32) T[(w aH)                             N+1



(33)   fl(wLsl)       [       Nfl1
Using (26), (27), (31), (32), and (33),                      the   conditions of Theorem 7 can

be evaluated explicitly. It is straightforward to show that, with

FN(L) set to zero for simplicity,


       (i)          > fl(wLaIl) if and only if t > [C
               fl
       (ii)    fl(wHcxIO) >
                                       — FN(H)        if and only if


               FN(H) >
                                   2
                                        (0H -    cH[i       - S(CH+Nt)]
                          (N+1)

       (iii) II — FN(H) > n(wHosH) provided                              is sufficiently small

               and         is sufficiently close to one.


With FN(L) set to zero and costs symmetric, and with t, FN(H), B,

and          chosen to satisfy (1), (ii), and (iii) above, Theorem 7 then

implies that in any equilibrium, z(L) —                       z(H) — 0; that is, every
equilibrium is a multinational equilibrium.-1.' We thus have


Theorem 10: In the linear demand model with plant—specific set up costs

and transport costs, parameter values exist which make the multinational

equilibrium the unique equilibrium.
                                     —30—



                      IV. Conclusions and Extension


     This paper has shown that when firms behave strategically and

information about costs is incomplete, multinationals can arise from the

desire to transmit cost information to foreign rivals. We have explored

the case of country-specific informational asymmetries where the

location of production facilities abroad directly informs rival firms of

an entrant's production costs, and the case of firm-specific

informational asymmetries where the decision to locate production

facilities abroad signals the costs of the entrant. In either case, the

firm may be led to multinationalize in the presence of incomplete cost

information even though its actual costs of serving the foreign market

are higher as a result. Based on our linear demand example, however, it

appears that the latter case ——     in   which location signals firm—specific

cost parameters —-   yields   the more plausible multinational equilibrium.

      The theory we have explored is clearly only a partial picture, and

should be viewed as complementary to other theoretical work on the

ultinational enterprise. However, it is consistent with the empirical

                                                         investment by Swedish
findings of Swedenborg (1979), that foreign direct
multinationals is more likely in relatively high wage countries, an

observation that is inconsistent with existing theories. A slightly

modified model from the firm—specific model explored above would also

lead to the conclusion that foreign direct investment is likely to be

positively correlated with exports to the host country market: just

enough foreign direct investment would be undertaken to signal the

 firm's efficient technology, and the remainder of its (now expanded)

foreign market share would be exported from the home plants. Most
                                  —31—




empirical work on the relationship between foreign direct Investment and

exports finds either no correlation or a positive correlation between

the two, something which is again difficult to reconcile with existing

theory (see, for example, Bloomstrom, Lipsey, and Kulchycky, 1987).

      Finally, an interesting and important extension would be to add a

second period to the game we have analyzed. The domestic firm could

then use first-period quantity as a signal as well. The interaction of

location choice and price/quantity choice as signals of cost Is an area

we plan to investigate in future work.
                            —32—



                         Footnotes




The existing literature on multinationals, both empirical and

theoretical, is vast, and we do not attempt to review it here.

For a review of this literature see, for example, Caves (1982).

The incentive to share cost information with rival firms   has   been

explored recently by Fried (1981), Gal—Or (1986), and Shapiro

(1986) under the assumption that cost reports are verifiable.

When verification is impossible, direct information exchange is

itself impossible. In such cases, observable signals such as

price or advertising may be used to transmit cost information,

say, to a potential entrant, as in Milgrom and Roberts (1982) and

Bagwell and Ramey (forthcoming). The signal we explore here is

the location decision.

In both the firm- and country—specific cases, the one-sidedness of

the informational asymmetry Is not crucial. With risk-neutral

firms, nothing would change if the domestic firm were uninformed

about the foreign cost parameter, and made its location decision

to maximize expected profits. Since this adds nothing to the

analysis, we abstract from it and concentrate on the case of one-

sided informational asymmetries.

The third option, that of technology licensing, is assumed to be

precluded for "transactional" reasons. The possibility of

contracting to provide the services of firm-specific intangible

 assets to a foreign firm in the country—specific case is similarly

 precluded.
                                     —33—




      Thus, the domestic firm chooses its (observed) wage by choosing a

      plant location and paying the prevailing wage. Wages paid by the

      domestic firm in excess of the prevailing wage are assumed to be

      unobservable to foreign firms. This assumption, which is

      consistent with the notion that foreign firms know the relevant

      country—specific but not firm—specific information, eliminates the

      potential for such behavior to serve as a signaling device.

—6/                     L    H
      We   assume that 0 < 0 < a, so that the domestic firm would

      never choose to use the commonly known technology a.

      This application is made explicit in the linear demand example

      used in the following section.

      Under our assumptions, it is straightforward to argue that

      separating equilibria cannot exist in which z(L)        z(H)    0.

.2/   Of course, it could be the home country that has the high wage, in
                                                   H
      which case it would be tne inefficient (0 )      firm   that would

      multinationalize in the separating equilibrium and the efficient

      (oH   firm   that doesn't, i.e., locates production in the high wage

      domestic country.

      The four assumptions on profit functions listed for the country

      specific case in section II also need to be satisfied. It Is

      readily shown that a range of parameter values will simultaneously

      satisfy these four assumptions and the three criteria listed

      above.
                                  _314_




                               Refer ences

Bagwell, Kyle and Garey Ramey, "Advertising and Limit Pricing, Rand
      Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Blomstrom, Magnus, Robert E. Lipsey and Knesia Kulchycky, "U.S. and
      Swedish Direct Investment and Exports,' NBER working paper 2390,
      September 1987.

Cayes, Richard E., Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis,
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982.

Ethier, Wilfred E., Foreign Direct Investment and the Multinational
      Firm," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1986.

Fried, Dov, "Incentives for Information Production and Disclosure in a
      Duopolistic Environment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May
      19814.

Gal-Or, Esther, "Information Transmission - Cournot and Bertrand
      Equilibria," Review of Economic Studies, 1986.

Grossman, Sanford and Motty Perry, "Perfect Sequential Equilibria,"
      Journal of Economic Theory 39, 1986.

Kohlberg, Elon and Jean-Francois Mertens, "On the Strategic Stability of
      Equilibria," Econometrica 514, 1003—1037, 1986.

Kreps, David and Robert Wilson, "Sequential Equilibria," Econometrica
      50, 1982.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, "Limit Pricing and Entry under
      Incomplete Information: An Equilibrium Analysis," Econometrica 50,
      March 1982.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, "Price and Advertising Signals of
      Product Quality," Journal of Political Economy, XCIV, 796—821
       (1986).

 Shapiro, Carl, "Exchange of Cost Information in Oligopoly," Review of
       Economic Studies, 1986.

 Swedenborg, Birgitta, The Multinational Operations of Swedish Firms: An
       Analysis of Determinants and Effects, Stockholm: Almquist and
       Wiksell International, 1979.

 Vernon, Raymond, "International Investments and International Trade in
       the Product Cycle," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1966, 80,
       190—207.
            Figure 1




Stage   0          Domestic Firm Privately
                  Linformed f Domestic Costs




tage 1




Stage 2
     Figure 2




w4
                  :
                              / /
                            /
                      / /
                / /
          Figure 3




L.




                              3-




                          -
                     '4




     o) ¶';,(i)
